Tell them how to do that.
Oh, so we're not ready. We'll
wait, we'll wait till it comes
up.
And
and Mr. Chair, while we're
waiting. I, um, majority floor
leader retiring Gail Chasey
provided our lunches, so let's
give her a
is in honor of the top I was
To.
That comment of the legislature
moved slow,
example one.
Mhm. OK. OK, we're up and alive.
Yeah.
So today we have a presentation
from the Council of State
governments, Youth Justice
Summit.
Which is an ongoing, apparently
an ongoing process and we're
eager to hear what's happening
and what will happen.
And what we might have already
missed. Thank you so much,
Chair, Senator Ortizip Pino and
Representative Chasey and
members of the committee for
having us. I think we are all
set. I might just have to say
next slide for every, OK, um, I
will do that. Um, well, thank
you all so much for having us.
Um, I'm Nina Solomon with the
Council of State Governments
Justice Center. I'm joined by my
colleague Christina Gilbert from
the Justice Center as well. Um,
and as a Representative Casey
mentioned, really excited to be
here in New Mexico, um, I was
here.
Uh, about 7 or 8 years ago, um,
with some other folks on our
team to uh engage in improving
outcomes for youth initiative
where we worked with the
statewide task force on juvenile
Justice. I think Senator, you
were part of that back then, so,
so good to see you, um, and
we're excited to be back for
this youth justice summit, um,
The purpose of the youth justice
summit is over the next couple
of days, we're gonna be meeting
with stakeholders from across
the state, across the juvenile
justice and other youth serving
systems to try and understand
kind of what are the current
challenges, where are their
opportunities for improvement,
um, in terms of getting better
outcomes for youth and families
and for the juvenile justice
system here in New Mexico. Um,
Starting later today we're gonna
be meeting with law enforcement,
other state level agencies, um,
besides juvenile justice. We're
going to be meeting with defense
attorneys and prosecutors,
community-based providers and
advocates, youth and families
that have been impacted by the
system, as well as a number of
leadership and staff from CYFD,
um, after these next couple of
days we're gonna be synthesizing
all of the information that we
hear back from all of these
stakeholders and share that back
in a memo with the state.
Um, that includes key takeaways,
but also includes some short and
long-term recommendations for
improvement. Um, it also sets
the stage for some potential
future work that we can engage
in with uh the state of New
Mexico that I'll talk through a
little bit in in our
presentation.
Um, for those that are not as
familiar, the Council of State
Government's Justice Center, um,
we are a national nonprofit,
nonpartisan organization.
Uh, we work with state
policymakers across all three
branches of government. We
provide data-driven strategic
guidance, advice, research on
all things juvenile and and
criminal justice. Um,
Or juvenile justice program team
that Christina and I are a part
of. We have an explicit focus on
improving outcomes for youth and
families that are at risk of or
are involved in the juvenile
justice system and improving and
strengthening public safety, um,
and we try and do that in a, in
a few different ways. Um, next
slide, please. Um, first, we
partner directly with states and
jurisdictions to assess their
juvenile justice systems. We
help them adopt and implement
data-driven.
po lic ies and practices to
improve youth outcomes and
strengthen public safety, um, as
I mentioned, that was the
process that we engaged in with
New Mexico, um, that lasted
about a year plus uh back in
2016, where we partnered with
CYFD and the judiciary and the
legislature to assess the
juvenile justice system, um, and
we developed consensus-based
recommendations for improvement.
Um, we've done similar work in
other states. We helped
Michigan, for example, last year
passed a comprehensive package
of 26 bills to facilitate.
ate improvements in their
juvenile justice system prior to
that, similar work in Indiana
and Colorado and other states
around the country. We've also
increasingly had a focus on the
front end of the system, helping
states and jurisdictions think
more about diversion,
cross-system collaboration to
increase access to services for
young people and their families
on the prevention side.
Next slide. Oh.
I'll keep going.
Um, we also produced original
research. We draft policy
briefs, we develop tools for
different types of audiences on
best practices and what works to
improve outcomes and strengthen
public safety, and we respond to
emerging needs in the field, um,
just as an example in the last
few years, we've had an
increasing focus on the staffing
crisis in juvenile justice as
well as on strengthening and
educating the juvenile court
system.
Um, next slide, I think one
slide 6.
Uh, keep going.
Yeah, I know, too far.
Go up. No, too far.
Yes, right there. Thank you. Um,
so, as I mentioned, we're, we're
calling this visit to New Mexico
and to the other states where
we've done this under the same
umbrella, a youth justice summit
or youth justice listening tour,
where we're meeting with
different stakeholders and
policymakers around the country
to share information on national
research, share most recent data
trends on juvenile justice at
the national level as well as
some state specific data, um, to
share some interesting
innovations and best practice
examples from other states, and
then we're gonna reflect that
back to leaders.
He, um, on what we're seeing our
current strengths, challenges,
and opportunities. Um, so I'm
gonna start just by sharing a
little bit more about the
national context of the next
slide, yes.
Um, in terms of data trends,
challenges and opportunities
facing juvenile justice systems,
then shifts to share some data
findings from New Mexico, um,
the data that we analyzed, uh,
from the state and then end with
some research and examples from
other states, um, just so you
all know, the data that we're
gonna share comes from a data
project that we engage with, we
engaged in last spring, where we
analyzed the most recent
behavioral health arrest and
juvenile justice system data
from a variety of different
data sources, um, the FBI crime
reporting data, CDC data, um,
the YRBS, the youth Risk
Behavioral survey data.
We published a national report
that's on our website, then I
can share also with you all
after this meeting.
Um, yeah, next slide please
further up slide 7.
Yeah. Yeah, you're on 22. Yeah.
Yes.
Uh
No, going up.
Uh, yes.
Yeah
Yeah. Thank you. Um, so taking a
look just at some national data.
Overall, we've seen a general
decline in arrests for youth
violence, um, from 2000 to 2022,
about a 54% decline.
This is looking at arrests for
the 4 violent index crimes that
are reported. That includes
homicide, rape, aggravated
assault and robbery.
However, um, next slide please.
That's nationally. This is all
national first.
However, we did see for youth
arrest for homicides that that
has increased over the last
decade and surged in 2022 to
unprecedented levels. Um, if you
go to the next slide, we also
saw that youth arrest for
weapons offenses spiked as well
in 2022 to levels that we
haven't seen for at least a
decade. So general trend on
violence nationally while
overall arrests for youth
violence and are down. There is
some concern nationally around
these.
two categories, homicide and
weapons offenses for young
people.
At the same time that we've seen
these trends for youth arrests,
um, next slide please.
We've seen homicide and suicide
are now the leading causes of
death among children and young
adults. Um,
Uh, this is really important
because when we think about
violent crime, it's important
not just to think about the
crime being committed, but also
that young people are also often
the victims of violent crime,
and so we need to address both
sides of that issue. Um, you can
see here that in about half of
all cases in which a minor
committed a violent crime. The
victim was also a minor, um, and
the numbers are even worse when
we look at the data for young
people of color. The rate of
firearm
deaths among black youth is 20
times higher than that of white
youth.
Um, next slide please.
We've seen this increasing
concern and attention around
youth crime and youth violence
in the media and the public
narrative over the last few
years. I know that's the case
here in New Mexico, um, and as a
result, we know that
policymakers are facing
increased pressure to react, uh,
to this public safety concern
and to suppress you violence.
Um, we're seeing this around the
country, not just here in New
Mexico or in Albuquerque, and we
often see public agencies if you
go to the next slide, this just
shows some headlines from around
the country on on kind of what
the
na rr ative is, um, yeah, that's
fine. Thank you. Um, we see
public agencies often pointing
fingers um around what the
causes are of youth violence and
youth crime, um, who is to
blame? How do we solve these
issues rather than really
focusing on a collaborative
effort to come together and find
effective research-based
solutions.
Um, next slide, please.
Yup. Thank you.
Um, we're seeing states, uh, in
some states around the country,
some jurisdictions that are
turning to strategies that are
more punitive, more detention,
more incarceration, more
transfers into the adult system,
harsher sanctions for kids or
longer times in probation or
incarceration because of that
frustration, um, there's
concerns around what to do with
youth violence. Sometimes
there's a misunderstanding in
terms of what actually works to
help young people, um, and to
intervene with violence, um, but
we do know.
from years and years of
research, um, on juvenile
justice and, and effectiveness
of services and interventions
that these things actually don't
work to improve outcomes for
young people and they don't
actually work to strengthen
public safety, um, and
oftentimes can make things
worse. We've seen a lot of
studies being conducted over the
last several years going decades
uh past that showed diminishing
returns, um, the longer time
that a young person is
incarcerated, and placing young
people in the adult system
actually and increases
recidivism. In addition,
to all the other negative
outcomes in terms of mental
health and, and increased
trauma.
Next slide, please.
These strategies risk using the
juvenile justice system as a
default system to address the
root causes of youth behavior
and to address why youth are in
a state of crisis and why youth
violence is happening in the
first place. Um, the research
shows that, uh, youth that are
involved in the juvenile justice
system actually have worse
outcomes than their peers who
were diverted in the years
following arrest. And this is
particularly true for low risk
kids that don't need a lot of
system interventions or services
to grow out of their
adolescence.
behavior. Um, oftentimes we see
in the research, young people
that even just have one arrest
experience more negative
outcomes when we're looking at
academics, behavioral health,
and the likelihood for future
arrests and so forth.
Next slide.
Um
And while we've seen an increase
in some violent offenses
nationally, and we'll get to the
New Mexico data in a little bit.
The overall population of young
people around the country that
are involved in the juvenile
justice system have not caused
physical harm to another person.
About 70% of young people that
are arrested are arrested for a
non-person offense, about 62% of
all youths on probation, and 62%
of youth that are incarcerated
are in those, uh, placements for
non-person.
offenses. And so we don't want
to create policies that are
focused specifically on youth
violence, but also risks
sweeping up and negatively
impacting the greater majority
of kids that are in the juvenile
justice system that are
committing non-person,
nonviolent offenses.
Next slide, please.
Also, we're seeing increasing
and more intensive behavioral
health needs of the population
of children and young adults and
in the juvenile justice
population, particularly post
pandemic, although we've seen
these increasing and more
complex needs starting to go up
even before the pandemic. We
know from national CDC data and
other data that there has been a
dramatic rise in teen anxiety
and loneliness and depression,
suicidal ideation. And given the
lack of actual behavioral health
systems for adolescents and
jurisdictions and gaps in
community-based and residential
services, the juvenile justice
system is increasingly becoming
the default service provider for
these young people.
Next slide, please.
However, we're seeing public
agencies increasingly struggle
to address the myriad needs of
kids and families. Um, if you go
to the next slide.
Most states have a historically,
as I mentioned, not had
effective or comprehensive
behavioral health systems that
specifically serve adolescents,
which results in kids not
getting access to services that
would help in moments of crisis,
other behavioral health issues
and help prevent them from
committing some of the offenses
that get them involved in the
juvenile justice system, um, you
can see here on the slide, for
example, um, about 5 million
youth who have had um in this
year of data, uh, at least
one major uh depressive episode.
About 3 million youth with
severe major depressive episode,
um, but only half of young
people who have had major or
severe depressive episode
actually received access to
needed treatment, um, to get
them the help that they need.
quick slide, please.
Um, at the same time that young
people are facing this increased
challenges of behavioral health
and other issues. We're also
seeing a staff hiring and
retention crisis in juvenile
justice, but also in the broader
service community, um, we're
seeing it in detention, we're
seeing it in residential
facilities as well as in the
court system and with
community-based providers, um,
about a year ago, we did a
national survey of juvenile
probation agencies and other
juvenile justice agencies
working in residential.
um, as well as, uh,
community-based supervision, um,
and what we found is that about
85% reported having a moderate
or severe challenge and hiring
and retaining staff, um, more
than 80%, um, uh, service
providers stated the same thing
that they were having struggles
with hiring and retaining
quality staff to serve young
people in there and to provide
services, um, and also very few
states reported having an actual
plan.
to address these staffing
challenges. This is causing um,
next slide, please.
This is causing uh a lot of
challenges for the system at
large. It's causing wait lists
for programming, backlogs and
cases in the court system and
also at times unsafe conditions
for both youth and for staff in
facilities, and we've seen these
headlines around the country
where this crisis is leading to
agencies to focus on reactionary
fixes, but not really on long
term sustainable or systemic
solutions. And it's made it a
lot more difficult for juvenile
justice system.
that are trying to implement
more research-based solutions
and approaches to improve
outcomes for youth and families.
Next slide.
Um,
we have seen some states start
to develop innovative approaches
to address some of these
different challenges when we're
talking about behavioral health
or staffing, um, or some of
these youth violence challenges,
for example, Kansas last year
expanded their stepping up
initiative, Stepping up as a
national initiative focused on
adults, trying to get adults
with mental illnesses out of the
jails, um, but they expanded it
to juveniles to try and get
juveniles that have
behavioral health issues out of
their detention centers and
implement more community-based
alternatives to detention. We've
also saw uh seen governors,
Maryland's governor, is one that
established a children's cabinet
to try and coordinate a
continuum of community-based
prevention and intervention
services and in North Carolina,
we saw the governor establish a
statewide office of violence
prevention. Um, we've seen that
happen in other states as well
around the country.
Next slide.
So I'm gonna dive a little bit
into New Mexico's data, um, I
wanna preface this by saying
this is by no means
comprehensive. This is just an
effort to show some of the
current trends like I showed on
the on the national side, it's
uh meant to help prompt
questions, um, and also to think
about further areas of
exploration where would the
state like to dig a little bit
deeper into the data. Again,
this is also reported data to
the FBI in terms of arrest data,
CDC, uh, and other data with
regards to behavioral health.
This is not data that we got um
access to from CYFD or or other
state agencies.
Uh, next slide, please.
Thank you. Um, so similar to
what we are seeing nationally,
behavioral health needs are a
significant driver of juvenile
justice involvement in New
Mexico, um, here you can see
some of the data from the CDC's
youth risk behavior surveillance
system, which is a national
survey that goes out, um,
annually. Um, this is from 2023.
About half of all female high
school students in New Mexico
said that they felt sad or
hopeless in the.
last two weeks in that uh CDC uh
survey, nearly 1/3 of females
said that their mental health
was not good, and nearly 20%
said that they had contemplated
suicide in 2023. That's the
females. You can see that that's
a little bit higher than for
males, and that's what we see
nationally, um, as well.
Next slide.
Um, students in New Mexico and
nationally also report very high
levels of trauma exposure. Um,
this is in New Mexico, data, um,
16% of New Mexico high school
students reported not attending
school at least once in the last
month because they felt unsafe,
9% of high school students in
New Mexico reported experiencing
sexual violence, at least once
in the last year, um, and 25% of
high school students
reported that their mental
health was most of the time or
always not good in the last
month. That's a quarter of all
high school students here in New
Mexico.
Next slide.
When we looked at juvenile
arrest data, um, the youth
arrest data in New Mexico,
similar to nationally has gone
down significantly, um, in 2020,
the youth arrest rate in New
Mexico was 79% lower than the
arrest rate in 2020. Um, but the
New Mexico arrest rate was 12%
higher than the national average
in 2020.
You do see when you look at the
curve, a steeper decline in 2020
during COVID, but the trend has
been moving in that direction in
terms of decline of overall
arrests well before the COVID
pandemic.
Next slide.
In looking at arrests by offense
um in 2020, 72% of youth arrests
in New Mexico were for
non-person offenses, which
closely mirrors the national
trend. I know this data again is
from 2020 and would encourage
everybody to, to dig in to look
at the most recent data, um, but
given the state's concern around
youth crime in the last few
years, um, I would really
encourage folks to look at the
data to see, is this just a blip
in the data?
In terms of youth violence, is
it a particular area of the
state? Is it a particular
offense of violence that is
going up also, is it a blip or
is it a long-term trend? I think
it's still to be determined if
we're looking at just a year or
two of data where that number
has gone up.
Um, but again, the overall, uh,
you know,
Over 70% of all youth arrests
are still for non-person
offenses.
Um, when we looked at each
offense category, New Mexico's
data really did mirror the
national picture across each
category with a slight
difference when we looked at
drug offenses. This was the one
category where arrests in New
Mexico were slightly higher, uh,
of a rate than nationally, but
you can see for person,
property, um, public order
status violent. It was very
clearly mirroring the trend, um,
in terms of the national day.
Next slide, please.
Next
Yeah.
Um, they use the arrest rate for
violent crime in New Mexico,
again, those 4 violent index
crimes that I mentioned earlier
was 61% lower in 2022 than in 20
2010. You can see it going up
from 2020 to 2022, again, with
caution against any long term
assumptions about the data and
really dive deeper to see if
this is gonna be a longer term
trend. Um, the New Mexico
violent index arrest rate was
19% lower.
than the national average in
2022, 200 youths were arrested
for those violent index crimes.
Again, that's um homicide, rape,
aggravated assault and robbery.
But overall, 61% lower than in
2010.
Next slide.
Looking at, uh, no.
Yup, thank you. Uh, looking at,
uh, the deeper end of the
juvenile justice system, looking
at pre-adjudication detention,
the detention rate in 2021 was
42% lower than in 2011, so you
can see a theme here, kind of
the system shrinking, um,
however, the New Mexico
pre-adjudication detention rate
was 29% higher than national
pre-adjudication detention rate
was in 2021. So overall more
kids are being detained in New
Mexico.
compared to the national
average.
Next slide.
Um, and while the proportion of
youth over time that were
detained for a person offense
has gone up. You can see that in
the green bucket um on the bar
chart, um, in 2021, nearly half
of all youth detained
pre-adjudication in New Mexico
were detained for non-person
offenses or technical violations
of supervision.
Next slide.
Looking at incarceration, um,
the rate of incarceration again
declined just like the other
parts of the system, 71% lower
in 2021 and 2011, similar to
detention, the commitment rate
was higher than the national
commitment rate in 2022, 17%
higher than the national
commitment rate.
If you go to the next slide,
Um
36% of committed youth were
convicted of non-person
offenses. Um,
So you can see the in the 2021
our chart, 24% were convicted of
a non-person offense, 12% were
convicted of a status offense or
incarcerated for a technical
violation of supervision.
Which is well, I will say that's
no lower than the national
average, 36% in New Mexico
nationally, we see 54% of youth
committed due to a non-person
offense or technical violation
of probation. So you do have
here in New Mexico, higher risk
kids committing more serious
offenses that are incarcerated,
which is what you would want to
see according to the research.
Next slide.
So that's the data that we
looked at, um, nationally and
for New Mexico, again, we can
share all of the data that's
available in our report on our
website, but I wanted to turn a
little bit to talk about what
are some possible solutions or
how we feel at the justice
center state should be thinking
about addressing all of the
different challenges that we're
seeing with young people, with
families, and with public
systems. Um, so if you go to the
next slide.
Um
Up a little bit.
Thank you. Um, we really feel
like this this crisis,
behavioral health challenges,
youth violence, concerns with
youth crime, the challenges with
the workforce and staffing
issues, um, and how providers
are struggling to provide
services to young people,
presents a critical opportunity
for states to develop a new
vision that includes an
interconnected set of strategies
for how to more effectively
protect public safety, but also
support the most vulnerable kids
and families in our state.
Um, how to get kids to
transition to a safe and
productive adulthood. We're
thinking of a vision that's more
collaborative, that's more cross
systems, that doesn't rely just
on the juvenile justice system
to get kids access to services
that's rooted in effective and
accessible services to all kids
and families. That's research
based and that addresses the
root causes of young people's
behavior and what causes them to
get involved in the juvenile
justice system in the first
place, um, with
had a more coordinated
cross-system solutions. We're
seeing many states that are
reverting back to ineffective
and more punitive public safety
policies that really failed to
address the use caused the root
causes of young people's
behavior, um, or they're really
working on isolated initiatives
that don't have um that aren't
going to reach the full
potential of impact that we want
to see for kids and families,
um, and that don't maximize the
availability of resources. If
you think about it.
Tyler as well, these kids on the
prevention side, these kids in
juvenile justice, these kids and
child welfare, are you really
maximizing the use of resources
because a lot of times these are
kids that overlap multiple
systems at the same time.
Uh, next slide.
Thank you.
Um, so this new vision that
we're, uh, going to be thinking
about, um, in partnership with
different states around the
country is really multifaceted.
Um, it includes on the one hand,
strategies to expand youth
diversion, so that low risk kids
that don't need to be in the
juvenile justice system are
diverted from system involvement
that they can get access to
services without any court
involvement, and for some kids
that might mean no services at
all because we know from the
research, um, that if we
overservice kids.
that actually can lead to worse
outcomes and sometimes kids just
grow out of their adolescent
behavior.
Um, next slide. It also includes
establishing a more coordinated
set of prevention strategies at
the front end to support kids
and families that are in crisis.
Things like mobile crisis,
creating youth assessment
centers, stabilization units,
really having a true early
intervention system, um,
expanding school-based diversion
and referral pathways from
schools, um, and I won't go into
detail, but here we shared some
examples of other states and how
they are addressing.
Um, or providing these kinds of
services across the continuum
for youth and families, um.
So you can see states like
Connecticut and Nevada that
established um mobile crisis
units that can be deployed
across the state for youth and
families that are in crisis, um,
states that have uh established
statewide youth assessment
centers that are, uh, regionally
based that can serve as kind of
a one stop shop for youth and
families to get access to
services, um, in states that
have really spent a lot of time
working on diverting young
people, um, through schools
using schools kind of a, as a
community hub, um, to provide.
kids and families with services.
Next slide.
And the vision also has to think
about the other end of the
continuum, the deeper end. It
has to include a broader
violence prevention and
intervention plan to support
those kids that I are higher
risk to public safety, those
kids that are committing violent
offenses, um, to help reduce
recidivism, um, it's important
we know to divert low risk kids
so that we can focus limited
resources on those higher risk
kids. Um, and the research shows
that certain interventions, um,
cognitive behavioral.
Therapy, functional family
therapy are more effective in
promoting strong public safety
outcomes, and these
interventions should be
available to youth that are
engaged in violence. Um,
violence prevention and
intervention efforts need to be
comprehensive. They need to be
rooted in communities, um, and
include community stakeholders.
It includes strategies like
credible messengers,
hospital-based interventions,
trauma recovery centers and real
true partnerships with
grassroots organizations that
cannot just intervene.
violence, but also respond to
the needs of victims more
effectively.
Next slide.
Um, so this is the vision that
the Justice Center is going to
be working on in the next year
plus, uh, with states around the
country, we're going to be
providing technical assistance
to a small set of states to
develop a statewide
comprehensive infrastructure to
be able to implement um a plan
that strengthens and scales up a
continuum of research based
community based services for
vulnerable children and
families. We're going to be
selecting states in the next few
months to participate in that
initiative.
We're going to help convene
state leaders across branches of
government and across systems do
not justice, child welfare,
education, behavioral health to
develop and oversee the
development of a comprehensive
state plan that can develop that
kind of infrastructure.
We plan on educating and
informing state leaders on a set
of uh strategies, policy
strategies, funding and
financing strategies, workforce
strategies to include in their
comprehensive state plans, and
we're going to engage with
states to do some system mapping
to assess where are they in
terms of these policies, um,
funding, uh, structures,
workforce strategies, service
provision across this continuum
of prevention and high-risk
intervention.
Um, and then we're gonna bring
these state teams together, um,
to help them identify
priorities, we're gonna have a
multi-state convening in the
fall of 2025 where state teams
can learn from national experts
and we're going to help the
teams translate all of their
work into actionable state
plans. We'll share more
information with you all and
with other leaders in the state,
but I just wanted to say that
that's kind of the direction
that we're headed in the Justice
Center, um, and would love for
new Macs that to consider that,
um, as an opportunity to partner
with us.
To develop that new vision for
how to best support vulnerable
children and families in New
Mexico.
Next slide.
Um, and, and lastly, I just
wanted to share with you all
some of the key questions that
we're gonna be exploring over
the next couple of days during
this listening tour, as I
mentioned in the beginning,
we're going to be meeting with
stakeholders across the juvenile
justice, other service systems
and with the community, uh,
providers, advocates and young
people and families, um, and
questions that we also feel like
policy makers like you all
should consider in thinking
about how to best improve
outcomes for young people in New
Mexico. So thinking about what
are the
biggest challenges to improving
public safety, to strengthening
and getting better outcomes for
kids and families. Do you have
sufficient services available
for young peoples and family to
prevent, um, kids' behavior from
getting worse from escalating to
involvement in the juvenile
justice system. Do you have the
services necessary to intervene
in terms of youth violence and
for those higher risk kids that
are public safety risk. Um, is
the system sufficiently focused
on public safety and
those higher risk kids. Um, and
then also the workforce piece.
Um, how can service systems
providers, communities work
together to address all of these
common challenges and to address
the workforce issue to help get
kids access with these services.
So these are some of the
questions that we're going to be
exploring and the next, let's
say 2.5 days, maybe 2 days, um,
with you all across the state.
So thank you all for your time.
Really excited to be here in New
Mexico, excited to kick it off
with this, uh, briefing and
presentation.
Um
Thank you, and I wonder if, if
while they're here, we might
have
The people that were involved in
the discussion with you this
morning.
Uh, introduce themselves, at
least a few or say just a few
words about what this means to
you, Judge. Go ahead. Why don't
we start with you?
No, you have to turn it on.
Yeah.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the the committee.
I'm
Very happy to be sitting beside
um our representative from
Council state governments,
they've worked with our state
before, um, I think New Mexico
often benefits greatly from
multi-stakeholder and system
inputs, um, that always has to
include community. It has to
include victims, it has to
include system impacted youth
and families, and I think
together we
Um, are able to come up with
positive solutions and and
Ideally,
I think the goal is, but I think
all of us want in New Mexico is
to improve outcomes for you and
keep our communities safe.
appreciate the time that you've
given CSG. Could you introduce
yourself? I apologize. My name
is Marie Ward. I'm the chief
judge of the 2nd Judicial
District Court.
If the others could just come up
and do the same thing, so we
don't.
missed the opportunity to meet
you all and, and to thank you.
Good, um, afternoon chair
representatives, senators, my
name's Brianna Samoa. I'm an
associate justice of the New
Mexico Supreme Court, um, and
the liaison for basically
anything related to crime,
children or behavioral health.
And that's why I'm here.
Right
Good afternoon, Teresa Casados,
cabinet secretary at CYFD, um,
I'm super excited to be working
with them, especially as we're
really launching our prevention
and intervention to really work
on how we can support families
early and get them the right
interventions that they need so
that they're not entering into
that juvenile justice system.
I'm excited that this is at the
same time as our juvenile
justice convening and they're
going to be there tomorrow to
talk with all of our staff that
are pulled together in
Albuquerque, um, so I look
forward to working with them
throughout on this project.
Thank you. Great. Thank you,
Madam Secretary.
Judge Snyder, welcome. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Angie Schneider. I'm the chief
judge in the 12th Judicial
District Lincoln and Otero
counties, and I preside over
juvenile justice, child welfare,
child welfare, excuse me, uh,
adult criminal incompetency
cases, so all of those cases are
connecting, they're connected,
they all involve the same
families, and I just, I really
just echo what my colleagues
said. I, I wear a number of hats
in the state, um, for in the
child welfare arena and and.
criminal justice and um we, we,
we need to be doing better uh
for young people and families,
period, and I think there's a
lot of work going on and, and
not a lot of collaboration and
communication, and so I'm, I'm
hopeful that this will be a step
in, in that, in that right
direction. So thank you so how's
your diversion program going
down there? Did it get off the
ground? It got to the ground. We
have, we're part of the
competency uh diversion pilot
program. We opened that two
months ago and um.
It's, I'm really proud of that
we're uh screening a whole lot
of people and um and we're also
starting a young adult court. um
we hired a program coordinator
for that and we're moving
forward on 18 to 25 year olds,
but we shouldn't have 18 year
olds coming into the adult
system if we're doing the good
work on the other side.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Alison
Park. I'm a staff attorney at
the administrative office of the
courts. I primarily work with
the Children's Court Improvement
Commission, tribal state
judicial consortium and juvenile
justice, other child welfare
matters, and I work under Selena
Jones, um.
Prior to coming to AOC 3 years
ago, I was a public defender in
juvenile justice for 14 years in
Albuquerque, um, in the 14 years
I saw juvenile justice go from
having
Many, many cases and 10 public
defenders just for juvenile
justice in Albuquerque to now, I
think there's 3 or 4 public
defenders. So the caseloads have
gone down, but the cases have
gotten harder, um, more kids,
more violence, um, and we, I
think that this is an
opportunity to really try to
help some of these young people
without getting them further
into the juvenile, um, into the
detention arenas, so.
Thank you.
Thank you, Allison.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
you all know me. My name is
Benjamin Baker, I work as a
policy advisor in the public
safety space for our governor,
um, and I won't rehash what my
colleagues have so eloquently
said, except I will share one
thing we we covered last hour
before we joined you was I'm
really grateful to be part of
the conversation with a group of
experts so impassioned on the
topic that we all hold so dear.
My
Optimism on our ability to
capitalize on this opportunity
that faces us right now with
this group here and the capable
group in our upcoming
legislation couldn't be higher,
so very grateful for the, the
facilitation as well as the
audience. Thank you.
Thank you then.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the commission. My
name is Bennett Bauer. I'm the
chief public defender. I
actually wasn't at the meeting,
um, I just heard there was a
free lunch.
Did, did you get one? I did
good,
afternoon, Mr. Chair and members
of the commission. My name is
Bennett Bauer. I'm the chief
public defender. I actually
wasn't at the meeting, um, I
just heard there was a free
lunch.
Did, did you get one? I did,
but actually, actually we have a
group of defense attorneys
meeting uh with with these folks
uh tomorrow, uh, from
Albuquerque and from around the
states. So I'm really looking
forward to what comes out of
that conversation is a public
defender's office, obviously, we
represent the vast majority of
the children around.
State and are really concerned
about whether
I guess the threat of huge
sanctions and especially adult
sanctions actually leads to a
deterrent effect for young
people making the decision about
whether they're going to commit
an act or not, uh, and the idea
that um we should be treating so
many more children, uh, in the
adult system. But we're looking
forward to the discussion. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Ben.
Well
I guess we could take 1 or 2
questions if anybody had a
question. Oh, we had several,
uh, we don't want to take too
many, but if you can limit
yourself to a single question.
Uh, Representative Herndon, and
then uh Representative Chavez,
Senator Lopez.
All the lawyers want to ask
questions a single question that
is not a 3 minute question that
you asked for 5 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
Madam, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
chair, my, my, I really want to
make a comment on one question.
So on this morning on peace
talks, they had a, a, a, a story
on NPR talking about people,
children who were involved in
violent incidences, and 60% of
the time those who were involved
in the juvenile justice system
had been bullies when they were
in high school, I mean when they
were in elementary school, and I
just wanted to find out if that
concept is, is.
flowing through and what you're
finding and as you do that,
there's also been a big push for
mental health rooms and with
that in, in that respect, there
have been students who've been
asking for them, and my one
question is, I want to make sure
I just wanna make sure that you
know there's gonna be a
documentary on, on December 30,
21st, where students themselves
have created a documentary from
the New Mexico Academy for the
Media Arts, talking about their
mental health, and I advise you
to come, as you can.
to look at New Mexico. So that's
my question.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chavez, you, did
you have a question?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
you talked about, um, this is
about the summit and, and my
question is, are there are the
AGs or DA's involved in those
conversations, specifically, uh,
Sam Brigman from Bernalillo
County.
It's, uh, thank you,
Representative Chavez and, and
chair. Um, yes, uh, tomorrow,
um, at the same time that one of
us will be meeting with uh the
defenders. One of us will be
meeting with a group of
prosecutors um from around the
state, including uh DA Bregman's
office as well will be
participating in that session.
Good, thank you. How about the
uh the Minister of Justice, is
he also going to be there?
The
Attorney general, don't believe
he established the Ministry of
Justice. I don't believe so for
members, that's how you do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for this presentation. When
you had mentioned about um
trauma.
causation of, you know,
different problems for youth and
behavioral health. Um,
Do you look at things like
alcohol, you know, um, underage
drinking prevention.
Um, yes, thank you for that,
that question. Um, thank you,
chair. Um, yes, if you look at,
and we have more data points
that we just didn't include in
the presentation, otherwise, it
would get very, very long, but
that, uh, survey that I
mentioned, the CDC is, uh, you
risk behavioral surveillance
system survey does have
questions around substance use,
alcohol, uh, use, etc. Um, and
we have seen that as well, um,
in terms of increasing rates in
addition to increasing um issues
with behavioral health trauma.
etc. over the last several
years.
OK, and do you, um,
can I add a point on the data of
the substance use, um, so the
national data does show that
well substance use has declined
significantly overdose from
substance use for adolescents
has increased drastically, so
there is more of that data, but
that's one key national point.
And and there are two things I
wanted to comment for the
committee's benefit, uh, Xander
will make copies of the, of the
presentation. We just got it
right before the presentation,
so we didn't have time, but he
will run them off and over the
next.
by this afternoon, we'll all
have copies of the presentation.
Second thing is, we usually
have, and I, and it just slipped
past us and I just wanted to
flag it for next year's interim
committee, a report on the youth
resilience study, and we didn't
do that this year, we should
have, and we, and it slipped
past me. um, but for next year,
that would be a good item to
make sure we, we, we keep
following up on to see the
change over years.
Mr. Chair, I have 11 quick, so
We talk about ACEs, adverse
childhood experiences.
The early childhood education
can help prevent kids from, if
we prevent the ACEs from birth
on, will do better when they're
adolescents and adults, and we
need to keep, keep pushing that
forward that, you know, well,
things are so bad. Well, we
could have invested in early
childhood 20 years ago, but we
chose not to, or some people
chose not to. So just a reminder
that, that ECECD is gonna play
it.
critical role in this. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Kate.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Vice Chair for
speaking this. You're non-person
offense is that a property
crime, a crime of poverty, a
crime of theft.
Uh, yes, thank you,
Representative, uh, Kates and,
uh, chair, uh, yes, so
non-person could be property
drug, um, any of the, any
offense that is not committed
against another. Thank you, Mr.
So I'm gonna show my age. In the
80s, we had unprecedented um
murder and acts of violence, uh,
affecting our young men of color
in this country and um I, and,
and we saw an investment on
opportunity as being really
addressing.
That more I understand we're in
a different age with isolation
with social media as well. We're
not as well socialized as we
were back then, maybe, but um I
didn't feel that I really saw
the address of poverty on on
this report, so I ask you for
that consideration, and the only
other question real quick more
more I just a clarification, you
have more detainments but less
arrests, uh, more detainments in
New Mexico, but less arrests for
juvenile.
now, is that correct?
Uh, yeah, so Representative Kes
looking at a rates, so not
actual numbers, but that
detention rate, uh, in New
Mexico is higher than the
national average.
Um, the detention rate overall
in New Mexico has gone down, but
the rate at which kids are
detained in New Mexico is higher
than the rate at which they're
detained nationally.
Senator Si Lous, did you have a
question? No block didn't ask a
question.
Thank you. Um, you say that um
that uh children or youth of
color are more involved, but
then you didn't break them down.
Do you have the data?
About, you know, what that looks
like. Yes. uh, thank you,
Senator Sidilia Lopez, Mr.
Chair, um, we have that data
nationally. We don't have that
data in New Mexico, broken down,
um, nationally, um, and
nationally we have the data
broken down in terms of black
and white youth. We know
obviously the population in New
Mexico focuses heavily on
Hispanic and Native American
youth. We don't have that broken
down, but we do see the
detention rates, incarceration
rates, kind of at every point in
the continuum that those youth
of color.
are arrested at higher rates,
detained at higher rates and
incarcerated at higher rates. If
you go back to our report in
2016, we did break down those
numbers when we had access to
CYFD data in in New Mexico, yes,
but that's back in 2016. I think
that's really important because
we're a majority minority state,
and I think that could explain
some of this, but I would
appreciate getting that if you
have it.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just
want to say thank you very much
for the presentation and um Mr.
Chair, as you know, we have a
Senate Memorial 5 task force
that we are currently working
on, and uh again, secretary
Casados and there's a sundry of
others. We've had this um data
and conversation.
And we're almost finished with
the report. We'll give a, an
overview on Friday. I'll be
going to LFC to give her kind of
a report out. We don't have
anything that's voted on at this
time because we're still working
through some.
How would I say Representative
Chavez is with me on.
Yeah, stuff, detail, um, on
that. But I do want to say that
this information is there.
And uh I also happen to sit on
the Children's Court Improvement
commission, and we've had
conversations on that, on this
particular subject over the
years.
And also I have the Children's
code task force, and we
currently are working on a
juvenile justice subcommittee
that again with the experts who
are on there are also sharing
money to the same data and the
response too, so, just thank
you, thank you for being here.
Anybody else?
Senator Pinto
a comment, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your presentation. Because
you do have a, uh, you know,
some people advocating and doing
some work in the community that
they want to expand because we
know a lot of this intertwined
with other, um,
Issues, but one of the things
too is the budget.
Did not seem to, well, not to
see the budget, but these lines
of how we try to get funding to
them seems to work against him
more than it helps to really,
and then they end up calling me
like we, we're still not getting
this, the vehicle. We're still
not able to get this because of
some holdups, so please keep
that in mind too. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and Senator
Pope we'll let you wrap it up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. I'll try
to be real quick, you know, I
substitute teach in some of the
Albuquerque public schools I
just substituted yesterday in a
Title I school uh in my
district, which is a community
school. And so we're talking
about community schools, we're
talking about violence
intervention programs, which are
funded with junior money and
grow money as well. Um, but you
just see so much need there. And
so even after school ended.
You're trying to get programs to
where these kids don't even have
a place to go because their
family's not there. Some of it's
for work, but some, they're
living with their grandparents
do not really have a place to
go. And so I just want to
emphasize to the committee, we
just have to find out ways to do
more, um, you know, you're
looking at a person example of
Raised by a single mom raising
me.
But I'm not here if we try to
make this system harsh and we're
in lock everyone up away.
And so we got to really think
about that and how we do this
and how we prevent this from
happening with our kids. So my
question real quick if we could,
is what needs to happen with uh
services or, or services from
community schools, um, that are
gonna help solve this issue.
Yeah, um, thank you, Senator
Pope and, and Mr. Chair. That's
a great question. We do think
that, um, using schools as a
community hub as a referral
pathway as an opportunity to
divert kids is really important.
Um, there has to be a connection
between, uh, schools and
community-based providers. There
has to be an easier way to get
access to those services for
kids through school, so they
don't have to get involved in
courts, and we do see community
schools, community-based mental
health centers is really good
examples of ways to do that.
So scaling and leveraging that
is really important. And, and
one of the other data points
that wasn't on here but it's in
our larger study is there's also
been chronic absenteeism and so
where often those community
schools were the hub, we need to
make sure we have ways to get
those kids reconnected with the
schools in the first place.
Well, thank you very much, and
I'm reminded by Representative
Chasey that the uh
PowerPoint is available online
for those of you watching
remotely, you can access it
under handouts under this
committee's meeting.
Today and printed copies for us
will be available shortly.
But thank you again. Thank you,
Representative Chasey for uh
making the arrangements to get
this here and great
presentation. We really
appreciate it.
And nice high quality sandwiches
today too. Very good.
Thank you very much.
OK, members, we'll move then on
to the afternoon agenda and the
first item.
Is the healthcare workforce
growth plan. So we have Doctor
Richards, uh, Doctor Finn and
President Stokes from UNM.
Doctor Richards is the interim
executive vice president for
Health Sciences.
Doctor Finn is the dean of the
School of Medicine
and uh Doctor Stokes is the
president of the whole shebang.
And she's still glowing in the
successes of the football and
basketball teams.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee for inviting us
to present this critical project
to the legislative Health and
Human Services Committee. And
yes, we are still grinning about
our success Saturday night. It's
been a long time coming
Um, before I really started
though, I want to specifically
thank you, Senator, uh, for your
service in the New Mexico sent
it for the last nearly 20 years,
um, your advocacy for the health
and well-being.
of New Mexicans during your
career is probably immeasurable
and it is certainly a lasting
legacy.
So today we want to talk about
the future of health care in our
state.
This is a bold and
transformative initiative for
UNM. Significantly expanding our
role in providing access to
healthcare for the state of New
Mexico. This effort is not just
an institutional priority. It is
a commitment to ensuring that
every New Mexican, regardless of
their location has access to the
health care that they need.
We are all aware of the
challenges of not having enough
access to healthcare. In fact,
it's personal. Many of us have
experienced delays in getting
primary, getting specialty
appointments in a struggle to
find primary care providers. We
all face these challenges
wherever we live or whatever
resources we have available, the
issue though intensifies in
communities that reflect more
rural characteristics due to
limited health infrastructure
and fewer providers.
And addressing New Mexico's
healthcare challenges, even in
plays a special role and has a
unique responsibility with
state's primary educational
institution for training the
health professional workforce,
and we serve as the state's
provider for many critical
health services.
If you're going to receive care
in New Mexico for many
healthcare issues, it will be at
UNM. You know, we all, we all
know we have the level one
trauma center, the comprehensive
Cancer Center, a dedicated
children's hospital specialized
children's emergency department.
So there are lots of unique
services that we offer.
This responsibility that we have
represents a promise to our
community and the state. It is a
promise to be a part of
everyone's health care journey
and to support every health
system across the state of New
Mexico.
Our regions have given their
wholehearted support for us to
do everything possible to
address the healthcare workforce
shortage and other critical
needs. There are certain things
that really only you and him can
do for New Mexico.
And this initiative we are
discussing today embodies that
commitment.
Before we delve into the
specifics, Mr. Chair, I'd like
to, uh, introduce, although you
have actually introduced our
speakers who will be sharing
their insights. So you've
already heard Doctor Mike
Richards, uh, uh, serving as
executive vice president for
health sciences, um, of course,
he brings a wealth of experience
in healthcare administration.
He's been a pivotal figure in
guiding our health system
through these transformative
times. We're also honored to
welcome Doctor Patricia Finn,
our dean of medicine.
She's a renowned physician
scientist and has led our school
of medicine with distinction,
advancing our mission in medical
education and research.
Um, I think I will start by
outlining how UNM is uniquely
positioned to shape the future
of healthcare in New Mexico and
our plan to achieve this goal,
uh, along with Doctor Richards
and Doctor Finn. So looking at
your handout and you pass the
first cover page to uh what is
effectively slide 2. this slide
explains what we mean by
strengthening uh campus through
medical school expansion. This
initiative is designed to create
transformative academic.
pathways. We will establish a
direct pipeline for our
undergraduate students to pursue
medical degrees seamlessly by
expanding dual degree options
and fostering interdisciplinary
studies, we will align
educational opportunities with
the evolving needs of the health
care sector.
As a nationally recognized
Hispanic serving and minority
serving institution are
collaborative pathway programs
are incredibly valuable and make
an important contribution to
workforce expansion.
Furthermore, we'll enhance our
research collaboration across
our campuses, which will
facilitate research initiatives
across all campuses and these
kinds of collaborations are
actually instrumental to the
creation of collaborative degree
programs, um, that are also
important for this expansion. It
allows us to push the boundaries
of what we know about healthcare
as well.
We must all be committed to
increasing campus connectivity.
So by integrating cutting edge
medical research and education
across our university and all of
higher education in New Mexico.
We aim to create and attract
more top talent, enhance our
academic profile and ensure that
UNM remains at the forefront of
medical education and research.
This holistic one university
approach is essential for
driving progress and innovation
within our institutions.
On the next page, um, what is
effectively slide 3. you can see
and hear that I am emphasizing
one university. Um, this is all
about all of us together,
unifying our efforts across
campus to better serve the state
and our communities. So by
consolidating our resources and
expertise, we will enhance our
ability to deliver high quality
health care education, research,
and service delivery.
A unified approach will help us
meet the evolving needs of New
Mexico's healthcare workforce.
It's a cohesive strategy that is
crucial for a diver for
addressing the diverse needs of
our communities. It's not just
about expanding our reach. It is
actually about setting a new
standard for how a university
can impact the well-being of the
citizens of its state.
On the next slide, you'll see
Mr. Chair, that we're not just
starting from scratch, uh, we
need to celebrate the hard work
and accomplishments that have
already taken place.
Uh, on page for the slide there
it shows you a snapshot of our
current efforts and its impact.
You went in plays a vital role
in healthcare across New Mexico.
Our clinics and affiliated
facilities handle over a million
visits from patients annually,
and that includes more than
75,000 emergency care visits and
over 21,000 surgical procedures.
These numbers reflect our
commitment to providing
accessible high quality health
care.
Although our unique influence
extends beyond patient care. I
do want to mention that we have
substantial impacts on the state
related to research, and you see
there a number from 2023, uh,
mentioning our $348 million in
research funding, but actually
that information turns out to be
a little dated because it turns
out in FY 24, um, our numbers
reached nearly 390 million and
we're on the way up. Um, our
excellence is evident in the
school of medicine.
Sis Blue Ridge rankings, um,
that is an institute that's well
established or well established
nonprofit that compiles and
reports annual rankings of
medical school departments based
on their funding from NIH and
where we have in the school of
medicine, 3 of our departments
have received prestigious
recognition with one ranking in
the top 10.
These accomplishments underscore
our leadership in advancing
medical knowledge and preparing
future healthcare professionals.
Moving to page 5, the slide
there. We also recognize that
there are complex community
needs that drive our expansion
efforts. Access to care remains
a significant challenge with 32
of 33 of New Mexico's counties
designated as health
professional shortage areas.
Many health care professionals
are nearing retirement.
Which will undoubtedly
exacerbate our existing
shortages.
Moreover, the state's diverse
population requires culturally
competent care, which makes
staffing needs even more
complex.
The aging population is
increasing the demand for health
services on nearly 25% of the
population lives in rural areas
with limited access to care. The
declining birth rates and fewer
students entering K through 12,
um, will pose challenges for our
future healthcare workforce, and
we know that there is a growing
need for care related to
addiction, mental health and
behavioral health. To address
these challenges, we must expand
our clinical.
education capabilities and our
research. This includes
overcoming limitations and
clinical training slots and
infrastructure while increasing
the faculty size to support
larger classes and higher
quality, the high quality
education.
So on page 6, the slide there as
a university, we're committed to
improving health care access and
outcomes. The required growth is
not limited to clinical and
educational advancements. It
extends to research and
innovation. Because we are a
university with a health care
system. We are uniquely
positioned to explore new
frontiers in healthcare and find
solutions to improve outcomes
for all New Mexicans.
Excellence in health education
remains a cornerstone of our
mission.
And we're dedicated to repairing
future healthcare leaders with a
curriculum that blends
experiential learning, early
clinical practice and modern
technology. We want our students
to not only be knowledgeable but
equipped with practical skills
that are necessary. Our
faculties's researcher at the
forefront of innovation and span
disciplines such as medicine,
public health, and environmental
sciences, and we must continue
to promote those
cross-disciplinary partnerships
if we are.
to truly drive progress and
address pressing health
challenges.
Our commitment to strengthening
the healthcare workforce
includes training providers
specifically for underserved in
rural communities.
Finally, Mr. Chair, on page 7
slide, let's address the stark
realities of the healthcare
shortage in New Mexico, as you
can see, the day the data
highlight our critical gaps. By
2035, the demand for physicians
will rise from 522 to 1680 and
the need for nurses will
increase from 5952 to 10,520.
Other professions are also uh uh
areas where we have critical.
shortages, dental hygienist,
public health professionals,
many others.
Addressing these gaps requires
more than even recognizing that
it exists. It demands something
strategic and innovative. It
requires a response that is
unwavering, a commitment that is
unwavering. So, Mr. Chair, I
will turn it over to Doctor
Richards to discuss the current
and future landscape of
healthcare delivery, and of
course then you'll turn it over
to Doctor Finn, and we'll go
back and forth. Thank you.
So, Mr. Chair and committee
members, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
I'm gonna pick up on some of the
landscape issues that you've
heard President Stokes talk
about, but also talk about the
opportunity that we have right
now here in New Mexico. Um, so
if we look at slide 9, in terms
of the health profession's
landscape, um, and we've already
talked about some of the, the
shortages. When we look at some
of these numbers, for example,
physicians per capita, New
Mexico actually comes in right
at the national.
average 320 physicians per
100,000. Um, but what that
doesn't tell us is actually what
we need. That tells us where we
are relative to everyone else in
terms of a per capita. But when
we look at what the healthcare
needs are for New Mexico, we
should really redefine this by
what are gap is in terms of what
would be an adequate supply. And
so when we can look at things
like family and community
medicine, we'll see that right
now we're at about 93% adequacy.
and by 2035 we'll be at 82%
adequacy. And when we consider
the fact that we're such a rural
state, those numbers oftentimes
in rural communities are half.
So if the overall state number
is 80 in the rural communities,
the adequacy can drop to 40 or
50%. And, and the other really
important piece of this is that
that's driven by the
demographics of our state, as
you've probably already heard,
you know, our state is an aging
population that consumption.
of healthcare is different in
the 65 and older age group, and
in fact, 65 and older consumes
healthcare in terms of like
hospital services and rate of 4
times that of the age group
that's immediately under that.
So even if our population is
staying the same,
The healthcare demands are
actually going up. And so we've
talked a lot about the idea that
this is really healthcare
professionals. Another concept
that I want to really um leave
you with today is that it's also
about healthcare infrastructure.
And so when we look at
infrastructure in New Mexico,
and I will pick hospital beds as
the marker for overall
healthcare infrastructure.
New Mexico comes in at about 1.7
beds per 1000, which gets us
ranked forty-eighth in the
country. The national average is
2.35 beds per 1000, which means
that we're 31% below the
national average on
infrastructure, and if you'll
flip over to the next page. The
reason that this belongs in the
context of a discussion about
health care professionals, is
that in many cases, the reason
why we don't have healthcare
professionals is we don't have
the healthcare infrastructure to
recruit them into and a good
example of that is physicians,
and you'll see here that now
almost 78% of all physicians
work for hospitals, health
systems, large medical groups.
And so if we don't have the
infrastructure, there's not a
place to recruit the healthcare
professionals into, and that is
true for nurses and all of the
other types of health care
professionals. On the next page,
you
you'll see that, that, that this
is also true for education. Um,
one of the issues for health
professional education is that
that those learners require a
healthcare infrastructure to
complete their education, and at
the University of New Mexico, we
really have not had a
significant change in the size
of our healthcare infrastructure
for almost 15 years. During that
15-year period, we've grown our
educational
programs to the maximum size
that the current clinical
platform can accommodate. So the
rate limiting step has been not
the need in the state or our
ability to recruit providers,
but the fact that we've got to
have both the patience that we
can see inside a healthcare
infrastructure to be able to
grow the educational programs.
And so this gets us to probably
one of the most important things
for today, which is why this is
different, and we've got a new
opportunity for the University
of New Mexico.
Um, we currently have over a
billion dollars worth of capital
projects underway in our
clinical delivery system right
now. The largest of which is our
new hospital tower, um, which
will give us 96 new critical
care beds, a completely new
surgical platform, diagnostics
and therapeutic platform, new
adult emergency department. That
building is also shelled out for
And how we can start to grow
educational programs as we grow
our clinical delivery system. We
look over a 10-year period, we
expect that the UNM health
system clinical delivery systems
will almost double the size of
the adult platform, that will
mean that we'll have over 265
more hospital beds, able to see
over 20,000 more hospital
patients will mean that we'll
need to recruit over 2000 more
hospital staff, but that will
also mean the opportunity to
recruit 300 more physicians.
As a part of that, we now have
both the patients, the clinical
platform to be able to grow the
educational programs, starting
with things like our graduate
medical education, which we will
grow by about 200 positions.
On the next page, you'll see
that it's not just about the
hospital-based services, but
it's also about the clinics,
because that's a critical
portion of how we create access
to care, but also where we train
our healthcare professionals,
get an opportunity to grow more
healthcare professionals and
growing more um school of
Anticipate that we'll be able to
bring on about 350 more school
of medicine faculty members,
about 250 to 300 more residents
and fellows, making us one of
the, which will make us one of
the largest graduate medical
education programs in the United
States, and most importantly,
this now lets us have the
conversation about significantly
growing our educational
programs, and then, and with the
charge of President Stokes in
role as the interim EVP. We've
now set a target that we would
like to double the size of all
of our educational programs for
health professions, including
the school of medicine, both
undergraduate and health
professional programs, and Dean
Finn will talk about that. We
move to the next slide, and, and
as I talk about what that means
and for the health sciences
center and growing these
educational programs. I first
want to talk about the idea that
we understand that our
goal isn't just to train
healthcare professionals. Our
real goal is to create this
opportunity for a health
profession's career for New
Mexicans. New Mexicans from all
over our state, because we
believe in and understand the
power of this educational
opportunity to be able to change
the lives of individuals, to be
able to change the lives of
families to be able to change
the lives of community. We want
to create the right pathway
programs that, that
Bring these students in from all
over our state with the
understanding that that's going
to give us the best chance of
creating the kinds of healthcare
workforce that New Mexico needs
and also the best chance of
having help professionals who
are more likely to go back to
their communities, um, where
they have connections to be able
to build the healthcare
workforce there. So as we think
about this, we start with the
idea of making sure that we're
creating the right pathways into
our health profession.
programs, doubling the size of
these educational programs
within health sciences may mean
we'll also have to think
differently about how we ensure
that individuals who may have
all of the capabilities of being
successful, but maybe weren't
given all of the opportunities
to be prepared that we are ready
to bring them into an
educational process so that they
will in fact be successful.
On the next page, we'll talk
about um the fact that as
President Stokes noted, we are
not starting from a dead
standstill. We've already
started to make some very
significant progress with
investments across the health
profession's colleges. We'll
start with our College of
Nursing, um, um, over the last
couple of weeks, we just
recently did a ribbon cutting
where we moved into our brand
new nursing education building
under the leadership of a new
College of Nursing Dean, Rosario
Medina, and she
rapidly embracing this idea of
how we continue to grow our
nursing education programs.
We've also on the next page,
just recently started the um
planning for renovation of our
College of Pharmacy, um, in this
particular case, I think that
we've got an, an excellent
opportunity to offer, you know,
careers in the pharmaceutical
disciplines such as the
clinician, pharmacist because
New Mexico has really embraced
the idea that these kinds of
healthcare professionals
Can really be used in our rural
environment to, to extend the
availability of primary care,
that I think will ultimately
mean that we'll be able to be
not just a destination for New
Mexican students, but maybe even
regionally to attract
individuals into those
pharmaceutical programs. And on
the next page, you'll know that
we, um, we have recently created
our College of Population
Health. It also occupies that
same building with the College
of Nursing, um, and recently
moved in.
there, that building, and, and
so we've had recent investments
where we've been able to grow
that faculty to be able to grow
both the masters and grad and
and PhD level programs or public
health, again, an essential part
of the health workforce for New
Mexico. And this, this gets me
to the next slide, which is the
school of medicine. While we
have made significant
investments in all of the other
colleges, nursing, pharmacy,
population health, the one
college where
We've not had that opportunity
is the school of medicine, and
in part it has been because up
until recently, we did not have
the clinical platform that would
have supported a significant
expansion of our school of
medicine. And so with that, Mr.
Chair, I'll turn this over to
Dean Finn.
Thank you so much, Doctor
Richards and President Stokes
and uh thank you so much, Mr.
Chair and committee members. I'm
really honored and absolutely
delighted to have the chance to
speak to you about this.
Opportunity for all of New
Mexico. So what you can see on
slide 19 is what we're talking
about, which is our next
generation graduating, and I
think about the future and an
opportunity for improving
health, health care, and access
for all New Mexicans and as a
model for the future. On slide
20 what I'd really like to
emphasize is on the right hand
side of the slide, which is that
the school of medicine is more
than just training medical
doctors. That
Indeed, the school of medicine
is training essential other
healthcare providers and
practitioners, and I'm sure
every single person in this room
has availed themselves of the
wonderful physical therapist of
the wonderful occupational
therapist of the wonderful
everyone that you see on there
are new anesthesia assistant or
um dental hygienist and not is
also comes under the aegis of
the school of medicine. So as
Doctor Richards and President
Stout speaks about
We're talking about amplifying
the healthcare workforce to
improve health care for our
patients, but also to
importantly to choose that as a
health care career for and by
New Mexicans. On the left-hand
side is just a bit about our
programs and that we definitely
have a number of faculty of
staff, Doctor Richards has
talked about including the
number of residents and fellows,
and also expanding the workforce
that you see on the figures on
the.
left-hand side, and all of these
programs are essential to the
health of New Mexico. On slide
21, I want to emphasize that we
are more than just an
educational environment. Our
commitment is always threefold,
care of patients at the center,
care of who they are and what
they are, but at the same time
research saves lives, so
thinking about innovation or
changes in COVID and how that
may have affected you or your
family, came on the backs of
research that had begun years
before and also thinking about
public health measures that are
so essential for not only
intervention but also
prevention. So our clinical
growth is to really respond to
the state needs, which are our
needs, access to care, but also
to increase the workforce and
increase the educational
opportunity. So clinical growth.
Our educational growth, but our
research and innovation. If I
were to say the term AI
artificial intelligence, we've
actually presented to the
committee on how we integrate
that and use those tools to
improve the care of our patient
and our educational
opportunities. So that leads me
to slide 22, and what I'd like
you to focus on the right hand
side, Fitz Hall is the picture
that you see was built in 1967.
Everything on the left hand
slide is why it really is not.
Um, amenable to remodel or
expansion, which we could
articulate if you want to ask
questions about it, but I want
to focus on the idea, the
strategies and the plan that we
are knee-deep in this now, that
in response to a call from the
president and um in speaking to
our Board of Regents at retreats
and to really speaking with
other important key
stakeholders. We have already
initiated and begun a business
plan. We are in the process of
it that we have to.
understand not only clinical
workforce and growth needs, what
the program is, but our fiscal
analysis as well as our economic
impact, and I would like to
stress what you see there as
LCME, that is our license
accreditation for our medical
school, which will occur, um,
this site visit will occur in
February 2026, so we are very
aware that that building
currently does not meet the
needs or the projections for us
in accreditation. So it's kind
of everything beautifully
happening at once and we take on
that.
challenge as an extraordinary
opportunity. We are also knee
deep in programming for the type
of facility and to align our
facility needs, our site
selection, which will show you
very briefly in some of the
subsequent slides.
So
We've been actively looking
together with our consultants
and our leadership team and
under the leadership of
President Stokes to really
Understand that other schools
are doing that. If you were to
go back to 1960s or 1970s, you
would see that other schools
also have these older schools of
which we currently fits all only
have about 50% usable space
right now, and that's based on
some of the architectural plans
that occurred then. And with the
new remodeling, many other
institutions are also beginning
to imagine innovation of medical
education, research for the
commitment.
to our patients and to bettering
healthcare. I've just listed 3
here which are University of
Utah University of Texas and the
University of California at
Riverside. They each have either
addressed research or medical
education loan or a combination
while we've put these out as
scienceists to say that we are
looking at other comparators
trying to understand what has
been undertaken, not just
beautiful buildings, but in
opportunity to innovate and
really think about the
clinical and educational needs
for our community at this time,
but for the future. And so these
estimates are just a ballpark
figure of about $1200 per square
foot, and our current foot hall
is I'll just round it out, it's
188 square feet. It was about
200,000 square feet. That really
only has about 50% usable space,
so if we're thinking about
doubling of letting present
numbers to you thinking
somewhere about a facility that
might be 25, 30.
00000 square feet. So don't hold
me to those numbers, but note
that they are estimates based on
peer institutions and
articulation with our business
plan and our program and
planning. Our site
consideration, which is shown on
slide 24 is to simply show that
yes, we are in the midst of
suggesting and implementing and
discussing with our leadership
team and our consultants,
possible sites, but to
underscore that probably the
first thing you'll look at is
item number 4, which is parking
and.
and safety. We understand for
that community, whether that's
our community who lives right
next to us and works there are
students who come there are
patients who visit that we have
to ensure that parking and
access is a high priority will
be considered, but also
proximity, where are we? Where
are adjacencies for academic
growth for clinical adjacencies
and also flow and streamline and
really to connect this
incredible community space as I
envision for really for us to
provide programs through
thinking about health and
education in the most fabulous
use of public health access that
I can think of. On slide 25, I'm
going to show you, and I'm sure
you're looking right into the
right-hand side, estimated
project cost is 367 million to
490, and if you gasp at that, I
certainly did. I grew up as a
poor working class kid, so
that's a lot of money no matter
who where we grew up, but
I'd like to bring you through as
we have estimated that if our
scenario, and let's just pick
scenario 2, which is 20,050,000
square feet that we have to
estimate costs for design, and
that's usually estimated at
about 10% of the total cost, and
if we say construction is
somewhere in the order of $1200
per square foot, the
construction costs would be 309
million and then for our
facilities fixtures and um
equipment that's about 22%. So
these are the numbers that we
have looked at very carefully.
They are estimates. We are in
the midst right now, which
you'll see on slide.
26 is what have we been doing?
I'm going to say I was honored
that President Stokes came and
visited with Fitz Hall spoke
with our educators, our
researchers, and our clinicians
about their needs and to really
understand and to promote this
in planning and processing with
our board of regents. So in
July, um, we have begun a
business plan in which we
estimate, and these costs have
been uh undertaken by the
University of New Mexico in
business.
plan and not business plan will
be presented to our board of
regents, um, subcommittee on
December 5th. We are also right
in the midst of programming and
planning, and that is wrapping
up where we will have an updated
presented at our committee of
the whole Board of Regents on
December 4th. And the reason
that we are doing all that is so
that we have the data and the
strategy so that we can make a
reasonable plan, and quite
honestly, we've been requested
to do so. Um, we presented these
plants to the um H.
in which they have already
included the second step, which
is in January 2025, coming up
very shortly. We will have a $37
million legislative request on
design, if you go back and look
at 25, that is where the number
came from, $37 million and our
goal is then in January of 2026
to then bring based on all the
data and the planning, the
business plan, the planning and
programming are designed these.
separate entities pulled
together with as much data and
strategy is possible so that we
can have a request for
construction and construction
will begin.
I would like to end my portion
of this on slide 27 is to say,
This in my heart and everybody
on this team is really in
response to needs for access.
When I first came here, which is
now a joyful two years ago. It
was my intention to follow in
President Stokes's footsteps and
to really visit each and every
site possible that I could in
the wonderful state of New
Mexico, and at each one of these
sites, I heard about access. I
heard about how do we train our
next generation? I heard about
how do we integrate rural needs
with our
ban needs and how do we really
live to our fullest potential,
which is the state of New
Mexico. So I leave you with a
picture of where we've been and
with the notion that we find
this an opportunity of where we
can go. Thank you so much for
your time, and now I would like
to turn this over to President
Stokes.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I want to say thank
you again for the invitation to
be here and for uh your for the
imitation and for your attention
today. Um, this is uh an
important presentation as I
conclude, I want to emphasize
the profound impact of our
effort. What we have described
for you today is not only the
largest non-clinical initiative
in UNM's history, but also one
of the most significant in the
history of the higher education
department of New Mexico.
How
The project is truly monumental
with far-reaching implications
for every aspect of the
university and the state of New
Mexico. It might seem strange to
say that a potential almost $500
million facility is not about
the building, but let me assure
you it's not merely about
constructing a new facility. Uh,
it's about shaping the future of
healthcare in New Mexico. It's
about enhancing our educational
programs, support.
our faculty to provide greater
access to healthcare. It's about
creating the infrastructure
necessary to support the vital
work UNM can do for New Mexico.
Work that goes far beyond the
walls of any single building on
our campus.
I hope we've made it clear that
to achieve this vision, we need
the support of a lot of people,
including the members of this
committee, our entire
university, uh, is behind this,
um, because we know that.
Educating the healthcare
professionals in our state
involves everyone, virtually
every discipline on our campus.
Um,
It's not just the school of
medicine and the school of uh of
population health and nursing
and pharmacy. Um, it really will
have an impact uh in serving all
of New Mexico.
We are deeply grateful for the
support that we've received from
many from, uh, and we know how
important the partnership with
the state of New Mexico is, um,
and the dedication of people who
have uh that we've made aware of
this project has been really
important and will be important
to its future. Ultimately
though, this project has to be
about advancing New Mexico,
which is goal one of our 2040.
Uh, opportunity to find plan at
the university. It must address
the needs of every health system
in every corner of the state. It
must focus on expanding access
to healthcare, especially for
those unique services that only
UNM can provide.
Thank you again, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
for your time today. This is a
transformative effort and uh we
will make a lasting impact on
the state, uh, in doing this
work. We're happy to take any
questions if you wish, Mr. Tay.
Well, thank you very much.
Um, let's start over here on
this side with uh Representative
Martinez, and what are we
giving? 3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
talk real fast.
I have a
3 questions, so I'm gonna ask my
3 questions, and then uh wait
for the answer.
On page 11, um,
There's, you talk about about
some of the saturation and not
having
A place to to expand. I was
wondering, there used to be a
partnership between you and M
Hospital and the VA.
And I'm wondering if that's
still in effect and are you
using that as a, as a teaching
opportunity.
Um, my next question on page 12.
Um, who makes the decision on,
on who's awarded residency.
And how many of those
residencies are from New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Martinez, so your
first question was about the VA.
The VA is a very important, um,
educational partner for us. We
actually have medical students
who rotate to the VA. They're
also a partner for us for our
graduate medical education. So
we've continued to build that
relationship and use that
platform. In fact, we've, um, a
bit of a model for the United
States and the degree of
partnership that we have with
the local VA.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Martinez, I'd
like to answer your question
regarding who decides on
residency. So residency is uh
what is termed a match, so it's
a competitive process and where
you put in your selections and
the site puts in their
selections and they get first
choice, so they decide to come
here and it's actually cannot be
restricted by geography, um, but
can come from all over.
So a significant proportion of
our residents are from New
Mexico, but what, and we really
uh have to adhere by the rules
and regulations so that it can
come from anywhere, but a very
interesting and important fact
that I want to stress is
regardless of where these
residents come from, 40% choose
to stay here in New Mexico. And
if you're going to ask me about
medical students and say, what
is the number of those that
train in medical school.
The number is the same, it's
40%. If, however, you go to both
medical school and residency,
it's 60%, but it's an important
component that there is a draw
here for residents in terms of
40% selecting to stay here after
there and remember residency and
fellowship depending on what you
take, can be 3 years, 4 years,
neurosurgery, 79 years. So
that's, did I answer your
question? OK.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, Doctor Finn,
I appreciate that. I always
wondered how the residency
program.
How that worked and uh.
The VA Partnership, uh, the VA
hospitals partnership, something
that we worked on 15 years ago
to make sure that we were taking
advantage.
Not only of the space.
But the new technology, the VA
hospitals implementing a lot of
new technology and uh glad to
hear that that partnership is
still going. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Did you get the answers to your
other two questions? You're OK?
But don't get used to using that
trick where you spend your 3
minutes asking the question and
then expect answers. I learned
it
from you guys.
Senator Hickey, your turn.
OK, my timer is on. Um, first,
uh, I wanna thank you for
presenting this plan, uh, what a
concept in New Mexico, actually
making a long term plan in
thorough detail with project
management surrounding it and
some of that 37 million is the
what's needed to be spent on
managing the project so that all
the pieces fit together over
time. I don't think I've ever
heard of anything in the state.
that. So congratulations for uh
doing that. Um, this, uh, we
will be hearing more about this,
I'm sure, uh, my perspective, I
actually was the led the faculty
practice at the University of
New Mexico and uh the uh early
1990s and um
And, and worked at the VA for 3
years as well, in my training,
and it is a, a really good solid
institution that's been directed
towards the state, but it has to
have the infrastructure to be
able to do it and to be able to
do the training and plan for the
future. The, uh, I, I will take
issue with you, uh, Mike, on
your numbers on page 9. they do
not pass the smell test. We
aren't even close to 93%
adequacy in primary care.
I'm, you know, take you out in
my next canvassing and my next
campaign, so you can hear the
number one issue in in people's
homes. So we're not there and
we'll talk about where you get
those numbers, uh, for the
future. But what you did do,
which is exemplary is you
recognize the elephant and the
snake, and that's me and people
like me, and those of you who
are coming shortly thereafter.
The baby boom.
And the demand for care.
That we will require, and we are
nowhere near. And in fact, we,
uh, when I worked with Guide
House, we are probably 800
primary care short in about 3
years, uh, as that, as that
comes in. So I just wanted to
take a note of that. Otherwise,
um,
The, uh,
I congratulate you for being
thorough and for planning and
for the long term, and I would
love for a number of state
agencies to come and see how you
do it, because we tend not to do
that in the state, in our
government. Thank you.
Mhm
Senator Pinto, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for your presentation.
I'm only an advisory member, but
I highly encourage those members
to actually take action to
support your, your request.
Or the, the, is that a million
for the business plan in about a
million for planning and
programming, and even giving
them a heads up about about the
37 million for the um all of
these 24, 25, 26 on your.
Page 26, PowerPoint. Thank you.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Silvia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. What a
great presentation. It's it's
really exciting and um and
really um something that's that
we really need in this state. I
hope in the future we can say it
see a similar one about
behavioral health cause we need,
we need that too. Um, I have
this memory and about you and
them taking on the
responsibility that BCMC used to
have to serve Native Americans
and the other day I was passing
the school and a little building
that said Indian healthcare near
the
medical school and I was just
wondering, are you integrating
that responsibility throughout
the medical facilities or how
you, how are you dealing with
that.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, committee
members and uh Senator Sadillo
Lopez. So the, the history of
our primary teaching hospital,
which is the University of New
Mexico Hospital, actually starts
in 1952 as a lease, which was uh
Albuquerque area Indian
Hospital, that ultimately then
became Bernalillo County Medical
Center, and then, and then
ultimately became the University
of New Mexico Hospital. That
lease from 1952, which
Um, included the, the, the use
of that land, which was native
land, is an enduring commitment
on the part of the University of
New Mexico. So we are in fact
very unique in that we are at,
at our heart, uh, a Native
American hospital that's
non-IHS. We are a county
hospital. We are an academic
medical center, and we are a
safety net or a central
hospital. So that means that we
do play a very unique role.
And so the answer is yes, we do
have an enduring commitment for
Native American care based on
that 1952 arrangement. That,
that's what I thought, so I'm
really happy to hear you
describe it in that way.
And Mr. oh, another question
unless you want
the, the only other thing that
I, Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Steve Lopez, that I would add is
that it's not in 1952
arrangement, and it's not a
legacy, it is actually who we
are today, and some of the most
innovative things that we are
actually doing as a healthcare
institution involve our
partnership with the Native
American community, and so I'll
offer up the brand new um
shipprock, uh, UNM family
community residency training.
which was the first IHS family
community reticent
medicine-based residency program
in the United States. We started
that two years ago. Um, I will
have to say that that kind of
represented a, you know, the
first on the United States, but
as soon as we did it, it really
then started the question of why
weren't we doing this before in
the United States, and it's
gotten a lot of attention, and
so I do think that here over the
next couple of years, we will
actually see that.
concept of IHS based community
family medicine and other type
of residency programs continue
to grow. Excellent. And how big
is Fisha?
Yeah
How big is fits all, cause I, I,
I, I'll just say a scenario 3,
seems the best to me only
because it's so expensive to go
back and retrofit and add things
on and whatever, but I just
curious how big is fits all. So
Mr. Chair, committee members and
Senator Sadilia Lopez, Fitz Hall
is 188,000 square feet, and as
you heard from Dean Fenn, it was
constructed in 19, opened in
1967. Just so happened that
during that period of time,
there was a kind of construction
technique that used port
concrete and interior cinder
block walls, that's the
construction of that building.
That's why when we say it's not
really amenable to, um, to
remodeling and retrofitting,
it's because it's essentially
poured concrete and concrete
interior, so it can't be
remodeled. That's what gets us
to the statement that Dean Finn
made, which is that there's
really only about 50% utilizable
space in that building.
because of the way it's
constructed. In contrast to a
new building where the designs
are, are more efficient. Um, we
could enter into, say, a 200,000
square foot building 200,000
square foot usable space, and
that would really only take
about 250,000 gross square feet.
Um, what we are doing as part of
the plan is that, um, and, and
this is something that Dean Fenn
talked about was a very
deliberate process. So we've
done.
business plan to confirm that
our plans to double the size of
those programs, fit with
accreditation, they allow us to
put a tenure pro forma together,
they allow us to look at the
growth of the clinical delivery
system and test to make sure
that all of those pieces fit,
and right now it's very
favorable if we're working with
our consultant. Then from there,
we, we, and what we've been
asked to do very directly, um,
from higher education is then to
program it and, and have the
programming determine.
the size of building that we
need. And so that would include
replacing the current fits,
growing the programs, um, to the
size that we've talked about,
which is essentially doubling
all of them, making
accommodations for the change of
our clinical footprint and
platform, which is creating the
opportunity, and then also
advancing our interdisciplinary
education. Those four things are
what's actually occurring right
now as part of our planning that
will tell us what the size of
the building needs to be, cause
it'll be.
Driven by the programming. And
so we expect it to, to come in
around the 300,000 square foot.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, when I
was at UNM we called it your
prison brutal,
the style of building that
poured concrete was prison I'm
brutal remind people that it's 3
minutes for questions and
answers, and you don't, so
including I, I know many of you
are lecturers and we get that,
but we don't have time, sorry.
Representative Cates.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and I
guess the most important thing
here is I wanted to say thank
you. Thank you for bringing this
too. Thank you for addressing
this issue. Thank you for
bringing us a path, um, which is
a very large tool, and that
toolbox and recruiting
retention. I know that all great
medical hubs across the country
are surrounded by the
educational center, uh, that is
their their heart of that and so
I do appreciate that. Um, I have
a couple of quick questions. One
is on
Um
On your, your page 7, your slide
7. So what is your plans of
expanding a shortly plans. Do
you have plans? Do you not plans
would probably be the plan I
need to know, uh, uh, beyond
dental, um, hygienists. So we
have a dental school.
On slide 7, you just have dental
hygienists there.
Or shortage of New Mexico by
professions.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Kates, we do not have a dental
school. We have, we have dental
health professions programs, and
our goal for dental hygienists
would be to also double the size
of those programs. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and do you have
uh do you have plans to expand
it into a dental school beyond
dental hygienists. So, Mr. Chair
and Representative Cates, we are
not making plans to to to add a
dental school to the health
sciences center this time.
slide 27, you're talking about
rural hospitals. I believe some
of my colleagues believe that
any place in Rio Rancho,
especially off of del Valcon is
in the wilderness, but, um, and
so I wonder why Sandoval
Regional Medical is not there. I
understand they're in a metro
area, but it most certainly is
serving rural area, people come
down from Cuba and and the Hamus
as well, and so I wanna know if
they are eligible for this kind
of attention and for dollars for
roll. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and, uh, and
Representative Kate Sandoval
Regional Medical Center is part
of our clinical platform. It's
and Rio Rancho, and we are
growing our educational programs
in that community at the same
time.
Yeah, just clarify, I I hope
that doesn't count in 3 minutes,
but it might. So these were just
a pictorial representation where
I was actually we don't have all
the sites that I visited. I just
was at Rio Rancho yesterday. So,
um, I just want to make sure,
and the other part I wanted to
say is we do have dental
residency, so we're very excited
that there is a dental school
here and as we are dream and
hope is that we are only not one
university. We are one New
Mexico so that we would work and
partner with those in creating
the residencies.
dental hygienists, our oral
health is very important for all
of our health. So thank you. Um,
representative Thompson
And remember, just 3 minutes.
Uh,
let me start it. So, um, no,
Doctor Richards, you said, Mr.
Chair, that um you wanted to
double the output, but you
didn't give us a date.
double. Um, we will actually be
hitting that doubling and some
of the other programs sooner
than 10 years. Great, thank you.
And then I just want to point
this out to the people out there
who are saying, oh my God, New
Mexico has no MDs, New Mexico
has no MDs. According to your
report, we're right on average.
I mean, everybody's short, so,
um maybe we can put the med
mouth thing to bed. Um, and when
you make school of medicine
references, you're referring to
all the professionals on page.
20, cuz when I went to PT school
there, we were under the school
of medicine, then we became
under um
Allied Health or I don't even
remember what it was called, but
so that, that does include all
of those professions. Yes, we
are, we are all one, yes. Thank
you. um.
And these costs, Mr. Chair, that
you give us are only for the
physical plant, not for faculty
or staff or profess whatever.
This is just the
So
Bricks and mortar.
Correct. So Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, you're looking at
the capital for the physical
plant, not the ongoing
operations. We, as part of the
business plan that we're doing
under Dean Fenn's leadership. We
are doing a 10 year operating
pro forma, um, most of the
clinical, um, um, providers will
be paid for by the clinical
activity. We will need some
increased investment for the
biomedical faculty who teach
across all the other health
professions and predominantly in
the 1st 2 years. OK, thank you.
And my final thing, and I don't
mean to be a Debbie Downer
because this is really exciting
to me, but in the past when UNM
has asked for capital money, it
always comes up that UNM has
this big fund. I don't even know
what it's called. All this money
sitting there and so I'm
wondering if you have a plan to
address or, or maybe that
money's gone. I don't know any,
but I do know that that's been a
hang up through the years. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair and um Madam vice
chair. So the, the, if you're
referring to on the clinical
delivery system, our capital
fund, you know, I will say that
we, we, we keep the, the capital
reserves necessary to have about
between 90 and 120 days cash on
hand, and then we also uh accrue
capital so that we can continue
to build. As you noticed here
that we've got about a billion
dollars of capital projects,
that's really being funded in
part by the capital reserve.
we have and I'm not just talking
about capital funds, I slush
fund is what I've heard. I mean,
all these different things, I
just, I just putting it out
there for you to be aware of
that, that's a historical.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Vice Chair,
so I, I hear you. We will, we
will be prepared to discuss our
reserve balances and both
capital and noncapital in future
discussions. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, um, one of the things that I
would like to see in, in your
reports um is in terms of uh
demographic breakdowns, and I
don't see your man unless I
missed it information in terms
of um students in the health
care fields, docs, nurses,
physical therapists, dental
hygienist, um, you know,
demographics, but also how many
are from New Mexico, and I think
it would be really, really very
interesting to know how many of
those folks are bilingual,
because if we
Talking about serving New
Mexicans, we always need to
remember that, um, not only do
people in New Mexico speak
Spanish, but there are also a
number of native languages and
other languages that are spoken
here as well. Um,
So my question is, in terms of
you mentioned about, you know,
the education for New Mexicans,
let's bring New Mexicans into
into um the medical field,
right, in all aspects of the
medical field. So my question
is, what are you doing to make
that a reality? What are you
doing to reach communities of
color, low-income communities of
color, um, at a very early age
so that kids are aware of the
possibilities because a lot of
kids may not be aware their
parents may.
not work in the medical field,
and it's something that they
believe um is not reachable for
them. So what are you doing to
really make that reality a
dream, and, and then one more
thing in terms of the teaching
faculty when I talked about
demographics, I would also like
to know um the demographics of
the teaching faculty and also
where they're from, because I
think that we need to recruit
people from New Mexico for those
positions.
We can get those numbers for
you, uh, and, um.
Charon and Representative
Chavez, um, we do have a number
of uh pathway programs. I think
it would be helpful, uh, if we
could share really how many what
proportion of our programs
really are serving New Mexicans
and I'm not sure if uh Dean Finn
might have some information
there to share about that, but I
know that we're frequently asked
about the composition of our
medical school class, and it's
my understanding that it's more
than 90%.
Yes.
So, yeah.
Thank you so much, um, Mr. Chair
and Representative Chaves, um,
we will absolutely give you each
and every one of those numbers
without question, for example,
in our MD program over 94% are
from New Mexico and you're
saying, what about those 6%?
Those are usually from witchy
schools or schools that either
don't have medical schools where
we have relationships with the
Native American population, so
we can get those for you. Um, we
are one of the most highly
underrepresented medical
students in the country and then
you're saying.
what about others? So I know for
sure, for example, in physical
therapy, 80% of those are from
New Mexico, but we'll get the
breakdown for each and every one
of those. As President Stokes
talks about, we have health
professions programs and that's
on slide 14 that does breakdown,
for example, our community's
career is under the leadership
of Doctor Valerie Romero
Liggett. We are very intentional
in every way. Actually, one of
our orthopedic surgeons
routinely comes to every single
high school and middle school
that he can to talk about.
possibilities for the future.
Every single person on this
panel that you see before you is
a first John. No one in our
family ever went to, um, any
kind of college, so we hear very
intuitively how important it is
to have role models and
exposure. That picture you saw
of the Dean's tour was exactly
that to meet with the students
to talk about what are
possibilities and just to really
listen to see how we can do it.
So we're happy to provide you
with more information. You're
asking a really important
question. We do indeed.
have medical Spanish as an
opportunity both in the
undergraduates and in and in our
professionals so that we, if
you're not either a native
speaker or want to become
proficient, that is included as
part of our training, and that's
so important for all the native
languages, everything you said,
are Vietnamese population, um,
and so anyway, I hope we've
answered your questions. Yeah,
I'd like actually, uh, Mr.
Chair, I'd like a, uh
I, I, a breakdown in terms of,
you know, like I said, you know,
which communities are you going
into just specifically and and
especially low income
communities of color.
Where kids don't have the kinds
of opportunities that that they
should have. Thank you.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, President Stokes, uh Vice
President Richards, and Dean
Finn, thank you for being here.
Good to see you again.
Looks like there's no um
Ribbon cutting today or
Flipping shovels of dirt,
there's no, you know, none of
those events going on that I've
seen you all at recently a lot.
Um, I, I wanna talk a little bit
about
Um, DEI and really making sure
that.
We are really being inclusive
with the faculty and then the
students here, uh, here in New
Mexico and really being able to
teach them that cultural
competence. People are seeing
people that look like them.
People are able to relate with
them, their medical
professionals.
can relate to the population.
Um, you know, there's this
narrative and this pushed
nationally in a lot of ways
that, um, you know, DEI and
inclusion, things like that are
a bad thing is that people are
being put in positions that are
unqualified.
I'm not asking this question to
get you in the national debate
or anything, but
I just would want to know why is
it important for the UNM School
of Medicine and UNM to really
make sure that this is an
important aspect. Um, in
addition, I know I've uh been to
a few of the meetings with
Doctor Romara Leget as far as,
you know, our high school
students or black student unions
to make sure that they're just
even shown.
Healthcare professional careers
because many of them just don't
even know that it's a
possibility. Um, that was the
same for me. I, I was a dental
assistant in the Air Force, but
I would have never had an idea
or had the opportunity to do
that. And by the way, I wish we
did have a, a dental school.
That's what I wanted to do, um,
when I was here at UNM, so
that's something we'll keep
pushing for, but I'll leave it
there of why the importance of
what UNM has with DEI and how
we, um, how that is good for our
community and good for our
healthcare system.
Ah, Mister Terrence Senator
Pope, I, uh, do wanna reiterate
the significance of equity and
inclusion for the University of
New Mexico. We did a, a 2040
opportunity to find plan goal 3
is in fact inclusive excellence,
but you'll see throughout our
plan that we are absolutely
committed uh to the values
associated with equity
inclusion, we see it as
absolutely essential, almost
every program we create at this
institution.
Um, it's designed to improve the
opportunities for success, and
we know that uh we cannot be
successful unless this is a part
of the really the DNA of the
institution. So whether it is uh
teaching of first generation
student from Roton, uh, or a
medical student. These are
absolutely these are essential
values for the university.
Um, and we know that our
students will not be successful,
um, without our focus on that.
I'm sure I may have other, uh,
the dean or someone might want
to say something as well.
Can I just
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
Senator Pope. I just wanted to
add there's data that shows that
diversity amplifies success. So
there's actually research
articles which show that when
you have a diverse workforce,
and that can, as representative
Shalo was saying, representative
of who's in front of you. It's
not only more effective, better
patient care, but also more
scientific discovery and
innovation, so it's important
key and essential and germane to
every success, and I'm really
proud.
of New Mexico, we are not only
holding the line, we're
advancing the line that we can
do it better together, and it's
that strength, and I think
someone brought that up of all
us working together.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Stepanics, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you for
presenting the plan. It's good
to see the future of what you're
looking for. Uh, first of all,
uh, a couple comments and then a
question. The parking is a
massive nightmare for people who
drive there, who are elderly,
who are disabled to the main
facility.
If they have a chance to go out
to Sandoval to a clinic, to UNM
cancer, that's a little bit
different, but it's, I've heard
from many people who have tried
to go down there. They don't
feel like it's safe, and they
don't even want to go there.
Secondly, a comment is on page
7, I think, uh, you might want
to see if your numbers are
matching up with workforce our
New Mexico Department of
Workforce Solutions, that's just
a comment. Uh, the third comment
is a question.
Since you're saying that a lot
of healthcare professionals, Mr.
Chair, are becoming employees
are moving to employee status.
Uh, what percentage increase
have you seen in your liability
insurance?
So, Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Stefanik, so first of all on the
parking issue, we understand
that way finding and parking is
a real issue and that at this
moment as we're undergoing the
kind of the big transitions on
our health delivery campus where
parking in the new building are
not, the new building is not
open, that it is inconvenient.
And so we are looking forward to
having the new facility open so
that the parking and care are
going to be in close proximity,
um, and, and Senator Stefan your
second question was on medical
it's really this I had one
question with your coming in
here about more people becoming
employees, I'm wondering what
increase you've seen in your
liability insurance. So, Mr.
Chair and and Senator Stefaniks,
we've, we're at the University
of New Mexico covered under
state risk management, and so we
have not seen a significant
increase in our liability
insurance costs because we're uh
we're covered under that. It
fortunately goes up when we add
faculty, but the overall rates
have not changed significantly.
Thank you. And so Mr. Chair,
that's a point I wanted to make.
It's taxpayer dollars.
That are paying the liability
insurance for this massive
healthcare system in our state,
whereas all the other health
care providers are on the
private dollar Rs dollar private
insurance or cash, whatever. So
I just want to make the
distinction. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and, um, some of you may know
I'm a big fan of the medical
school. I had a uh two family
members attend there, my, my
cousin.
Attended and uh her husband was
in the first graduating class of
the medical school, um,
His name, yeah, he, he, his name
is Don Wharton. He was from Las
Vegas, New Mexico. His pictures
on the wall there, um, I
remember.
Uh, the dean show taking me to
see his picture one time, um,
I'm wondering if you are
planning to expand the PA
program. You didn't have
specifics on that. In fact, you
didn't have an estimate for the
future of what you need, but it
seems to me that sometimes PAs
can fill a role of an MD.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and thank you. Um,
Uh
Representative, uh, Tracy, um,
I, I did not, it's not
specifically included. Doctor
Richards did allude to it. Our
plan is to double the size of
all of our healthcare
professionals, including um PA's
for sure. We understand in all
my visits throughout New Mexico,
how essential that integral work
crosses, um, they have expanded
somewhat, and I just want to
remind everybody in case um our
PA students actually work with
our medical students.
On the same class in the same
structure for the 1st 18 months
and also similar to our medical
students, it's important that
they have clinical uh
opportunities, so as Doctor
Richards and President Stosis
described this clinical
structure that's growing, that
will also be available for the
sites for PA students as well.
Have I answered your question?
I, I, I think so. I, I, I just
know you'd have an additional
bilingual PA if the school were
larger cause my cousin's
daughter, and she grew up in
Arizona, and then after college,
went into the Peace Corps in
Nicaragua and worked in a health
clinic in the rural areas for 3
years and very bilingual, and
she didn't get in here because
of the size of the program, but
she got into Duke, uh, the PA
program there, and so now she
lives in Raleigh Durham instead
of right next door to Arizona.
where her family is, she's never
coming back. Um, but I, I do
think we could use um probably
more than double on the PA
program and um I wonder if you
have any ideas about how you're
going to attract the workforce
that you'll need to expand in
terms of teaching and so forth.
May I start and I'm, I will, um,
yield the court yield the court,
I'll, I'll yield the um platform
to both uh President Stokes and
Doctor Richards. We are very
intentional as you, I hope, have
seen that to have a plan and a
strategy with data in place. So
we want to look at what works,
what doesn't work. You've heard,
um, Senator Pope and uh and
Representative Chavez talk about
our introduction of starting
together with education writ
large.
throughout the state of being
present, of being available, but
also to ensure that we have the
best possibilities in place for
scholarships for incentives for
staying for creating this is a
possibility for careers. Other
places, other programs as we're
looking at building sites have
done that. We can take playbooks
from the, I'm very excited and
I'm, I just want to emphasize
what you said. I'm so sorry
about your family member who
went to Duke and left us that
absolutely breaks my heart.
And I'm here to say that this
whole idea and dream is not
those fabulous people here who
will always make us better,
should be able to be here and
enhance the lives not only of
New Mexicans but the entire
United States. So that is part
and parcel of our goals and the
President Stokes may yield.
Uh, Mr. Tay and Representative
Chasey, I just want to comment
too and refer to something that
Doctor Richards said a little
earlier about the planning that
we are engaged in right now, a
big part of that is actually
planning uh additional pathway
programs because we know that
we're going to have to increase
the work that we're doing to
actually produce that work, that
healthcare workforce for the
future. So although you know,
Dean Fin has already described
some things that we're doing. We
know we have a whole lot more.
To do and that is part of the
planning that we're actually
engaged in at this time.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you presenters Dean Finn,
I just want to make sure that I
heard you correctly, that the
communities to careers program
is going to be in your budget
this year, and it is going to be
funded. Is that correct?
I'm so sorry. I don't think I
heard that. Did someone else
hear that? I just heard you
mention that program. I just
wanted to make sure that program
is really important for our grow
your own uh project here in the
state of New Mexico for making
sure that we do have healthcare
professionals to stay here, but
I will skip that and I'll let
you tell me later. So my next
question to you all is a part of
your bigger, is a bigger
business plan, you know, we've
had a lot of conversations with
your residents, and they've been
most concerned about their pay.
And so it's a part of the bigger
plan that you continue to grow
residents. Are we going to grow
their pace so that it is an
alignment with those in other
states that are around us.
So Mister Chair and
Representative Herndon, um, so
your first item was on the, the
healthcare professions pathways
and in our office of uh um
community development um under
Doctor Val Romero like we do
have an RPSP on those programs
for this year because we do want
to see those continue to grow,
and then your, your second
question was regarding our
graduate medical education, um,
compensation, and so we we
remain very committed to
ensuring that we offer a
Competitive uh compensation for
those residents and fellows, and
we will target um having them at
the national 50th percentile,
and so that's what we're working
on. We, we have them there now
and we're committed to keeping
them at that compensation level.
One last question, Mr. Chair, is
with respect to the number of
residents who stay in the state.
You indicated that we were at
40%. Is that at the national
average, or are we below? Where
does 40% lie for residents and
whether or not they stay where
they take their residency. We're
very close to the national
average is between 40 and 50
depending on when and where and
how you look. So we're very
close and let's suppose also for
the medical students as well as
residents.
And thank you. And one last
question is, would you please
make sure that your BA MD
program still will engage and
involve young women if they
decide to have a child in high
school, but they want to go into
the BAMD program.
Thank you so much for that
represented her and and I hear
you loud and clear, and I think
it's really important for all of
our health professions that we
consider that, uh, it is really
important to think about other
family matters, including having
children. I hear you, and I
wanted to make sure that uh you
heard that from your first
question, I think I
misunderstood your question. We
have every intention of
amplifying all of these programs
in its present Stokes has said
this is going to be included in
careful.
strategic planning to ensure
success because we're talking
about 10 years from now, we have
to start yesterday.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. Thank you
representative, and I had 3
quick questions all on slide 12.
Um,
One
I, it's just jumped out at me.
In your planned uh facility.
Plan not programmed yet. There's
the adult psychiatric and
substance use disorder Center.
Is that gonna be a a standalone?
What are you thinking of there?
Is that gonna be a new
standalone inpatient facility
for behavioral health problems.
I hope so, Mr. Chair, so that
is, um, that's one of the next
large projects that we
contemplate and that will be
the, the complete remodeling and
overhaul and expansion of our
adult psychiatric center, but
with a focus on ensuring that we
expand our substance use
disorders, so that would be both
inpatient, um, emergency and
outpatient care.
And, and that according to this
that would
Planning at least would start in
26.
Looks, looks like Mr. Chair,
yes, that is correct. Thank you
for that. That's badly needed
and I'm, I'm delighted to hear
you're doing that. Um, then
there's
Um, the law was critical care
tower phase 2. Is that just the
build out of some floors that
were already built in in, in
phase one, or is that another
new facility? So, Mr. Chair,
that is uh the current building
that you see includes two
floors, which are shelled out,
but have not been constructed
for actual patient care. So that
represents that phase 2 on this
graph. Great. And then my final
question really is enough slide
12, but it's about the planned
demolition.
Fitz Hull, um, I know it's
What did you call it?
Mhm
Prison,
prison brutal architecture. But
This is
It's the same one that the the
same type of architecture that
the jail that was just
demolished in downtown
Albuquerque was built that same
way, and for the same reason, we
couldn't do a thing with it, but
And, and there may be much
better plans than this afoot.
But couldn't it be converted to,
to a school of social work.
Couldn't that be a building that
would good house classrooms and
offices for a school of social
work, even if it couldn't be
adopted, adapted to a clinical
type of training.
See.
And then Doctor Richards, um, I
there is on the slide where we
talked about not remedial. It
has maybe 10 to 15 years of
usable life is currently
configured, not because we don't
care, I don't want to use it,
but simply in the construction
of 1967, where sort of the air
conditioning or any conditioning
or water or sort of the
structure would not make it
amenable to remediation. And I
think I've written that and I
can't find the slides I just
want to tell you the number.
Uh, there's coming.
It, it's not there, there it is
on slide 22 with consultants and
other experts and including um
President Stokes visiting each
and every. It's not for me, it's
not amenable to remediation.
But we hear your idea.
All right.
Well, thank you, exciting
proposal. Uh, we certainly hope
those tight wads at LFC listen
carefully and and agreed to go
through with it.
Um
He's a short time.
What are they gonna do to me
that.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you,
Mr. Chair and committee members.
So now we have the LFC reporting
to us.
Some of the tightwad staff
themselves. It's the members of
the committee that the tight
well it's, not the staff. Yes.
So we have, uh,
report on the behavioral health
gaps in the state, and Eric,
Eric, do you like to say Chee or
Chene?
Uh, Shee, Mr. Eric Shenye was
here to share his information on
the behavioral gaps, one of
which will be plugged up if they
build that adult say that again,
mister.
The proposal we just heard for
an adult psychiatric and
substance use disorder center at
UNM. I'm gonna ask those of you
in the back having conversations
to please step out.
Before I have to force you.
How do you propose to do that?
All right, Mr. Chair, uh, my
name is Eric Shea. I'm the LFC
analyst for the healthcare
Authority.
Um, I just, before I get
started, I just wanted to point
out, um, a couple of people that
actually helped me out on this
report and uh number one is uh
Maya Peterson. She's um a
contract, um, analyst for us.
She's been doing a lot of data
work for us and it's kind of
helped us out on this a bunch,
and then also um Dorothy
Mueller, who's, who's, uh,
listening online and, um, you
know, is ready with texting if
uh if I need help, but she's
been kind of helping with um.
Um, formulating a lot of this
stuff, and so, uh, they've been
a great partnership, um, and I
just wanted to mention them.
Before I get started. So I'm
gonna start off on slide 3.
Mhm
Uh
The state, local communities,
and federal, federal government
invested significantly in the
last few years.
Putting funding among the top um
putting funding from the state
among the top of all states.
The number of providers and
provider organizations also has
increased over the last few
years.
However, uh, there's a
significant diffusion of roles
and responsibilities. There are
about 17 state agencies, many
local governments and local
provider agencies receiving
funding, but, but there's little
planning to strategically use
the resources we have more
effectively. I think you're
gonna hear that a few times
throughout this presentation
that, uh, you know, I think
that's the big lesson here is
that more planning, uh, needs to
occur, uh, especially at the
local.
levels to, um.
Uh, improve the outcomes and
behavioral health in this state.
Where there is planning it's
spotty, uh, in addition, there
may be an urge to take the one
size fits all approach, such as
building an inpatient
facilities, but these issues
need to be determined at the
local level, and patients should
be used uh inpatient services
should be used.
Sparingly and only for a certain
uh uh group of people.
Uh, you know, that's inpatient,
um, for co-occurring and people
with unstable housing, you know,
that's been recommended by
SAMSA, um, and there's actually
evidence by Samsa, um, I was
reading a report a few weeks
ago, uh, showing that um
inpatient for substance use
disorders can actually be quite
a bit less effective than, um,
medication assisted treatment,
but there are those, those uh
instances when it is, when
inpatient.
is definitely.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative.
Uh, the agency and state
government and the legislature
responsible for doing this work,
the work of planning and um
organizing is the behavioral
health purchasing collaborative.
collaborative has not met for
about a year, and there is no
director, um, and I think we've
mentioned that in a few of our
reports to, to this interim.
Um, in the absence of the
collaborative, taking the lead,
and in the absence of their um
doing strategic planning and all
that sort of thing, and it needs
and gaps analysis as required by
statute. This report, um, is the
first
Uh, needs and gaps analysis by
the LFC, and I'm gonna um
I kind of considered this report
as a work in progress, you know,
I plan on building it out quite
a bit more as we go forward and
as more data becomes available,
uh, you know, through either
Medicaid or you guys received
the uh presentation from DOH a
while back about the all pairer
claims database as we get more
access to that, um.
We're hoping to be able to bring
in more data and, uh, provide it
even better gaps analysis than
we have right now.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
slide 5. This is just a um or
chart and it just includes state
entities who have a role in uh
behavioral health in the state,
federal agencies are not
included in neither are local
entities, and if I were to put
those on this page, you wouldn't
be able to see it cause you
wouldn't be able to read it. The
org chart would be much larger,
right? And so,
Um, as you can see, it is
dispersed and would be a lot
larger without those other
entities included.
And at one point I want to make
is that
Nobody really has their arms
around, um, everything.
Behavioral health that is
occurring.
Uh, at the local level with
local entities, and we'll talk a
little bit about local entity
funding in a minute here, and uh
The state and what the federal
government is doing, and I, I
think those, those three kind of
Those 3 kinds of bodies aren't
really working, um, together and
collaborating, uh, the way that
we would hope they would.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
slide 6.
Um, so what are the needs? Uh,
New Mexico ranks poorly on key
behavioral health metrics. The
number of behavioral health
providers is growing though, and
we have seen, um,
Um, some improvement there. A
focus on providing more high
quality evidence-based services
is needed.
And improved data and analysis
will show where to focus our
efforts.
Um, so I provided on the right
hand side there, the 2024
rankings for behavioral health.
Uh, these rankings actually got
quite a bit worse, uh, in 2024.
And so last year on that first
one, the overall mental illness
prevalence among adults and
children. Last year we were at
36. This year we're ranked at
forty-fourth.
Worst in the nation, um, last
year on the Adult substance use
disorder, we were at 32nd.
Uh, now we're at forty-ninth,
um, youth with major depressive
episode. Last year we were at
42, now we're at 46.
Use substance use disorder,
we're at forty-seventh last
year, and now we're last. And so
I think
You know, with, uh, you know, I,
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about here in a minute about a
lot of the money that we've put
into the system, we've put a lot
of money in the system. We've
done a lot to grow the
workforce. We've done a lot to
grow providers, and we haven't
seen, uh, at least in this data.
Those outcomes, um, that we're
hoping to see.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
slide 7.
This is just a, you know, I've
broken this out for you guys
before. This is just to
illustrate, there's a big chunk
of the state's budget, uh, this
year we're at about $10.3
billion with um all funds, uh,
you know, of course, the largest
chunk of that is the federal
funding, um, I just checked
yesterday and as of October, we
had about 875,000 enrollees on
Medicaid.
Um, and that's um an important
little piece to kind of note
because since 42% of our state's
population currently receives
Medicaid. It's the biggest lever
that the state has that you all
have.
To actually affect change when
it comes to uh improving
behavioral health outcomes. Um,
about a billion of the one about
a billion 900 million of this
funding in Medicaid goes to
behavioral health, uh, spending.
So just keep that in mind.
Moving on to the next slide,
slide 8.
Um
Uh, so this is just to show the
Medicaid Behavioral health
spending growth over the last
few years, Medicaid is the
largest payer, as I mentioned,
for behavioral health services
in this state, and it's also the
largest payer nationally for uh
behavioral health.
However, there is a significant
amount of funding that I'll talk
about here in a second from the
federal government, um, that is
not really tracked at the state
level, and we need to do a
better job of, of, uh, tracking
that and understanding it better
so that we can um
Coordinate our services better,
do a better job of making sure
that those services are being
provided to the people who
actually need them.
Other high users, uh, you know,
kind of leveling the playing
field and making sure that, um,
we're putting the right
resources in the right places.
Uh, so moving on to slide 9.
Just a second.
You said Medicaid is the largest
federal money coming in, but
there are uh what other it's not
being tracked because Medicaid
we track. I'll, I'll jump into
that in a minute. OK.
I've actually got the breakout
for that in just a couple
slides, Mr. Sherman.
And Mr. Chairman, uh,
collaborative agencies
altogether spent about 1.1
billion in FY 25, which was a
25% increase since FY 22.
You can see in that, uh,
Green, red, and blue, uh, slices
of the pie there. That's about
um $900 million that's $900
million I was talking about. And
then we've got other amounts
dispersed throughout the state,
such as in early childhood,
CYFD, uh, the behavioral health
Services Division at HSD um.
And most of this, uh, all that
other funding that isn't related
to Medicaid actually goes
through that, um,
Our administrative services
organization falling Colors.
Moving on to slide 10.
Here's another, um,
The point that I wanted to make,
behavioral health special
appropriations provided
additional funding for 2020
through 2025.
So we appropriate since 2020,
about 424 million.
Um
State agencies have budgeted
about 240 million, while we've
either encumbered or spent.
About 40, 6 million. Now I will
caveat that $46 million number.
With, um, that sometimes some of
this money won't be picked up in
the um share accounting system,
which is where we pulled this
data, and so they're they're,
they are further along in
spending this funding, um, as
far as I know from reporting
from the department.
But that's over 5 years. That's
over 5 years, Mr. Chair.
The of the $424 million in
special appropriations for
behavioral health. I'll caveat
one other thing too on that is,
you know, that the 2023 session,
uh, if you look in that little
table just to the right. You,
you'll see that rural healthcare
grants, that is included in
there and that's for both
primary care and behavioral
health. And that went out in
2023, and so that's a, that's a
big chunk of it, and there's a
few other pretty big chunks that
are in there that are more
recent.
the appropriated, um, in the
last couple of years, which is
also another reason why it's
going kind of slow. But your
point is still a good one, we're
having a hard time spending the
money that the legislature
appropriates. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
And then just, just all of these
are in thousands, right? Oh
yeah, Mr. Chair. No, no.
Yeah, oh, I'm sorry, actually,
uh, these are,
yeah, I'm sorry, this, this
chart right here, I, I
apologize. I put that one in
millions. OK, so, but the other,
the previous numbers were all in
1,000s. OK, thank you.
All right, Mr. Chair, and then
moving on to slide 11, uh, this
is just a, um, you can see that
there's a significant amount of
funding coming in from
Uh, and if you look at the one
up here, it's actually better
and this is why I really wanted
this on the slides up here
because this didn't print out
very well on your actual
printouts.
Uh, but you can see that we do
get a significant amount of
funding from
Samsa, the Office of Justice,
HUD and Hsa on the table on the
left hand side is the funding
that we get from the federal
government for all services and
the table on the right hand
side.
Um, is your behavioral health
breakout, funding for behavioral
health and substance abuse.
And that's just to kind of break
that out for you. Now here's
what, uh, now if we go to the
next slide,
Slide 12.
We kind of get to the question
that you had, Mr. Chairman,
which is what's, which money is
coming to the state from the
federal government that we don't
really have our hands around.
And if you look at the, the one
that first column on the.
The top table direct to provider
entities, that's money that's
coming into the state and it's
going directly to those provider
entities and the state never
touches it.
Right? And then you have money
coming into New Mexico State
agencies is on the next one.
And then, uh, the grand total,
you'll see that the percentage
there, the state agencies, um,
only get about 32% of that
funding. The other 68% of that
funding is never seen by the
state.
And so,
Um, when it comes to actually
trying to
Coordinate the services that we
have and to um attempt to not
duplicate services that maybe
the federal government is
already funding when they send
that money directly to local
agencies or entities, um.
Nobody really has a great handle
on that, and so that's, that's
gonna be a piece that, uh, in
the future, next time we do
this, we're gonna definitely try
and dig into that a little more
and see, you know, where is
this, what are the actual
Things that we're spending that
the federal government is
spending their money on.
And are we duplicating some of
those services, that sort of
thing. So, so do we get a uh
A reporter.
Information sharing from the
feds when they give a grant to a
a YDI or that's, so that's where
we got this data from actually
is they do, they do have a
report that you can access
online and see all the money
that's come in, um,
But, and I, I think it does
break it out by grant, but I, I
think we do, in order to
understand this better, I think
we do need to kind of get into
each and every grant and kind of
understand exactly where it's
going. So that's gonna take more
work and now the Congress has
gone back to allowing earmarks.
Right, or do you pick that up
too, your market funds?
I, Mr. Chairman, I don't know. I
don't know if that's in there or
not.
OK. Thanks.
Um
Yeah, and then on the, the lower
table there on the right hand
side, you can see how much, how
many grant dollars went to each
state agency.
Uh, moving on to slide 13.
I'm just gonna kind of pass over
this one pretty quick, federal
grant funding.
I know this table's pretty uh
pretty small, uh, but it just
kind of breaks out, you know,
the, the total amount of funding
coming into the state and then
um highlights the ones that are
for behavioral health.
Um
You can study that as needed.
All right, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Moving on here.
I'm gonna kind of switch gears a
little bit, um, you know, and I
had this, this next slide,
mostly for LFC.
Um, and I know you guys are the
experts in this committee, and
you probably have a pretty good
background in what actual
behavioral health services are
out there. I'm just gonna touch
on a couple of them.
Uh, the crisis intervention, um,
you know, those are the services
that uh
Intervene when there's a crisis
going on with, you know, um,
behavioral health, supportive
housing, um, that's the services
that we provide.
You know, we provide housing
along with behavioral health
services to stabilize people,
right?
And the big one I wanted to hit,
uh, to talk upon about is in
substance use disorder math, uh,
medication assisted treatment.
Uh, it's, you know, it's the
best tool that we have at the
moment to treat substance use
disorder. Um, you know, there's
a lot of people that um kind of
believe in the inpatient model,
but a lot of those inpatient
models are
Um
Abstinence only, and it also
requires people to leave their
jobs, their homes, whatever, uh,
to get into those services, and
Matt, uh, it tends to be in the
community, um, and people don't
need to leave their jobs, um.
On that, so that's, that's
another one I wanted to kind of
point out, very last bullet
there, Matt, and cars real
settings, 90 days prior to
release.
The department recently got
Permission from the federal
government to um start
implementing that, uh, and when
I say the department, I actually
mean the the healthcare
authority. Um,
Got you. And that's supposed to
be starting um their sending
their plan to CMS, uh, I believe
in a couple of weeks from now,
CMS is supposed to be um
approving it, uh.
Pretty rapidly, and then getting
it back to us, and then we can
start implementing that, and
then they do have a request in
their, in their budget so that
we can uh get that, get those
medical services, 90, 90 days
prior to release from prison or
jail, um, up and running, which
includes Matt.
Uh, moving on, uh, this is
another one that was kind of
meant for LFC certified
Community Behavioral health
clinics. I know you've had DOH
in here, or I'm sorry, uh, HCA
here talking about these um
We're gonna have 7 of them up
and running, um, in January.
Uh, last time I spoke with, uh,
the director, Nick Lucas of the
Behavioral Health.
Services division, he said there
was gonna be 7,
Coming up, and these
Community behavioral health
clinics, they're great because
they provide the entire array of
services, uh, that folks need
when they are having a.
You know, either struggles with
behavioral health or substance
use disorder.
Including the crisis services
when people first come in, and
then the integrated services and
community focused care and all
that.
Moving on to the next slide.
Uh, so these are prior LFC
recommendations.
Uh, that are kind of still on
the table, um, but that most
you'll find that a lot of them
were actually making some
progress on
So issues, successful treatment
of substance use disorder often
requires screening, assessment,
detox.
Outpatient and inpatient
treatment.
Matt, counseling, recovery,
support and services.
Um, so one of their
recommendations around that,
that, uh, LFC has made in the
past is to require Medicaid
funded certified community
behavioral health clinics in
high need communities to ensure
access to the full array of
services. Like I said, they're
rolling out those in January,
um, and we included the $15
million last year for that, and
there's a request for a little
bit of additional money for
Um, CCBHCs this year.
Um, pharm, uh, one of the issues
is pharmacies often limit the
types of medication assisted
treatment drugs available in
areas with high rates of opioid
use disorder.
So one of the things to do on
that is to start working with
the Department of Health, um,
and, and the pharmacy board to
start working with trying to
make sure that that's more
available in the high need
areas. Another thing that's been
talked about quite a bit
nationally is
Um, that
Um, primary care providers are
kind of reluctant to do math,
um, in their practices. And so
another thing that uh I, I think
we need to work on more is, is
getting more mat, um, provided
through those primary care, uh,
practices.
And then currently providers
must become credentialed for
providers through each managed
care organization separately
before seeking reimbursement
from an MCO.
Um, and I know you guys have
talked about this a million
times, the whole single
credentialing thing. I, I think,
um, last time the department uh
healthcare authority was here.
They mentioned that they're
expecting a single credentialing
system to come up in January.
We'll see if that, um, if that
transpires.
Uh, and then work to expand the
availability of more services
such as IOP functional family
therapy, and transitional
housing.
I know I'm throwing a lot at you
guys. I apologize. Um,
Next slide, 17, Medicaid MCO
provider accounts increased from
2022 to 2024, uh, led by
increases in nurse
practitioners. And so this is
kind of getting into the
The piece around this showing
that we are actually kind of
improving.
Our, uh, workforce. We are
improving the number of
providers that we have out there
and so uh certified nurse
practitioners that um work in
behavioral health.
In Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Uh, went from 175 to 231, and
Presbyterian that went from 269
to 340, and so,
Uh, they've improved on several,
several of these quite a bit.
Some of them are kind of flat.
Um, we don't have data from
United and Molina yet, because
they just started in July, and
so once that data, you know,
once they start.
You know, uh, providing services
more, we'll start integrating
that data into this.
Moving on to the next slide.
Uh, MCO facility counts show
modest increases in some
declines from 2022 to 2024.
I'm not gonna spend too much
time on that one.
Um, and then slide 19.
This gets us into the behavioral
health collaborative, the local
collaboratives.
We decided to
When we're talking about the
needs and gaps, and I'll, I'll
get into some of the slides that
we have.
Uh
In the appendix here and just,
just to kind of walk you through
a few of them.
Um
We decided to organize these all
by the local collaboratives
because they already exist and
uh it's useful for
Many of you to see where you
might have services in your
local communities.
But before I do that, 11 thing I
wanted to mention was the most
provider types on the next
slide.
Uh, increased.
Um, in New Mexico, and this is
just to show you statewide.
All of the providers in the
state, not just Medicaid, but
everybody.
Um
For the most part, we've
increased.
Uh, we've decreased residential
treatment facilities, um.
But we've increased nurse
practitioners by 107%, which is
uh pretty, pretty decent
increase there.
So I'm gonna move on to a couple
of the slides in the appendix
here. um, and I wanted to
Uh, first of all,
Local collaborative Area one.
Anybody from, oh,
Senator Stefaniks from Santa Fe
County, you know, local
collaborative area one is yours.
Um, you know, Santa Fe received
76.9 million for Presbyterian
medical services.
Um, last year.
Uh
30 million went to El Centro
Family Health.
Um, with 2.1 million for, for,
uh, from SAMSA for medication
assisted treatment.
And then on that table there you
could see where uh
Your area has done either a
little bit better or a little
bit worse than the state average
and recruiting, say, for
example, the behavior health
technicians.
Um, haven't grown as fast as the
rest of the state, but your
marriage and family therapists
and clinical
Neuropsychologists have
increased, um, pretty well.
Uh, just go to the next slide,
Bernolio County, so that would
be
You know, you, uh,
representative Cates.
You know, if you're in
Bernalillo County, but um, you
know, 72 million has gone into
the University of New Mexico.
Um, 42 million for first choice
community health, and so on. And
I just wanted to walk you
through a couple of those, uh,
the rest of the members, you can
kind of look through the
The appendix here and see your
own local communities and what
we've pulled up here. And
I will say that over the next um
few months, a year or so, we're
looking at putting a lot more
data into this kind of thing,
maybe even making a dashboard,
uh, so that, uh, individual
members can kind of track um
what's happening in their
individual communities.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'll,
uh, stand for questions.
I think this time we'll start
over here on the right.
Um, Representative Chase, do you
have any questions?
That.
Senator Stepanics.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for the report. While
I know this wasn't your purview
in the report, I continue to be
very concerned.
About the replacement of
providers and the recruitment of
providers.
Aside from
You know, and organized
approach, good salaries. What
else do you think the state
could do? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Senator, I, I think it's, it's
coming down to really working on
planning at the local level.
I think it's
You know, we've put a lot of
money out there, um, I think
we're looking at probably
putting even, you know, I don't
know if you're, if you're paying
attention to LFC yesterday.
Um
Senate Finance folks put forward
like a package that they're
wanting to consider in
behavioral health, so I'm, I'm
guessing we're probably gonna
look at doing quite a bit more
this year.
Um, on that point, sorry, on
that point, several of us, um,
Mr. Chair, we're in land grant
committee yesterday, so we
didn't hear that. So are they
proposing a trust fund for
behavioral health.
Uh, all I've seen so far is just
a list of um items that they're
looking at possibly funding, so
um.
You know
And, and we could get you the
list if if uh needed.
Thank you. Um, but that's,
that's, that's what they were
discussing.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator Pope.
And since we're short on time, 2
minutes.
I'll pass.
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So one of the
questions that I have has to do
with um inpatient psych services
for kids, like under 12.
Um, as you were doing your
report, did you have a sense of
where the gaps are.
Uh, for those kinds of services
for state. I think that's kind
of uh something that was out,
out of the purview of this. I do
think that it's something that
we want to build into this
report, uh, as we go forward.
OK.
Um, and then the other question
that I have is, it's on page 14,
so Matt incarceral settings, um,
and my understanding is that
there's really very few of
those, right? Berlio County
might, might maybe be the only
one.
Uh.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chavez, yeah, my understanding
is that's, that's correct.
Yeah.
Um, and so, you know, we're
looking, I know the department
is looking at expanding first to
NMCD and then uh later on to all
the county or to as many
counties as want to participate.
Um, but that'll be, you know,
that'll be being rolled out over
the next year or two.
Representative Gates.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
for your presentation. Um, my
first question is on slide 13.
Um,
Every
Why are there less federal grant
funding from year to year. There
is a drop, a steady drop, as you
are showing us from 2021 to
2024, less money every year
going into these programs. Uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
representative, uh, the 2021,
uh, would be the tail tail end
of the pandemic when there was a
lot of increased funding for
these services.
Um, as far as, you know, uh, the
next 2 years going forward.
It was kind of variable,
honestly, um, all the pink lines
are dropping down every year,
right, every year for behavioral
health, so it's, it's something
that it's, it's a good question.
It's something to dig into, I
would be interested in finding
out why so if are we not
applying for the federal funds
or the federal funds draining
up? Are we not um asking for
them in a different place, we're
just relying on that pandemic
money and it's dried up and we
haven't done the others, so I,
I'm interested.
interested in knowing that if
you can find out. Um, also, uh,
The um.
Uh, I, I have 2 together. Why,
why are, um, primary care uh
providers reluctant to do that.
You know, my understanding, and
this is from
Kind of national sources is that
a lot, a lot of practitioners
are concerned about bringing
Those types of people quotation
marks into their into their
practices. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you very much for your
honesty. I appreciate that. Um,
why, uh, I, I see here, do we
have any reasons why I'm looking
in, I'm sorry, I have to be I'm
self-centered, so I have to look
at Sandoval County. So, um, I'm
looking at uh see.
Just real quick, sorry. The
nurse practitioners, so nurse
practitioners is one of their
underperformed statewide average
percentage team over the 4
years. Um, the population has
grown in the last 4 years. The
medical facilities have grown,
uh, UNM is opened up more
facilities there. Why are we
less nurse practitioners, is
there a place where, uh, that,
that information is being
provided.
I apologize, Mr. Chair and
Representative, which page were
you referencing 22 slide 34.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in your, and
you're asking why we have, why
nurse practitioners and clinical
neuropsychologists have been
growing slower, that sort of
thing.
Yeah, I understand you're at
you're just gathering data, but
sometimes you'll find, oh, like
you'll you'll tell us, oh, that
year they didn't collect the
data or like you just said,
pandemic funding might have
dried up. Have they provided any
reasoning why, because I, I know
for the last 4 years, the
population has increased, the
expansion at UNM.
Sandoval Medical Regional
Center, the expansion of rust,
um, medical has expanded, so why
are there less nurse
practitioners.
And Mr. Chair and
representative, uh, I've got
Maya Peters in here. Hi, Mr.
Chair.
Representative case, um, there
was an increase in in nurse
practitioners. Um, but it just
wasn't as high as the overall
increase in the state.
So it's not that there was a
decrease. Yeah. It's just that
I'm so sorry. Oh, no, no, no,
it's OK. So we increase but not
to the state standards of the
need, right, and not to say
that's good or bad, it's just it
is what it is it is what it is
right. Thank you. Thank you for
your indulgence, chair.
Representative Block, any
questions? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I have 2 minutes, so I
just have one question. Uh, page
10.
The 3rd check mark says 37% of
budgeted dollars remains, Mr.
Chairman, does that just mean
that that's not been spent or
where are those dollars?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
representative.
It means that
This funding is not showing up
in our accounting system. Yeah,
it's not showing up as being
spent, uh in our accounting
system and so that's
That's where that number comes
from. I do happen to know
though, that, uh, you know, the
rural healthcare grants that 126
million, I know that um
Healthcare Authority has already
Uh
Announced those grants and
they're working on actually
starting to roll those out and
so
There is more in the works, it's
just not showing up in our
accounting system, but at the
same time, they've had the money
for a while and we are hoping to
see it move a little bit. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I had. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Sevilla Lopez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I, uh, the, for
the graph on page 91 thing I've
been asking for um for some time
now is a breakout of behavioral
health services that would would
separate out uh mental health
use, uh, health issues from
substance misuse and
specifically break that down
into alcohol abuse and other
substances, um, and I've never
been able to get it and I was
hoping.
Um, that we, that I would see
that here and I've, I've asked
different people at LFC. I've,
I've asked the governor Gina,
the governor's office and
somehow, is it just impossible
to get that information, and if
so, why? uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
You know, we actually just got
um access to some new data from
Uh, the department, and I, I
think we might be able to
actually break this out for you.
May not be perfect, but I think
we can get pretty close to what
you're, what you've been asking
for, and I, I know you've been
asking for that for a while, and
I, I apologize for not having
it, but I do think we can.
Uh, get to that point now, uh,
in the next.
That that would be awesome
because as you know, one of the
strategies for dealing with this
is to kind of plan for a time
that we don't have as much
money, um, you know, how we ride
the roller coaster of oil and
gas. And so we've been proposing
um representative for and I have
been working on the, on an
excise increasing the excise
tax, which hasn't been increased
in 30 years, 32 years now. Um,
and so, but one question is,
what is the need? And it's very
difficult to
Uh, to figure that out. And so I
would appreciate that. That
would be wonderful. Thank you
and thanks for the thorough, uh,
otherwise thorough presentation.
Representative Pinto, nothing.
I mean, representative senator,
Senator Hickey.
And thank you for turning on my
mic. Um,
basically, uh, I encourage my
colleagues to look at page 36
and 37, the opportunities and
questions, which is really where
we've got to go, and one of them
is, is, do we need a centralized
plan. Number 2, in that
centralized plan, do you think
that we could get data and
benchmarks of what our needs
are, as we talked about at the
medical school, the, the, the
elephant
and the snake, what are our
needs in terms of our behavioral
health issues, I would think you
could get some sort of idea, so
we have a goal to know how well
we're getting there or not
getting there.
Um, they, uh,
It's, it's data, data, data. Are
you getting the data you need
from the au pairer claims
database out of the Department
of Health.
When you need it as you need it.
Are you getting it?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
no, um, but I so do I need to
pass a bill or write a bill
requiring them to share all raw
data with you, and then put it,
uh
A piece in that allows you to
construct a data warehouse so
that you can do this without
having to wait all the time, as
currently is my understanding is
what is occurring.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that certainly
would help, um, you know, and
Or something like this, you
know, it'd be great for
behavioral health, but I can
think of a
100 other use cases for that
data, that whole your ability to
do the eye back, everything you
have to have the data, you can't
have this. We're playing our
games over here in the
Department of Health, you have
to have full access to that. So
it sounds like I'm gonna have to
get a bill written to require
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One
question on page 15.
You talk about the, the uh 7
clinics that are expected to be
operational in January. What,
where are those clinics?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I can get you
a list of those. I don't have
them, uh, with me. I can get
them for you to, to you right
after this, so.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are a couple in
Albuquerque, one that you and
him one at all all face.
And, and the guy that presented
to us in Portalis from Carlsbad
has one too.
I forget his name, but like.
Anybody else?
Oh
Yes. Oh yeah, you, I'm sorry, I
forgot about you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me
stop this timer. So, thank you
for the presentation. It's
really kind of disheartening to
think that we're still trying to
dig out from 2013 and in NMFA a
couple of weeks ago, we had a
provider from up north and I
asked him, you know, what, what
is your case load like compared
to what it was in 2013. He said
we're at about 40%.
So there's 60% of people in that
community that aren't getting
what they need, but just, just a
request. Um,
For, for, especially for new
members or people who haven't
sat on the um appropriations or
financed. I, I would appreciate
like just a little legend that
this is in thousands cause it
all of, you know, all of a
sudden it's in, it was in
thousands and then you get to
actual numbers and it's like,
wait, is that plus 30s or so
just, just so that folks when
they're looking at it can, can
have a frame of reference for
what, what, how much they're act
cause when I started looking at
the um
The federal dollars, I, I'm, I'm
assuming those are um not in
thousands, those are direct
numbers. It's so just to, just
to clarify it for folks who
aren't used to reading this kind
of stuff. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, um, we
typically do that. We typically
report everything in thousands
and um that one slipped by and I
apologize.
That's it.
Um, and I just had a couple of
things first, really concerned
about the collapse of
Or the disappearance of the
behavioral health collaborative.
I mean, it just seems
Over and over again, the issues
around planning and
coordination, that's the vehicle
that we thought was in place,
but they haven't even met in a
year, so it's not surprising
that we don't have a plan. We
don't have much coordination.
Um, two departments that you
left off of your chart that
ought to be on it. Maybe they
don't officially belong.
But Hire and PED. Both of them
crucial elements in the
behavioral health.
Service system that ought to be
part of that, one training the,
the workforce of the future, the
other.
Providing lots of care through
this, at least through the
school-based health centers, if
nothing else, but also special
ed money that goes to them.
There's lots of behavioral
health that goes on at the
school, so all of that ought to
be brought together, but
Until there's a drive from the
top to do it, it ain't gonna
happen spontaneously. I mean,
this is like expecting all the,
all the kindling to assemble
itself and strike a spark. It's
not gonna happen until somebody
brings a match to the game.
Um, I had a couple of questions
about slide 17.
Which just jumped out at me.
The Presbyterian figures are the
ones that are so disconcerting.
Three last line.
Suboxone certified
psychiatrists, MDs or certified
nurse practitioners.
In the entire Presbyterian
network.
There is now one.
Is that, is that accurate? Well,
Mr. Chair, and
I do need to look into this more
for you. I'll get you an exact
answer on this. I do believe the
reason why that is though, is
because they're not required to
be certified at the federal
level through the DEA anymore.
Oh, so they can just do it
and and so you're seeing that so
that number drop off because
they're not renewing their
certification. I see, OK,
because, because Blue Cross is
200 and, and, and you would
expect it if somebody's eligible
for Medicaid.
They wouldn't run into a
situation where I couldn't find
somebody, but you're saying
their doctors can do it with a,
that's my theory. I do need to
look into that a little bit.
That makes a lot of sense. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, and on that, if you
could also look at why Blue
Cross Blue Shield is so
different, I mean,
200 to 1 and, and my guess is
Blue Cross Blue Shield covers a
lot fewer lives. Um, so just why
that so such disparity.
And then on slide 18,
Um
Again, the Presbyterian network
has 0.
Residential treatment centers
that are JCHO certified.
Now, I don't know how you
maintain.
Network
sufficiency if you don't have
any.
that kind of service cause it,
yeah, you would think there
might be at least one of their.
Patients that would need that
service, and they don't have
any,
so I mean the the those are the
things that just kind of jumped
out at me, but.
Uh, thank you.
Thank you for the work you've
done on this. Thank you for
keeping it updated and reporting
back to us next year again. It's
really helpful stuff, Eric.
Thank you. Thank you.
And I forget, I, I missed your
name too.
Maya, Maya Peterson. Maya
Peterson, thank you for the work
you've done on this. You're
welcome.
OK, we'll move then to the last
item on the agenda.
Which is Ruben Esquibel.
Not an LFC tightwad, an LFC
staff person.
Yeah, yeah, that's right. Uh,
she's gonna report on
prescription drug pricing data.
Right. OK.
Yes.
Be you.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Try and uh
Keep things lively
pharmaceutical, that's not very
likely though for last
presentation, but give it my
best shot.
Um, first of all, I do wanna do
a shout out to my colleagues who
have helped me with data, so
Doctor Allegranandez in the
back, thank you so much and also
Maya Peterson, who's here,
they're so wonderful and digging
through massive amounts of data
and coding and doing all the
pieces we put these nice little
graphs up here. I just want you
to know it takes so much work
behind the scenes and they're
actually doing coding.
To get all this data for you, so
it's amazing, so I just wanna.
gives a shout out here to these
two women with the big brains,
so thank you so much. Um, with
that, I will flip to slide 2. So
this presentation today, um, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, this is really sort
of a fiscal.
take on the pharmaceutical here.
So there's any numbers of ways
you could cut this and look at
this, um, we, I wanted to kind
of look at where we are as a
state fiscally and then kind of
look at how we rank and we're
looking at trend a lot in the
data that you'll see before you
trend and then kind of looking
at what's the trends nationally
with other states and what did
they tell us, so that's um what
this slide here is telling you.
We're gonna look at sort of
where we're at fiscally.
Um, Medicaid data for
pharmaceutical states where
they're at other states. What
are some of the the better
states and what strategies
they've employed and then um I
have some pharmacists data,
Doctor Richards earlier had
talked some about, oh, we have a
lot of ability as a state to
sort of leverage pharmacists and
so with that in mind, I provided
you at the very end in the
appendices some data on
pharmacists in the state.
So that's what we're gonna be
looking at. All right, so if we
start with slide 3.
Why do we care? Why do we care
about pharma pharmaceuticals.
Why do we talk about it? We all
talk about it a lot. We kind of
like, oh, pharmacy benefit
managers, oh, you know, all of
us we kind of talk, oh, when we
go to buy our prescriptions and
frustrated, sometimes you have
to pay not very much. Sometimes
you have to pay a ton. Why is
this? And why do we care?
So
Rising healthcare prices cause
companies, this is some
interesting data that are just
information I wanted to share
with you when I saw this, I was
kind of surprised. The rising
health care prices caused
companies to cut jobs and lower
wages. We were talking about the
wages for our direct healthcare
providers for the DD waiver and
all. So our health insurance
directly impacts jobs and wages.
So, um, this is according to um
the National Bureau of Economic
Research has a direct impact. So
at 1% increase in county level
health care prices reduced
county-level labor income per
capita by 0.00.27%. It increased
flows into unemployment by 0.1%
points a reduced income tax
withholdings by 0.4% and
increased unemployment insurance
payments by 2.
5%. I know these seem like
really small.
Numbers, but you, when you think
about employment and all, you
know, we always talk in pretty
small.
Small percentages, the
percentage changes we see are
relatively small. So I was
surprised that they had a direct
quantifiable impact. So I just
wanted to provide that to kind
of start this off.
Now, the next slide, slide 4.
Let's look at some specifics
here. So, overall with our
public schools.
Public schools in New Mexico,
there's many throughout all of
the state, OK, from FY 18 to FY
23.
The insurance expenses rose from
approximately 310 million to 378
million. That's an increase of
22% or about 4% per year.
And that was based on data from
the public education department
PED. So that's a pretty
substantial increase. So when we
look at public schools and we
know that the largest percentage
of our budget in the state is
for public schools, right? A
large percentage of it is being
driven by these increased costs
in health care
and then when we look at health
insurance specifically for
schools, um, they were up by
basically 46 million or 21%
again an average about 4%.
per year and then from FY 18 to
FY 23, the legislature, you all
added 50.1 million to the public
health school funding formula
just for insurance costs, and
that was um mainly to cover
their health insurance rate
increases. So 50 million into
the public school funding
formula. So,
That's, that's a lot of money,
you know, when we see, you know,
when we were seeing during FY 18
to FY 23, those were years that
The latter part, FY 21, 2223,
those were years when we had
more of the increase, the oil
and gas revenue, right? But in
FY 18, FY19 FY 20, we weren't
seeing those big increases then.
We were seeing what our new
general fund dollars were about
22 to 300 million are new money,
50 million right there in public
school funding went just for
health insurance. So I'm trying
to just.
It's substantial, right? OK. And
then the last bullet there is
saying, however, this falls
short of the 68.5 million and
increases at school school
districts and charter schools
actually paid, so we know that
they had the large, um, their
cash balances, we talk about
that a lot in the finance
committee, so they can use that
to offset, um, offset cost, so
that's how they made up those
differences, but this is
substantial and then we were
also running deficits. So to
that.
point if you turn to slide 5.
This is the New Mexico Public
School Insurance Authority,
NIPSia as we call it.
So actuarial actuaries for the
public school insurance
Authority, NIPSI reported a 417%
increase in the use of obesity
management drugs among NIPSA
members in calendar year 2023.
Um, so it was 455 prescriptions
to over 2000 prescriptions. Um,
so why do we care about that? I
mean, one, we know that's
important because.
Good, treats diabetes, treats
health conditions, all of that
we've had these new drugs come
onto the market, which is
important for health outcomes,
so that's good.
But there's a cost associated
with that. So the second bullet,
total costs were up 616%. So
from $433,000 to $3.1 million.
So this is going to be a theme
you're going to hear in the rest
of these slides. We've had a
shift in the market.
That is driving costs
substantially, and this is going
to be across all the sectors
here.
So, uh, this is where you'll
first start seeing it. So the
last bullet here, additionally,
fewer members are using generic
medication. In 2022, 30% of
obesity management prescriptions
were for generic medications in
2023, only 5% were for generic,
um, actuaries noted this was
driven by national trend. Now,
we know this committee heard
just last month, right, in Rio
Rancho from the, the PBAs.
But, um, came and talked to you
and, and talked about
Formularies and PBMs and how you
can work the market to require
only to basically disincentivize
using generic and all, so we're
probably seeing clear examples
of that in all of this, and it
is substantially driving costs.
So, um,
I wanted to give you some
specific New Mexico data in our
programs and how, what the
impact is. So, so you can see
it, it's substantial.
OK. On slide 6.
This is our, our state health
plans, so this is um.
This is our risk, so this is our
state employees, so state
employee benefits and then local
public bodies fall under it, so
it's that um when we became the
health when we um the law passed
to become the healthcare
authority, they pulled in what
used to be um the state risk
that was in the general services
department, they pulled that
into the healthcare authority,
so this is that piece there that
used to be at GSD now is in the
healthcare authority, HCA. So
this
State health benefits plan is
projecting a $73 million
shortfall for FY 25. We're
currently in FY 25.
So the gap between FY 24 revenue
and FY 27 FY 25 expenses is
projected to be $157 million.
The, the expenses for the plan
are projected at 552 million. So
this is a 97 million or 21%
increase in expenses from the
prior year.
And for FY 25, the year we're
currently in, the 10% increase
in premiums, and that's what
state employees got a 10%
increase charged to us for
premiums. Um, this is projected
to increase revenue by 84.6
million, which is good, but
since there was already a
structural shortfall for FY 24,
it won't be sufficient to cover
the revenue gap.
And the most significant cost
driver of this revenue gap was
You got it. The 25% increase in
pharmaceutical costs, primarily
driven by weight loss drugs. So,
um, so we, we knew that we I I
should preface these, these
bullets here. We knew that we've
had for a while a deficit. Um,
it was like a millions, millions
and millions to, you know, 80 to
$200 million dollar deficit in
uh in state employees and
benefits. So we know that it's
for.
Many years, the premiums were
not adjusted, so that was
leading to a buildup, but still
I just I'm giving you these the
fiscal years that we're in in
the prior year just so you can
sort of see where we're at. We
did finally do that 10% rate
increase, but it's not gonna be
enough. So we're gonna have to
look at that.
And the last bullet just says
here I wanted to shout this out
to the healthcare authority
under Secretary Armijo, they are
looking at how to try and
address these costs and try and
look at the program in general
now that these are all part of
the healthcare authority and
that was of course the plan by
pulling all of these components
in under one umbrella. So what
they have reported is that
they're looking at implementing
their studying, looking at.
ing potentially reference based
pricing, um, looking at the
pharmacy benefits manager and
performing acclaims integrity
audit among several other
efforts. So, um, those are, are
things that are, are gonna be
looked at by the healthcare
authority to address this issue.
All right. With that, Mr.
Chairman, let's look at
Medicaid, slide number 7. So
slide number 78, and 9 are 3
different snapshots basically of
looking at Medicaid, um, costs
and, and kind of where we fall
and these might be a little hard
to see, but um, basically,
What we're looking at the first
years they compare.
2020, 2021 to then next year's
2021, 22, and then start the
next set of comparisons.
So basically, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna draw your attention to the
bottom line. This is tiny
online, but you could see it a
little easier here. The bottom
lines here that say pharmacy.
So it says pharmacy all thanks,
Grace. Pharmacy all, there you
go, and it goes across and it's
got the aggregate costs, the
previous 12 months, the current
12 months, the percent change,
and then it's got the per
capita. And basically, this is
all sort of where we're I'm
saying we're starting to look at
trend and these costs I also
want to point this out because
we're gonna have some other
data. These, these numbers here
have the rebates pulled out, so
they'll be a little lower, the
dollar totals from other.
Slides we have which don't have
rebates pulled out. So what
we're looking at here, 2020,
2021, 2021 to 2022, we're
spending about 455 million and
then it went up.
496 basically 0.5 million, so 9%
increase.
So this was um this was before
the
The big
You know, uh, name brand weight
loss drugs in these years here.
So, but we are seeing a 9%
increase, so that's over medical
medical inflation, medical
inflation wasn't that high
during that time, so you're
seeing a pretty substantial
increase in the cost of
pharmaceuticals.
So, um, and then just the per
capita cost 2%, and that was at
that time when we couldn't
disenroll people in Medicaid. So
our per capita that would drive
down the per capita costs,
right, because we have a larger
per capita pool. I think what
you want to see there is that
9%.
So, um,
Keep that in your mind. So let's
flip to the next slides, slide
8.
12%.
And then the per capita went
goes to 8%.
So this is in years 2021, 2022
to 2022, 2023.
So, and we're spending.
And this is of course the total
spend, but um 45 to 5:44, the
total numbers look a little
different, looks like, but the,
the trend, the percentage
increase is substantial 12% of
and this is overall for our, you
know, our overall um.
Medicaid plan in the state.
So
I just kind of wanted that to
sink in some because we spend a
substantial amount on
pharmaceuticals, and this was
way over medical, medical
inflation.
All right, and then slide number
9.
Now this one, it went down.
And went down to flat basically.
Of course, it was so high in the
previous years. So, but the per
capita still is pretty
consistent. So.
And the OK, the per capita here
we were looking at a lower 2%
and then it went to 8% and then
it even though the numbers
stayed the same, the per capita
is still at 8%, but this is when
our numbers are starting to
decline, our enrollment numbers
in the Medicaid program are
starting to decline, but the per
capita cost still stayed.
Pretty high, the per capita
percentage.
So that's the takeaway piece
here on this slide.
It's the same as the previous
year when we had the 12% growth.
So you really have to kind of
look at these, like I said
before, we're starting this all
like you have to look at the
trend, and you have to look at
the backstory, what's going on
with our enrollment, what's
going on with medical inflation
to really see the picture and
see the story.
All right, so, um, then if you
flip to slide 10.
This is a, these are the two
slides where we don't have the
rebates pulled out, but you see
the trend here. So it's going
up.
And um my help me put these
slides together, so if there's
questions here, she's here to
help, but um I wanna call out
the two bullet points here. The
point of sale pharmacy costs
increased by 28% between 2021
and 2023. That's a, that's a
substantial increase, 28%.
And then the Medicaid, or rather
the medical pharmacy costs
increased by 62% between 2021
and 2023. So this is sort of the
difference between point of
sale, like when you go and
purchase directly versus medical
costs when you're getting care,
you know, so that's the
difference there, but those are
substantial increases in both of
those.
Places where you touch
pharmaceuticals, so substantial
increases.
And then in slide 11, this one
has a lot of data on it here,
but basically.
We're seeing on this slide, Mr.
Chairman, that the, the medical
pharmaceutical spend increased
in 2023, more rapidly than the
point of service, and then the
highest amount for medical
pharmaceutical spend was for
cancer drugs in this, and then
we break out for you all of
these different um component
pieces and the paid amount and
the cost amount and the the
differences.
So I can just go through those
really quickly and we have a
doctor here, which is great.
Senator Hickey because he will
know what these are. So I don't
even know if I can pronounce
half half of these, but anti
neoplastics and adjutant to
therapies, um, over 6 million
endocrine and metabolic agents,
1.5 million neuromuscular agents
1.4 million
Emi, I can't even say that 1.1
million.
contraceptives 1.1 million other
hemutological one a little over
1 million
of them however you say that
optimal, how do you say that
ophthalmic ophthalmic, thank
you, um, 779.8,000 immunizing
and treating agents 761,000
gastrointestinal 652,000 in
analgesics for
anti-inflammatory, almost
300,000, so you see a little
breakout here.
the component pieces, but the I
think that the takeaway is in
the difference in treatment and
where they're at and the costs
everywhere are increasing and
this slide is showing here. This
isn't driven by the weight loss
drugs. This is driven by these
all, all these other class of
drugs as well. So, um,
So we're seeing increases really
everywhere. And then Mr.
Chairman, the next slide, slide
12.
This is dollars here and we
didn't include the little dollar
number because it was hard with
the coding, but these are
dollars underneath these, but
these show that um with new
drugs, they're introduced in the
last 2 years, they have shifted
the composition of the top
Medicaid drugs, and that's
primarily gone to all of these
new um
There's Humira is in here, but
there's also, of course, all the
weight loss drugs, but you see
the list here and then the cost
for Humira and Trulicity have
continued to increase due to
Medicaid member membership
increases and cost per script
increases, and this gets to that
issue again of generic versus
name brand drug use and how
we're sort of directed and the
market.
Incentivizes the use of those
drugs, even when you have
generics that are lesser cost
and available. So that's really
the takeaway we wanted to break
out here and look at all these
specific drugs and where do
generics fit in and there's not
really generics here.
So that's, that's the issue
here. And a lot of that is
driven by.
Market and.
And how we are using our, our
pharmacy benefit managers. So
Huh
And television and all of those
things in the market, yeah, so,
um.
So with that,
Let's look at states and what
they've done to you've just seen
all of a picture of New Mexico,
a picture of what drugs are
being used here, a picture of
the Medicaid program, a picture
of overall other um public
sector pharmaceutical usage, all
of that.
Now let's look at it, Zoom out
and look at what other states
have done. So there's some
slides here now that are looking
at what are the preponderance of
state laws that have been passed
by other states to address
pharmaceutical costs.
So the first
Bucket, if you will, is
affordability review. So that's
like the creation of like the
affordability review boards, all
of those that you all have heard
discussed in this committee over
the years. So 14 total laws have
been passed, and this is from
2017 to 2024.
So that's a pretty big span of
years. So in 7 years,
14 laws have been passed in 10
states. So this isn't really the
big
The big change agent here, these
affordability review boards,
just a few states, so that's
Washington, Oregon, Colorado,
Minnesota, and then sort of New
England. Those states have
passed some of these, but this
hasn't been the big area.
OK.
Next slide.
14. Look at that.
Every state, the, the tranche
for pharmaceutic pharmacy
benefit managers, PBMs, pretty
much every state over the last 7
years has passed laws to try and
look at PBMs. So there have been
186 laws passed, um, every
state.
So, um, that gives you an idea
where most states are thinking,
OK, this is an area where we
need to look at and make some
changes.
I'll get to efficacy later. So,
OK, just trying to give you an
idea of of the the the buckets.
So, OK, slide 15.
Consumer cost sharing where
people are looking where states
are looking at, um, copays, that
kind of thing. What, where can
we help with consumer cost
sharing over the last 7 years,
you know, some states have
looked at that, um.
You know, can we take copays out
of behavioral health. Does that
sound familiar, Senator Hickey?
So 53 states have looked at
that. New Mexico is one of them,
um, uh, or 53 laws, 28 states
have looked at. So, uh, a lot of
states in the Southwest and the
Pacific uh Northwest, um,
through New England through
there, so a chunk of states.
The next tranche.
Not very many volume purchasing.
So, uh, ways to look at volume
purchasing over the last 7
years, only 3 laws have been
passed, 3 states, so not too
many states that have looked at
that.
Slide 17 importation. This is
looking at how can we group
together with um like uh groups
that are purchasing out of
Canada and those kinds of
things. New Mexico looked at
that.
Um, but there's not too many of
that either, so Colorado, New
Mexico, Texas, a few others.
Over the last 7 years, just 8
states looking at that.
Um, transparency, slide 18. Uh,
a chunk of states there, 24
states passed 38 laws over the
last uh 7 states looking at,
well, how can we bring more
transparency to pharmaceutical
costs and pharmaceuticals
overall and purchasing and all
and and try and do more of that,
so I think there's been more
support for that and more
looking at that.
And then um the last slide on
that is slide 19 study looking
at studying, how can we study
this further and I'll, um, 12
laws were passed in the last 7
years, 9 states, uh, kind of
spread throughout. So just
looking at studies, but the next
slide slide 20.
What is, let's look at who's
been effective.
So look, when we try and look at
which states this is the
efficacy point, which states
have actually been effective at
lowering pharmaceutical costs.
This lays it out here, we pulled
it out for you. So, um,
basically the winners ding ding
ding Oregon and um Missouri.
So they, this is their impacts
on the trend here. So they were
effective in reducing their
trends, um, by.
These percentage points, 9%, 8%,
so Oregon and Missouri, so New
Mexico, where do we rank New
Mexico we're, we rank
thirty-third when analyzing
changes in the cost of
prescriptions over the last 5
years.
Dates have taken any number of
tactics as you just saw to curb
the trend for pharmaceutical
costs, um,
And then each state may have had
changes. This is a note to their
Medicaid populations over the
years that could impact their
rate of trend. So we know that,
well, this is a thing that
everyone always says in
Medicaid, and I think, uh, madam
vice chair was referencing this
earlier with the DD waiver when
she said, you know, you can't
just compare.
One state in numbers to the next
state, because when you've seen
one Medicaid program in a state
you've seen one Medicaid program
because every Medicaid program
is really unique, but um, but
you see that there have been
states that really have been
effective in in changing.
Pharmaceutical costs in the
trend. So with that in mind, I
pulled some of the specifics of
these last two Oregon and um
Missouri to actually look what
did they do?
So the last few slides here,
it's words, but I'm gonna just
read the words to you so you can
hear sort of what they do, what
you're like don't read the words
to me. OK, I won't read too many
words. I'll I'll do it quickly.
Is that all right?
OK, what are some of the things
that worked? These are the
things that work strategies that
are effective. So in Oregon, 2
slides on Oregon, they did a
bunch of things. Missouri did
one big thing. Oregon did a
bunch of things. So these are
two very different tactics in
these states that had that were
effective in reducing
pharmaceutical costs. So Oregon
did several, so they
established, they did that
oversight review. They
established their prescription
drug affordability Board.
And they um, they annually have
to identify 9 drugs in at least
1 insulin product they that may
affect their affordability
challenges, so they did that.
They um developed a plan through
this board for establishing
upper payment limits on drugs.
They capped the amount that a
carrier can require an enrollee
to pay for insulin, um,
And they tied it also to the
consumer price index, CPI. They
required um their health plans
or their PBMs to include any
amounts paid by theenrollee, um,
when calculating their overall
contributions and their cost
sharing requirements and so, and
they're they're looking also at
generics and limit and limiting
um prior auths prior
authorizations and
Trying to really incentivize
generics, um, they looked at
mail order.
You know, and, and saying that
when you um fill a prescription,
um, you can use um mail order,
but you can look at other ways
to get the prescription as well.
Um, and then they looked at um
placing a drug um allowing
maximum allowable costs when
those have been established that
there be at least 2 multiple
source drugs and that generic
drugs can be considered for
purchase as well. So this gets
to that PBM sort of the way they
structure things.
So they looked at that and then
on the next slide 22, they.
Prohibited PBMs to require, um,
their enrollees to obtain a, a
covered clinician administered
drug from a pharmacy that was
selected by them and basically
they allowed them to have more
choice in where they can get,
get their drugs.
They also said that um that PBMs
shall submit any contract with a
pharmacy services administ
organization, that's who you
guys heard from last year, last,
last month that they um that
they have to have some
transparency with PBAs also.
Um, and they also required their
health authority to study the
cost differences in
pharmaceuticals used primarily
by women compared to those used
primarily by men, men and women,
because they're seeing cost
differentials in those. Um, they
also looked at drug
manufacturers, their annual um
report of pricing for
prescription drug costs and
costs associated with developing
their marketing drugs and
presenting all of that data to
their oversight boards, and then
they
Doug manufacturers to report any
increase that they're going to
do in the price of drugs and
provide that data to them at
least 60 days ahead before they
increase prices, so they're
having to give notice on price
increases. That's pretty cool.
The other thing was they
required um pharmaceutical
representatives to obtain a
license.
And that um licensed pharmacy
representatives can't fail to
disclose the wholesale
acquisition cost of a drug or
the availability of a generic.
And then lastly, Oregon required
um to conduct a survey of retail
pharmacy providers enrolled as
Medicaid providers, um, to
determine the cost for
dispensing drugs and if the
survey
denoted that there was a a
discrepancy or problem they had
to work with their, their agent,
their Medicaid agency to do a
state plan amendment. So this is
something we hear about. I
wanted to include that because
we hear about that a lot. You
all have heard about that a lot,
really every.
year from the local rural local
pharmacies that are struggling
to stay in place in Medicaid has
adjusted periodically, year over
year, they've adjusted the
dispensing fee to try and help
them in the state plan. This is
something that Oregon looked at
as well. So that's what that's
referencing there. And on slide
23, what in Missouri do?
They, um, basically they
prohibited prohibited the
pharmacy benefit manager from
including a provision in the
contract with a pharmacy or
pharmacist that requires a
covered person to make a payment
for their prescription drug at
the point of sale in an amount
that exceeds the lesser of the
co-payment or the cash price.
This measure also allows the
pharmacist to provide a covered
person cost sharing information
and then information about
alternative medications.
You all have heard about that a
lot that pharmacists typically
they may know that there's a
lower cost or they could maybe
get a rebate or use the brown
bag plan or any number of
things, right, but they can't do
that. So this is one thing that
Missouri did. So
You've heard about that so much.
I wanted to be sure and include
that.
So that gives you a feel for
where we are as a state.
Effective practices in other
states, what's been most used
and then just really quick, um,
Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chairman in your appendices.
This is just looking at
pharmacists. And as I said, you
heard earlier from you and
Doctor Richards talk about, oh,
there's a lot of capability to
use pharmacists, particularly in
our rural areas, and even in our
urban areas, as in a clinical
model, more of a clinical model
and leverage them. And so in
order to do that, we kind of
need to see well where do we
stand with pharmacists. So
there's just 4 slides here and
um
Basically bottom line on all of
this, we're sort of middle of
the pack in this in the in the
country. So this is the first um
slide 26 is employment of
pharmacists by states. You see
here in New Mexico, our
employment is, um, we have
almost 2000.
Um, are that employment per
capita is about 2.3, but in our
annual mean wage for the pharmac
is $131,000 per year, so we sort
of fall this is telling us
pretty much lower to middle to
lower of the pack.
The next is where do we fall
slide 27, the annual mean wage
of pharmacists, um, we're kind
of to the lower
Percentile of the of the
country, the hourly is about 63.
$3 an hour. I already gave you
the annual 131,000, so that
shows you here sort of where we
fall.
And then this you might be
interested in the next
employment of pharmacists like
28 by area. So now this is
looking at the state. So for
your districts here, what does
this mean?
On slide 28.
For your pharmacist, the
Albuquerque area has 1160.
Eastern New it starts dropping
off real quick then. Eastern New
Mexico 240, northern New Mexico
and Las Cruces, 130 to 160
Farmington area 80. So you start
seeing in these outlying areas
of the state really drops off
quickly.
And then how much do we pay them
by when you break it down to
regions of the state.
The last slide here 29 Santa Fe,
136,000 eastern New Mexico
135,000 for your Albuquerque
area, 130,000.
Farmington 129,000 northern New
Mexico, 127,000 Las Cruces,
124,000. So that gets to that,
how do we look at salaries and
all to try and incentivize
pharmacists and all to come to
the state. So, um, Mr. Chairman,
that's the presentation and we
hope it just gives you a little
bit of an idea of where we are
with costs, the trend, we see
that the trend is going up
everywhere. Medicaid, all of our
programs substantially, and what
are some of the effects?
strategies to try and address
that with that stand for
questions. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Ruby and lots of
solid information.
Um, let's
Let's start at this side and
just move right around.
And take 3 minutes each, 4
minutes, 3 months.
4 minutes each. We don't have
that many of us. Oh my God, just
luxuriate in that
don't get used to it.
OK, um,
Thank you. There, there's a,
there's a lot of information in
here and there are a lot of
trends to be able to pick out
from it, um, the
Oregon is definitely
I had in a few may recall we
heard from the Oregon,
Washington, uh, group array, and
they do some bulk purchasing and
that's one of the reasons why
they've been able to keep um the
costs down. I think probably out
of all this,
A key driver in lowering costs
is simply volume. And how you
handle that. And so as we look
at the IBA.
Um, and the nymphs, you got a,
a, a glimpse of that, uh, and I
do really wanna, for those of
you who are wondering, saying,
0, 4% is not that much when you
take it down to a per capita, it
gets much bigger. And so those
figures are actually
significantly larger on a per
capita basis cause we haven't
had a steady decrease in, in
enrollment, um, particularly for
the, for the IBA agencies, but
the point is this, the sooner
the H
DA is able to require all IBAC
agencies to come together and
also
To come together with Medicaid
and put that into and, and take
the pharmacy contracts and put
them into one single vendor for
that one PBA like a, a right way
or um a capital or or a uh or an
array that will drive the
volume, which is gonna drive the
cost down. I mean, that's what
we have to get through, but that
getting through the bureaucracy
to get those agencies to work
together.
I mean, this started 3 or 4
years ago. We are not there yet,
um, and, and the number of
agencies within the state to get
them all to come together is, is
basically the, the best handle
we have an opportunity to
control the cost. We can do
organ did 1000 little things,
and yeah, they, they add up, um,
but Oregon is really benefiting
from the um uh
component of its relationship to
Washington and Missouri, uh, and
there is another piece and this
gets very technical. They have a
standardized pricing
methodology, and when you have
that, and you may not remember
the array and capital or not
array right way and capital,
both talked about how they had a
standardized discount from a
standardized fee schedule
instead of all the rebate junk,
uh, that goes on. That's the
other.
thing that gives you the lower
prices. So what's encouraging is
we're really beginning to look
at this data, again, we'll end
with my comment that the sooner
the the sooner the information
in the all-payer claims database
gets over to the LFC and the
more that LFC has to be able to
drive these analytics further,
we will then get the
recommendations that actually
start to cap out some of these
really
Excessively high price increases
that we're experiencing in both
Medicaid and in the IBA. So,
thank you, Ruben for uh all the
detail. And yes, we must always
continue to look at other
states, um, the New Mexico way
uh is quaint, um, but other
states have been dealing with
this and we need to look at
them. Thank you.
Thank, thank you, Senator.
Senator Silvia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a
lot of information. Um, I really
was impressed that Oregon
really, it looks like they just
focused on it and and made um
achievements, um,
How many of those make sense for
us, or which do you think makes
sense for us of the of the list
of things Oregon did just
because um has Senator Hickey
pointed out we are smaller.
And, you know, some of them.
Like I love the cap on, on, and
so, you know, there's certain
things and then the federal
government is trying to do
something too, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chaman.
Senator, uh, Seria Lopez, so.
I
Senator Stefaniks isn't here,
but um she has talked to me a
couple of times and she, I
believe, is.
collaborating with the
governor's office and different
members of you all and all so I
think there's a group of you
that are, uh, the PBM, yes,
yeah, so yeah, so.
Yeah, I think there's a big
group of you that are
collaborating all on that bill,
so yeah, so you, a lot of your
good minds are coming together,
so I think that's just one of
these things, the PBM, but I
think that bill is gonna have
some component pieces in it that
are looking at a chunk of these
things that are in the Oregon
PBM component piece model here,
so I think that's probably gonna
have some great ideas in it and
we'll pull in some of these
things that are or that Oregon
has done around the PBMs.
Are we gonna see that for um
endorsement.
Um, yes, uh.
Um,
Doctor McEnaney, Gina, and
others, and, and uh Senator
Stefaniks are working on a bill
that incorporated in to explain
how these work because there's,
there's twists with and twists
within twists. That's the
problem with PBMs and it's kind
of like a whack a mole game, um,
as soon as you hit one twist,
they'll come up with another.
And so it's in it's trying to
put together legislation that
circles around to where they're
gonna go as well.
to hit where they are today. Um,
and so we need to do that, but
ultimately they get the price
control, we have to get into
some type of volume purchasing
situation. And um Mr. Chair, I
just want to remind people that
we have, um, in fact, a lot of
the nonprofits have sought to
kind of pool with us on
healthcare, um, and then we, and
it seems like a good idea to me
if we need volume.
Um, so I just wanna throw that
out there. I can't remember.
I don't think it was last
session. I think it was a
session before that they sought
to pull with us and it it just
seemed like a really good idea
to me.
Yeah, legal aid, you know, some,
some of the legal, uh, uh, I, as
I recall legal aid, um, legal
services, you know, just a group
of nonprofits that realized that
they could benefit from volumes,
and they had collaborated
together, but they need realized
they needed bigger volume and it
just seems like a really good
idea to try to create more
volume.
In the state so that we can be
at a competitive level.
Thank, thank you, Mr.
Senator Sadia Lopez to your
question and to that point, um.
Alluded to it earlier that the
healthcare authority, the whole
thinking behind that creation of
the healthcare authority was to
pull all of these public entity
or
Not all, but most of the public
entities under one umbrella and
try and leverage more of just
what you're saying and just
what's Senator Hickey is saying
around bulk purchasing and how
can we better leverage all of
these entities together and so I
think the first component piece
I mentioned here in the slide is
they're looking at um what can
we do for the state employees
and change, make some changes
there, but then even broader
with that, they're trying to
look overall like how do we want
to just overall construct our
insurance, our purchase of our
insurance overall in terms of a
group. So as you do that, expand
your market, that of course
trickles down to
pharmaceuticals, so I think
that's something that we will
see some recommendations coming
forward. Thank you. And did the,
did the state retiree authority
finally, they didn't want to get
into
Um, they did not, OK. Thank you.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I have a bunch of questions.
I'll try to get to all of them
with the, the organ example here
in the slide, Mr. Chairman.
How many of these principles
that have been implemented in
Oregon have been implemented in
the state of New Mexico, Mr.
Chair.
too.
Mr. Chairman, um, not really,
not, I mean, we've looked at
some component pieces, but we
don't have the oversight boards,
we don't have the array to that
level of the PBM changes that
kind of thing, the things that
we've done here, um, we've
addressed some of the copay
issues we've done some of the
transparency things we've done
some of the pieces around the
importation although that never
really got implemented. It was
looked at and and was discussed
and it was led by GST.
Risk management, but um that
never really was implemented,
so, um.
So we really haven't done too
many of them.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chairman, thank you, uh, for
that. So next question real
quickly. I know that there was a
bill, it was like years and
years ago, Senator Fel Feldman
passed regarding Medicaid, uh,
reporting, I believe it was, it
was uh
Supplemental rebates.
And that where we in
implementing that law. I don't
know.
You guys have looked into that,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chairman.
Um, Ma and chair representative
Park. I am so impressed that you
knew that. Surely anybody knows
about that. So gold star, um,
supplemental rebates is
something that we have talked
about.
At LFC for a while and it's
something that our program, our
Medicaid program was behind.
Basically we were one of the few
states that weren't doing the
supplemental rebates. So we were
losing out on that and there are
some reasons why we weren't
doing it and all, but basically
it was an issue that we had
raised repeatedly in our
Medicaid program and said we
needed to be taking advantage of
that. So, um, in the past couple
of years, we've made some
progress, our Medicaid program
in in rebates and doing that,
but is there still some capacity
for that, I would say yes,
there, there is. Thank you so
much, Madam Chairman.
Chairman, you snuck back in here
and thank you for that. So, my
next question, I guess,
regarding the volume.
Whatever that volume bill is
that we pass here. I think it's
in one of your graphs buying in
volume, uh.
Volume purchasing, that's,
that's it. So I'm just wondering
cause our state is kind of tiny,
right? Our state is half the
population of Oregon.
Like a third of the population
of Missouri, would we actually
see reduced costs with this
implementation of this bill
since our population is just so
rural, so small, and it's just
so different than many other
populations across the country.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman
Representative block, there are
two component pieces to that one
to increase our volume, it's
that piece we said pull all of
our, particularly all of our
public purchasing, so that's,
you know, the, the, you know,
retiree healthcare NIPSA public
schools.
All of those state employees,
Medicaid, all of the public
purchasers in our states. So if
we pull all of that, we increase
our volume. Number 2, the second
way to increase our volume is to
do interstate compact buying. So
that's something that's been
talked about and, and uh Senator
Hickey alluded to that with the
Oregon plan and that they're
combining with Washington some
to try and in in certain
circumstances and instances to
increase their volume purchasing
power, that's another thing that
we could look at. There's
multiple.
Um, interstate purchasing
compacts that we could consider
as well.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
cause I see on the graph here,
there's not really any other
states around us who've
implemented certain policies
like that. So, I just don't know
how we would figure that out,
and so,
Yeah, I guess that's all I had.
I guess I have a little time.
Thank you, I guess I don't have
a little time, but
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good sense of timing,
representative.
Representative Cates, thank you,
Chair, and thank you, Ruan. You
know, this, this is a tough work
and um and it's a lot of data to
approach a problem solving and
um I appreciate your enthusiasm
with uh not always very happy
information, but you, I can see
you have the joy of problem
solving in your head, which is
exactly what I appreciate. Um, I
have just, you know, all this
data, and I see that there's 1
$57 million shortfall and um
and, and I do see that you were
talking about like the weight
loss drugs being um one of the
weights on all the uh the, the
cost there, but what I don't see
is
Where are we saving money on the
diabetes treatment because
they're putting the money in the
weight loss drugs, are we not
decreasing our pharmaceutical
needs on metformin and insulin
and amputees and uh kidney
treatment and those sort of uh
uh uh which is at an epidemic
rate, especially here in New
Mexico. Why are we not or why
has that not been presented here
to show a balance of its
addressing with the cost. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Kate, that's a really good
question. Um,
Two pieces, um, one, basically,
we don't have the data, so this
we did, we did good to get this
data, so we basically are
pulling pieces from these big
aggregate Medicaid reports
report 44, and um and then using
basically federal sources to get
the other data. That's not where
we need to be getting data. We
need to be mining our own data,
so hopefully, you know, um, Mr.
Shee, he discussed that.
But in his presentation just
beforehand that hopefully we're
gonna be able to utilize the
payers' claims database soon and
uh also maybe utilize Medicaid
management information system
replacement project there, that
new system, so our hope is we
will have more data and then we
can get to some of those you
really have to look at all of
these things together. The
second piece to answer your
question is
Outcome you're really talking
about outcome too. If, if, if
we're using seeing more of these
drugs than how is it impacting
our outcome, I would say that it
might be a little too soon to
see some of the trends for that
because usually I a lot of our
outcome data lags, truthfully,
easily 2 years, specifically,
especially for Medicaid, cause
we're, we typically use heat to
stay in that like 2 years easy.
So, um, it's probably a little
too early, but also all of the
outcome data we've had that even
touch on these things to date is
is not positive. The trend has
been downward, so hopefully we
will start to see positive
outcomes and have more data to
support that. Thank you very
much, um, and, and thank you for
uh uh formulating the strategy
and knowing that you're thinking
about it, uh, my, my wise, uh,
vice chair has once said that
his legislators, we
We are not able to with LFC to
look at cost savings. We're
always looking at costs, not
future cost savings on one
thing, and this is what my wife
vice chair tells me all the
time. So, um, but I do want to
be sure that we're telling that
part of the story as well that
we're not just looking at the
cost of these new drugs, we need
to also look at and and you're
very generous in saying it's a 2
year lag. I would say it's a 5
year.
black, but thank you for your
optimism. um, and, uh, and we
need to keep our eye on that as
well. Thank you, cheers.
You, you. Thank you so much for
this, Ruby and. It is dense and
a lot to go through, but um
looking at your page 5,
we, this is proof that
advertisement works. Um, and
there's so many people out there
who see an ad and they go to see
their provider and they think
that's all there is. I must have
Ozempic. I, I, you know, I can't
do something generic, and I see
that as a real problem moving
forward that um and this, I
mean, this may not
be the first one, but this is
proof positive to big pharma
that killing us with
advertisement makes them a lot
of money and so I don't know how
we're gonna address that, but it
scares the heck out of me in
terms of in and and then I think
about, you know, when you go to
a pharmacy and you get a
prescription filled, you know,
for some.
Generic, uh, antihistamine, and
it's, you know, $30 and you turn
around and on the shelf behind
you, it's 399, and you paid $30
for it when it was I, I, that
was one thing Oregon uh did,
but, um, you know, we have to
make sure that folks are not
paying, you know, 20 $27 extra
to get it from a pharmacy when I
could pick it up and so, um,
And then
Mhm. The the au pair claims
data.
From your, from your lips to
someone's ears. I mean, that's
been
I know that Representative um
Debbie Armstrong has been
working on that for probably
what feels like her whole life.
And, you know, it's just so slow
and I don't know why, um, I
don't know if it's foot dragging
or um
Or wanting to keep things kind
of secret, but with all of us as
a committee have to start saying
we need this data. We can't do
anything around healthcare costs
if we don't know what's going on
out there.
And then, um, in terms of
On page 28.
I would like to see that um
slide with also a per capita
because it looks, oh my God,
Albuquerque has so many in
eastern New Mexico has so few,
it may be that eastern New
Mexico has more per capita than
Albuquerque does, so that that
would be helpful for me to
really see which, which areas of
the state are, are in the worst
shape. Uh, no one's in good
shape, but, and then um
What other data sources could we
Make available or could we try
to force an agency or pass
legislation that says some of
somebody that you need data from
must provide that data. Are
there other other places that
you think you could use, I mean,
I know there are, that you could
use data that we could help you
make sure to get.
Um, um,
I think probably miser, you
know, at uh HCA, the Medicaid
Management Information System
because that'll have a lot of
great data and Medicaid is, you
know, we're the Medicaid state
per capita. So that's becomes
really crucial. So that's
important. And then we, he just
say we keep working with
secretism I was just gonna look
at Senator Hickey's been trying
to help us so if we could get
the synchronous data which we
have not got, so that would be
great. So uh but I do wanna do.
a nice shout out to um
Department of Health, we've made
some steps forward with the all
players claims database, you
know, we're not totally there,
but we have, we're making
progress, so baby steps count,
so it's all good. So we'll take
it and then, um, another shout
out to um falling colors. So I'm
trying to be positive, doing the
positive again here, right? So
following colors says we've
worked with them for many, many
years to try and, I mean, we've
developed dashboard, we've done
so much work and finally we're
getting.
Some data sharing with them. So
we have made some strides and
hopefully with APCD synchronous,
um, and also uh miser MMIs that
we can all of those if we can
make strides, that would be
really great. So, so Ruben and
Mr. Chair, do you, um, think we
need to do legislation to get
you miser. I mean, what's your
suggestion?
Or you can think about it and
get back to me. And then the
last thing I was gonna say is um
Oh, I'm, I'm on the synchronous
board and the CEO wants to meet
with me shortly. So if you have
things that I can pass on to
her, I'd be more than happy to.
Um, Mr. Chairman and vice chair,
that would be great. We could
talk with you afterwards about
that, that'd be terrific.
Thank you, Ruby and for, for the
presentation. I had a couple of
quick comments here.
But, um,
On page 23, the Missouri.
Looks like Missouri just did one
thing, but
To me, the most significant
thing probably is that last
sentence.
The measure also allows the
pharmacist to provide a covered
person, cost sharing information
and information about
alternative medications. If the
pharmacist has that freedom.
Isn't limited by a PBM or by
some contract.
Then they can be the ones to
suggest that generic drug that's
sitting on the counter.
I mean it, it
I have great confidence in our
pharmacists being able to make
much better decisions than a TV
advertising company, so.
This
on the, on the Ozempic, um,
yeah, I think it is gonna take a
while for it to show up, but
theoretically at least, a
reduction in obesity in the
population should result in
better health and in the long
run less expenditure for
emergency room visits,
amputations as she said, uh,
those expensive uh
stomach surgeries where you
remove uh you wrap your stomach
and all of that stuff. So
theoretically in the long run,
it may, but it'll take a while.
It's not gonna be the, the, the
quarter you take the Ozempic
isn't going to be the quarter
that the balancing savings shows
up.
So we ought to be monitoring
that. That would be really good.
If we could have some way of
identifying the kinds of
procedures that obesity
generally leads to, and are we
seeing a reduction in those?
Um, then my last comment and
question for you is on page 10.
I just keep looking at that
medical pharmacy costs.
Have increased by 62%, whereas
Point of sale pharmacy costs
only increased.
Is that all in hospitals? Is
that where that goes, it takes
place? It's, and is it that
there's no incentive for the
hospitals to try to hold down
costs. I mean, they have no
reason, do they just go all out,
yeah.
Yeah.
I don't know how we get at that.
But of course, that's also where
some of the more expensive
cancer drugs and so on are
probably dispensed.
Yeah
OK. Well, thank you, Ruby, and
you've given us great food for
thought.
We have one more public comment.
This is the time we had
scheduled for public comment. We
took some early.
Um, and it's online.
And I
forget to
Patsy Romero, are you online
with us, Betsy?
Anybody in, in the building?
I'm, can you hear me? Patsy,
yeah, we can hear you. Go ahead.
Hi. Well, thank you so much, uh,
senator, and, uh, madam co-chair
and members of the committee
that are left.
I know you've had a long day,
but I wanted to make just a
couple of comments about the
behavioral health gaps that were
presented today, uh, Senator,
and I'm, I'm sure some of this,
uh, you can, uh, you're familiar
with, but uh what Eric presented
I thought was very good, but he,
he brought up 3.
He said
Analysis. Now, as you know, I've
been doing this for over 30
years in New Mexico, and I think
we've had a couple of gap
analysis, and by the way, if you
read them, they are, they're all
the same. They say the same
things, things haven't changed
in New Mexico in the last 30
years. So I think instead of
wasting time on a gap analysis,
we ought to go back to what has
been told to us over and over
again in New Mexico and start
implementing some of those
strategies.
Some of them we did in the past,
some that, you know, it appears
to be all these new ideas, but
it's the same thing.
Access, access, access. The
other thing he talked about was
to develop a master plan. Now
that, uh, senator and members of
the
He, if we're going to
Mexico. I don't think it's about
the money. You all have given so
much money already, but the
master plan never gets
implemented and the moneys are
there and you don't know where
they are. You don't know where
they go, and we continue to have
the same gaps in New Mexico. It,
and I think I apologize. I'm
Patsy Romero, president, CEO of
Santa Maria El Mirador, and I
also advocate for
No in New Mexico, the National
Alliance.
And finally, he talked about
contracting for delivery of
services and brought out uh the
CCBHCs as a new way of doing
things, and I would like to
remind this committee that we
had community uh behavioral
health centers in New Mexico, 17
of them, all over the state with
the same criteria, the same
requirements, performance
outcomes, uh, access all of
those
issues were already in place
with regulations, with standards
of practice, and we dismantled
all of that back in 2013. So I
get a little bit frustrated that
in
Our wheels, and we have become
in New Mexico a transitional
living uh state where we keep
going over and over and doing
the same things over and over
again with new acronyms, and
we're still not meeting the
needs of New Mexicans in
behavioral health. So it's just
some comments that I wanted to
make. I really do appreciate you
giving me the time to ramble a
little bit, but this has been a
passion of mine for over 30
years.
Work diligently with Senator
Mary Kay Pain on many policies
and uh bills that all of you
helped to support, and it's just
very disappointing that Eric is
here before you and basically
telling you the same things that
we have learned over and over
and over again for the last 30
years and we don't seem to
progress.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee that
are left, I appreciate you
allowing me to gripe a little
bit. Thank you. Thank you,
Patsy. We have two other
comments online, public comment.
Jonathan Buxton and Adrian
Smith. Jonathan, you go next.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Jonathan Buxton with
pharmaceutical Care Management
Association, uh, Y'all know me,
it wouldn't be an LHHS meeting
if I wasn't keeping you here
late, but I'll try to make it
quick. Um, I do
Applaud the committee for
continuing to look at the plague
of rising prescription
healthcare costs in the state of
New Mexico, uh, PBMs are the
only member of the supply chain
working to put downward pressure
on those, uh, cost, and so we
think we can be a valuable
partner. You've heard
presentations last month on some
of the tools that other
companies use, uh, to keep those
costs down. And as you look at
the, the things that other
states have done, I want to
encourage you to compare what
New Mexico has already done.
Mexico has already passed many
of the same provisions that
Oregon has passed. Missouri has
actually passed more than um
than the one that was shown, and
I'm going to work with LFC to
share our enacted law charts so
that they can see what we see.
Y'all have done a lot. It hasn't
necessarily worked. I think
Senator Hickey's work on volume
and trying to increase your
buying power is a valid and
thing to pursue, um, one of the
things we've also seen is y'all
passing laws to restrict prior
authorization and you saw today
that your numbers on things like
autoimmune drugs are going to
continue to increase. And so we
need to work together to figure
out what tools help drive costs
down and find ways to implement
and protect those tools, uh,
otherwise, it's gonna continue
to, to be very expensive, not
only for the state, but your
taxpayers and your employees and
as we saw in the slide earlier
today when those premiums go up,
Wages go down, unemployment goes
up, it costs more for everybody,
so we encourage you and applaud
you on your work to try to find
solutions to address that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Jonathan. And
finally, Adrian Smith. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
very much for um having this
public comment period. My
comments relate primarily to
this morning's presentation. I
heard some very good news and
appreciated all all the data
that was presented from Doctor
Dance's report.
Um, and DDSDs hard work.
I, my, my comments primarily are
to thank you and remember your
leadership.
One of your very members,
Representative Kathleen Cates,
led House Bill 395 in 2023, as
you remember, and Senator TC
Pino led Senate Bill 203 in the
Senate that very same year that
was designed and meant to
collect workforce data on the
direct support professionals.
The lowest paid workers in the
DD system, developmental
disability system and the people
who work the most closely with
those with developmental
disabilities.
That first formal report was
presented to you. I wasn't
there, so I don't know how, but
it was presented at your
September meeting.
It contained data on workforce
stability, attrition, vacancy
rates, workforce volume,
full-time, part-time workers
compensation, wages, benefits,
training requirements, and even
the capacity to meet future
needs. I think that's why I was
so one reason I was so impressed
with Doctor Dance's report, um,
but it also follows on the heels
and, you know, I think should
remind you of all you've already
done.
That bill not only passed this
committee unanimously. It passed
both chambers unanimously and
who would have thought that
workforce data collection could
be so compelling and
interesting. I'm also making
public comment because I want to
remind you that we're talking to
one of your committee members
about um leading the a very, the
very mirror image bill for the
personal care services,
caregivers in New Mexico. So
those are, those are workers.
And providers who serve elderly
people on Medicaid primarily the
elderly on Medicaid.
And I'll tell you too that we're
working hand in hand with Megan
Lorino's association, the New
Mexico Association for Hospice
and Home Care on a separate
appropriations bill that does
indeed include a wage pass
through for workers, and that
organization and ours have come
together over a couple of years'
time.
Um, to actually work on a wage
pass through, so it can be done
here. It might, we might not
have the will in New Mexico to
do it, um, but it, it has been
done in other states and it,
and, and we've done it with uh
the, with the association that
represents the home care
providers.
So
And just thank you so much to
all the staff who work on all of
these issues. I think there's
nothing like state agency staff
in my mind, they're just
everybody's such a hard worker,
and everybody's, I think, just
doing their best to make systems
better for the people who need
the services the most. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Adrian.
And, and members that, that
concludes today's agenda. We
need to get some rest because
we're gonna start off bright and
early at 8:45 again in the
morning.
Yeah. That's what the agenda.
OK, I was.
So with that, we'll, we'll
recess the meeting until
tomorrow morning. We still have
3 more days to go.
So Shepherd your energies, don't
blow them all tomorrow with, you
know, one of your marathon.
