of chaos today.
My name's Bill Sherrer, senator
from District One.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Pat
Woods, state senator, District
7.
Good morning Mr.
State Senator Laberto Bobby J.
Gonzalez, District 6, which
encompasses part of Santa Fe Los
Alamos where we went house.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Brian Baca. I
represent House District 8 in
Valencia County.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I am
Debbie Sarignan. I represent
House District 21 in Bernalillo
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Jack
Chatfield District 67, Colfax,
Curry Harding, Quan McGill and
Union County. Glad to be here
this morning.
Represent pedigree you want to
start us down there.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I am
the enabler for the director of
chaos on the on the house side.
District 61 Lee County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the audience, Harlan Vincent,
state rep District 56, Lincoln
and Otero Counties.
More against your chair, members
of the committee and everyone
here today. I'm Katherine Brown,
state representative, uh,
representing a large portions of
Eddie and Lee counties.
Good morning, I'm George Miosa.
I'm state centered District 4
represents Vola McKinley and San
Juan counties. Clayton, you're
gonna start us off this morning.
Madam Secretary, Up Senator
Shindo.
The tallest men are in the back
row.
Good morning, chairman of the
committee, folks in the
audience, I'm state Senator
Benny Shindo representing Senate
District 22 portions of uh
Sandoval, Rio Reba, McKinley,
Berlio, and uh.
Reba.
Good Clayton. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, good morning. My
name is Clayton Lobo. I'm one of
your LFC program evaluators, and
this morning, um, I'll be
presenting a LFC policy
spotlight report on successful
school practices with my
colleague Stephanie Joyce. Um,
you should have the report in
tab A of your binders, and it
looks like this, and will also
be going over the report on the
screens above as.
We go through the presentation.
Before we start, I would like to
thank, uh, secretary Designate
Padilla, and the staff of the
public education department,
particularly the priority
schools Bureau and director
Elizabeth Peterson and her team
for uh collaborating with us for
this report. Um, we would also
like to thank the
superintendents, principals,
teachers, and parents who spoke
with us for this report, um,
and, uh, I believe, uh,
Superintendent Dempsey and
director uh Ravia are here as
well in the audience. Um, uh, so
we want to thank them for their
coordination with us and um
discussions with us for this
report, and with that, I'll now
turn things over to Stephanie.
Thank you, Clayton. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. If you'll go
ahead and turn to page 3, you'll
see a summary of the report.
As you know, New Mexico has
struggled to substantially raise
student performance in recent
years, even as you, the
legislature, have increased
public education funding by over
a billion dollars since 2018.
Many New Mexico students face
headwinds from social variables
outside of a school's control,
but some schools like those that
you'll see circled in the top
right corner of chart one, are
able to beat the odds and help
students achieve at high levels,
despite those headwinds.
This report looks at what those
high performing schools are
doing differently from their
lower performing counterparts,
but first, we had to identify
those schools. So I'll walk you
through a little bit of the
process of how we did that. If
you'll turn with me to page 7 of
the report. You'll see that the
federal every student succeeds
Act, or ESA requires each state
to have its own school
accountability system that
identifies high and low
performing schools. New Mexico.
current system for doing that is
called NM vistas, and in vista's
assigned schools a 1 to 100
score based on things like
student proficiency, academic
growth, attendance, and
graduation rates.
From that score, schools receive
a designation. If you'll turn to
page 82.
You can see all of the possible
designations in vistas.
For the purposes of this report,
we're going to focus on the top
and the bottom of this chart,
Spotlight schools in green,
which are the highest performing
and CSI or MRI schools which are
shaded in red, which are the
lowest performing.
If you'll turn to the next page,
page 93. You'll see that schools
that are designated as CSI or
MRI receive additional state
oversight from PED's Priority
Schools Bureau.
Since last school year, so
that's the 23, 24 school year.
That additional oversight
includes an in-depth assessment
of the school's practices called
the school support and readiness
assessment, or SSRA.
The assessment process is
outlined on the next page, page
10 and 4.
PSB contracts with education
specialists, former principals,
superintendents, district
leaders, etc. to conduct those
assessments.
And the practices PSB looks for
in the assessments are rooted in
research about what works to
improve student outcomes.
For the purposes of this report,
PSB also conducted those
assessments at a selection of
high performing spotlight
schools.
If you'll turn to page 12, chart
4.
You can see benign, high and low
performing schools that we
visited with PSB teams. And just
to spend a minute on this chart,
what it's showing is the
percentage of students in a
school who are low income,
plotted against the school's
2024 NM Vista score.
As you can see, overall, Vista
scores are fairly strongly
correlated with income and high
income schools tend to have
higher scores, but there are
schools, those in the upper
right corner that have many
low-income students, but also
perform very well.
Also note that while it's not
reflected in the chart. Many of
those schools also have above
average numbers of English
learners and other at-risk
student populations, as those
are defined by the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit.
We know at-risk students tend to
have worse academic performance,
but at these spotlight schools,
that's not the case.
So
What's happening? If you'll turn
with me to page 14. We'll dive
into that in the first chapter
of the report.
As you can see on page 14, the
report's first finding is that
there are differences in
school-level practices at high
and low performing schools.
Chart 6 shows the percentage of
PSB assessments of low
performing schools with
identified issues in 4 areas,
which are listed along the
bottom of the chart.
Grade level instruction, teacher
development, monitoring student
learning and communication.
This chapter covers the specific
differences in foundational
practices between high and low
performing schools in those four
areas.
The report focuses on practices
that have a strong basis in
research, which create the
foundation for a school's other
initiatives. As we go through
the practices, I think you'll
find that a lot of them are
quite common sense. Things like
making sure teachers get
feedback on their work, that
there are systems for tracking
what students are learning.
But as the report covers, PSB's
assessments show many
low-performing schools struggle
to implement these practices.
So if you'll turn to page 15,
the first area of difference
that the report finds is in the
delivery of grade level
instruction.
What does that mean? Well,
delivering grade level
instruction includes a number of
components, but the key ones
are, one, connecting state
standards to the curriculum and
lesson plans in an order and
with sufficient time for
students to learn everything
they need to know in order to
move to the next grade.
And 2, making sure students who
are ahead of grade level are
sufficiently challenged while
helping students catch up who
are behind.
That can be a lot for one
teacher to do on their own in a
classroom. So it's important for
schools and districts to create
systems that support teachers in
doing those things.
But as the report notes, the
systems are not always in place.
Another area of difference
between high and low performing
schools, which the report covers
on pages 1817, and 18.
Is in how teachers collaborate
within those schools.
I think we're all familiar with
the one teacher, one classroom
model, but research studies have
found that varying that model
can benefit both teachers and
students.
Examples of that came up at two
of the spotlight schools we
visited, including Albuquerque
Collegiate Charter.
At that school, teachers in the
lower elementary grades team
teach in order to be able to
better tailor their instruction
to students at different points
in their learning.
That's really important if the
goal is to get everyone to grade
level.
So that's one kind of
collaboration.
The report also finds that its
spotlight schools, the school
and district prioritize time in
their calendars were out of
classroom teacher collaboration,
both within and across grade
levels.
That kind of teacher
collaboration often happens in
what are called professional
learning communities or PLCs. As
you can see in the middle of
page 18, the report finds that
spotlight schools and their
districts had very clear
expectations around lesson
planning and analyzing student
data during that collaboration
time and critically, there was
time for it in both school and
district calendars.
Continuing on at the bottom of
page 18, and on to page 19.
You'll see that the second
sub-binding of the chapter is
that high performing schools
have robust systems for teacher
development and accountability.
Many studies have shown that
teachers are the biggest school
level influence on student
outcomes. So it's really
essential for schools to have
systems in place to help
teachers grow and refine their
skills, just like any other
professional.
Teacher collaboration, as we
just discussed, is part of that.
Teachers learning from other
teachers.
The report also finds that
high-performing schools tend to
have systems in place for
regularly observing teachers and
providing them with actionable
feedback.
Either from principals or
instructional coaches, or their
peers. There's an in-depth
discussion of that on page 19.
And then turning to page 2, the
other component to teacher
development is professional
learning.
The consensus on what makes for
effective professional learning
has really evolved in recent
years.
For a long time, professional
development meant conferences
that teachers went to. That has
been shown to be ineffective.
Instead, more recent research
really emphasizes the importance
of professional development that
is job embedded or tied directly
to real classroom challenges. So
that might include things we've
talked about like PLCs,
professional learning
communities, instructional
coaching is another element.
But the key, as you can see in
bullet 4 of figure 8, is that
there needs to be a system for
ensuring the professional
learning actually gets used in
the classroom. And that ties
back to the last point on high
performing schools having
systems for observation and
feedback.
You don't know if professional
learning is being used in the
classroom if you don't have
that.
And that illustrates a bigger
point of the report, which is
that many of these practices are
interrelated, and they need to
be implemented together in order
to create the kinds of feedback
loops that actually lead to
schools improving.
So that brings me to page 21 in
the third subbinding of this
chapter, which boils down to the
idea that high performing
schools have feedback loops for
student learning.
In other words, they have
systems for regularly monitoring
what students are learning and
adjusting instruction
accordingly.
If you turn to page 22.
Figure 9 breaks down the kinds
of assessments that schools used
to gauge what students know.
The kind we talk about most at
the state level are summative
assessments, the end of year
tests that are used, for
example, for accountability and
NM vistas.
Those don't tend to be
particularly useful to teachers
when it comes to guiding
classroom instruction.
So many districts in the state
also require schools to
administer standardized interim
assessments at the end of a unit
or a quarter, and then it's a
well researched best practice
for teachers to also conduct
more frequent assessments of
students through quizzes, etc.
Those are often called formative
assessments.
What the report finds is that
high performing schools have
really well developed systems
for interim informative
assessment, while many lower
performing schools do not.
Now, knowing what students are
learning is important, but there
also need to be systems for
monitoring that over time, that
students can get help when
they're consistently struggling.
If you turn to page 23.
Figure 10, you'll see two
examples of schools attempting
to track student progress, one
of which is much more effective
than the other.
As you can see, the first
example is of an entire
classroom of students with their
proficiency level and absolute
score on an interim assessment
tracked by month?
It's very easy in this
particular chart to see which
students are improving, which
ones are backsliding and which
ones are not making progress. At
this particular school, there
was a chart like this for every
classroom that was posted in a
secure staff space. The idea
behind that kind of public
tracking is to encourage all
school staff to feel responsible
for every student's outcomes.
And now if you'll jump ahead to
page 24 with me, I'll go over
the final sub-binding of this
chapter, which is the high
performing schools have well
developed systems for
communicating both within the
school and with families. There
is, there's a discussion of what
effective communication looks
like within schools on page 24,
that includes things like weekly
staff newsletters. And then if
you turn to page 25. There's a
lot of research evidence that
suggests family expectations
have a large impact on student
achievement.
And here the report explores how
one high performing elementary
school, Hatch Valley Elementary,
makes sure student, pardon me,
makes your families get
information about their
students' academics frequently
and in a variety of formats.
That was a lot, but that brings
me to the end of the first
chapter on evidence-based school
practices for improving student
outcomes. And for the next
chapter, I'll hand it back to
Clayton. Thank you, Stephanie.
Now, if you'll turn with me to
page 27. You'll see the report's
second finding that implementing
evidence-based practices
requires effective, consistent
district and school leadership.
While this report is primarily
focused on school-level
practices. Schools exist within
the larger context of districts
and the state, and many of the
practices that Stephanie just
went over are more easily
implemented at the district
level with district support.
Whether it's standardizing how
student progress is tracked
across the district or ensuring
that there's time within the
calendar for things like
professional learning
communities and professional
development. If you'll turn to
page 28, you'll see a case study
focus on Gadsden Independent
School District. Gadsden is a
consistent data outlier, with
many of its schools performing
much better than demographic
peers.
Um, and you'll see the case
study looks at one example of
how Gadsden prioritizes
supporting its teachers with
instructional coaches.
If you'll turn to page 29,
you'll see that hiring and
retaining effective principles
is one of the highest impact
strategies for school
improvement. A 2021
meta-analysis study found that
replacing a less effective
principle with a much more
effective principle had a
significant impact on student
learning.
But it's difficult for
principals to be effective if
there's frequent turnover.
National research shows that
principal turnover often has a
negative impact on school
outcomes, and roughly 1 in 3,
schools in New Mexico lose their
principal each year. That's well
above the national average of 1
in 5.
New Mexico's high level of
principal turnover makes it
challenging to set up and
sustain evidence-based practices
in schools.
Turning to page 31 and 32. The
report discusses how to reduce
principal turnover and promote
principal efficacy.
Research shows that robust
principal preparation programs
on the job professional
development and improved pay are
all promising practices and
strategies for reducing turnover
and improving the quality of
school leadership.
You, the legislature, have
increased principal pay in
recent years and also allocated
$22 million since FY 19 to PED's
principal professional
development programs.
PEDs professional development
programs for principals provide
workshops and individual
performance coaching.
However, principals opt into
these programs, and PED does not
track the impact of these
programs on principal retention
or student performance.
That's important because a
recent RAND study found that one
model of principal professional
development led to significant
increases in student test
scores, particularly for
low-income students, but the
same study looking at a
different model, found zero
effects from um from that
intervention. So it's important
to uh track and analyze these uh
types of principal professional
development programs.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, if you would now turn
to page 34, you will see the
final finding of this report
that New Mexico's current
accountability system is not
aligned to produce better
student outcomes. PEDs school
accountability system is meant
to identify low-performing
schools, and then provide those
schools with additional over
oversight and support to help
them change their practices.
However, if you'll turn with me
to page 35, you'll see that last
year. PED made some changes to
its Annavistas calculation,
making it easier for schools to
exit from improvement
designation, CSI, MRI
designations. Now, as a result
of those changes, 73 schools
left improvement status, but
more than half of those schools
had declines in either reading
proficiency, math proficiency,
or both.
Not only that, there's little
evidence that those schools made
changes to their practices, and
in fact in some cases there's no
way the schools could have
changed their practices from PED
assessments because um the uh
redesignation happened just days
or weeks after, um, the
assessment occurred.
So given that the idea behind
identifying high and low
performing schools is to
intervene and improve practices
at low performing schools,
redesignating those schools
before they've changed their
practices.
Calls into question the purpose
of the accountability system.
Turning to page 37.
You'll see that the report also
finds that PED could more
systematically track the
implementation of evidence-based
practices at schools.
The priority schools Bureau uh
assessment is an effective
qualitative methodology for
evaluating the presence or
absence of certain practices
within schools. That being said,
the result of those assessments
are communicated in a way that
makes it difficult to track over
time, um.
So, if you look at page 38,
you'll see an example of a SSRA
school assessment from PED in
figure 13. Now, as you can see,
the reports are narrative, which
makes it a little subjective,
and it also makes it hard to
track, uh, how a school needs to
change over time, and, uh, where
they are in their progress.
So if you'll turn to page 39.
Figure 14, um, shows what it
looks like to adopt a more
structured approach to
communicating these findings.
A more structured approach would
allow PED to quantitatively
track a school's progress toward
establishing these
evidence-based foundational
practices over time. Now, PED
does track uh and ask uh PED
does ask schools to
self-evaluate their practices
using a rubric like this one.
Uh, but this report recommends
that PED uses a similar rubric
as part of its SSRA school
assessments.
And finally, on pages 40 and 41,
the report discusses the reality
that all schools have room for
improvement.
But the current accountability
system is primarily focused on
the lowest performing schools.
The report recommends that PED
partner with school districts
ful school practices, uh, across
all schools in New Mexico. And
now, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, if you'll turn
back to page 4 of the report,
you will see the key
recommendations of this report.
Now, among other things, this
report recommends that the
legislature consider funding a
randomized control study, a
pairing principles with
performance coaches, and that
PED should develop and use a
rubric, uh, that can
quantitatively track.
the implementation of uh best
foundational practices and that
school districts should set
clear expectations for
principals on district-wide
evidence-based core practices,
and now, uh, Mister Chair and
members of the committee, with
your permission, I'll turn
things over to Deputy Secretary
uh uh Debell and director
Peterson for PED's response to
the report.
she's coming up.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um,
it's great to be here with you
this morning to talk about this
program evaluation. Um, I was
very pleased to have the public
education department um um
collaborate with um the LFC
program evaluation team on this
um report.
Um, there was really strong
collaboration on the part of PED
Priority Schools Bureau, um, as
well as LFC staff. Um, I really
feel that this program
evaluation highlights the things
that we already know at the
public education department in
terms of what really works in
successful schools. Um, it also
highlights
The work of the priority schools
Bureau, the work that they do
every day in our schools
designated in need of
improvement.
Um, I would like to thank um the
LFC for your budget
recommendation because you are
continuing to invest in a real
way, um, and this type of work,
it allows the public education
department staff to be able to
go into our schools and work
with them on these very key
things that we know really are
essential to successful schools,
so I want to thank you for that.
Um, this fun
is allowing us to not only do
this in our MRI and CSI
designated schools. This year,
the public education department
is expanding those efforts into
ATSI and traditional schools,
because we know that this work
is not a one time thing. It's
not just for our schools that
are most in need of improvement.
These are essential practices
that should be happening in
every single school. The public
Education Department is
committed to um coming into any
school, um, regardless of
designation to help them with
these types of things. So again,
thank you for supporting our
school transformation budget
requests because we're able to
continue this important work.
Um, I want to, uh, point out
that we have 2 of our spotlight
schools here with us today. Um,
we have from Gadsden, um, we
have superintendent Travis
Dempsey.
And his uh chief academic
officer, Maria Hernandez, and we
also have Jade Rivera from
Albuquerque Collegiate School. I
welcome you to um uh invite them
up to to share a bit at the end
of this presentation to hear
from them directly. Um, I teased
superintendent Dempsey a little
bit at the beginning of before
we uh began the presentation and
I asked him, are you getting
tired of us highlighting Gadsden
yet.
And, and I say that because we
recognize this, the districts
and the charter schools that are
doing these things consistent,
consistently, and they really
are demonstrated, demonstrating
academic success for their
students. We will continue,
we're committed to continue to
highlight those that are um
consistently engaging in these
practices. Um, I also believe
that through our school.
accreditation process, which we
are also working on at the
department will help us to
continue to make sure that we're
uh working with schools and also
able to um hold them accountable
when, when that's necessary as
well. So with that, I'm gonna
turn things over to uh director
Peterson and Deputy Secretary
Duval.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Elizabeth Peterson and I
have the extreme privilege of
leading a very small, tenacious,
and gritty team called the
Priority Schools Bureau that
believe more is possible for our
children if we ensure we have
the systems, the accountability
and the leadership in place to
have courageous conversations to
ensure every student has access
and opportunity to choice.
We thank the members of the LFC
for joining us on our great road
trip for going into schools and
doing the work with us to have
conversations with leaders,
teachers, parents, and students.
About what works, what's not
working, and what is possible.
We thank Superintendent Dempsey,
Superintendent Chavez and Hatch.
Superintendent Hyatt and Gallup
and executive director Rivera.
For joining us in this
conversation to highlight what
we know works in schools.
This report is secretary shared
demonstrates that with
Systems of accountability and
structural infrastructure,
talent management, and clear and
consistent communication,
schools will rise.
The challenge we face is the
inconsistency of this practice
among our districts.
The report states and talks a
lot about systems. So I want to
quickly address what are those
systems that we see in schools.
Leadership
At every level, from the
district.
To our teachers, our building
principles, our custodians and
secretarial staff who truly run
the school.
Leadership matters at all
levels, and it is a miserable,
lonely job to lead a school.
Where you must assure first and
foremost safety of everybody in
the building.
And then ensure opportunity and
access.
That students are being given
the opportunity to participate
in high quality instruction.
That data is used to rapidly
reteach.
We call this our instructional
infrastructure.
Our standards is the
instructional scope, being
taught.
Our teachers being held
accountable to ensuring they are
covering what we know are
essential standards.
Are we taking a brutal look at
the fact when we get our data
back and it didn't go as well as
we wanted.
And how do we rapidly reteach.
And how do we provide that
teacher support.
To ensure that they have the
tools needed.
Culture and equity wraps around
one of these 5 domains or
drivers.
And as our colleagues at the LFC
pointed out, it's inconsistent
in our schools.
We know from evidence and
research and from the voice of
our great leaders across our own
state.
These are the domains that
matter.
These are the things that must
be occurring consistently in our
state.
And unfortunately, we are yet to
ensure the consistency of these
practices to provide opportunity
for our children.
We're incredibly grateful for
the support of secretary and the
Deputy, and a small team of
committed contractors who even
without funding.
Said we cannot identify for
schools in need of improvement,
and not get in the ground with
them.
And so the school support and
readiness assessments were our
entree back into school
improvement.
That was the first step.
To build the relationship to
hear from them, to understand
what they see as their challenge
and to lean in.
And point out things that are
hard to see when you're doing
the very best you can to keep a
school up upright.
This year, we've moved into
monitoring visits.
The Monitoring visits are all
about our goals and data.
Every school across our state
has a strategic plan where they
identify what they believe is
possible in 90 days to improve
academic outcomes, and
meaningful 30-day chunks.
Unfortunately,
We do not have consistent goal
setting.
It asks for stretch.
We see schools saying that we
can raise 2%.
When you break that down to the
number of children in a school
and share with an overwhelmed
principle, you're moving the
little finger of the left hand
of one student.
That's not going to help us
improve academic outcomes.
It is overwhelming to say you're
going to grow 10%.
I think it was Yogi Bearer that
said Reach for the moon. If you
miss it, you'll make the stars.
That's what we're working with
our leaders to do.
Let's stretch and ensure we have
those systems. Let us walk this
journey with you.
And we'll get you across the
finish line.
And I'm walking that journey, we
think the legislature.
The school and the funds that
have supported school leadership
development and teacher leader
development, that have grown.
Recruited and retained leaders
across our state.
I think it was 2011, we had an
idea for a program called
Principals pursuing Excellence
based off our work at UVA.
That program continues. We've
grown superintendents.
Cabinet members.
This is an optional choice.
The leaders to come together and
move through what we call our
flight plan.
Of teacher leadership.
Cabinet level leadership.
Superintendent development.
It's not mandatory.
But imagine what we could do if
we had greater representation of
schools.
And leaders who are struggling.
monitoring visits, as you can
see, crisscross our great state
and it is critically important
that we are in front of school
leaders in their communities.
Beginning tomorrow, we go back
to the field.
From middle of year
conversations with leaders.
To see how close did we get to
our goal?
And if we didn't make it, we
need to understand why this
isn't a gotcha.
This isn't a, oh, that was not
great.
This is a let's understand what
stopped you? Was it people,
paper, or process? And how can
we support you as the leader?
You know, we have a program
called Thrive where you can
learn more about observation and
feedback.
Because we know if we can
support you getting into
classrooms and giving teachers
explicit feedback on their
instruction, we have a greater
chance of improving outcomes in
that class, as secretary shared,
we need to do more than support
our MRI and CSI schools.
Through her leadership, we have
Tiger teams.
Tiger teams across collaborative
experts supporting schools
identified for student group.
And we too are concerned for
schools who have exited status.
They are just getting.
Beginning their improvement
journey.
And we have offered for any
school who exited status.
Continue in our professional
learning.
Continue with our site visits,
we will come with you, because
we don't want to see you back in
improvement.
But we can't do that without
The legislative request.
We know what's possible.
It takes leadership and systems.
And we're working fiercely to
have those conversations.
But leadership matters at all
levels.
We can go through the whole
presentation now or you're gonna
have to run through it pretty
quick.
I, I can go quick. Yeah, yes,
and um, yeah, um, Chairman
Munoz, we just would like to
address, um, our sentiments with
the recommendations from the
LFC. So, um, we do know that the
key recommendation number one
would require funding to support
our research-based performance
coaching model. We agree that in
order to do a pilot here that we
could, um, in fact, change the
trajectory for the single most
important folk.
s who are on campuses, um, for
teachers in front of students
and the principals who work with
teachers. We also know that
principles need ongoing coaching
and support, not only because we
heard earlier that the job is
very lonely, um, on a school
campus, but we also know that as
students change principles as
well as teachers need to
maintain their skills in order
to be effective with their
leadership, and
We know that because of the work
that the priority schools Bureau
does that we could retain
principles, we could support
them as they are working with
their communities and making
sure that students are getting
every single thing that they
need.
The second recommendation that
we agree with is that um there
should be a rubric that
quantitatively scores, um,
schools, um, longitudinally, so
we, uh, if a principal is
joining one of our flight
pattern programs, we have them
for anywhere from 1 to 3 to 4,
maybe even 5 if we're lucky
years, but longitudinally, we
have not been keeping track. So
we agree with the
recommendations of the LFC that
we actually
could develop a rubric that
would inform best practices for
not only the schools that are in
designation, but each of our
schools.
Next, one of the next
recommendations is that the, the
priority schools Bureau and the
PED share the results of the
SSRA we currently post them on
our websites, um, so they are
public, um, however, we do agree
that school boards should be
made aware of how each of the
schools in their districts is
performing over time. From this
point forward, very easily done,
great suggestion. We will
include letters to send the
attached reports to each of our.
School boards across the state.
Next key recommendation is that
the priority schools Bureau and
the PED should partner with
district leadership to adapt the
SSRRA protocol into a uniform
triennial evaluation process
where all schools are kind of
going through the work.
We know that as we are working
through our federally mandated
school accountability program
that we will designate schools
on um that triennial basis, and
we would love to partner with
the LFC and the legislature, um,
in order to expand this protocol
for all schools and districts,
and that we know that that would
require additional funding and
resources to make that work
happen.
The notion that this work can
happen also demonstrates this
ongoing tension that exists in
our state that we cannot keep
secret. We know that there are
best practices that serve the
field of education, but many
times we are combated between
where local control also falls
in line with what best practices
are.
So we will keep that in mind as
we move forward.
The recommendation, um, where we
are being asked to collect and
analyze data about teacher and
principal performance, um, for,
um, additional, uh, professional
development opportunities. We
agree wholeheartedly. Currently,
the PED has no way of reviewing
teacher and principal
performance in a systematic
longitudinal way.
Um, that helps us to inform our
decision making around the
supports that are needed to
improve the educational
workforce in the state.
We currently house our
evaluations in a program that is
called Canvas, but this is a
learning management system that
we have inherited over time, it
is not a data management system.
We would need additional funding
to purchase the data management
system that has a dashboard.
That we would be able to drill
down to the district and school
level to be able to support
ongoing and continuous
conversations.
Next recommendation number 5,
monitor and measure the impact
of school improvement efforts,
uh, including both school
improvement assessments and
leadership training programs.
We know and we are currently
implementing school improvement
efforts that are measured by the
NM dash or sometimes we call it
the 90 day plan for short. It is
a school improvement plan, um,
Ms. Peterson just spoke of it.
There are 30 day increments to
continue the um efforts at the
school level, but we see when we
go in to peek at the New Mexico
dash that there is no systematic
way for building school
improvement plans, and that each
principal does
His or her own best work when
they are creating those plans.
We want to use the New Mexico
dash, um, as a way of
development and reducing
barriers at the school site
level. These barriers could be
addressed through the collective
and courageous conversations
that Miss Peterson mentioned
earlier, and we know that we
need to create some
standardization for our
expectations for what needs to
be in the New Mexico dash. Key
recommendation number.
6 was for us to modify our New
Mexico vistas calculations in
order to exit CSI ATSI and MRI
schools on the same three-year
cycle.
We should not be allowing
schools to to exit designation
if their overall proficiency has
not improved.
And we should not allow schools
to exit designation without
improvement in school practices,
and schools should only receive
points for students who were
moving from level to level,
moving up on the proficiency
index.
So we use our New Mexico vistas
for our essa, every student
succeeds Act, which is the state
accountability model.
This year, we have a new model
which is measuring not only
proficiency, but the growth that
each school is um demonstrating
as well.
We will continue to look to our
school leaders as we and and
state leaders as we continue to
modify our work, but I do think
this is very important that we
need a model, a system rather
that we can look at for a period
of time because changing it
every year does not demonstrate
good practices for the fields.
And we are almost finished. So
we know that some of the key
recommendations are how the
state can provide expectations
for school level, um, leaders
around the professionalism that
they show, calendar and time for
teachers in order to be able to
present. We agree with the 4
recommendations, and we know,
and we want to demonstrate our
commitment to supporting school
leaders.
With these. We can recommend
these best practices to district
leaders, but we are not
currently able to require them
to be implemented, and unless
explicitly outlined in state
statute or administrative code,
sometimes we live in a gray
area.
We would love to follow the the
key recommendation for
developing and strengthening
school-based systems in order to
provide teachers with frequent
feedback on their practice,
connecting grade level standards
to lesson plans and high-quality
instructional materials,
regularly tracking and
monitoring students, uh,
learning over time, as well as
communicating with families
about their students' learning
progress.
The 4 recommendations that are
that have been provided from our
partners with the LFC report are
at the school level, and again
we can recommend the best
practices we can send our tiger
teams out to show schools how it
is done, but we are not exactly
able to mandate implementation
unless explicitly outlined in
statute or rule.
We know that the work of school
improvement is hard, and it
requires adult behaviors to
change before student learning
can change. We know it is
possible. We know that it
requires hard work, and we also
know that it requires systems,
policy, expectations, and
commitment.
This is a small snapshot of some
of our school leaders who are
digging in every single day to
do this work.
Leaders who join us at the table
often stay with us. They bring
along their teams as they're
building the bench of their
building.
And we know, as we have seen it,
and we will continue to do this
work to expand upon this work,
and we urge you to consider and
to um focus the work on how it
happens, which is money from the
legislature. So thank you for
that, uh, Chairman Munoz, and we
now are available for questions.
Thank you, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I will be short direct, but I
may get a little bit passionate,
so, excuse me, up front, Mr.
Chairman, committee, um, I'm
gonna direct my areas in 4 areas
of the school and the
instruction. The first is the
grain bands, we talked about the
data, we've talked about this.
My, my question is really about
The impact of the investment
we've had in early childhood
education.
When we talk about a fund that's
reaching $10 billion. We said
many years ago before our
commitment to preschool that our
kids enter kindergarten 2 or 3
years behind.
What was the 3 and 4 year old
programs, my question is, what
impact has that had on
kindergarten readiness.
Because the fact about it is if
we're saying that the answer is
just money.
$10 billion is what this
committee is going to pass for
the whole state. So we need to,
and we've asked for, I've asked
for it. We need to find out what
that impact is.
The K2 K2 band, because as we
get early intervention, early
identification, we get kids at a
3rd grade, they become ready to,
um, you know, that access to
grade level curriculum.
The other thing, Mr. Chairman,
is
Middle school.
When we talk about it, I know
we've talked about the unit
value. We've talked about the
factor in 6th grade.
But when we talk about all the
ales of high school, we talk
about.
Dropouts, we talk about low
attendance, we talk about these
things, the decisions to drop
out comes in middle school.
And so when we're talking about
middle middle school reform, we
need to talk.
Talk about an investment and
even a restructure of that.
K through 6, many of the
students are motivated by their
teacher.
Starting from 7th grade middle
school, they begin motivated by
their peers.
How are we going to address
their structure and their,
their, not only their content,
but their schedule, that we can
address their social emotional
needs, academic needs as well.
Mr. Chairman, the next thing is
engagement. The elephant in the
room is we have 40% of our kids
that are missing school or we
have chronically attendance.
We will not be able to make the
gains that we need and the prof
that we need when 40% of our
kids are not engaged.
And they're not there. So what
we need to do is we need to
figure out, we need to give our
students a reason to go to
school.
We need to make it, whether it
be grade level curriculum,
whether it be relevant, uh,
instruction, would there be
activities?
We need to find that hook in
that carrot.
And we may need to make an
investment from the legislature
as to why I don't care if a kid
is in sports, in band, and ROTC
FFA, whatever it is.
We have to realize that if we
don't invest in that, we lose
money.
Because we're talking about
students that are leaving us, we
see declining student
populations, we need to make an
investment and we need to get
our kids in school.
Mr. Chairman, uh, the other one
is about assessment.
OK? And I'm gonna talk about
consistency of assessment.
Through all of our things we
have been talking about, we have
had our changes in both short
cycle and summit of assessment,
many years. Well, that's like
when we talk about the
Mississippi miracle, we talked
about that that was 20 years.
We're talking about consistency,
and if we're always changing the
standards, if we're always
changing the assessment that we
always are facing a moving
target.
We need to rely on this, and we
also need to talk for
assessment. What are the things
that we learned and first thing
I learned in uh educational
leadership, data-driven decision
making.
And the fact about it is, once
we have the data, we have to do
two things. We have to determine
what is the data tell us, what
is our response to that data?
And we've got to be able to do a
better job of making those kinds
of form decisions to support our
schools.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, my
last question, my last point is
leadership, and I'm gonna pick
on Superintendent Dempsey.
Superintendent Dempsey and I
actually went to grad school
together back 2003 to 2005.
Superintendent, how many years
have you been in Gats?
8 years. Uh, Mr. Superintendent
Dempsey, how, how long is the
average tenure for a
superintendent? You're gonna
have to come up to the mic,
otherwise we'll get lit up by
taxi.
And there's a machine that
transcribes it, yeah, you're
good.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I've been in Gadsden 8
years, I believe the average
time of a superintendent is less
than 3 years. I think we're
somewhere around 2.
So Mr. uh Mr. Chairman and how
long were you at cloud crop? 6
years, sir.
Mr. Chairman, do you see my
point? and we're talking about
the, we're talking about
highlight schools, we're talking
about spotlight schools. We talk
about consistency of leadership.
We talk about consistency of a
superintendent. With the
superintendent that stays in the
district more than 2 years, I
guarantee you their principles
and their staff stay there as
long because we, we're talking
about not a constant turnover.
It's like every year starting
with a new head coach.
And I think that that's one of
the things that we need to
realize.
Is that these types of things
take time.
And it takes a commitment and
investment.
By our
PED because that's another one,
Mr. Chairman's uh.
I see uh secretary of Mariano
Padilla there. I think my
secretary but is the 7th 1.
In like 4 or 5 years. I could
with a couple of turns. She say
no, I'm gonna, we're gonna say
yes because it starting with
Steinhaus, I've been County. So
we're, we're about there, so
we're talking about, so.
Mr. Chairman
I, I think that when we're
talking about this, and we're
talking about as a finance in
making investment.
There is no new ideas in
education. I'm gonna say that
again.
There are no new ideas in
education. We talked about
data-driven decision making back
in 2006, didn't we? Secretary uh
uh Director Peterson.
When we're at the UVA.
We talked about, we knew what
Defo said about PLCs. We knew
what Marzano said about
leadership, and we knew about
data-driven decision making.
What this does and from the guy
from the oversight of the
legislature, we're not to solve
the problems.
But we are to create funding and
targeted errors and create
consistency so that our
teachers, our staff, and our
students understand what is
expected of them and have the
tools and resources to make sure
that we get it done.
And I will say the last thing
about it.
When I was talking before this.
We're talking about local
control, and I'm gonna be very
specific to this local control
for school board does not means
that you can make decisions with
for your community. It does not
mean that you make decisions for
curriculum. It does not mean
that you spend professional
development.
That's the job the
superintendent, that's the job
of the curriculum person. That's
the job of leadership.
So people kind of confuse what
local control means.
And I'm gonna say this, and we
talked about 3 years, that's an
area for us because it's the
function of a school board that
leads to high Superintendent
turnover, high principal
turnover.
This is something that the, the
legislator needs to be
monitoring. This is something
that we need to watch, and it's
something that we need to make
sure that we are providing our
kids. Our kids deserve our
attention. Our kids deserve
this.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Representative Syria.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for your presentation.
I'm actually gonna need Mr. um,
Superintendent Gaston back of
her dancey back up, but I have a
couple questions, um, for PD,
uh, early in their presentation,
they said, you start teaching at
grade level, and you keep going.
But that's not always possible
because most kids don't come in
at grade level. So when will,
based on early childhood
education, what we've been
doing, when do you believe they
will start coming in grade level
starting early and, and really
can start a school year at grade
level.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think that's already happening.
I, I think that, you know what
we're seeing with our our
student readiness as they're
coming in to a kindergarten, we
are seeing them.
Um, coming in with more, um,
more skills at grade level that
that's going to allow us to see
a big difference in K-12 LFC has
already done program evaluations
in this space, they have uh done
some longitudinal tracking of
students and they've identified
um just what I said that we are
already seeing the impacts of
early childhood education in our
K-12 system. Mr. Chairman, so,
um, if I'm a freshman teacher,
will my kids, are they?
That level where they are coming
in a grade level or what year
are we at with? Does that make
sense?
No, Mr. Nore representative can
you.
So restate that, OK, so you're
saying they're coming into grade
level early, but at what point
are they now? What grade could
you say these kids are coming in
at grade level.
Like I'm, I was a freshman
teacher most of my career. Um,
my kids never came in a grade
level. When, when we're seeing
their proficiency. So for
example, uh, Representative
Saraana and Chairman Munoz. I
think, for we saw a dip in our
3rd grade reading scores last
year, so for the 4th graders
that are, um, now, right now in
4th grade. And we know that 3rd
and 4th graders were in
kindergarten and learning how to
read online. So I think now
nationally, we're kind of right
along with everyone else. But if
we think back to when our early
childhood care department, um,
started pushing to get 3 and 4
year olds into programming,
those students are around the
5th grade level right now. And
uh an additional point, um,
part, uh, a project on the LFC
program evaluation work plan is
looking into pre-kindergarten
and that report, um will be uh
prepared for next interim.
All right, so, Mr. Chairman,
we're so by now in a couple of
years, they will actually be in
grade level by the time they're
in high school, OK, cause that
was 9th grade was freshman year
was the biggest dropout rate. I
do not agree with everything.
representative said, but, um,
OK, Gadsden, um, so what do you
do differently as far as
attendance and mobility, or is
that, does that affect your
school? I'm, I'm trying to
figure out how you're, you're
doing so well that we could pass
on and I have 12 schools.
in my district, so I'd like to
be able to tell them.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, representative, uh,
first of all, I, I need to,
there's brains behind the
organization obviously. um, Mr.
Nadi is our chief academic
officer, um, and if you're, with
your permission, like to ask her
to come up and join us. I can
share with you a little bit that
I would say, and this, it's come
up a little bit in terms of
standards. If, if you do the
research behind standards, it
takes almost 22 years.
To teach all the standards
listed 22, we don't have
students for 22 years,
newsflash.
So what you have to do is you
have to prioritize those
standards, and you have to be
very clear at grade level what
those expectations are, and
then, as we said, you have to
monitor every piece of that. So
I would ask each of you, if you
go visit your schools, and it's
very easy to get in to see your
superintendent in their office.
You have a problem.
If you go to your your your
schools in your area, it's very
easy to get in to see your, your
principal, you have a problem.
Those principals and
superintendents, as myself and
others need to be in classrooms,
monitoring what's going on,
what's occurring, what's
happening. How do I help? It's
not a gotcha. How do I support
you? How do I help you improve?
What kind of professional
development opportunities are we
bringing to you?
Our example and, and the name
was mentioned earlier.
We follow a model developed by
Doctor Robert Marzano, high
reliability schools. It breaks
down a framework and levels.
Level one is culture. Level 2 is
curriculum, and you have to have
those in place before you can
move to each one, Mr. Hernandez,
I don't know if you want to
share a little bit of your
insight. Thank you, Chairman,
member of the committee, thank
you for um the opportunity here.
Um, to answer your question or
representative, um, one of the
things that we do across the
board, so my job in our district
is to
Um, supervise and um ensure that
all of our district initiatives
are in place. I supervise
elementary department, secondary
department, um, testing, pre-K,
and so my, my team, um, we're
very collaborative. We, we, I
like to say that we have
collaborative leadership in
regards to how we implement
initiatives and how we do all
those pieces. So when we are
meeting with the funding and all
these and all these areas,
finances involved human
resources involved, uh.
physical plant is involved in my
meetings with academic services
as well as superintendent so
that we all have the focus of
students in mind, how is
everything impacted? How is
everything, um, being, um,
developed and how are we making
sure that what is required and
being implemented in the
district through the state is
being done, um, in reference to
one of the questions in regard
to how early they are uh
starting to be proficient. The
structured literacy initiative
by the state has been a great.
Um, tool for us, um, after the
pandemic as you all are aware,
the students fell behind, um,
our population is a little bit
close to 60% identified EL, um,
and I say identify because when
you have our parents put on a
lot form that they don't speak
Spanish, but we know that it's
part of of our of our challenge.
Um, so we make, we ensure my job
is to make sure that every one
of my directors and department
leaders has the ability to look
at data at every campus level.
Um, we are a district that
really likes to look at the way
the funding is used, um, we
really like to invest in human
capital because we know that the
biggest impact in the classroom
is the teacher, but if you don't
have well trained teachers,
they're not gonna make any
impact, right? So yes, your
teacher is the best resource,
but if you don't have a teacher
who can support students, the
students are going to do well.
So our district prioritize this
instructional coaches on every
campus with the accountability
piece and um our district also
has district special.
which provides the opportunity
for the PD, for example, my
literacy, my elementary
specialist, um, about 6 or 7 of
them, we have about 10 now. uh,
are trained as trainers for the
state and in letters, so they're
able to really provide support
to campuses. Mr. Chairman, so,
um,
Specifically, absenteeism and
immobility. How do you deal with
this?
because um
because I,
I, I'll go ahead and start with
this piece. One of the pieces I
also uh like to comment about
middle school. I was myself a
middle school principal and a
middle school teacher, and I
completely agree with
Representative in regards to um
changing the way we do school
for middle schoolers, so one of
the things we do is we really
invest in after-school programs,
our middle schools, for example,
we do exploratory coursework for
CTE so that they are able to,
um, you know, engage in things
that they want to do and our
after school programs, for
example, right now.
We have robotics, uh, we
coordinate with legal. We do
things that kids want to do, and
so you can't be in the after
school program if you don't come
to school, um, because thisency
across the district in regards
to our proficiency scales, which
is what we use for our
standards. Any kid who moves
from any campus is doing the
exact same thing, so we don't
see any consistency in
instruction either.
Um
So one of the big pieces is even
in high schools, you know
Gadsden is, we're very proud of
our graduation rate, but we do
the same thing at the high
school level, we've restructured
our programs.
Make sure that students have the
opportunity to participate
because that's gonna go to
college, so we wanna make sure
that they have some
opportunities that they're
interested in like wealthy like
um.
I don't know we're doing a
cosmetology, things that support
our communities, and so we're
very strategic and very
intentional in how we use our
funding and what kind of
programs we use.
Thank you.
OK, next question, this is for
PED. Does every school have a an
attendance coach. Um, Mr. Chair
Representative Sarignana No,
they do not.
Um
Many of the, the, uh, school
districts and charter schools
used um their federal funding
pandemic money to hire
attendance coordinators, um, and
interventionists, um, when we
have been requested uh PED has,
um, and that money.
Uh, the majority of it goes
directly out to the LEA so that
they can
Invest in the attendance of
supports that they still work
best for their community.
And I don't know, super in depth
uh Superintendent Dempsey wants
to talk about what you're doing
against Mr. Chair, committee
members, um, representative. We,
we have a team in place, um,
That is, you know, we divide up
our schools amongst that team,
that is all funded through
federal programs and
operational, we do not, um, we
did not utilize um SRR dollars
to do that because our fear was
when those dollars roll out,
then we wouldn't run out, we
would not be able to continue
that, and so we have chosen to
go a different route. We've also
pushed really hard in, and we
just uh uh recently early this
year, opened what we believe is
the first community district
model in the
State of New Mexico. It's built
on the same uh pillars and
principles of community schools,
but we did it at a district-wide
level, and we have 4 community
centers spread across the
district to serve the needs of
the students and families, which
is typically uh the one of the
main points of our students not
getting to schools, our families
need some type of extra
additional support.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Turner.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Cha, glad to see
you guys in here today. I went
to school there for a little
while long time ago, more than 8
years ago.
It was, it was a good school,
uh, you know.
I think now it's a better
school.
Uh, a couple of things that I,
that I've been hearing, um,
I think uh a tennis is
important, and uh.
I think CTE is how we're going
to get that attendance.
One of the fearful things that
I'm kind of hearing there is
more controlled by PED and less
less local control.
And I think not every school is
the same, and not every student
is the same, so I think some CTE
programs that 50 students.
Or uh
What
chain that far.
Uh, I, I hear that leadership
matters and I couldn't agree
more. I hear the consistency
matters, and I couldn't agree
more.
But for PED I'm excited to see
Secretary Paa here. I have great
hopes she has the 7th secretary.
He was 6 year secretary or
designee, some of them were
designees not secretaries, so
maybe 5 secretaries, but she's
the 7th person that has appeared
before this committee, uh, in
the 6 years that I've been here.
In the 6 years I've been here,
we have increased funding to 60
for education as a whole.
We've gone from almost last to
dead last.
So, I'm ready to go, you know,
guys, let's, let's start
winning, let's, let's win them.
Uh, I do think that leadership
matters consistency matters,
funding matters, and uh we're
trying on this end to hold up
our
Our end of the deal, and I hope
you stay no matter if it's 5 or
7, that's a lot.
And I hope you stay. I hope to
see some consistency.
So that the people understand
what standards they're being
held to, who's making the rules.
Um
Your take on that. I, I will
give you a chance to think about
that. Yeah, Mr. Chair
Representative Chapville, we
agree with much of what you're
saying. We know attendance is
essential. If students are not
in in school, there's no way
they can learn. We know that,
uh, kids are not coming to
school for a variety of reasons,
chronic absenteeism is an
incredibly complex issue.
Um, that requires us dealing
with challenges in the family,
sort of, um, side of things with
behavioral health with all sorts
of things, but the student
engagement piece is critical,
and things like investing in CTE
things, things that we just um
heard from uh Miss Hernandez
our, are really critical things
in terms of engaging families,
community schools, all of these
things are really important for
engaging families, and we have
to figure that piece out, um,
totally agree about.
I've been kind of
Yelling about this for a while,
we need to really focus on our
middle school students and a
really
Meaningful strategic way it
requires investment, it requires
after school programming, um,
when students are already pretty
severely behind academically.
It is really hard to stay
engaged in school.
And you just don't feel
successful when you don't feel
good.
It is really hard to stay
engaged in school, so the things
that we're doing around literacy
and that we will be doing with
math will really make a big
difference in all of that.
Um
You know, we know things that
um result in successful schools.
This program evaluation really
highlighted much of that. That's
why I'm so excited about this.
We know.
What every school should be
doing, of course, they'll have
their own nuances. They'll be
reflecting the unique sort of
qualities and needs of their
school that we know. We know the
recipe. We just need to get in
and, and do that and, and as far
as um we will go to any school
that invites us in.
We're not gonna come in and say,
you have to do it this way,
you're, you're doing it wrong.
It's not that, it's coming in
and doing it with them.
Talking about how are you using
your professional learning time.
How are you really utilizing?
And bringing in teams to help
them do that, and so I'm really
excited to do more of that and
to use this as an opportunity,
uh, to, to go into more schools
and be supportive and and also
replicate what is happening in
really successful districts like
Gadsden, they have the right
mix, the right recipe, the right
leadership, and the consistency,
um, and they're not afraid to to
demand it and talking with uh
Miss Hernandez, she's not.
Um, mincing words when it comes
to school leadership. She is
very clear about what the
expectations are and setting
that expectation and uh holding
people to it while also
supporting them in it really
matters.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and
Thank you presenters.
I believe we'll see you over the
next week or two and in HAFC as
well. So, Chairman, I'm not
gonna.
Uh, as for that.
Um
Representative Chatfield talked
about how much
Uh, and at the same time.
out on page 9.
About funding a loan is
insufficient for better
outcomes. This LFC report, which
I would have loved, um.
Um
As positives and negatives
inside of it.
But we talk about the funding
chairman fact that funding isn't
a critical piece.
Uh, so I would, I would like.
sit here y'all.
Um, um, secretary designee, um,
I would like to, um,
I go through this report and I
see called out as top
performers, but I don't get a
list of the schools.
On the list.
I want to know where they're.
From public school to charter
schools. I would like to see
that list.
Thank you, yes, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, the,
the school designations that
we've been discussing, the
Spotlight schools, um, uh,
traditional schools and the low
performing um CSI MRI schools,
that's all publicly available.
If you go to NMvistas.org, uh,
you'll be able to pull up your
districts and you'll be able to
pull up, uh, your individual
schools and see um the data.
that PED publishes uh regarding
all of that. And so you can um
see those lists there. I just
wanted to point that out. Also,
one more thing, um, regarding
the attendance, um, uh, the LFC
program evaluation earlier this
interim did a spotlight on
attendance, um, uh, which had
some of the information that,
uh, and some other information
pertinent to our conversations
here today. So I just wanted to
flag that you'll see summaries
of that in your volume one.
And Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, we would be happy to
sit down with you and go through
New Mexico Vista so that we can
kind of show you all of the
information that's in there, so
if you'd like.
Thank you very much for the
answer and uh with respect to
that.
I will attempt to find the
report. Thank you. I will do
that and then before we have
that conversation. On page 30,
you talk about effective
principles.
Again, when we get to
Um
Getting into the meats of this.
Effective principles are skilled
in 3 principles are skilled in 3
areas organizational management.
developing and managing people
and supporting instruction. I
can guarantee anybody that wants
school to be a teacher didn't
get taught.
And I've looked at the
coursework from level one to
level 3 on the little forces and
the micro.
Courses and all that kind of
stuff. None of that's in there.
So as we grow teachers, we're
growing teachers, maybe at some
point in time I have a desire to
be somewhere else.
But we're not doing anything
about that. I've heard some
conversation today about that.
I would like for PED at some
point in time to get to a point
to understand that this phrase
this old.
Senates alone suggests.
Maybe we ought to start looking
at business people to run
schools.
not teachers.
Or trained teachers to become
business people because those 3
Aspects or what business people
effective business people do if
they want to own and run a
business.
Um, so I'd like, as we talk
during HAFC chairman, I'd like
to see how PED standard
practices fit into that. 7 and
page 34 talks about
accountability.
And
On page 7, it says Mexico has a
school accountability system
rooted in the idea that changing
school level practices changes
student outcomes.
On page 34.
New Mexico's current
accountability system is not
aligned to produce better
student outcomes.
Does conflict.
to bold s sentences on both of
them conflict. And again, I want
other people to be able to have
their time chairman.
Address this when we go through
HAFC because those two.
Bold sentences conflict
significantly.
Um, yes.
Oh,
page 27.
We talked about best implemented
and it came.
That was one of the
presentations
and I think
Clayton that came from you.
Evidence-based practices best
implemented at the district
level with district support.
I think was your phrase.
That you used once again.
This whole thing tells me, why
are we, why do we have a PED?
So, page 40.
aligned with that.
P PED does not have a strategy
for encouraging best practice.
Now we've chosen
Over the last several years to
increase your budget.
$1.7 billion.
In our LFC report says we don't
have a strategy.
What are we paying for?
Once again, I'm good with, and
it's up to the chairman on how
much time he wants to allow
that, allow for this. I'm happy
to have this conversation at
HAFC. I'm just gonna, I'm, I'm
giving a preface, uh, I've given
a
The view into the next few weeks
on questions that I'm gonna be
asking and expect good solid
answers for.
Um
Determined they talk about a
uniform triannual process.
Do you know how many reporting
processes we've added to our
superintendents and principals
over the last 5 years.
Signific yet we want to add
another one.
We're not taking anything away
from him.
But we want to add another one.
I'd really like the concept of
how that continues to work.
Actually, my note is another
reporting dashboard. Oh my
goodness.
Um
Easy to get into your
OK
Superintendent, you, you made a
statement. It's, it's easy to
get into your principal and
superintendent, that's a
problem.
I feel like parents are not
saying that they shouldn't be
respectful of it, but just like
people, I served 31,000 people.
Call me, schedule an
appointment.
It should be really easy to get
in to see me. And if it's not
easy to get in to see a
principal or superintendent. I
think we have a problem.
Thank you, Chair.
Represented Lujan.
Mr. Chair, thank you, um, for
being here, um.
Yeah, maybe give you insight of
some of the questions you're
gonna have as we go through
committees. Um, but I want to
start on page, uh.
Um, 26 and 27, um.
28, um, we're being a case study
and we're looking at guests and
I'm thank you Superintendent for
being here. Um, I know your
school district well. I used to
live down invada and my um uh my
family is from there and my
ex-husband was
Top of the class there, and so
were his brothers. Um, so you,
so you, it goes back cause you
have a history of of well
performance and really serving
your community there.
Um, and there's, it's a
community that, um.
By some of the things here, um,
there's, there's poverty there,
right? There's a low income and
poverty there, and that's where
my a lot of property.
And not always food to eat on
the table.
But, um, also you have a high
population of Spanish speaking
uh students and community. What
is your bilingual program there
and how many, how many educators
do you have there that speak
Spanish?
Gotcha. OK. Uh.
Mr. Chair Representative, the,
the and Mr. Hernandez get uh a
little bit further into this,
but here's what I would want the
committee to understand. One,
we're a Title I district.
So, not a title one school, a
Title one district, 12,000
students, about 60% Es.
Um
We're very, we have some of our
elementary schools called a dual
language, so Spanish and English
are taught in are taught.
And in a in a.
And a perfect model by a team
that doesn't, that's not always
possible to do. And then you can
have a self-contained model.
That's where Mr. Hernandez can
get a little bit uh uh.
A little bit deeper into what
that needs to look like. You
have to understand that those
models all cost something
different.
There's a funding tool for
bilingual programs, but I will
share with you if you're very
specific about elves, the
current tool needs some
modification.
President of Lujan, thank you
for the question. So yes, we do
have a dual language model um in
our district, we approximately
have 14 elementary schools, um,
of those, uh,
13 or dual language and the rest
are transition. We are trying to
go to a dual language model
because um research has showed
for our population, getting a
fifty-fifty model is, is better
for the students, right? Um,
teachers that speak Spanish, so
all of our teachers in teaching
the Spanish component are
bilingual certified, we are
required to have that, um, I'm
going to say close to 100
teachers, uh, in, in our
district, we, um, are very proud
of the program.
Currently it is in one of the
middle schools, and in two of
the middle schools and one of
the high schools, so we are
seeing that piece, um, uh, it
really is supporting also our
bilingual seal, uh, this year, I
believe there's 200 students who
will close to 200 students who
will be receiving that in our
district.
Thank you. I really appreciate
the answer, um, I probably go a
little bit deeper with you on
some of this. I'm just looking
at some of our funding and
trying to understand it, um, and
specifically Mr. chair at the
Hispanic Education Act. So this
may go to um PED right now, um,
and understanding that we have a
liaison.
The, uh, for, for the act that
serves the priorities of the
Act. What is missing from the
act?
Uh, or the requirements to the
act that we are, that aren't in
place with it, we need to
develop better, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan,
uh, just to make sure that I
understand your question. So
you're asking what is needed in
the Hispanic Education Act and
the bilingual multicultural
Education Act to help.
Fulfill the needs of our
districts and we're looking at
cultural inequity, and this is
the primary focus of in your
presentation here and throughout
this discussion that we're
having, we're having, I know
that we don't have any funding
currently. One of the questions
is why? Because we need to have,
I think we need some more
information from PG to
Get to that with that that
answer. Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Lujan, I will say
in comparison to the Indian
Education Act, they're very
different acts. The Indian
education Act has very specific
Things that direct the PED and
school districts and charter
schools to do, um, there's also
a fund which funds programming,
it can fund um FTE can fund
staff and so it's a different
approach to to those acts, um,
as you mentioned, uh, there's
limited funding for both of
those acts as well as the Black
Education Act.
So with, with more funding
allows for more direct sort of
programming, um, including
investments in staff that uh
support the program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and can
you tell me how many Hispanic
students we have in our public
school systems. Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Luhan, I don't
have that, um, and, you know,
that figure, but I do know where
a majority uh minority states.
Thank you.
Uh, one aspect, you know,
there's, there's a lot, uh, Mr.
Chair members of the committee,
there's a lot, um, that wasn't
covered within this report. This
report focused on the core
foundational practices that need
to be baseline, really. Um, and
so there are lots of other
things that are important for uh
educational outcomes that this
report wasn't able to cover. I
just wanted a caveat that that
there's there's a lot in the
realm of education, but this,
uh, folk, this report focused on
on those core foundational
practices that should be
everywhere in the baseline.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
I really appreciate your work,
um, back to, you know, some of
the recommendations that you
made in this report on page 42,
uh, for, um, I find them very
reasonable.
Um, but if we're gonna go to
page 43 and we're looking at the
comparison from 2012 to 2024.
Um, we knew we had, uh, the
school grading system in place
which is more punitive of a
model, and the variables there
were interchangeable, uh, the
frequency of those changing of
those variables was, was huge.
Um, and then you're looking and
we're talking about
stabilization. I really want to
appreciate that. I'm hearing
that from everybody. We need to
stabilize those those variables.
What are those vari
so the primary variables that
we're using in this calculation
for 2020.
So, um, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, I was hearing you talk
about our new school designation
process and the variables that
are used, you know, I think to
the point of the LFC
recommendation that perhaps
we're exiting school from in
need of improvement design I.
Share that concern to a degree.
But I want to be clear, when
people exit.
As as in um a need of
improvement designation, it
doesn't mean they're done.
This new um measure or
methodology is recognizing
growth and growth is, it's
really important to recognize
growth in in schools. One, I
think it reinforces.
The positive, the successful
practices that are happening in
schools. If we keep schools and,
and in need of improvement
designations without really ever
having a lot of opportunity for.
Um, celebrating and recognizing
success and then also
reinvesting and supporting the
things that are demonstrating
growth. I think that that is not
the best approach either.
So I just want to be clear and
it's something that we at the
public education department talk
about all the time, as schools
are transitioning out of MRI and
CSI status, by no means are we
saying you're done, you've
arrived, check, we're there.
That's not it. We're really
saying you're doing the right
things, you're on the right
path, continue to do those
things, expand those best
practices and you'll continue to
see advancement in terms of uh
student academic outcomes. Thank
you. Did you want
comment?
Yeah, if I may, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, um, I
would echo, uh, what the
secretary designate has said,
which is, um,
That, you know, schools across
the state are in need of
improvement. If you turn to page
8, you'll see in this chart, um,
with the designations in NM
Vista's, um, that even Spotlight
schools have a lot of room to
grow. Um, I think our concern ah
with exiting schools from
improvement designation. uh, so
quickly on an annual basis
rather than a triennial basis is
that those schools most in need
support. The schools we visited
where we really saw that these
foundational practices that
really
are the basis for all of these
other things that everybody is
talking about. We're not
necessarily being implemented
correctly. So, um,
That's why I said I, I, I like
those recommendations. I think
that I think we're having that
discussion now and I, I feel
like that stabilization is going
on. This is the last thing I
wanted to talk about right now
was just, you know, we're having
this discussion and, and um
we're looking at um local
control and those sorts of
things, uh, one of the things
and I love the comment is we
know the recipe, uh, but we have
all kinds of schools and we do.
And one of the things that we
have is we were not measuring
the differences in types of
schools that we have.
We have charter schools that are
their own independent government
entity, and they stand alone,
have their own um oversight and
all those sorts of things and,
you know, we've had reports on
what's going on and some of
those things we are we doing?
The right thing as um
legislators are appropriators
and not really looking at the
full scope of this. Um, I think
that is an issue. I think we
have created so many of our own
variables within our own
schools. And what is going to
get us back to that standard and
what is going to be more
equitable and more affordable,
if you will, for our state.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Mr.
Superintendent, maybe we should
switch with the secretary. Let
her sit down for a minute
I'm just trying to be polite,
but stay close right there
Sharing is caring, remember
that? That's right. Thank you.
in woods.
This chair is just a quick
Couple of
Questions
We many times with all of our
intelligence, we start programs
and stock programs. Some of them
are very efficient in some
districts.
And some districts are not.
When we, when we fund a uh math
coach and uh middle school and
Toton Cary and 2 years later,
take the funding away and then
they and then tell the school
district, well, you're now
qualified to have that.
coach in high school. It's hard
for a school district when we
have declining populations to
keep this stuff going.
We know things that are working
like these coaches.
And
You know, one of my main gripes
is so much money below the line.
It's, it's hard.
You know, and I've, I've had the
discussion, Mr. Chair, with the
LESC and they tell me, well, how
can I make them change if we
don't put it below the line.
My question to you is,
Once they apply for funding.
And it's a below the line fund.
It's hard for them to, when they
have success.
Can we make some kind of
Accommodation for them.
That they can keep that staffer
going.
If it's working.
Why not keep doing?
Another problem I have
is
And I don't know how bad this
winter is gonna be.
You know, uh,
This summer was never gonna have
a cold, another cold day.
This winter, it seems like in
northern New Mexico, it may get
pretty bad. We've already had
snow days and a link several of
them.
So
We have kids that's got
Computers, we've got.
The set up to do remote
learning.
Can't we make some
accommodations instead of saying
you got to make every one of
those days up.
Can't we make some combinations
for some.
distance learning during those
days and in order to, to keep
our schedules on track.
I know that not every place is
successful with that, but some
places were successful with, uh,
Des Moines is the one I'm
talking about. So,
I represent 11 school districts
in my little
Senate district.
And there is a very this
Across any district could be.
I love, I love.
Stuff like this, but.
Every district's different.
If we could get superintendents
and school boards to agree to
stay together.
For a long time, that would be
great if we could even get the
same teacher in the same
classroom and teach her how to
teach that particular classroom
or that particular subject and
leave her there long distance
would be great, but we have a
constant turnover in our school
system.
A constant turnover and you
can't blame someone in
administration wanting to move
up.
And that's what happens a lot.
They train them in small
schools. They move up to bigger
districts.
And it's just a revolving door.
And I don't know how you fix
that part.
But
We have a lot of damn good
teachers.
But we
We keep change in programs.
We keep
We keep thinking we got the next
big silver bullet out there.
Consistency.
On some front would be helpful
to these people.
I came here 12 years ago.
We had silver bullets at that
time.
12 years later, we're still
looking.
Consistency somewhere is a
secret.
And uh
How do you get people? We've
made teachers so mad, they won't
hardly stay in the dang
business.
We downgraded them, we, we
looked down on them, we've done
everything in the world when
they are the very people we need
to teach our kids.
I don't know how we changed
that.
But it's a, it's an occupation
that is just
Straight from God.
If you can be a teacher and
teach our kids. It's a
A profession that should be
praised, and we, we've increased
their wages and you're never
going to increase wages enough
for everybody.
But
Continue to throw money at
things.
It's a wonder to me.
Of course
We're getting all our money from
one industry.
And I will go into that.
But it's, it's
Consistency, if you start a
program, keep the program going.
Is my advice, Mister Chair.
Through with my lecture, sir.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Senator Woods
schoolhouse.
Yeah
Represents small.
Thank you, chair. Uh thank you
to the evaluation team,
secretary and to uh Gadsden and
um also the APS school who's,
who's here, uh, in secretary,
your team as well. Mr. Chair,
first, um, why is the the
principal turnover so much
higher in New Mexico. Do we have
sort of a sense of their a love
from the evaluators from the
department and then if
The districts are interested in
sharing thoughts, that's great.
If not, that's OK too.
I, I'll go first and then I'll
turn it over and then perhaps
Superintendent Dempsey would
like to share his thoughts, Mr.
Chair, uh, uh, Chairman Small,
um, you know, I, a lot of it is,
um, preparation and training and
making sure that they um.
are prepared to be successful,
um, principals need coaching
too, making sure that they have
the support that they need to
be, um, the instructional
leaders in their schools is
really essential support from
their superintendents, all of
those things are a big piece of
making sure that principles are
successful, feel supported, and,
and really have that uh
sustainability.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, certainly think uh the
secretary has covered the main
points there. It really is, um,
very important that principals
have adequate preparation, as
we've discussed, you know, an
effective principle needs to do
3 things. One is organizational
management, uh, people
management and also
instructional improvement, um,
and so, um, making sure that
they're adequately prepared when
they step into the job to do
those three things, um, we do
have $2.3 million in the budget.
uh recommendations specifically
for principal preparation
pipelines. Um, I think that is
very important, uh, some of the
programs we've discussed at PED
that are um designed to improve
leadership, uh, at the school
level when they're already in
the job, um, it is.
Very, very important, uh, that
we have those, those preparation
and on the job coaching, uh,
models in place.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
the way it would respond to that
and and I'll come back to a few
things. One is, without
question, um, and I spent, um, I
guess 7 years in the classroom.
I taught everything from 4th
grade to seniors and adult ed
when we see teachers from our
own systems grow into
administrative positions. That's
a pipeline, that's a strength
for us, Mr. Hernandez is a great
example. When I got to Gadsden,
she was a middle school
principal. Within about a few
weeks, I realized I need her on
my leadership team.
Um, and, and, and when you get
an opportunity to grow in your
system, I think that entices
more people to come into your
system. Um,
I agree that there is
consistency when you, when you
hire a teacher and you keep them
in a grade level for multiple
years, that's typically a good
thing. I will tell you after 5
or 6 years.
They probably need to change to
keep them motivated, and there's
nothing wrong with that. Well,
if you were to ask me how we've,
and, and I think we only have
one new principal this year, um.
Many of those principles have
come through our system, and
then
We're gonna support them through
it, that we don't just throw
them to the building and say,
here's the keys, go make sure
everything does, everybody does
their job. We're there to help
them. We, we spend a
considerable amount of time with
them on a regular basis. I have
monthly principal advisory
meetings. Um, we even have an
opportunity where the principal
is just me and principals no
leadership teams available, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Superintendent, I, I
wanna pick up there and ask a
additional question, which is so
great answers. Thank you.
Can you walk me through sort of
what the worst case scenario
like the what you don't do
superintendent and what Gaston
doesn't do, you just sort of,
you know, you don't just turn
folks loose. What happens not
being any other district
specific, but what can happen
and what do you sometimes see
and, you know, particularly from
PED's perspective, again, not a
specific district, but give us
like a, a bit of a window into
what that worst case scenario.
principles might be.
I'll let you starve Mr. Chair,
Chairman Small.
I think you said it in your
question. Just don't turn them
loose to kind of struggle or
figure things out on their own.
What leads to that though? Is
it, is it, um,
What are some things that lead
to that just turning them loose,
quote unquote.
Mr. Chairman Small, a lot of the
structures that exist in schools
for things like professional
learning communities like you
heard LFC staff talk about when
you have the support and the
collaboration among your
colleagues, it is incredibly
meaningful. If you add an
instructional coach into that.
mix, it's even more meaningful
when you align your principle,
who is driving and supporting
those structures, that is even
more effective. So having all of
those things when I was a
beginning teacher. I did not
have any of those things. I had
a principal who believed in me,
but wasn't really an
instructional leader for me as a
young teacher.
Madam Secretary, and go to the
evaluators sort of thinking back
to that time.
Was that um colleagues who sort
of
You know, were there a long time
and you were the new person. Was
it uh a lot of new folks at some
of these like upper leadership
levels within the school, so
they were just getting up to
speed at the same time you were
starting out as a teacher.
Mr. Chair, Chairman Small, in
my, in my experience, there were
uh teachers that have been there
for many, many years. These are
really, um, very experienced
teachers. There was not really
collaboration again, I was very
isolated in my own classroom.
That was incredibly challenging.
Um, and I just.
Cared a whole heck of a lot. I
worked incredibly hard. Um, I
did everything that I could. I
spent every moment with my
students every recess, every
lunch, every moment I could and
just put everything I had into
it, but I know had I had the
structures that we're talking
about here. I mean, it's, it's
game changing. It's a totally
different approach where you are
implementing the things that you
know work, not the things that
you're just gonna try and hope
for the best, because you have
the best of intentions.
And so again, it is not just the
the responsibility of one
teacher alone. It really is all
of these pieces that were
describing, and it really does
go all the way up to your your
school principal and leadership.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Representative Small peppered
throughout the report, you'll
see side by side comparisons
which take the documented
observations of the priority
schools Bureau for Spotlight
schools and, uh, low performing
MRI CSI schools. So if you'll
draw your attention to page 22,
you'll see at the bottom on
table 61 of those side by sides,
and the example is the high
performing schools, uh, school
in that case study.
Uh, used formative assessments
to guide their instruction and
modify the instruction for
student learning, whereas in the
low performing school, uh, it's
de-identified, but uh that was a
documented instance that they
observed where teachers weren't
sure when to use the formative
assessment and, and, and what um
the expectations were regarding
using that information to guide
instruction. And there are
examples like that peppered
throughout the report. We didn't
go through them all in our
presentation.
Thank you very much, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, great, uh,
that is super excited to
continue sort of on this and
Madam Secretary, really
appreciate from your end sort of
the firsthand knowledge and
declare sort of feeling,
experience and commitment and
dedication that it's.
Really continues to show. Um,
Second, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Superintendent Dempsey, I was
struck by uh a long uh with um.
Mr. Her Hernandez, you seem to
describe like very clear funding
structures or um
The instruct for, for some of
the most challenging
instructional areas with the
English language learning is one
of those.
How, how did you build that? Um,
Where it, it sounds like and
maybe uh with Ms. Hernandez.
Is it um
I, I, I was just very striking,
you know, as the committee has
noted, we've
But in aggregate a great deal
new amount of funding into PED
you seem, you all seem to be
describing a much more granular
sort of micro like this money
for this purpose. Can you tell
us a little bit more about that,
please, Mr. Chair
Representative, here, here's how
I would describe it. Maybe I can
just give you, give the
committee a little bit of a feel
of how we develop a budget, and
we do this every single year. We
really reach out to schools and
community and our communities
that we serve.
And there's really about 9 small
communities we serve. We're
looking for a list of needs. So
our parents are telling us,
here's what we think we need.
We try to put those into
buckets, then we go to our staff
and our our principals and say,
what are your needs? Again,
trying to align those things and
you know, there's a lot of times
they're very similar, and then
we truly prioritize everyone and
how many can we get done? And
every year, we probably get 2 or
3 done. And over the course of 7
or 8 years, you see more and
more of those priorities get
addressed. So what I would
suggest is it takes time, um, we
were very committed when Esther
and Art dollars rolled out to
not utilize.
them for recurring expenses, and
we held to that.
We, we, and, and I think that's
benefit us. If you weren't able
to, and I understand, I mean, I,
for the community to understand,
I, I was a teacher in Little
bitty mountaineer. I was a
principal in little mountaineer.
I was then a superintendent in
little clocroft, and they got
the opportunity here in Gadsden,
which is considerably larger.
Um, still at the end of the day,
we have to meet student needs,
and those budgets for us is
about meeting students' needs.
And there's always competing
factors with that.
Um,
At the end of the day, we're
gonna try to knock as many of
those we can off, and then we'll
try to regroup and see what we
can do next year. Every time you
increase SCG dollars in my
operational. I get another
chance to hit those needs.
Sometimes I can use how we use
federal dollars, um, has, has
helped. I can supplement that
way. That gets a little tricky
and, and, and I know you've all
heard this, but as
As
Salaries increase.
If I have it, uh, employees in
federal dollars, those dollars
haven't increased, so I've had
to absorb some of those, a
considerable amount of those
into my operational. The great
thing for me has been, you've,
you, the last few years you've
really given me more room in SCG
to do those type of things.
We
Chairman and Representative,
yes, thank you, um, on our end
on the academic services piece
like Mr. Dempsey stated earlier,
so we, um, we have a very uh
collaborative piece, like I said
earlier, so Mr. Dempsey, for
example, and myself, we have a
student leadership team, which
is student leaders from all the
three high schools and middle
schools, right? And then we meet
with our trenches support our
trenches are a group of leading
in regards to campuses, we also
do support trenches for our
support staff so they can give
us their peace, but on the
academic side in regards to how
we fund some of these programs,
as the money comes in and and
we're allotted our pieces, for
example, in the Martinez Yazi
case is a very important piece
for us as a district, right? So
we have, like I talk about
district specialists in that
language equity and cultural
department in our district, we
have bilingual district
specialists who support those
pieces in those schools along
with our general ed district
specialists, and now we've
reorganized our special ed
department, so now I have
special ed.
District specialists, but I also
have special education
instructional coaches, which is
a big difference in supporting
the subgroups in the populations
in order to support the general
ed piece and for students who
are not in particular units,
this other coach supports and
developing IP goals and growing
students academically who were
at risk, right? So as we get our
funding, we really look at where
do we really need to focus, and
again, um, we strategize, you
know.
know, all the time as a team and
we're very intentional and where
the money goes, but we also
monitor every piece of it. I
think that's the piece that
we've been talking about that's
been missing. Yes, we have all
this money. Yes, here's the
data. So my team and my job is
to make sure how we convert this
data into PDN instructional
practices that support the
classroom, which is a difficult
piece for some people because
yes, the data looks great, but
how do I move the data when I'm
teaching. How does that look,
right? And so that's what we do
as a team.
Got it. Thank you. And do they
value.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Small, if I can
just add to this, what we're
seeing, I think in real time
here is um knowledge sharing
from the high performing schools
in our state, which is really
wonderful to see. That was one
of the goals of this report was
really to look at what are these
schools doing that's different,
um, and how do we replicate
that, um, you know, one finding
of the report is that really we,
we would like to see PED doing
more of that knowledge sharing,
helping facilitate more of that.
Knowledge sharing. There's
obviously a lot to learn from
the districts that are doing
well in the state. Right now,
the accountability system is
almost exclusively focused on
intervention at low performing
schools, really think there's an
opportunity here for lessons
learned from high performing
schools and that's Mr. Chair, my
final question in this we can
follow up, but Madam Secretary,
in that vein, is there a space
for us to, because, you know, it
makes sense, right? Like you're
the um sort of peers.
sharing their success stories,
particularly when they've
overcome probably similar
challenges can be as or maybe
more powerful than uh sort of
the accountability, quote
unquote from from PED is there?
Um
Can we work on ways that
That learning along with your
own and the what the department
is doing, find ways to magnify
and share that, including
potentially
You know, explore if like, I
don't know, not that you have
the time, superintendent and and
and other members like, is there
uh
You know, pure mentoring or peer
sharing, is there a, a stipend
that exists there or would folks
like to do it, given a platform,
maybe even remotely. How do we
explore that?
To really um
Help
Yeah, help magnify the successes
and share our successes.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we are doing that
work in many different ways.
Um, through the cohorts of of
professional learning that's
happening that work happens. Um,
through coaching, coaching is
another way of really supporting
those best practices. Um, we
have, um, an opportunity right
now. It's, it's a project that
we're doing with several school
districts that are sharing best
practices, this is an effort
that's being paid for in
partnership with the Permian.
Strategic partnership is helping
um partner with the public
education department to do this,
and so they are really working
through, um,
Professional learning
communities, um, and they're
supporting us in doing that and
so that's been a really
incredible opportunity where
we're bringing.
We're bringing um school leaders
from different districts
together to do that work. Again,
if we had more funding to do
this more intentionally, we
could absolutely do more of
that. We also do it informally
just by pulling together work
groups of superintendents. We do
it quite often. We right now
we're doing it related to
attendance and chronic
absenteeism. It's something that
the department has done for many
years, and that's another way of
doing it, more informally around
a specific topic.
Um, so I'll just stop there.
That's great. Thank you. Thank
you very much and look forward
to following up. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, you know.
4.7 billion, right?
And we're forty-ninth.
And Stephanie and Clayton. I
mean, your report's good, right?
Tells us what we need to fix,
but, I mean, I don't know when
the legislature's gonna wake up
and start saying, OK, we need to
mandate some of this, right?
Period, end the conversation. My
wife was a teacher or principal,
even she's been through the
whole system library and
everything, right?
I don't know how we're gonna get
this mandated, right?
And, and for me as a parent and
other parents, right? It's, if I
had a good teacher, I'd stay in
the classroom. If I had a bad
teacher, I was out there, right?
I was out, I may even out of the
school, because the next teacher
that gave me may have not been
that good. And that's
reputations within the community
and kids going home, so, you
know, I love my teacher, I hate
my teacher, right?
And then to the superintendent,
I mean,
You know how it works too,
right? We want good people
moving up all the time and
principles will burn out.
And they'll burn out quickly
depending on what kind of staff
they have, what kind of support
they have and what the needs of
the school, cause every school
is a little bit different. So,
I mean, the this kind of goes to
the executive too. I mean,
6 years or 7 years now, right?
And 7 cabinet secretaries.
I think you're the 7th.
We can count in this committee.
That's one thing we can do.
Well, in terms, whatever.
I mean, we had 3 in one session.
Right?
And so when there's no
leadership at PED, what do you
think the schools are gonna
react to, right? Cause everybody
comes in and has a different
idea in a different set of
rules.
We want it in the school
districts, but then we don't
follow it with, with the
legislature.
And
You know, my biggest concern is,
is I've read these reports and.
The 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th graders,
right?
How do you connect them?
They're going through puberty
toughest times of their lives,
right? No telling what could
affect him every single day. And
he would keep those kids
connected, I think.
We kind of targeted that. I
really didn't know that the 7th,
8th and 9th graders is where we
are underfunding them, right?
And why hadn't that been fixed a
long time ago to fix that
funding.
We just kind of came to our
attention this year, and I've
been here for 16 years, 17
years.
too long maybe. But I mean,
those are some of the basic
things that we should have
fixed. If you don't fix the
funding, you don't really fix
the problem in the school
district, right?
And then 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th,
if those kids aren't interacting
in some way and they don't feel.
That they're relative or make
the connection in the school,
they're out of there, right?
And they're dropping out at the
highest rate. There's a study, I
forget what year Charles, um,
We tracked 2000 of them, right?
Send them back and, and did some
retraining and 200 of them went
on to graduate, 1800 of them
dropped down.
I mean, 1800 is the number we
talk about of us getting in the
middle of the pack in the US and
not at the bottom.
I, I think it's on the
legislature, because no change
comes from PED.
Unless the legislature does it.
And you can go back through
time, whether it's.
Teacher grading, which I didn't
agree with, and my wife was a
principal and how much time she
spent in the classroom, grading
teachers and the evaluate
teacher evaluations, right?
Well, she's supposed to be the
principal.
And then she'd see good teachers
and bad teachers, and then you
can't get rid of the bad
teachers and you want to reward
the good ones to help them.
And then you couldn't do that.
And and so teacher evaluation, I
mean, that was, that was a
battle I don't know how many
years ago, but I mean, how, how
do we, we're all adults, we
should be able to figure this
out, right?
But how do we really?
Change where we're at with $4.7
billion. It's not for a lack of
money.
That's a lack of something. I
don't know what it is, I mean.
Superintendents spend the 3
school districts, so that tells
you that there's one, but I
mean, superintendents don't have
a long shelf life because
somebody goes after them because
they didn't get their football
team or their band instruments
or it could be anything, right?
And, and so they're like,
they'll just throw their hands
up and say, you know,
politically, I, I don't need to
be the football in this arena,
have a goal and got an education
for education, and I'm not gonna
play this game.
So that's
I know the truth of that is I
see it, he's shaking his head,
yes, you don't agree publicly
but I, I mean,
How, how are we gonna figure
this out, Secretary? We got 60
days. Tell me how we're gonna go
from 49th.
That's only, that's only 9
slots.
So 60 days. All right, Mr.
Chair. Um, what I will say is
that it isn't just funding.
Funding is really important.
It's very, it's, it's, it's
critical, right? We can't and we
can't implement the programs, we
can't.
Higher and retain our teachers.
We can't do these things. We
can't invest in high quality
instructural materials. We can't
do these things without funding,
but it isn't just funding, um.
We, we've been talking for the
last hour and a half about the
things we know.
are working in our successful
schools. So we do have the
formula. We do know the things
that need to happen.
To your point, maybe there are
some things that should be
required.
I agree with you. There are
certain things that we know need
to happen, like structured
literacy, which now needs to
happen in schools and we have a
bill that's gonna also change
how we're doing things in our
educator prep program. There are
things that should be required.
I agree.
I think that uh we need to look
at those things as a legislature
and as an executive and with our
school districts and charter
schools to to think through
those things. Um, I think that's
when you start.
Seeing improvement. The issue
around um attendance, chronic
absenteeism is significant. New
Mexico is bottom nationally,
even with the great growth that
we've seen.
10 point increase or improvement
in chronic absenteeism, that's
huge. That's something we should
be very proud of, but we have a
long way to go. These are the
kinds of things that we really
need to be focused on and
address in a very strategic,
meaningful way, uh, we need to
measure outcomes. We need a
budget according to supporting
student outcomes. These are the
things that need to happen, and
it's not just PED, it's not just
the legislature. It's not just
the school.
It's all of us. We all need to
be accountable and we all need
to do those things, um, and then
we will see change. Then I just
want to address your point
around sustainability at the
department.
I will tell you that.
I've been in this administration
and a part of our education
agenda since January 1st, 2019.
Our education agenda has not
shifted.
Significantly in that time we've
had a clear strategy. We've
stayed true to that strategy and
we continue to do that. So I
just wanna
Share that with you.
I'll remind you what the draft
show though.
Look on any page and you see a
decline from 202,020 on down in,
in pretty much everything I'm
looking on page 14, but, you
know, you have the ability to
make rules.
You have the ability to do this.
Right?
And, and the question now
becomes this.
If you see it as a clear vision,
are, are you working on it in
rulemaking? Have you started
that process, have you started
that, I mean.
The legislature only meets once
a year, and so to create statues
a little different thing, but
you have the ability and
rulemaking, and I have never
seen a budget cut in education,
maybe.
In '09010 when we were on the
border.
Have we made a cut in education
since?
2016
Well, there was a
There was a cash balance credit
which recognized
Local revenue that existed, uh,
there's been definitely changes
to how much you funded and below
the line.
Uh, initiatives throughout the
years where those have been
increased and then uh some of
you gone by the way.
But in terms of like an overall
shrinkage, particularly as it
relates to
The shrinkage in the number of
of students, um.
We have
Man, we've been, and there's
nothing wrong with painting.
You want good people paying
good.
You know, that is a
superintendent, you're gonna pay
the maximum that you can hire
to. Do you want those best
thing, and we've done that.
We're gonna increase it again.
And at some point,
And secretary's gonna be on your
shoulders.
To fix a lot of these problems
that we have and they'll be
warned.
I mean, if you want to really
want to change a kid's life, I
mean.
I think my dad taught me this
early, so the best thing I can
give you in life is an
education.
If I don't give you an
education, then you don't really
have anything.
And, and so I don't know how
we're gonna figure that out,
but.
We're gonna have to do that.
Mr. Chair, my parents said the
same thing to me, and their
parents said the same thing to
them, and that's coming from my
grandparents.
Who did not graduate from high
school, so totally agree with
you.
Um
I will say that we
Make rules all the time. There
are many things that the
department does under our
authority, but we don't have the
authority to do all things
everywhere, and so we have to be
honest about what the department
actually has the authority to
do. We are utilizing more
strategies like the
accreditation of our educator
prep programs, as well as
accreditation of our school
districts and charter schools,
we will be utilizing every bit
of authority that we have, um,
more
ro bu s t robustly under my,
under my leadership as well as
just talking about the successes
and then also talk about where
we need to do more work and to
be transparent about that, to be
supportive in that and ready to
come in and do the work that
we're doing in the priority
schools Bureau and across the
department. We're ready. We're
ready to get into schools and to
be uh uh supportive in
implementing the things that we
know work.
Well, Mr. Dempsey.
Correct. Tell me your last name
again. Dempsey, yes sir. I mean,
his success is because he could
navigate the system and he
understand how it worked and
what he, how he got from point A
to point B, right? Make the
changes in the school districts.
You're gonna agree with me or
disagree with me with me behind
you shaking their head, but I
mean, that's the system you
want, right? A superintendent
that can navigate that, I mean,
I think Gallup superintendent,
he's, he's doing a good job.
He's loaded with money, right?
Money makes it a lot easier.
But I mean, you have to have a
good superintendent in there to
do those.
And if you don't have a good
superintendent, you don't have
good leadership from the top to
the bottom, then it's gonna
fail.
And
Nothing on you, but, I mean,
we're watching, watching the
chart go the other direction
under this administration and
not go the other direction up.
And 6.
You want 6 or do you want 5 or
do you want 7? I mean, um, how
many cabinet secretaries have
we've been through in education?
And I think there was a bill
last year.
Senator Novell and Sir.
Um
The pro tem sponsored, right?
to make the cabinets or to take
it away from this governor to
make it a.
Uh, position. I mean, I'm gonna
support that bill this year. I,
I just, I think we need
stability in our, in our system.
And that's the only way we're
gonna get it.
Uh, blame it on the legislature,
I mean, blame it on, on whoever,
but I mean, we got to fix it.
The most interesting thing to me
over the Christmas holiday to
see this was just amazing,
right, to hear about it?
ASU comes into Gallup, New
Mexico.
Into high space.
And tells high school kids, if
you take our ASU high school
program.
You're guaranteed.
Into ASU. What happened to our
school, what's happening to our
school system now? I mean, that
is, it's pretty amazing to watch
how many people in Gallup, I, I
bet there's, I mean, I was just
over the Christmas break, just
hearing about 20 or 30 kids.
They're now leaving the school
system.
Go to an ASU high school school
system.
Right, some of them for free,
some of that tuition rates.
And navigate that, so they're
already into college, you know.
We're.
It's incredible to see what's
happening around us and we're
not keeping up, but I know
that's not why you're here,
Madam Secretary, I hope to see
some of this stuff come forward
in statute.
If you need it in statute. I
mean, we can support you all we
want, but if you guys don't run
the programs, get them paid, get
them out quickly and, and make
that change and help the
superintendents that are on
their way to do that.
And and really hold them up and
support him. We're not ever
gonna be here in another 10
years and still be 49th, and
that's, that's not my goal, I
mean, 1800 students.
1800 graduates.
Takes us to the middle of the
pack.
To the middle of the packing.
He just
Don't want to be in the middle
of Pac maybe we want to be in
number one.
We should learn to win it.
Every single year, we should
figure out how we win win that
game.
Because Arizona has just figured
it out.
Arizona has just figured out how
to take our New Mexico high
school students into their high
schools and their college
systems, and that's a very thank
your time, thank you, Mr.
Superintendent. I hope we did.
but
thank you. Thank you members of
the committee. What's the word
for the session? What is the
word of the sharing is
character.
I'll remember, I'll remind you
the other secretaries come and
they say, uh, where can we get
money? I'm like sharing is car
and go talk to the PED
secretary.
Clayton Stephanie, good job.
Was the
Let's see, we're gonna go to uh
we're gonna go to miscellaneous
business and just clean up the
calendar. There's 2 things, uh,
the minutes of last month and
then adopting the language
changes.
Um,
a Mr. Chairman, tab C is the
approval of the November and
December meeting minutes.
Moving to pass, Mr. Chairman
motion by Senator Rodriguez,
seconded by.
Second
represent a small any objection
to adopting the movements
and then tab D, these were the
technical corrections that we
found after the LFC.
Uh, adopted the recommendation.
The first is just clarifying.
Um, that the
Funding amount for the leasehold
community assistance that you
adopted, uh, was for a total of
um
56,000
But it was the increase was only
36,000, and then the other uh
proposed changes where we had
classified uh some of these
appropriations as other state
funds when they should have been
shown as transfers, um, as well
as the standard language for,
uh public school support.
To go with the recommendation,
Mr. Chairman. Any questions on
Catch up, clean up.
So
have a motion might represent a
small second line representing
Dixon, any objection to the
motion? See none.
Charles when you're onto.
So, Mr. Chairman, if we want to
move on to committee sponsored
legislation.
That is behind tab B.
I can go through the
Items one by one if you'd like.
Yeah. OK. So the first one, this
one is slightly different than
what you saw in the memo, uh, in
December. This is a bill that
would create 2 wildlife funds.
The issue that
Wildfire, sorry.
Making wildlife corridors
wildfire, um.
One of the issues has been, uh,
how we use the emergency funding
to both.
Prepare for like prepositioning,
as well as respond to actually
fight the fire. And so this
would create two separate funds.
The first one would be um for uh
preparation for fire season.
This is a prepositioning, you
have a recommendation to load
that fund up contingent on this
legislation with a couple of
years' worth of funding, um, for
inner. This would make it very
clear and, and get them out of
the, the EO um.
Uh, funding kind of issue, uh,
make it very clear, uh, on how
they could use that funding. The
same thing for wildfire
response. Uh, they could get
money from the ACF uh into this
fund to, to fight the fires, and
it would be much more uh clear
rather than having it tied in
the accounting system in a way
that's very difficult to track.
Uh, this would clean that up.
This this this bill, the change
is it does not include reforms
to the appropriate.
contingency fund and how much
money can come out of that fund.
So that's been stripped out of
this proposal, it simply creates
those two, different funds and
requires uh reporting mechanisms
back to you as a legislature.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Approximately how much funding
are we talking about?
Well, in, in the case of the
prepositioning fund, you had set
aside $12 million over a
multi-year period for them to be
able to do the fire preparation
work that normally they were
issuing executive orders for. So
you're basically signaling to
the executive, stop using
emergency funding for things
that are more, uh, should be
more regularly planned as part
of the, the budget. And uh Mr.
Chairman, does this tie in to
the
2 hotshot crews that were
established that separate in
their uh base budget uh where
you funded the hotshot. Thank
you. So this is, so the
executive doesn't have to write
46 executive orders in order to
get enough funding to make them
operational. She can only write
them at 750,000 each. This is
just
Us learning to navigate the new
environment.
me other questions.
Represented a small, you wanted
to carry the spills, right?
Yes, I know.
For Saint Vincent and others.
OK, so representing smalls on
their center compost on our
side. Why, why don't we just,
just list in there.
I, I, on my list I have.
Uh, you, and then, uh,
representing.
Well, Representative Vincent, I
have Harlan written down, um,
representative Chatfield on my
side on the Senate side, Senator
Compos, Senator Gonzalez,
Senator Woods, right?
Next you want to do a motion for
adopting it or need a motion to
adopt some of.
That motion represents small
second by Sara Gonzalez, any
objection to the motion for
adoption, See none.
The second, Mr. Chairman, as
part of uh the committee's
recommendations to make the
government results in
opportunity fund part of the
reserves. There's actually not a
definition in statute in one
place for general fund reserves.
This bill would simply define
the components, uh, that, uh, we
currently count towards reserves
as well as the growth.
And in a one page bill, very
simple.
So, any questions?
So, represent a small and I will
carry that we'll start that in
the Senate.
I have a motion to adopt that so
much motion by uh Senator
Campos, seconded by.
Represent a small any objection
to the motion for adoption. See
none.
Number 3, Charles. The 3rd bill,
Mr. Chairman, if you recall
during the session in the
creation of the government
results in opportunity fund the
accountability provisions and
the mechanism for uh those
accountability plans was
stricken from the bill and
instead, uh, the legislature
directed us and DFA to work
together to come up with kind of
a joint recommendation. Um,
We worked with DFA during the
interim, we took care of a lot
of the grow request process and
basically enhanced uh how
agencies are uh needing to
justify an expansion of their
budget. So that's been taken
care of administratively. This
um proposed legislation would uh
work on the accountability
provision coming out of a
session when an agency gets
growth funding, it says the DFA
and LFC need to agree with an
agency on their accountability.
Plan, how they're going to do
the evaluation, what the
performance measures are, and to
do that in a, in a joint way. So
that's what uh this this
provision doesn't, I think it
sets us up for not waiting till
the end of the 3-year period for
an agency to come in and say,
well, this is a great program
because we asked the people
we're giving money to, and they
said that's good. It's like, no,
we want a well designed uh
research project and to find
success on the outset of the
project, not uh later on.
Senator Rodriguez. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to
elaborate a little bit more on
that and that currently the
government accountability Act
applies to recurring already, so
that should have been already
done. We all recurring
appropriations we are supposed
to have some accountability
reports, but, but there was no
accountability requirement in
the statute to require
non-recurring funds. In other
words, when we did it last year,
we said all recurring
non-recurring, we want
accountability for everything,
and that part was vetoed.
it was thought that the
government Accountability Act
did not apply. Well, it does, it
just doesn't apply to
everything, so now this is
filling in all the gaps, making
sure that it applies to
everything and hopefully no
questions asked. We need
accountability. Thank you.
Thank you. So I have represented
small and
Senator Sheer and Senator
Shindo.
So can I have a motion to adopt
number the the
the grow opportunity motion by
representing Dixon, second by
Senator Rodriguez. Any objection
to that adoption? See none.
We're on to number 4. Mr. Chair,
#4 does the same thing, uh, by
reforming the public ed reform
fund, where when this was
created coming out of Yazi
Martinez, that was kind of the
intent was to do these
evaluation and accountability
provisions.
Um
This bill would basically move
that process from uh PED and
public ed projects wouldn't
necessarily receive grow, they
would receive public and reform
fund you parked 150 million for
projects, things like
attendance, success, um, uh, how
do we do school improvement. Uh,
you've got that in your
recommendation from the reform
fund, so it would mirror what
we're doing in the
accountability. The only
difference would, it would
include LESC in that process.
Of approving the accountability
plan.
The bill would also clarify uh
and reinforce the AG opinion
that the PED budget uh request
for those below the line items
are also due on September 1st,
with that, Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer your questions.
Any questions?
a motion.
Senator, Senator Campos motion
second by Representative Dixon,
any objection to the adoption,
OK,
number 5. Next one, Mr.
Chairman.
We had a committee work this
interim on the underperformance
of our severance tax permanent
fund investment performance, uh,
and that one of the things
that's significantly been
holding it back, going back
years, has been the venture
capital economic development,
uh, program component, uh, of
the authority of SIC to make
investments.
This one was basically
Largely starved of inflows for
20 years because we were
diverting revenue from going
into it to go into public school
capital outlay where we were
spending all of the available
capacity for capital outlay,
you've made a major fiscal
policy shift over the past
couple of years to start loading
that up as a place for uh future
revenue from the um
For the general fund, uh, and
diverting excess oil and gas
revenue into it. So this fund
has grown by, you know, about 5
billion over the last couple of
years.
And right now there's a cap on
how much can be invested for
these purposes, but it's a
percentage.
So
You know, 12% of 5 billion is
very different than 12% of 10
billion.
Uh, particularly if that's been
a drag. And so, what this bill
proposes is to set a cap well
above what they are, uh, using
this fund for these uh economic
development um instruments right
now, but it would be a hard
dollar cap of $700 million.
Uh, and then we can come back in
a couple of years to see if
under the new leadership, that
component of the program is, is
not underperforming and dragging
down the overall performance and
you can make a change to it, uh,
versus having it as a percentage
of a growing pie.
Uh, so that's the, the staff
recommendation on this one. I
consider this probably on my
priority list for things for you
to consider.
Any questions?
Um, Senator Campos and Senator
Woods. We had a house sponsor
for that. We didn't have a house
sponsor, but that's a, a TBD
so that would be to do number 5
the economic development
investment, a motion by Senator
Campos.
took him by.
Represented Dixon.
Any objection to that motion.
None.
Under 6. Mr. Chairman, there's
been a desire from um
A variety of committee members
as well as throughout the years
for LFC evaluation staff to do
more work.
On tax expenditures and how well
they, they work. Uh, LFC is one
of the few evaluation shops that
has a limitation on our access
to uh confidential information
in the executive branch, where
most other states' evaluation
shops have access to any
information. They're not
authorized to redisclose it, um,
but they are authorized to get
that information and do analysis
and report aggregate data back.
This would in a very narrow way,
uh allow for that, uh, to be
able to evaluate those tax
expenditures, um, to see what
kind of results you're getting,
um, and that's the, the proposal
on numbers. No redisclosure of
that information at the from the
staff to anybody.
Center share.
So, Mr. Chair, I put my name on
that, but I do want to make sure
that this is aggregated
information, not
It's not Senator Bill Sher's
information. It's
People that fall in this group's
information.
Information that would become
eventually public.
Would be aggregate, no
individual taxpayer, but we
would be able to work with the
tax department to get the level
of detail that we need in order
to, they've got access to all
that same information, this
would extend it to LFC staff
with no redisclosure authority.
Any other questions?
Senator Shindo 2nd.
Representing Dixon, and I know,
uh, Mr. Chair,
that Chairman,
let me, uh, so I have lenting in
Senator Shio and Senator Sheer
on this one.
So can I have a motion tube dot
the evaluation.
And motion by Senator Gonzalez,
seconded by.
Senator Rodriguez, any objection
to adoption? So no.
So number 7, this would require
standardized reporting for Lita
and J-tip to the LFC right now,
this has been um voluntary kind
of, I would say.
Uh, hit or miss, depending on
the administration, and this
would uh codify the requirements
for those two programs to
regularly report their
accountability provisions to the
committee.
Any questions on number 7.
Now this can, it, it has to
happen cause they, they say
they're out of Lita money every
year, and then right before the
session, they only have 30
million and then right after the
session, we may give them 20 and
then go to 80 million. And so
there's no accountability in
JTIP is, I think there's a
little bit of account, uh, so it
can have a motion to adopt.
Representing Dixon, seconded by
Senator Sendo, any objection to
none. Representative Dixon and
Senator Shindo,
uh representative.
Number 8, Mr. Chairman.
is a financial cleanup bill with
a bunch of technical changes,
including reducing the amount of
time for agencies to revert
money back to
Um
The general fund.
Uh, to change the distribution
timing to align with general
fund, you know, RLD and the
racing commission are two
agencies that collect.
Um, revenue outside of TRD, so
trying to get those all in
alignment.
Uh, and then
For SIC making sure that we're
consistent with uh how they are
to manage, um,
Those funds uh across a variety
of different ones that you've
been assigning SIC to, you know,
in the past, SIC would manage
maybe 2 or 3 funds, uh, we've
been assigning them that duty,
uh, for more and more. I think
they're up to maybe
6 to 8, uh, that they're
managing now. Uh, and so they're
just being consistent with how
we want them to manage, OK
motion to adopt any of a second.
The Shindo seconds it any
objection to that?
See none.
So Representative Lite and
center.
Number 9, child welfare. Some 9
we've handed out.
Um
In this draft, and I would ask
it.
The motion would merge these
drafts into one bill. Uh, there
was uh
We've been working with council
service on including the
Transfer of the
Um, substitute advisory.
Counsel from RLD to the courts.
The whole point of this council
is to advise the courts on
what's happening to kids in
foster care, uh, so the motion,
uh, would be to uh combine both
of these pieces of legislation
into one.
Um, child welfare system reform,
and this is the culmination of
the work of the subcommittee,
uh, as well as the input from
the Senate Memorial 5 Task Force
as well as work, uh, that was
done this interim with LHHS.
Uh, the first, uh, major
component.
Uh, is reforming the Kara
statute, that's the Kara statute
is, uh, deals with kids who are
born exposed to uh substances.
Uh, and make sure that families
get access to care.
Uh, and makes HCA the lead
agency there where what we found
is that's a gray area and
nobody's taking responsibility
to participate in those
services.
The bill also updates an
evidence-based statute that you
had passed on differential
response, uh, from a couple of
years ago to basically tell CYFD
to take this statewide versus a
pilot, um.
It codifies the federal family's
first prevention Services Act,
where basically says CYFD do a
plan for implementing child
welfare services that
Research shows works.
And then the federal government
will pay for 3/45% of the cost
of that.
Versus trying to make it up as
we go, says follow this federal
law.
And then, like I said, moving
the substitute care advisory
counsel to AOC.
Um
The final piece is governance
reform or uh how the CYFD
secretary would be selected.
There would be a basically a, a
nominating uh commission similar
to what you do for OSI and PRC
to say is this person really
qualified as experience to do
this kind of work, and we
recommend the governor, uh,
nominate, uh, this particular
individual. So adding a vetting
process, uh, formalized vetting
process, uh, similar to what
you've set up.
with other agencies, uh, to
Hopefully improve uh who we're
appointing ultimately into these
programs. You've had a number of
cabinet secretaries that have
been appointed to this important
agency through the year that
have no background in this
particular area and and the
subcommittee found that that has
caused real challenges um for
administering these important
programs. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
any objection to that?
Yeah, you did, Mr. Chairman, uh,
item 10, we've focused a lot
this interim on the
Um
Our liability insurance
coverage, um, for state
agencies, uh, and the fiscal
signa that fund has been
experiencing, uh, we had done an
evaluation about how other
states manage.
Their liability funds, and found
that, uh, many of them cap, uh,
those payments for individuals
that are uh suing the state. And
so the recommendation would be
to set a new limits on how much
risk management could
Um, issue and settlement
payments.
Uh, at those levels that you see
in.
We know these have gotten out of
control.
We know this is gonna be roughly
a $300 million cost to the
state, we don't start figuring
out how to cap it, I mean, NMSU
did some settlements real
quickly.
And now they're gonna have to
pay more in insurance, I mean.
Um, UNM has another one. It's
not just a higher ed
institutions. It's kind of all
of motion.
Endorsement, Senator Campos.
The woods
Uh, I do not, we have someone,
we have Senator Woods on our
side.
And Representative Chatfield.
Easter no.
I mean, so you've got emotion
you oh yeah any objection to
that motion.
See none
We charged lobbyists $1
screenshot.
In case you didn't know, this is
already on the LLC, uh, LFC's
website so you could print it
out and not have 10 photos.
Uh, go ahead, Charles. Uh, the
next one goes hand in hand with
the uh item number 10, but this
is, let's get out of uh getting
sued by doing a better job of
delivering services that are not
harming individuals. So really
beefing up uh RMD's ability to
work with agencies to on these
loss prevention teams to learn
lessons from what happened in a
certain situation, so that they
don't happen again, uh, and
reduce our liability exposure in
the first place.
With that, Mr. Chairman. This
was also an evaluation staff
recommendation, you've got.
Uh, the house is proposing.
When we get to their different
sponsor. Um, so I think we're
who mentioned this in a
presentation the other day.
We're one of the only states
that doesn't do training.
For our employees.
And it was in a presentation
somewhere.
track of time already. And so
we're, it's very interesting
that we don't do that loss
prevention training happen. um,
I have Senator Woods and Sheer
on our side in Lujan.
Representative Lujan on the
house.
Represent Luhon, you ready for
that fight.
OK.
All right, I already adopted it,
right? Uh, you had a motion
emotion, any objection to the
adoption.
See none. We're on number 12.
Mr. Chairman,
There's been a lot of discussion
this interim about uh budget
adjustment requests from
agencies. Current statute allows
the LFC director to object.
To a bar, uh, for any reason.
But
Uh, and then that bar cannot be
processed for 35 days in order
to allow the committee an
opportunity to hold a public
hearing on it.
But there's nothing in statute
that says if the committee
lines that the bar
Uh, in the committee's view is
outside the bounds of what a
statute or the law provides that
that bar would not go into
effect.
Um, and so there was a, a
direction to
Draft legislation to
Uh, allow the, the committee to
stop a bar that it believed was
not complying with the law, um,
from going into effect. There's
Separation of powers.
Uh, questions raised during the
drafting process. Uh, I'm kind
of of the view that
If a legislative director can
delay a bar by 35 days.
Why wouldn't that
Extend to being able to stop it.
Um, if the committee voted,
there's
Many, many legislatures that
have recognized like in the
administrative rulemaking
process where they are
delegating uh part of their
responsibility to the executive
branch, those legislatures have
held that they can basically
veto, uh, administrative rules
from going into place, some
states administrative agencies
have to come back to get all the
rules ratified by the
legislature, uh, in the case of
Texas, their LDB can do a
preemptive budget adjus.
investment change. So there's 50
ways of doing this, uh, no real
rule. Um, the draft that you
have before you basically says,
uh, if you find as a committee
that something is outside the
bounds of statute or law, uh,
that you would refer it to.
The uh courts um for a remedy.
Well
I think we wanted it drafted
that the bar wouldn't go into
place.
Until the courts ruled that it
was legal and a further delaying
it.
Um
It's not drafted that way before
you.
Uh, you can do this already. So
I'm kind of of the opinion, Mr.
Chairman, that we pulled number
12 and continue to work with you
and small.
Um, uh, what we can draft that.
pass constitutional mustard or
Maybe roll the dice and see uh
what we can get.
Worked out, uh, different, well,
yeah, we, it, there's some
constitutional mustard that
needs this needs to pass, but
the real problem becomes in in
July when the budget when
enacted less than 10 days later,
ECECD was already requesting
bars.
They are requesting bars for
which is
We don't have an issue with
that. They had authority
specific authority for that, and
that was to establish the pre-K
transfers.
Over to um
Public education department.
Uh, transportation we always
expect a bar the first day
rolling over unspent um road
fund money into the new fiscal
year, but then, as you saw, Mr.
Chairman, there was a number of
agencies that were uh doing bars
all fall.
Normally we'd have a, a bar
moratorium during the session.
Uh, that's not the case this
year, so we're continuing to get
Um, flooded with, uh, budget
adjustment request during the
session.
Uh, I just objected to one on
Friday, LFC will not have the
ability to review that bar
because LFC is going away
tomorrow.
Um, and so that part will go
into effect and the reason I
objected to it was it was a
really significant
Budget adjustment that increased
money from some funds for the
environment department that as a
legislature,
Uh, by, by them doing that.
Uh, it was something that was
never in their budget request,
um, and it was also a pot of
money that you could have
appropriated in lieu of general
fund uh to do some similar
things, um, and then it was
during the session, which didn't
allow the, the committee to be
able to have a public hearing on
it, so.
Oh, we're gonna have some
hearings on them in Senate
finances,
but this is one of the ones
where it's clearly in it's for
for environment department. It
clearly violates statute.
And they're clearly taking,
trying to transfer fund money to
create
Operational money and then come
back and request us to fund
that.
And so then when they come in
here and say, we're right eds
about me and oh, you didn't do
the fun money, right? He didn't
do the fun money, right? And
look what they're doing with the
fun money.
We're gonna, Mr. Chairman, it's
taking basically what could be
considered non-recurring fund
balance and using it on
personnel and other potentially
recurring items, and it's so big
that it's depleting the fund,
and you've spent the last two
sessions hearing about how they
can't afford to use that money
for raises or other things, and
that they need a general fund
instead, so there's a lot to
sort out during the session on
the special revenue funds with
this department.
Yeah, and then people say, oh,
we don't have the money in this
fund to clean up, we don't have
money for oil and gas clean.
Well, here's one of the funds.
They're gonna tap and so when
you want to complain that
there's no money and we have to
put more money in the fund to
raise the fees in the fund. It's
because the agency has done
that.
they've done it to themselves.
That's 2 years ago I got off the
bars and and really didn't want
any bar authority, um, that was
talked out of it and then look
where we're at today, I mean,
how much, how much are they
requesting to move I forget in
that particular request, it was
over 4 and what was that would
empty out the fun completely. It
was significantly depleting one
of, one of the funds was coming
out of two funds significantly
depleting one of them. I, I just
wanna make you guys aware,
especially as the house goes
over and all this bar authority
and all this stuff, I mean.
Once it happens, there's no
stopping it and so, you know,
think about language that if we
want to give people that need
the language, the authority,
given the language, but those
that don't need the authority.
You know, or questionable should
be.
Very cautious. So then, Mr.
Chairman, the final bill for
approval would be the sunset
bill, which extends the sunset
dates for
Barbers and cosmetologists,
landscape architects, nursing
home administs, coal surface
mining, and the water quality
control, uh, board by 6 years.
I mean, we don't have the
Interior designers last year.
We we've done those another year
when there's only one person.
Nobody shows up.
Any Questions on the sun.
I have emotion, senator Compos,
you have emotion of a second
from myself.
And we send her compost can get
us better haircuts with the
board.
Uh, any objection to endorsing
that. So you know
Senator Compos, I have your name
on that. Anybody else on the
house side.
Representing Sariana.
OK, that's it. And then the
final one is just information
only as a potential bill.
You've got a situation
developing where
There are
Major infrastructure projects in
the the best near term example
of that is uh
A new building for the medical
school at UNM. Uh, this project
needs to happen.
Uh, whether it's a full doubling
of what the medical school does
is an open.
Question though there's a lot of
support for that.
But this is a, a project that
our normal capital program
cannot handle.
Uh, and it's an opportunity, I
think, to maybe introduce some
reforms.
Uh, into the capital outlay
process, starting with higher
education. So the proposal would
be to create
A higher education, major
capital projects fund to start
parking money over the next
couple of years for these really
big ticket items, and we're
gonna have the cash.
To be able to do it, as opposed
to trying to come up with really
complicated finance schemes or,
or expect the STBs or Geo to be
able to, to find a
350 to $500 million.
Uh, project
Uh, and it would
Get to the chairman's point this
interim of
Requiring institutions to do the
business planning and
pre-planning.
Uh, coming with
You know, projects that have
Uh, more, well, they're better
prepared.
Uh, and then they can get some
design and engineering money and
then we'll do the
Once we figure that out, we'll
take a look to make sure that
that design and engineering is
appropriate and excessive, and
then you can make appropriations
for the capital cost. Uh,
As opposed to what we've been
doing, it's like a school comes
in and says we need to replace
this building, we agree with it.
Somebody spitballed $100 million
replacement cost. We don't know
if that's the right amount or
not.
And the school doesn't start
doing any of that planning or
redesign until after they get a
tranche of STBs and then after
voters approve another
challenge, a GO and then maybe
they've gone, so this is, this
is an idea that we're throwing
out. We're not asking for a
committee endorsement today, but
hopefully it's something the
legislature can work on uh
during the session. So we can
get going at the very least on
this medical school, uh,
building.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, if I may
please, then so in terms of
this, if it's not going to be uh
recommended by the committee,
it's OK to go ahead and get this
drafted in order to go and have
this as a a separate bill, uh,
not recommended by the
committee, but that we can start
in the process. Is that, is that
the understanding?
That's correct. Thank you very
much. So I'd like to go ahead
and do that, Mr. Chairman.
OK
Well, I have a couple of people
that wanna be on that one, when
we do it, Senator Gonzalez.
Sendo yourself. I mean, this is
no more on riding on the napkin
and then say we take this to the
legislature and give us our wish
list, right?
I'm not fucking, I am.
for sure, OK.
No more writing on the napkin.
It's like you're gonna come with
a plan and you're gonna come
with a solid plan.
The union Medical School has a
pretty good plan that they
He talked to us about our last
meeting, and so,
That gets developed will keep
those 5 people in the and the
other thing, Mr. Chairman, for
disclosures that historically
for
Because we didn't have as robust
of a capital program, the state
would not participate in
auxiliary um functions or
buildings like student housing
or um student recreation
centers.
And
What's changed on that now is
that
Institutions would use uh
student fees and tuition revenue
bonds to fund those projects in
the past, but what we've told
institutions now is that we're
going to pay for free tuition
and fees, and we're not gonna
want to increase those.
For these purposes. So we got to
figure out a mechanism if they
don't have another revenue
source to help potentially um
pay for some of those things and
Uh, the same thing for
Um
pure research facilities. Maybe
there's, you know, $150 million.
Pure research interdisciplinary
facilities.
Somebody's got a good idea on
the good planning to do water
research or engineering or
otherwise, that in the past we
would have not have entertained,
uh, because it wasn't focused
specific, so one thing to
explore is whether those type of
uh this particular.
OK.
All right?
Or on auditor.
See back there in the audience
surprised I don't see him on TV.
I see him on TV quite a bit.
I, I
wouldn't start whenever you're
ready.
Ricky, how many times have you
been pulled out of retirement.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Wow,
that is hot. Members of the
committee, um, our, our slides
loaded up here.
Um, I don't know if we're
working on it.
OK.
Anyway, let me just start by
introducing members of my team
that are here, um.
To my left is my deputy, Mr.
Ricky Bejarano.
And to my right is our
compliance and quality control
director Ms. Elise Mcnardo.
And here in the front row is our
policy director Mr. David Pena.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Speaking of napkins, I think uh
the next two subjects.
Went from napkin to computer,
um, very recently, but
Uh, these are very, very, uh,
technical topics.
And so I brought kind of the
brain trust of my office and it
doesn't include me. Um,
But I want to start out by
saying, you know, the duty of my
office is to inform and notify.
But the next couple of subjects
that we're going to cover are
two subjects, and it's not quite
in the order on the agenda. Um,
the first topic is, uh, New
Mexico State Agency financial
audit reform study.
And then we're going to end it
with, uh, a report that my
office did on budgetary
controls, and I do want to state
last week we did send both of
these documents on cover letter
to each of you electronically
that way you had the reports.
Uh, in advance.
So with that, uh, what we're
gonna do too is my deputy Ricky
Bejarano is gonna present on the
UNM Bureau of Business and
Economic Research Study on uh
state agency financial audit
reforms.
Uh, and I'll cover budgetary
controls.
So with that, let's, let me just
give you kind of a
pre-presentation overall of the
UNM Bieber study on state agency
financial reforms, um, this
topic has never been studied.
And definitions are, are gonna
be covered by Ricky, uh, at the
outset of his presentation, but
the ultimate goal is to move to
a singular audit of
consolidated.
audit of all state agencies in
the state of New Mexico, I think
you'll find out based on
national state of the practice,
uh, we're not there, the rest of
the country, I think, has
already gone there.
Um, I do want to explain that,
uh, Senator Nancy Rodriguez
supported a, an appropriation
back in FY 24 for $100,000 to
study, uh, what it would take to
go to a a federal singular audit
study, and I just want to give
you a kind of a recap of the
outcome of it. Our initial
thinking was,
That we would put out a bid and
we would seek the services of
these big accounting, public
accounting firms that don't have
any business in New Mexico that
way there's no conflict.
Well, the bits that we got were
Huge, uh, like a half a million
dollars. And so, long story
short, we weren't able to fully
obligate that, well, we, we
didn't obligate any of that
initial 100,000 appropriation,
um, that we received in FY 24,
but
My agency and and myself
included, really felt strongly
about
Truly looking at this, um,
moving to a singular audit. So
we decided to use my own
agencies' budget.
We, we decided to go to academia
because we felt.
Their their objective, they're
credible, the prices are a lot
better than big accounting
firms, and so we went ahead and
hired uh UNM to to do this
initial study. And again, uh,
Ricky Bejarano is gonna, gonna
cover that. The cost of that
study was about 90,000, so it
was very close to the uh uh 2024
appropriation that we received.
And we do have an FY 26
appropriation request to build
on this initial phase of the
study. Um, so I wanted to kind
of set the context for this
presentation, and so with that
I'm gonna have Ricky present on
the UNM.
Uh, study
Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Auditor. Thank you, members of
the committee. Um, this will be
about as interesting as watching
grass grow. So please, please
bear with me, um, in terms of
actual definitions, we'll hear
some discussion about the ACFA,
which is the annual consolidated
Financial Report of all state
agencies throughout the state.
It's an accumulation of
Approximately 130 audits that
are conducted audits and
financial statements, and it's
quite an arduous uh exercise
that the DFA goes through every
year to present that
consolidated report.
Uh, we'll be talking about the
federal single audit.
And the Federal single audit,
uh.
is required by federal
government.
If an agency or state.
Or even a local municipality
receives more than a million
dollars in funding for a
particular fiscal year.
Then it's, it has to be
conducted. So essentially there
are 2 audits going on whenever
you have federal funding.
that qualifies for the federal
single audit.
You have the regular financial
statement audit that's conducted
yearly.
Throughout all the agencies, and
then there's the single uh and
it's a federal audit, so
essentially currently there are
2 audits performed per agency if
they qualify for federal single
audit.
It's, that's important as, as we
go along, understand.
The other term you may hear is
component.
There are components.
Of the departments that are
mentioned, but what we'll be
referring to primarily as
component units.
These are
Essentially, usually, um,
nonprofit entities that are
separate legal entities that are
required to be audited
separately, but then get
incorporated into the aquifer
statewide.
Um
And then the term singular
audit.
We've adopted that term so that
there's not confusion between
the federal single audit and
what we're attempting to do,
which is a statewide singular
audit of all agencies.
With that, I'll proceed. Uh, the
first slide shows the overview
of the study. In essence,
The ascent they assess the
general norms of the financial
reporting.
For the annual comprehensive
Financial Report across all 50
states.
They collected data from state.
Reports the actors themselves
and from state single audits,
federal single audits.
This was for this was for all 50
states.
Uh, we reviewed the National
Association of State Auditors,
Comptrollers, and treasurers'
data.
And the researchers conducted
interviews with 9 different
states.
The reason it was limited is
because not all states are have
the time or are willing to
participate, but we gleaned that
data from whatever information
there was publicly. Um,
And then they also gathered
qualitative information from
these states about their
financial reporting practices.
Noting those that were potential
to streamline and or speed up
the state's.
Annual consolidated financial
report.
So the next slide.
So is the results of the
A study by the
Bureau
What's important to note, I'm
sure you're not interested in me
reading each line to you, uh,
but it's important to note is
that our act for
Our annual consolidated
financial report.
I usually completed between 8
and 10 months.
required to be completed within
6 months.
And it takes us between 8 and 10
months.
Uh, another outlier.
Is that we're essentially
And we'll support this with the
next slide as well.
Where
Now where the soul state that
doesn't have a.
Uh, consolidated report, and
audit.
Of all state in state across the
state.
I'll point out the advantages
and disadvantages of that as we
go along.
Uh
There are some agencies that
will still need to be audited
separately.
For example, the funding
pertaining to Medicaid has to be
audited yearly.
Uh, so there are some entities
that will continue to be audited
separately, but that's across
the country. All states are
required these separately.
The next slide
Is even more compelling.
We are the only state that has
no
Singular audit at all.
We, if you look at the middle
box of red.
There are, it shows 3 states,
the 3 states aren't in the
singular audit.
Arena
That's a bit of a misnomer
because New Hampshire and New
York do have singular audits.
But they also conduct separate
individual audits as needed.
So we are the outlier, we are
at.
So moving on to the next slide.
The Bieber, uh, the Bureau of
Business.
And economic research out of
UNM. The recommendations.
A sight of the proposed an
outline and transition plan.
We're getting to the singular
audit across the state.
This would entail.
Uh, a consolidation of financial
reporting, we'd have to figure
out some way.
To take data from, for example,
universities and colleges.
And incorporated into the state
system.
That's currently not a
possibility, but we need to get
there for this phase. And again,
at this point, I'm talking about
the federal, the not the
federal, but the statewide
financial reporting.
More of the operational
reporting side, not the federal
singular art.
Uh, it does mention an interface
with what is our currently, our
current financial reporting
system.
But at this point, that would be
a really heavy lift and
Uh, requires a number of changes
that we'd have to negotiate with
DFA.
The next slide is.
Brings in the federal singular
audit or the federal single
audit statewide.
And we believe that's an easier
step and an easier lift to get
across.
For one thing, not all agencies,
not all 130 agencies require a
single audit on the federal
side.
So it would limit the number of
agencies that would
incorporated into a statewide.
Fed signal out.
It would reduce it to about 60
agencies.
That would be easier to achieve.
No.
At this point, I want to
discuss.
The what's advantageous about
moving to a statewide.
Singular out.
The first is, of course,
efficiency.
A singular audit consolidates
multiple audits into one
comprehensive audit, reducing
time and resources needed.
For separate audits.
The cost savings.
Ultimately, we believe that
we'll be conducting one singular
audit across the state.
Significantly reduced costs over
time.
It'll reduce audit fees, staff
time and administrative
expenses.
Consistency.
A singular audit ensures
consistency in audit procedures
and standards across all
agencies, leading to more
uniform and reliable results.
Instead of valuing an auditors
that are stove type.
Currently, we have 130 audits.
They are spread out amongst
various uh individual and
independent professional
accountants.
Do these audits.
And they're not necessarily
consistent. We see that in our
review at the Office of the
State Auditor.
But one
Accounting firm will emphasize
is not emphasized by another,
and vice versa.
So this would ensure consistency
because you're auditing across
what resulted in improve
oversight, we believe.
The singular audit will provide
a holistic view of the state's
financial health and compliance
with federal regulations as well
as state.
Regulations making it easier for
state officials to identify.
And address issues.
So you'd be looking at one as
As our legislators, you'd be
looking at one comprehensive
audit across the state, instead
of going back and forth between
separate audits.
And there are 130 of them
currently.
And it would reduce the
administrative burden.
Agencies can focus more on their
core missions.
And I'm preparing multiple
audits.
Having been in various agencies.
The other process can take
anywhere. We have a fiscal year
end of June 30th.
It can take you up to December
31st.
Depending on the agency, the
size, the complexity.
When you're preoccupied with
that audit for the previous
year.
Before you can actually get on.
With the current fiscal year.
Things are still being
processed. Payments are being
processed, revenues are being
received, but it's almost an
aside to the all important
audit.
So that this would actually be
very advantageous in the long
run. The Bieber study pointed
out that state bond ratings.
This is more associated with
time and timeliness.
It'd be the audits would be much
more efficient and
They'd be completed sooner or
the statewide audit would be
completed sooner if it's one
audit across the board as
opposed to 130 individually
done.
Uh, there are times when
If it's uh
Major agency, one of our larger
agencies, and there are issues
with that audit.
It's holding back the entire
state for.
For that period of time.
Cost is another thing that
Bieber did point out that I've
pointed out already.
And the other thing they wanted
to point out is that when we go
to a singular audit,
It'll be essentially a hybrid.
As I mentioned previously, we'll
still be having to audit some of
the larger agencies individually
or various compliance reasons.
But across the board, you'll
have, then they'll be
incorporated into the statewide
audit and across the board,
you'll have one.
View of where the state is at.
And with that, I stand for
questions if you're not asleep.
Mr. Madam Chairman, uh, before
we open the floor to questions,
I wanted just to provide a recap
on on this study and.
And let me explain the reasons
why we used UNM slides as, you
know, as researchers, we don't
wanna
Modify their work in any way. We
wanted to keep it intact.
And when we presented the
possibility of making this
presentation, the chairman did
not want to hear from Bieber's
staff, so, so we decided to
present uh the results of their
research. So to recap though,
this, this entire effort, uh, is
really meant to, to modernize uh
state agency audits to better
address risks and comply with
professional, uh, standards, as
I mentioned, we have, uh,
$500,000
FY 26 appropriation request to
develop a transition plan.
Um
And so initially, as you know,
as was stated, we'd like to go
to a statewide federal single
audit.
Like program versus agency.
And we, we think that that would
improve the development of the
annual comprehensive financial
report because
As the deputy said, current
state agency audits right now
have two major elements, the
overall financial audit, and
then the federal single audit.
So if we initially transition to
a statewide federal single
audit, the single audits removed
from the agency audit.
And consolidated.
And so that should save us some
time and
Result in a more timely uh a or
annual comprehensive financial
report.
And again, as mentioned, if
you're all uncomfortable with
jumping to a a federal statewide
single audit on a program basis,
we can still uh have standalone
agency audits, uh, especially
for those large and complex
agencies.
Um
The other thing too is the
federal government sees programs
by
On a statewide basis.
Uh, versus an agency level.
And that's why the entire
country has gone to a a
statewide federal single audit
with the exception of New
Mexico.
And so the other issue that that
was very apparent is uh
universities, uh, certain
universities and component units
do not integrate or use share
and so this, this study, as long
as you all want to keep Cher
recommends that you integrate
the universities and component
units uh into share.
And then the, the implementation
of the singular audit, that's,
that's our ultimate goal, but as
the deputy said, we could still
audit agencies perhaps on a less
frequent basis, maybe every 3
years.
And I do want to mention the
last attempt at legislation.
A call for a, a singular audit,
a consolidated audit of all
state agencies was in 2018, uh,
Senator Stewart Engle, um,
was the primary sponsor, but
there's not a lot of education
that went into that. And so we
feel like we need to take a more
deliberate nature and answer all
those questions that you might
have in terms of what's going on
across the country and how New
Mexico can catch up.
With the rest of the country.
So with that in terms of our
legislative strategy is, uh,
it's like the kitchen sink, um.
We're going to propose a bill
and swing for the fences and see
if we can make another attempt
like Senator Engle did back in
2018.
Uh, our fallback would be a
memorial, uh, so that's, that's
kind of our legislative
strategy, but again, we feel
like we're on a path to really
and truly uh reform state agency
audits in the state of New
Mexico.
And now we'll stand for
questions on the, on the UNM
study.
And again, at least is gonna
assist us.
As well
Any questions on the the Bieber
study.
I don't see anybody's Senator
Woods.
Yeah, I've got a question or
two.
So you're talking about
Even with the single audit,
we're still having to do.
Two audits were having to do.
A state single audit.
And then the federal party.
Or would they transfer with each
other, would they?
That's the question I have. You
say now we're having problems
because we're having all these
individual audits and then we
still have to do the federal
audit.
I guess the question is, can we
just do the federal audit and
substitute for the single state
on it.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods.
In essence, yes. So,
Right now, we have 130 agencies
approximately 60 of them
receive.
Uh, enough funding, which is a
million dollars to be required
to conduct a single federal
single audit.
What we're proposing is to do
the federal single audit across
statewide across the board by
program.
For example, if it's educational
funding, you don't have part of
that smattered pad, some at
higher ed, some at uh CYFD
various agencies received
funding from USDE. That's just
one example.
Instead of uh separate audits,
you'd have that.
Program, you, you'd have your
educational programs audited
statewide.
And that would reduce the number
of audits that would have to be
conducted.
So it it it basically it removes
it from the regular.
Financial reporting audit.
And one isn't dependent on the
other.
The aer would continue to to be.
Audited but separately from the
statewide uh federal single
audit.
OK.
I think I've got that. So we've
got 60.
That actually do receive enough
federal money to be audited,
that will have to be audited in
a single audit.
And we've got 130 total.
So that's why we'd have to do 2
audits because
Only one of them would cover the
60, and the other would cover
130, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Woods, that was already
happening. You have the regular
audit that's required under the
Audit Act.
And then you also have the
federal single audit, yeah, and
so you have an additional, and
that's an approximate number, 60
audits, in addition to the
regular
Mr. Chair, right now.
We've got
Entities
I haven't got it.
Right now we've got some
Small entities, local.
Entities that don't have audits.
They
They haven't completed an audit.
So, does that have anything to
do with any of this?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator Woods,
if you're speaking about uh
federal single audit, there's
some entities that currently
aren't required because they
don't meet the million dollar
threshold.
So yes, to, to the first part of
your question, but all entities
are required to be audited, but.
That takes us to a separate
issue with smaller local public
bodies. We have an initiative
going to catch them up.
They are still required to be
audited under the current act.
But yeah, I realized they're
required, but what I'm asking,
if you do a statewide single
audit.
Do you pick those up also.
Or is this just state agencies.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods.
They still would be picked up in
some form or fashion, but across
statewide, it wouldn't be
individual audits, they're
funding would be picked up.
As appropriated.
But
They don't have an audit now.
housed a statewide audit going
to help Mr. Chairman, Senator
Woods, if they don't have an
audit now, they're not in
compliance.
OK.
That's, yeah, OK.
I'm chasing the, the, my dog is
chasing his tail.
I see.
So
Why
Our universities are components.
Not using shear.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Wood.
Uh
That
Has evolved over time.
Over time, they weren't required
to be on the same system, and I
do want to
Uh, proposed some type of
caveat.
They
could continue to be on their
same systems, but what we're
proposing or what Bieber is
proposing is that they interface
so that
summary information could be
loaded into whatever the state
system is.
As opposed to putting everybody
on the same system.
Each entity is unique.
Having been around for almost 40
years in state government, I can
tell you that every agency,
every college, every university,
every uh school, anything that's
funded by the state, believe
that they're unique and
standalone and need to have
their own separate accounting
system. That's a much broader
discussion.
Trying to bring everything under
one state consolidated system
and
It'd be a heavier lift than even
singular audit, in fact.
Currently, it'd be impossible.
The woods.
It's true, I don't understand
what we're talking about.
Well, don't get on it.
Don't get on it. I understand
that.
Because I don't understand how
we're ever gonna use a single
state audit, uh, we're just
going to put in the numbers that
we want to put in.
So we're only gonna audit the
numbers that
That
I, I, uh, maybe we can talk
about this offline and, and
Where you can straighten me up
and I won't be confused. I, I
don't want to take any more of
your time, sir.
They'll be happy to meet with
you, uh.
Sindo here.
Uh, yes, Mr. Sherman, thank you
for the presentation. I had a
quick question on number of, I
think this page.
The speech numbers on result to
the audit ACFRs across the state
I think there's a, I think the 3
bullet, I was just curious.
The average time to completion
is less when the primary auditor
is private. What does that mean?
I mean, can you explain, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Shingo, what
that means is that
The, when they're contracted out
to firms.
We refer to them as IPAs,
independent professional
accountants.
But it's, it's essentially the
accounting firms when they do
the audits.
The turnaround time is generally
faster.
As Mr. Chairman, as opposed to
whom, who, who's also doing the
auditing
Senator,
as opposed to us doing it
in-house.
The state auditor's office.
Oh, OK, so that's distinguishing
between, uh, Mr. Chairman, your
office, and if I may, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. uh, Senator
Shindo, uh, this is comparing
all states. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. I don't see any
further questions. Let me ask
you some questions. They're kind
of
Concerning, you know, with this
university Southwestern New
Mexico happening
the auditor has the authority to
go look at the foundations.
I think that was proven.
A while back in in, so can we go
in there and look at the
foundation spending and and
audit them or look at their
reports spending money because,
you know, they may be spending
public money over here.
And then on top of that,
Other money
So when we start looking at some
of this makeup of how that's
done.
It'll give us a clearer picture
of
Of how much they're really
spending on certain things. I
think that foundation is a key
to to a piece of the puzzle and
how things are happening to me.
I, do we know and I don't know,
maybe you already know.
We know that the 1.9 million was
that paid directly out of
Uh
The school funds or portion was
paid out of.
Yeah, they're fun. Yeah, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee regarding Western, uh,
as you know, we launched an
investigation on the actual
payment. So we sent a list of
many, many questions to the
university.
Uh, on just that point, you
know, where did the money come
from? Who gave the approval, and
so forth. So we're looking into
that, uh, as some of you know,
whenever we do launch an
investigation, um, agencies have
15 calendar days to respond to
our list of interrogatories.
And so I think we're at day 5 or
6 now. Uh, so we'll have some
answers with respect to Western
and the nature of the, the
payout to the president in terms
of foundations and, and we will
find out.
If the foundation had anything
to do with that payment.
But I, I think my best example
in terms of the role of
foundations, uh, in higher
education institutions is uh,
let's take Mesalands Community
College, you know, we, we
conducted the audits for FY 22
and 23, we're about to embark on
the FY 24 audit.
The university has come a long
way with teetering on the brink
of insolvency, and now they've
reconciled all their
transactions that were
backlogged almost 2 years.
But, um,
The agency, I'm sorry, the
foundation of Mesalands was very
resistant to cooperating with my
staff during that community
college audit because they
contend that they're not a
component unit, and they are a
component unit.
And our rule states that any
component unit, it has to be
audited by the same auditor that
audits the primary government.
That includes that component
unit. And so,
As a consequence of the, I
think, indifference on the part
of the foundation for Mesa lands
is that uh that part of the
audit, uh, was disclaimed, and
so they didn't get a clean
audit.
Because of the foundation's
resistance to cooperate.
With my auditors. And so to the
subject of foundations in
general.
We are going to do a statewide
review of all university
foundations, uh, that is on our
plan, uh, for this coming year.
Uh, we recognize some of the
challenges that we faced.
Uh, you know, we've had problems
with foundations of charter
schools where you had conflicts
of interest, you had members on
the foundation board serving on
the charter school board, you
had leases that, that uh
unfairly enriched the
foundations at the expense of
the publicly funded charter
schools.
And so this issue with
foundations and presenting
problems for the primary
government, especially in higher
education has been problematic
and so we recognized that, and
we're going to take that on, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, I mean, it may, you know,
they could take state money if
they're not audited correctly
and pushed into their
foundation. It'd be interesting
to see what happens, to cover
expenses were.
They really aren't looking at
them. They could do a lump sum
transfer, and we wouldn't even
know.
But I mean, our problem becomes
is we can't punish the students
of western New Mexico.
We can't punish the board
because they don't exist
anymore, right? Even though they
violated their fiduciary
responsibility. I mean, the
Attorney General could probably
look at the fiduciary
responsibility that they
accepted and adopted and see,
you know, what happens. I don't
know what could happen, but that
fiduciary responsibility, I
mean, I mean, if I, I was on a
hospital board and I told him
you're gonna give us fiduciary
training, right?
If you don't give us fiduciary
training, then we're liable, and
we're liable personally.
And if they don't do that.
And so as you get BRO board
insurance, right?
That's not part of the insurance
policy, then you don't have
coverage and anybody wants to
serve on a board that doesn't
have judiciary training, it is
risking their own personal
assets and their own personal
liability, so it'd be
interesting to impose that
question too, um, but we're
gonna have to figure out this
for all the universities. I
mean, for foundations, the
Attorney general, you have to
file a report with the Attorney
General.
Tell them your whole story.
How that's being handled, right?
What's being handled in every
member and every makeup and
audit, so I mean you'd have to
coordinate with him a little
bit, but I mean.
We're gonna have to look hard.
Because this is the problem in
New Mexico. This is the story,
right?
How many times has this
happened?
I, I know 5 or 6.
Right? And so we're just gonna
continue to, to shuffle that
and, and who gets hurt in the
end, right?
It's the kids, it's the students
that get hurt because 1.9
million to back bill out of
there.
Without raising tuition. Well,
Western New Mexico is the one
that raised tuition, we asked
them not to raise tuition,
right? So.
I mean that's another question
is, where did the tuition
increases go.
And they go to fund.
What?
And, I mean, an audit that have
to be pretty hard to, to track,
but I mean, some of that stuff
we're gonna have to really dig
in deep on.
Um, but I don't think we can
continue to
just stick our head and
The deal and say, all right,
we're gonna do some some very
internal audits and some very
investigative ones and, and it's
gonna go to to the boards and,
and everybody else, I mean, if
they
State employee at a higher ed
institution is paid 50% out of
the foundation and half out of
the.
State funds that makes him
eligible for an audit, you're
commingling those funds, that
correct?
Ricky.
Say yes, yes, OK.
And just let me clarify, uh,
With respect to Western, the
other action that my office took
was we designated Western New
Mexico for a special audit to
look deeper into the
irregularities that we found in
a previous.
Investigation that went back
about 5 years and as many of you
know, we discovered over 360,000
of improper spending in the
travel and procurement category.
Um, you know, the university had
been wrestling with the
self-designate this so we want
to do a special audit.
This is back in 23, and so much
time went by, they finally
signed a contract on their 2nd
procurement attempt, uh, with an
auditing firm back in August,
but in light of all the
developments that have happened
since last August, uh, I felt
compelled to step in and
designate them for a special
audit to delve deeper into that
initial investigation. Yes, that
will mean that the existing
contract between the selected
accounting firm in the
university is null and void, but
we
intend to accelerate the
timeline for that special audit
to avoid any additional delay
that could be consequential to
my action. And so our goal is to
complete that special audit by
the end of the spring semester.
Well, the signal is when they
can't get an audit company to
come into an audit.
That's signaling you that
there's something wrong cause
they're gonna look over them
real quick and if they don't
want to be in the mix, they're
gonna back out and so that's
kind of a signal to me if you
have an auditor that says, no, I
really want to do the audit over
there. That's a, that's a pretty
significant signal.
And if you have 2 or 3 years of
that, where they're signaling
they don't want to do the audits
for him.
That, that is a benchmark that
there's trouble in there, so you
might look at some of those
numbers where they're not not
not wanting to do audits on
them, so.
that.
Something you want to say, we're
going to wrap up.
No, just any more questions, I'm
ready to move on to the next
subject, which is um, I thought
we had them all covered. No.
No we have one more, um, it's a
transparency report that my
office conducted
governmental accountability
office.
So the, the
We included a table of contents,
but I want to focus your
attention to the project
timeline, so what we did
basically is we reviewed
statutory provisions for
budgetary controls that
basically came out of several
interactions that we had with
this committee in Senate Finance
Committee, and this goes all the
way back to January, um.
Where you asked us to look into
state agency deficiency requests
in January of last year.
Uh, in August of last year, we
produced a report called State
Agency deficiency Appropriations
requests in that report, uh, and
we made it available to you. We
made recommendations including
uh reviewing state laws
regarding budget adjustment or
budgetary oversight.
Um, and then back in October, I
think you all asked us bring,
bring some.
Some policy recommendations to
us, and, and that's really what
we're doing today because as you
know.
We're an agency that has a duty
to inform, but I think we also
have an obligation to make.
Recommendations for policy.
Um, and so in January we
conducted this report, um,
And it provides a kind of an
in-depth evaluation of all state
statutes and budgetary controls.
We also looked at state of the
practice in other neighboring
states and
We're offering uh a, a contrast
and compare kind of analysis on
these practices with other
states. So, uh, let's go to key
terms. You all know what a
budget in cash deficiency is,
but what I do want to focus on
is these two aren't mutually
exclusive.
Uh, many state agency requests
stem from cash deficiencies.
Uh, the state can help prevent
deficiencies by modernizing and
clarifying state agency budget
making and maintenance and
related oversight via budgetary
controls.
So some other key terms and I
think this really reflects to
the status quo here of, of what
But uh, budgetary controls
entails, um.
The primary purpose of budgetary
controls to ensure government
does not spend more monies than
appropriated.
Uh, and experience a cash
deficiency, um, budgetary
controls can prevent a financial
transaction from proceeding, if
there are not sufficient funds
available to cover the cost of
the transaction, uh, examples
include denying encumbrances,
purchase orders, invoices,
requisitions, or not approving
budget authority.
If revenues are unlikely to
materialize.
Also state level budget controls
are intertwined with budget
oversight monitoring and
maintenance by central oversight
agencies.
OK, so, again, this research
took a deep dive, I think we we
identified 9 statutes that have
anything to do with budgetary
controls, but we felt compelled
to highlight at least 7 of those
9, the first one is uh 8-6-7. It
provides penalties for wrongful
drawing or payment of warrant.
By the Secretary of Finance
Administration or the state
treasurer.
Now
this law tries to prevent cash
deficiencies, but, uh, dates all
the way back to when our state
was a territory. So this statute
is very, very old. It was last
updated in 2003, uh, when the
treasurer and DFA had separate
fun tracking and share.
Uh, but there's no longer any
difference between issuing a
warrant and paying a warrant.
Um, the agency initiates and DFA
pays, um.
Not the state treasurer.
So our recommendation is to
revise this section of law to
remove the treasure from any
discussion regarding warrant
issuing and refocus on state
agency roles in the warranty
process.
So the next statue, um, is
6-5-6.
Um, I want you to focus your
attention on the clause funds at
an agency's disposal that's
gonna be the theme, I think in
this in this uh kind of
revisitation of the statue, but
this statute provides for state
agencies and DFA's financial
control division, otherwise
known as FCD to ensure actual
expenditures do not exceed
appropriations, allotments, or
unencumbered balances of funds
at an agency's disposal,
including receivables.
Like federal funds, not yet
received.
So this law appears to prevent
DFA's financial control division
from issuing warrants that
exceed periodic allotments or
funds at the agencies's
disposal, um, like most
governments, uh, our state
operates on a cash basis, uh,
expenditures are dependent on
receivables.
Uh, and they depend on the
accuracy of estimating
receivables.
Um, now, here, here we go with
that clause. Language regarding
funds at the agency's disposal
is vague and and prone to
subjectivity between DFA and the
agency.
Uh, the inclusion of
receivables.
not received in the calculation
of funds at the agency's
disposal makes it hard to deny a
warrant, the agency is largely
responsible for that
determination. So our
recommendation with respect to
656-5-6 is
You may wish to clarify um.
How to measure the impact of
receivables and other accruals
uh that they have on any measure
of the ability to pay, uh, you
also may wish to strengthen, uh,
DFA's financial control division
and their budget division uh
regarding oversight of revenue
projections.
OK, the next statute that
We felt needed to be revisited
in the context of budgetary
controls is 6-3-6 and 6-3-8, uh,
these provide the
responsibilities of DFA for
allotments, withholding
allotments.
And penalties for expending more
than allotments.
Uh, under our state law, there
are only allotments in place
every other year.
And only for 6 months of that
year. It's unclear.
Uh, if the allotment limitations
apply only to an agency's
general fund appropriations or
whether federal and other funds.
Uh, are included, um.
Penalties are significant, but
it's unclear how violation would
be made enforceable because the
scope is not well defined.
So our recommendation regarding
this statute is you all may wish
to revise these sections to
create a kind of a
standardization across years in
the use of allotments increase
allotment frequency and provide
clarification on funds regarding
budgetary controls.
The next statute, I know you
guys are getting angry. We were
really worried about doing a
deep dive on these statues while
you're angry, but we're almost
done, um.
These, these statutes that I'm
about to talk about our, our,
our, our
They pertain to kind of
budgetary control laws, um,
6-3-15 and 6-5-2.1 requires DFA
to uh obtain information on
financial problems and creates
duties for financial oversight.
6-4-6 prohibits DFA payment
unless it may be reasonably
expected.
that at the end of the fiscal
year, the balances in that
funder account will be fully
restored.
So this language indicates that
expenditure should not be paid,
uh unless fund balances are
reasonably expected to be
restored. Now whether funds are
reasonably expected to be
received depends on the accuracy
of the revenue forecasts, um,
for for federal or uh end of
year reconciliation, preventing
ongoing monitoring, uh, other
issues regarding vague and
outdated oversight exist in
other sections of the laws that
we didn't cover in this
presentation.
So our recommendation regarding
these statutes is you may wish
to revisit the provisions for
budgetary adjustments to require
more stringent procedures.
Uh, in the form of mandatory,
uh, budget adjustments of
revenues are not recceeded.
By certain dates.
Clarify the process by which DFA
reviews agency forecasts and
reinstitute limitations on
appropriations and or.
Allowed determination of
expenditure limits by DFA.
All right, so here's the state
by state comparison, but I want
to focus your attention under
the right column, um, under the
heading of comparisons, uh, all
states and we looked at Utah,
Colorado, Arizona, Texas, and
Oklahoma.
Uh, all states require all these
states require balanced budgets,
but the mechanisms
And the specific, uh,
requirements to balance the
budget very.
Uh, states differ in their
oversight mechanisms, some
involving the governor and
legislative staff directly.
Some states have more detailed
provisions managing budget
adjustments during revenue
shortfalls and reallocations.
So this kind of gives you an
idea of what the regional state
of the practices, uh, relative
to the our state.
So in conclusion, and you know,
don't jump for joy, but uh let
me just recap this, um, what
this report really does is
We're, we're recommending to you
that we need some modernization.
Uh, we need to modify these
statutes to reflect current
state financial operations,
ensure the legal framework
involves current lines of
authority and financial
oversight responsibilities and
reflects electronic processes.
Here's the thing, insure
penalties are effective and
enforceable.
There's a need for clarification
to remove the vagueness of uh
roles and responsibilities
between agencies and DFA remove
conflicts in statute when older
statutes conflict with newer.
And promulgate new statutes to
enhance controls.
So in looking ahead, what does
this mean? Many elements of our
state statutes are so outdated
that they conflict with current
practice or the current
electronic share system. As
share reaches the end of its
useful life, we should look to
statutes that reflect any
upcoming new systems.
So with that, Mr. Chair, um,
As you can see, these are just
recommendations, my office
doesn't have any plans to pursue
any um pieces of legislation.
To carry out these
recommendations that we're
making to you, um, you know, I,
I thought maybe Senator, uh, Mr.
Chairman, that you might
consider, uh, looking at these
statutes as a whole, and at
least beginning the process.
To to update them and modernize
them and have them be consistent
with current accounting
practices and of course, the
issue of the state of share, uh,
is out there, um.
There might be some people that
want to do away with it like
yesterday, uh, and others might
consider it to be a legacy
system that might be too costly
to
You know, to, to scrap, so, uh,
but I think you heard their
share really needs to be updated
and evaluated. In fact, um, our
initial attempt.
To look at a singular audit that
initial scope.
Included a comprehensive
evaluation of share because we
see
Kind of
Statewide audit reform being
hand in hand with share and how
it operates and how it
interacts, for example, with
universities and other component
units.
OK. That's it, Mr. Chair. We
stand for any questions. I think
we're on time. We had till
12:15.
Um, they handed us a food
initiative, so that's why
everybody.
Got the bush, uh, that is so,
uh, it's in.
This room, 0305. It's in 305
after for members. No, the
problem is when we don't have
money.
You don't have to worry about
controls. When you have lots of
money, you better worry about
controls, and we see that all
the time throughout the whole
system of agencies.
I'll, I'll give you a perfect
example, DOH for 2 years in a
row has overspent their budget
in and have tried making cuts
and you come into the session,
you try to fix it and the day
you're ending the session, they
say, oh, we, we know we're
short. Well, why don't you tell
us during the session to fix it,
and they continue to spin.
You have agencies spending
incorrectly overspending their
budgets and that there's no
recourse unless somebody, a
legislator wants to take him to
court or the executive and some
of those are, are very
concerning if you want to take
him to court or not.
Representative Chatfield, you
had.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
my question is,
Uh, with these statutes apply to
the state employee health
insurance fund.
Uh, let me help you out a little
bit. So GS well, not GSD
anymore, HCA has underestimated
the amount and the cost of the
state employees and local
government employees.
Healthcare.
And so we've underfunded that
and so they're running in the
negative, we have to backfill it
to every year to the tune of
about 100 and so as we do that,
that's his question. I mean, if
they, if they don't have the
right premium calculated.
Will they be
Under the audit. Is that the
correct?
as an audit deficiency, that is
correct.
Uh, I'm gonna have Elise
McNardo, my complaints and
quality control director, we
stole her for TRD and she is
really uh an incredible
resource, but she, she's gonna,
she's gonna take this one.
Um, Mr. Mr. Karen and
Representative Chatfield, your
question is regarding a specific
fund and what what we recommend
in the statute review that that
we all did. This is something
where
You have public health and
safety at risk, especially, you
know, obviously coming out of
the COVID years, this would be
something specific that um our,
our office, the auditor myestus
and Deputy Bejarano would, would
recommend that the legislature
determine which funds, if any,
would be permitted to uh
overdraw and when and for what
circumstances, and it may be um
something very specifically
defined in statute, so that when
we do
We have something real concrete
to go on.
As the audit pointed out, the
statutes that we reviewed are
super old and unenforceable and
auditors are very hesitant to
write a finding.
When there's no response.
And, and Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Chatfield, as you
know, uh, in our, I believe it
was our 23 audit of GSD, uh, we
found that they had overspent
that fund by about 120 million.
Uh, that balance has gone down
considerably, but as I
understand the the entire
responsibility to hire the
actuarials to project premiums
and, and develop the contracts
for healthcare resided in GSD is
has now moved to, I believe, the
healthcare authority.
And I'm not sure if there was a
deficit that transferred to the
healthcare authority, so you
squared them up.
But we did look at that
initially and it's a
It's a compliance violation. So
we, we certainly dinged them on
their audit at that time for
that, that um exceedance of 120
million.
Uh, in that health care fund.
Mr. Mr. Chair, we squared them
out last report, I believe, was
125 million.
Yeah. So let me, so that that's
the problem is we've made the
transfer where they were didn't
take a deficit across, right?
And because the rates weren't
high enough and the cost of
healthcare is increasing.
They run a deficit and they're
gonna continue to run a deficit
because the premiums not set at
the right rates in.
So we're carrying that deficit
through the HCA is transferred
over, but it transferred at 0,
is what we thought we did.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, I, I want to
make one suggestion. I know we
presented some really
Uh, complex topics, but um I'm
offering my technical staff to
work with LFC staff and perhaps
DFA since.
A lot of the budgetary control
statutes are have to be enforced
by DFA, so I'm just offering
assistance on the technical side
to work through these if when
you all have the.
the desire, the strange desire
to take on all these statutes.
For modernization. Yeah, we'll
have to look pretty hard and and
see what we can clarify, but the
Constitution clearly says you
cannot, we have to have a
balanced budget, and if they
deficit spend, they're in
violation of the Constitution,
it's a little
down in there, some some places,
but I mean to continue the
deficit span the Constitution
clearly clarifies that for so.
Thank you for your time. We
appreciate it.
We'll see if any fish bite the
hook today
that, thank you guys. I
appreciate everything LLC's
been, it's always been fun and
entertaining for me, I don't
ever not learn something and
walk in this building, um,
represents small and I will
visit and maybe do a little
review and.
See how we can get better it for
next year.
You have the staff's performing
and see where we need to tweak
things and make things
different, so appreciate it.
