I see what happened
all right
good morning everyone
we're really excited for the
sand so having the feet today
but really excited to fight in
with mister for our program
valuation on election costs
and also appreciate the
secretary's office made of
secretary of being up here with
that will go over
and start with server
thank you everybody good morning
to hear members of the committee
i'm doctor serious principle
program evaluator with your lfc
joining me today are a number of
members from the sector it
states office as well as the
secretary state we have a
sheriff you know secretary close
over linda government and
mandate here with me today
today we're discussing the
election cost report it's under
table and looks like this
before I begin I want to
acknowledge a her drew waiver
who is the lead evaluator on
this project he got married last
weekend and is so is on his
honeymoon right now and
therefore unable to join us
today
now please turn with me to page
four for a summary of the
evaluation.
The secretary of state and
county clerks administer
elections in new mexico since
twenty nineteen both the amount
as well as the proportion of
state election costs have
increased as shown and chart one
the amount paid for elections is
almost tripled over the last
four years from five point two
million for the twenty twenty
one regular local election to
over fourteen million for the
twenty twenty four general
election
having the state pay for most
election costs can increase
efficiency and consistency of
elections but it also pusses
risks in responsibilities for a
state.
Since its inception the
statewide election fund has
frequently had negative cash
balances last year the secretary
of state spent more money than
was allocated for the twenty
twenty four primary election and
used for twenty five funding to
cover primary costs which
occurred in fy twenty four.
Although the process for
reimbursing counties has been
refined and improved since
twenty nineteen sector estate
reimbursements two counties
continue to increase and the
process remains inconsistent
counties frequently request
additional funding or sent and
spent money back to the
secretary of state
to ensure elections are
conducted efficiently as the
state takes more responsibility
for election costs strong
overset of vendors and counties
is needed the state's most
expensive under contract
provides ballot undermean
systems and and slow equipment
services these allow for a
customise valid to be printed
for a voter when they go to cast
their about the cost for this
contract has more than doubled
growing from two point nine
million in the twenty eighteen
general election to six point
six million in the twenty twenty
four general election.
Regarding county oversight while
access and local decision making
or essential to me individual
county needs counties are
operating many more pulling
locations then is required by
law and this leads to an
estimated additional three point
two million dollars in state
costs and the state has limited
knowledge over control over the
amount of poll workers machines
or resources used by accounts.
The secretary of state should
work with vendors and counties
to ensure the number of voting
centers whole workers and body
machines provides accessibility
to voters while also being cost
efficient.
Now please turn with me to page
six girl background information
regarding election costs in our
state.
Legislation passed over the last
six years has sought to simplify
elections election planning
while shipping the cost to the
state and the state now pays for
almost eighty percent of
election costs.
Looking at figure one this shows
that from twenty eighteen to
twenty twenty four there were
multiple pieces of legislation
that have altered many election
administration practices this
included consolidating some
election car elections and
creating consistent dates for an
immunistical and local elections
increasing election official pay
in creating the statewide
election fund to find election
administration this fun now
receives up to fifteen million
dollars per election however as
the states for all in funding
elections has increased local
discretion and implementation
remains very high.
I'm here to be
hurt three shows that due to
this in due to these increased
and change it legislative
changes particularly requiring
the state to pay for county
election costs according to the
election code the secretary
state reimbursements to counties
for election costs has brisn
significantly from thirty seven
hundred in fy eighteen to eleven
point seven million and four
twenty four
counties are predominantly
reimbursed for personal costs as
the state contracts with vendors
to lease ball it and vote of
registration systems.
Now shifting gears a little i'm
gonna spend some time
highlighting the election
structure in our state as shown
in figure to mexico has three
main types of elections these
are primary elections general
elections and regular local
elections.
Primary and general elections
occur in even numbered years
while regular local elections
occur in identities for each of
these types of elections voters
have three different ways that
they can vote their first
through absentee or mail and
balance the second is through
early voting and the third is
through day of in person voting
in person voting occurs at
voting convenience centers these
centers allow voters to vote at
any location within their
counting of residence
moving to page nine chart for
we'll see that voter turn out
various significantly depending
upon the tape of election with
many more voters during a
general election than a primary
or a regular local election.
Importantly new mexico's
building rules are the same
regarding the number of days of
early voting and the number of
point locations regardless of
the type of election occurring
this means that costs are
similar regardless regardless of
turn out.
Moving to page ten chart six
this shows that using national
data new mexico election costs
per registered voter have grown
in estimated a hundred and forty
five percent since twenty
sixteen from five dollars and
forty cents per registered voter
to thirteen dollars and twenty
five cents per registered voter
and if we look at costs for
actual voter we see that in the
twenty twenty four election
cycle these range from sixteen
dollars for period sixteen
dollars per voter for the twenty
twenty four general election to
sixty dollars per voter for the
twenty twenty four primary
election as our costs have
increased so has the state
planning for the administration
of elections with the budget for
the bureau of elections
increasing four hundred and
twenty nine percent from three
million point three point one
million dollars to sixteen point
three million dollars from four
seventeen to FY twenty four.
Yeah.
Moving to page eleven.
Table two shows that for the
twenty twenty four primary
election which is the most
recent election for which we
have reconciled data the
secretary state spent fourteen
million dollars with vendor
costs making up roughly two
thirds of election costs and
personnel making up roughly one
third of our state direct
election expenditures.
From f seventeen four twenty
four rockroom revenue made up
forty one percent of our state
election costs with non ukraine
appropriations that all revenue
and emergency funding
contributing significantly
looking at chart seven this
shows the trend in recreating
funding for the secretary state
you're of elections of no wilder
direct appropriations to the
bureau of elections decreased in
it about twenty five and twenty
six the secretary of state now
receives up to fifty million
dollars per election in the
election fund and therefore the
overall funding to the secretary
state has not decreased and
increased in our four twenty
six.
On page twelve
table four shows the secretary
of state received many special
supplemental indeficiency
appropriations for elections
these totaled over forty two
million dollars since fy
seventeen with a fifteen million
dollars special appropriation in
f twenty four and both
supplemental and efficiency
appropriations this last
legislative session.
Furthermore there is uncertainty
regarding peter or funding and
in kind support and this may
impact the state by up to three
point six million roughly two
point six million of that is in
kind of support for cyber
security.
County payments.
Within this chapter there are
two main points that will
discuss the first is around the
state we're election funds and
how it has frequently had a
negative cash balance and that
the department of finance and
administration approved in a
secretary of state spent money
out of the fund while it was
running the negative balance.
The second focus is in regards
to the specific processes the
secretary of state and countries
go through to reimburse counties
for election costs looking at
figure three
this figure highlights the
current county and state
reimbursement process however
this process can be unclear at a
couple steps
one the secretary of state does
not have a defined formula to
determine how much each county
receives in the proposed mo or
grant amount provided to each
county to cover election costs
and two allowable reimbursing
expenditures are not clearly
defined.
I'm page sixteen
the secretary is spent four
twenty five funds in florida to
cover the twenty twenty four
primary election and this
contributed to the election
funds negative cash balance last
summer the department of finance
and administration authorized
the secretary of state to use
two point one million dollars of
a fifteen million dollar
appropriation allowed by chapter
twenty four of last twenty four
for four twenty five election
costs to cover some of the
primary costs which occurred in
f twenty four this potentially
obligated future legislatures to
cover a previous cost.
In october twenty twenty four
the election plan had a balance
of negative three point eight
million dollars and this
decreased further to negative
seven point six million dollars
after the november election.
Even with the funds negative
cash balances sector estate
provided funding to county is
prior to the november election
giving all but the five largest
counties a total of one point
seven million through its more
grant making process to receive
funding the secretary of the
state constitution and our state
statute require funds be
appropriate.
Specifically the constitution
says that except for interest or
other payment on the public debt
money shall be paid out of the
treasury only upon
appropriations made by the
legislature.
On page seventeen
the funding for the state what
election fund is provided as a
reimbursement so the fun may
have a low or negative balance
until it is replenished.
When the fun has a negative
balance the secretary of state
would need to apply for
emergency funding with the board
of finance or halt spending
potentially leading to delays
and reimbursements as well as
conflict between the secretary
of state's processes and
statute.
To most accurately appropriate
funds secretary of state the
legislative finance committee
and the department of financial
administration should work
together to to create reliable
cost projections annually during
our budget making process
i'm page eighteen.
Secretary states amount is
determination process has not
reliably determined costs
leading to additional
reimbursements as well as
returned funding.
The map in figure for shows the
mou amounts very by county and
register voter reading from a
low of one dollar and forty
cents per registered voter in
the candy county to a high of
thirty three dollars and sixty
seven cents per registered voter
and harding county many counties
with similar number of
registered voters.
Or voting convenience in hers
also receive desperate payment
amounts.
I'm page nineteen
as you are amounts or not set
formula a formula driven process
could create more predictable as
well as accurate reimbursements
m amounts are determined by an
internal review process at the
secretary of state which factors
in minimum dispersement
requirements voda turnout and
collaboration with county clerks
however other states use
formulas for instance arkansas
reimburses counties on an
estimated average cost per voter
basis and within that they
consider previous actual costs.
Table seven shows my amounts for
the twenty twenty four primary
election we're both too high and
too low with twelve counties
returning money and thirteen
counties receiving additional
funds.
Moving to page twenty.
Beyond the move process a lack
of specific guidance regarding
what is and is not reimburseable
leads to inconsistent county
reimbursements.
The current m o u process
includes excuse me the current
amount itself includes a list of
eligible reimbursement
categories but doesn't specify
when items will or will not be
reimbursed.
Arkansas state board of election
commissioners provides rules
that define a specific defined
specific election expenses and
includes guidelines with
instructions as well as forms
for counties to use new mexico
should could annually provide
county clerks up did a guidance
and procedures regarding what is
reimburseable and when as well
as annual treaties on how to
apply this guidance
movie to page twenty two
will move to our last and a
second finding the secretary of
state could strengthen
procurement county oversight and
data collection processes.
New mexico's election system has
many cost drivers some of which
are under the secretary states
control and some of which are
under county control for
instance in new mexico elections
use this centralized procurement
system with the secretary of
state negotiating and paying for
election technology for each
county meanwhile counties
determine the number of owning
convenience centers the number
of poll workers assigned to each
center and as shouldn't figure
five each building convenient
center is conservatively
estimated to cost at least
eleven point two thousand
predominantly this is due to
election technology
pricing as well as personal
costs.
To better control our costs the
state can look at the cost of
election technology and provide
more oversight of county
practices.
The secretary of state may poor
pay more than needed for
election vendor services this is
due to a lack of negotiation
vendor competition and limited
economies of skill.
Sixty three percent of our
election funding is preventing
vendor services and these are
all provided through contracts
providing this technology to
counties across the state.
Page twenty three her eleven.
Shows the most expensive
contract is for our ballot on
demand system and related
equipment and services and this
cost of state six point six
million dollars for the twenty
twenty four general election
more than double the contracts
price for the twenty eighteen
general election.
Valor undermined systems allow
poor workers to print a
customised ballot to allow
voters to come to any pulling
location within their counting
of residence.
Additionally nationally election
technology costs are increasing.
And they are projected to
continue to increase between
twenty percent and fifty percent
by twenty twenty nine this
increases the need for our state
to have consistent negotiations
I am also
makes our state need to solicit
requests for four proposals for
multiple vendors for this
technology
currently while there are
limited vendors as he staff
received no indication that
contract pricing was being
consistently negotiated beyond
negotiation as shown and table
nine of page twenty four.
And the secretary of state could
also save six hundred and forty
four thousand dollars per
election by using only one
bio
biodiven currently the state
uses two vendors both as and
robust up but however these have
a different cost per machine and
county's determined which vendor
to use even though one bender
charges fifteen hundred dollars
more.
Additionally while there are
only a few vendors nationwide
the state could try to solicits
from additional vendors and
determine why vendors haven't
been in our state previously
this is a practice that's done
in maryland at the county level
county so far more voting
convenient centers than required
turning to page twenty six
chart twelve shows that uh
church will shows that for the
last three elections over thirty
percent of our voting
convenience centers are pulling
locations had less than one
hundred voters on election day.
Additionally statute repairs at
least one boating convenience
and are per ten presents but new
mexico is operating closer to
one voting convenience in our
perform precincts i'm table
twelve if the state reimbursed
counties for the statutory
required number of voting
convenience centers our state
could save approximately three
point two million dollars
counties could still operate
additional building convenience
centers and the second date
could still fund more than the
state story required anymore as
long as as long as their
additional things available
however if this occurs we would
also want greater oversight and
data collection
moving to page twenty seven
the sector is date could not
provide some election
administration and expenditure
data for example if you look at
table thirteen on page twenty
eight you'll see that for the
twenty twenty two primary
election the security state
cannot readily provide a county
election expenditure data for
any county if the state had
central repositories for
election administration which is
similar to some practice that
other states do such as colorado
these data would be available to
to create such a republic during
the past uh legislative session
the legislature provided one
million dollars to create ever
pository in our state further
warm new mexico like other
states doesn't assess the
quality of the selection of
instruction.
Especially not at the county
level by assessing county level
performance metric data the
state we could provide
additional support to those
counties that need it.
Now please turn with me to page
five and will go versus the key
recommendations from this
report.
The secretary is date should
work with the legislature the
less than the finance committee
and the department of finance
administration to forecast
upcoming election costs and
insure accurate budgeting for
the statewide election fund
through annual through the
annual general appropriations
process the secretary of state
are still create a formula based
m l u process and establish
detailed guidance on what will
and will not be reimbursed to
counties.
The secretary of state should
also work with counties to align
the number of building consumer
centers with the status
statutory standard of ten
presidents provoding convenience
center and priorities funding
for those that meet or approach
this threshold however counties
may operate additional voting
convenience centers but state
funding beyond the minimum
should be continged upon
available resources thank you so
much for your attention i'll now
turn the presentation over to
the secretary state who will
provide a response thank you
very much doctor denses and
secretary
think is so much mister chairman
and think you doctor.
With always always appreciate
the opportunity to come before
you we have provided of course
of response or a bottle if you
will that is contained at the
back of the report
because our office strongly
refutes a lot of the assertions
that have been made and this two
month crash course that the lfc
has engaged in and trying to
learn how elections are run and
how we
manage costs and in fact many of
the recommendations that have
been made or actually processes
that we are already undertaking
so while I appreciate the
intention behind this report I I
have to express serious concern
about the rushed process the
lack of election specific
expertise we hear have well over
hundred years of election
experience and unfortunately the
staff at well will intention
have have to have for two months
I have been trying to learn and
I might mention not during an
election cycle so not actually
watching how the election is
going and this was initiated
during the legislative session
as well so we were doing a
million things and we did
cooperate and work very closely
with all of sea we directed them
to a number of election experts
to talk to to county clerks
elections are among the most
complex public services and they
demand not only fiscal prudence
as has been noted but also legal
compliance security and above
all voter accessibility
you have been provided a number
of slides that I you know
I know you didn't have a chance
to look at um until today
because we understand all of
this was embargoed until this
morning so there was no public
opportunity or opportunity for
you all to even look at this
report and our response until
now i'm so hopefully you'll take
some time today just after the
fact.
We you know again the concerns
we have with the evaluation
process again at compress
timeline
there were some input from
election experts but it was
outside of an election cycle
and you know we're troubled that
the evaluation this is the first
evaluation of season conducted
on elections but if it really
failed to reflect the nuance
expertise and complex ability
and the complexity
the academic research studying
elections is incredibly complex
even for the nation's foremost
researchers for example
of the complexities and bobbed
in researching and comparing
election cross-costs across
states we provide a blink and in
our response but you can see the
cost of conducting elections by
charles stewart the third of my
t's election data and science
lab and on that no new mexico
is rained number one we were
ranged number one by mit's
election lab for having the most
secure most exact excessible
elections in the country they
said we were doing the best and
the mit election lab is the only
sort of source of the ranking of
election administration
and the key policies driving
that success are policies that
we've worked with you all over
the years to pass online but a
registration automatic and seem
devoted registration expanded
absentee and early voting and
i'm going to touch on early
memorial not early money tribal
and rural outreach innovations
and a hundred percent hit paper
balance post election audits and
ballot tracking
we have been working with you
and and the political science
department to track trust and in
our election process over the
years and over the years trust
has consistently grown.
In our election process of
course we always have the nice
ears but when you pull the
voters generally you see that in
general folks trust our election
process
and again according to the
report that we're referring to
we rank fortieth and the nation
and terms of election spending
now again that might be prior to
new initiatives that have been
passed and of course whenever we
pass a new initiative we are
going to bring on new costs
so cure our concerns with the
the recommendations first of all
I think there are some misguided
assumptions on procurement on
contract amounts of line with
rfps did not equal a lack of
negotiation as a as the doctor
mentioned we have a there is a
very limited pool of vendors to
provide these services in the
nation and in fact once i'm out
of this job one of my biggest
projects i'm actually working
with harvard and in an in an
executive session right now at
the canada kennedy school of
government on what are the
things we can fix and elections
and one of them is election that
the limited nature of election
technology before we can put out
an p to procure services we have
to buy law certified those
systems so we are undertaking
that process this summer and we
of course put out notice that if
you want to work with the state
of new mexico with the building
system you have to be certified
to federal and state election
security standards and technical
standards and once again we had
a handful of vendors we have one
new vendor applying this year to
be potentially certified to
provide ballot on demand
services so that's one more than
we had before um see purchasing
division is always been fully
involved
and the best and final offer
was.
Removed to streamline
percurement was based on expert
advice from dfa
so you know we of course are
relying on our fiscal.
Folks and state government to
give us the best
recommendations we've already
talked about the limited nature
of of the market of course we
support a goal of more vendor
engagement but again we have so
few vendors and to the point of
going down to one vendor to
provide ballot on demand
services
we have already been informed by
both of it vendors that neither
has the capacity to cover the
whole state.
Need the day they just can't
so it we're we're in a position
where we're having to use the
two vendors
and there's also some county
clerk preference going on there
but not one nor the other could
take over the whole state.
I want to talk a little bit
about our concerns about the
reports characterization of
obligating
certain future elections to
cover election cars and and
there's notion that we've run in
negative balance in the um the
election find so here's my issue
with that and we provided to you
original legislation that we
wrote that we worked with the
senator munios and senator
rodriguez to support former
senator rodriguez the idea there
was.
You would appropriate twenty
million into an election fund.
Twenty nine fifteen because
fifteen
is kind of too close to call and
that we would come before you
every year in the budget process
and ask you to replenish that
fund and it wouldn't necessarily
be a full twenty million every
year it would be the balance of
what had been spat and the prior
election the reason we had a
negative balance is because the
bill was passed prior to the
primary election in twenty
twenty four and we were not
reversed from reimbursed from
the election fund because it
didn't go into a fact until
twenty twenty five and in fact
it was both dfa and the director
of the LFC who we were on a
phone call with that told us to
put our election costs on the
credit card.
And to enter go into a negative
balance and to cover those costs
once we finally started
receiving and reimbursements and
fiscal year twenty twenty five
that was an radiator the bill
got changed to be a pure
reimbursement.
Bill
frankly without our consent
and that's how it passed so I
want to be very clear that that
was not our idea of how how to
do things and in fact I
expressed my very very strong
opinion that I thought that that
was very bad public policy and I
was told by both the director of
the dfa in this staff at the dfa
and director that that was how
it's it was going to have to be
done.
So I want to make sure the truth
of about how that happened gets
on record here.
So let's talk about contingency
supplies their complex but
important
there's been a recommendation
that we do some sort of regional
pooling of of election supplies
first of all counties already
maintain emergency stock because
emergencies happen and they
happen all the time regional
pooling is logistically
difficult castle and risks chain
of security issues and when
you're thinking about especially
all for the rural counties
let's see representative we
decide
that the place where we're going
to centralize the pool is up in
union county
and that's where especially
really they have to go get their
resources from their extra
emergency resources when they're
when they're already maxed out
right
so that doesn't make a whole lot
of sense unfortunately we are
open totally to discussing how
to implement without adding a
necessary burdens but we're just
kind of envisioning how this
would actually play out in real
life I really want to emphasize
something about building
convenient centers the doctor
kept to referring to the
statutory requirement the
requirement of ten yes there is
a requirement of at least at
least ten one voting center per
ten presents.
It also says that county clerks
can add as necessary and let me
tell you all one thing we
haven't done is we haven't
redone the formula since we did
the presinct splits after the
senses and I guarantee you with
the county clerks are doing
right now they are running fewer
voting centers then would be
required if we were following
the new the new number of
presincts that we have and in
fact we're going to put those
calculations together and get
them to you but they're
providing the voting convenience
centers you know ten as a floor
or not a ceiling according to
the water and so again for you
all in rural areas you know
representative small lives out
in hatch you know it is a done
accounting click and it take
away the voting convenience
center for your area
or for and shop out
or you know just imagine you
have a a rural part a lot of
your from rural for firm role
counties and and then you're
going to meet people drive into
your county seat or whatever
because all of a sudden the
county the cars is being put on
the county.
And they they can't afford it
and so imagine in our need of
areas imagine how services are
going to be cut there a lot of
times what they do in our very
rural and native areas as they
have mobile voting units and
they take those mobile voting
units through a so for two for
two days they do a mobile early
voting in you know one chapter
house and another day and it in
the you know south eastern
county they're they're kind of
going around in a circle doing
more blurredly voting in certain
small communities so they're
already using those economies of
scale
but it's not a one size fits all
situation and again we have to
consider the geographically
diverse and the rural and tribal
nature of our state
and you know a lot of these vcc
numbers are driven again by
population growth
and counties need to have and
and I might add county clerks
have the exclusive decision as
long as they're following the
minimum formula they have the
exclusive right to determine how
many vote centers they want and
where to locate them we work
with them on that we talk about
that.
We say he do you really need one
here let's talk through that you
know we're not just rating them
a blank chuck
so sort of the notion that we
don't follow any sort of formula
and just kind of willing nearly
let them do what they white is
is really not the case and
especially when we're talking
about election day pulling
locations and staffing
whole worker staffing various by
turnout facility layout and
accessibility requirements we
have that minimum requirements
but many counties need more to
serve voters effectively i'm
trying to see if I have any
bernarding or county
representatives here I hate yeah
sure so have you ever been to
the dust close plaza early
boating site in the middle of
town that is the most popular
routing site in berlin of county
because it's right in the middle
of town
and they need like ten people to
work there because they have so
many people coming through and
voting whereas you might have a
tiny little um citizen
elderly center in you know jal
that really only needs three
people you know two judges on a
clerk and the county and the
county clerks know what they
need depending on the size of
that vcc and depending on
how many voters and and when
we're trying to predict voter
turn out to.
You know what we're looking at
past elections and we need to
compare apples to apples and not
apples to oranges you know it
went in one of the early
parts of the report you're asked
to compare the very first
regular local election we ever
conducted in november with the
twenty twenty four general
election.
Which was like the second or
third highest turnout election
we've ever had in the state and
regular local elections
typically have between twenty
and twenty five percent turn out
you cannot compare apple
storages you have to compare
apples to apples
in terms of the central data
repository we agree and last
year we asked you for funding to
start that project and we have
begun starting that project the
money that we received from you
all is a great start
and you know so you know the the
the things that the doctor was
referring to such as
you know what's the number of
poll workers
what's the formula that's being
used in the more you how much
did we actually reimburse oh and
it was mentioned in terms of
ream the reimbursement and
over payment peace we we got one
major over over payment sent
back to us in and I believe that
was in twenty twenty
or twenty twenty twenty two from
bernaly of county and the in the
amount of about four hundred
dollars that's because they
received a grant.
An external grant for about the
same amount of money so they
didn't need the state money and
that's why they sent it back to
us we are not routinely getting
money back from the counties and
to the extent that we do it's in
very small amounts
however to that point we are
working on we are continually
refining the m o u process
we started with an initial
formula now we have every single
county sign in mo acknowledging
the acceptable expenditures so
if you can put a sign up with
your free sign it that's on you
you know if you're going to hang
banners and things with your
name on it that's on you if
you're going to do extra signage
it things like that that's on
the county but if it's ballot on
demand systems voting systems
or pole workers that those are
requirements of the state to pay
so we're continuing to refine
that the mo process for this
upcoming early is going to be
further refined in november and
then
that will apply to the twenty
twenty sixth selection
and a yeah I should mention we
also wrote a rule on this and
twenty twenty three i'm so we're
not again willing nearly just
handing out money
and we have you know to the
point of training county clerks
and making sure that they're
understanding is consistent in
that their training is
consistent we actually proposed
a bill this year to require
additional mandatory training
right now they have just what we
call election school rate before
every election we try to cover
like a million things and
basically a day and a half.
We proposed a bill that got hung
up and sent it judiciary.
That would have required that
mandatory training we will we
continue to provide the training
anyway but the county clerks
that come to those trainings are
usually the county clerks that
need that training the least
um unfortunately and so that's
just kind of how it works
I will end by saying we have a
few recommendations ourselves
that that a wine entirely with
many of the recommendations and
and this report first of all we
we would like to have that
election management system fully
funded and and that's that that
data that sort of central data
collector i'm so we had asked
you we add some initial funding
last year will be asking you to
complete that funding you know
of course it's one time funding
and will have some small
maintenance fees moving forward.
We would appreciate a funding
cyber security migration I mean
one of the things we haven't
talked about here in fact it was
just kind of a foot now is that
we are taking on now the bulk of
the responsibility for the
cyprus security of our state's
election systems because um d h
s federally and says in specific
the cyber and infrastructure
security agency who previously
provided us was so many free
resources
basically they've been told to
acts and they've actually fired
all of the regional staff that
were working directly with us we
did receive a minimal amount of
additional federal funding and
then continuing resolution that
passed earlier this year we do
not anticipate further federal
funding to come and when we're
fighting nation states like an
unliterally just within the last
few days we've been getting
attempted deducts or denial of
service attacks where they
constantly ping us to shut us
down from iran from china
north korea rush has been a
little quietly at least which is
kind of interesting but in the
past rushes sort of been our
number one challenge and you
know as we've always said is
i've always said to the federal
government look weekend let's
see we can't fight other nation
states just by ourselves as a
state
so we're gonna need to
transition to or do it
environment and that is urgent
and overdo so we can consolidate
those resources
of course we want to continue to
fund out region education
we racking and and they think
it's important
for this party to recognize and
I know that you do but I just
want to emphasize their agencies
of a the realities of a small
office
sos is small and lean every
single staff position we have as
a central we don't whole
positions vacant.
Just to hold them vacant every
time we have a vacancy we post
it and factor one point last
year we were actually a hundred
percent staffed which never
happens
however even though the vacancy
savings we had last year did not
get as passed that finished line
in fact we had to go to the
board of finance I think that I
think the the idea that because
we had the election fund
therefore we didn't need to
fully fund the operating budget
it was mentioned earlier that we
had.
We are we we were given sixteen
million for our election
operating budget
no that is our entire operating
budget for the entire agency
which also includes business
services and are office staff
and that things that we do the
election find is a hundred
percent money that goes to the
vendors and the counties
themselves
to to pay for what they do
so you know again every staff
position is essential we did not
have enough money to get through
this last pay period this year
thankfully the board of finance.
Hot had a hat or back and had
enough money so when we come to
you this year and we say okay.
You know let's continue with the
election fund and i'm fine to
have the bill rewritten to come
back before you all.
As the recommendation of the
offc because that's how I wanted
it in the first place and so I
mean i'm open to having that
discussion and again again you
know we need additional training
with clerk so I all stop there I
I just want to think you all I
know over the years and I know
there's a new members bet some
of you you know heard me selling
this before it's it's the tail
is all those time you know we're
working.
Were can't consistently being
underfunded and then oh look at
them they're coming back to you
for you know they're going to be
worth a finance for emergency
funding in their coming back to
you for supplementals and
specials well why is that.
It's not because we're going
around buying merger machines
for you know county clerk
services I mean my greater
machine some days would be
really nice
but it's because we are
consistently under funded and
have a hard time you know it it
looks like we do magic
you don't want to look beat the
surface of what we're going
through as a staff and as an
office without adequate funding
so I will just leave it at that
we will I really the last thing
i'd like to say is you know we
would really like to partner
with you i'd like to work with
you all individually as we're
heading toward the legislative
session and go over things and
more detail I would love to
you know pick through things
you know
dig into staff we we are wide
open book
and you know again I think a lot
of the recommendations that were
made
in in this report were good and
and there are some a lot of them
are things that were already
working on we just need your
help to get them over the
financial so with that I will
stop yapping across take any
questions that you we will I
guess both take any questions
that you are me excellent thank
you very much men and secretary
things to your team for being
here
were you as a reminder you know
staff does uh their work in in
its up to us to wrestle with
sort of the uh the different
political dimension staff is not
political and we deeply
appreciate their work and
they're going off of
facts and figures that are
that are those facts and figures
it's up to us to sort of work
through what all of that means
with that we're going to go
straight to the questions first
with center gonzalez then going
to center to heal and continuing
from there senator.
The.
Thank you all mister chairman
before I started did anyone
looser sunglasses last night.
Though you're those remind yes
sir thank you that's.
Alright at a wonderful wonderful
event it was really special
thank you
thank you very much and I just
have a few things that are that
I wanted to bring and i'm open
to ever want to respond that on
the legislative report on page
eight
and or you have the local
regular local election.
And then the menicipal officers
the election.
For the entities that decide to
hop out.
Is it more expensive relimited
to be on their own or to go with
the
with the regular local election
i'll take that and if it's okay
so actually
senator we had proposed we we
just had this one piece of
legislation kind of dealing with
the few things this last year I
a hundred and twenty
municipalities in the state
there are approximate at least
six.
Laughed that have not opted in
it is more expensive and in
addition to that it takes
secretary of state staff
resources and county clerk staff
resources essentially the county
clerks are
running the elections
in these in the small areas
bernaly I believe that spend
yours about to opt and we we
heard and which will be great
but even smaller areas like
cuban new mexico hemisprings
so
we you know you know when you
get to a tipping point you know
we're like way passed that to
being rate so we're spending all
this time money in resources to
help help these municipalities
run their own separate election
in merchant and when they end up
getting like three or four
percent turn out
so yes ideally we would love for
them to come in to the early
because it would certainly save
it would save those
municipalities money and it
would save staff costs and
resources for the counties and
this day.
Go your thank you for that on
that helps me because I have had
a you know constituents and then
I I don't know how to answer it
you know where saying well
before we used to have our own
elections certainly wasn't that
expensive and i'll be a later
starter I would bring that up
fixed now we been working with
that water how many years now
about three four years will be
our third fourth gosh for its
regular local election wow
thank you the next one yourself
I just just see no the
environment of today's world
do you feel that we need to do
more in the area of security and
safety for our workers during
the election cycle.
The senator mr chair
sorry neglected to go through
the chair before I apologize mr
chair
the
we are continuing to do more
the systems of course protecting
but of course our person i'll
need to protecting
we have a local and I don't know
for how much longer
representative from d h s that
we've worked with over the years
to develop security plans for
are
our county clerks and their
staff and then of course our
pole workers we've taken
advantage of trainings you know
of all sorts we do things like
table top exercises or we kind
of envision worst case scenarios
and things like that
counties themselves have taken
on the costs of either having
their sheriff's department
provide additional security
in playing clothes because we're
not allowed to have uniform on
enforcement around pulling
places and.
For reasons going back to the
civil rates movement but also
just hiring security firms and
they've taken those costs on on
their own so currently the state
is not paying for those things
but you know hopefully we'll be
able to continue to provide that
training and those resources but
the future is uncertain where d
h s is concerned.
Oh thank you I was triminal just
have two more things oh.
Two well
I know that you came to us sold
I think it was two years ago
three years ago that you wanted
to separate your budget because
it looked like you were always
an
up and down you know based on
the election so has that
happened
so yes senator that's the
creation of the election fund
and so operating budget you know
it's fairly consistent and
unfortunately you know I don't
know if it was because of the
creation of the
election fund that are operating
budget request wasn't granted.
So
yes when you look at the cost of
elections and you can you can
look exclusively now at that
through the election fund rate
in your not factoring in other
operational costs so you look at
the cost of an early regular
local election or you look at
the cost of a general election
you'll be able to get a sense of
of what those differences are
but then are operating budget
for the most part
you know remains consistent.
Yeah yeah exactly right so you
know the the the election fund
was passed in twenty four so
this is really the first you
know sort of eyes on that you
all have been able to have to
kind of see umm.
How election car specifically
differ from.
Are operating budget.
Thank you
the less part that a first still
you know I just really want to
congratulately to also for
number one that you mentioned
and then the other one is now
your vacancy at being at a
hundred percent that you have no
vacancies you know that's the
says a lot of the last part that
I have is some you mentioned
about the shortage and the lack
of vendors and what would it
take for us to promote in new
mexico
whatever it's called the
annoyance it's a company or if
it's an organization to do that
in on a parallel because that
has been brought up to us by our
state auditor also the shortage
of auditors and he has started
to in some more
doing basically some training
and you know going with some
interns matter is there any
thought to that or how could we
work with our universities or to
create our own vendors well so
the challenge mr chair and
senator is that there are just
very few vendors that work in
this particular space
there are to my knowledge for
voting system vendors and minion
being one or a dominion state
we've had our current
tabulators since starting in
twenty twelve so
that's thirteen years that we've
had them um they're nearing end
of life
the the clerks will tell you I
want to there are this machine
across the what in effort to
room and so that you know.
That's a situation but the other
challenge I think as I mentioned
is not only or they're very few
vendors but we are required by
lot to certified them both to
federal standard federal and
state safety safety and security
standards and technical
standards so they have to apply
for that first now we have a
amandatory meeting of that
committee this summer.
We have to do it after every
presidential election in the
summer but at any point any new
vendor that wants to enter the
space and be considered when we
go out to bed we can convene
that committee
it's just again senator there
are very few and there are some
you know there have been some
there's been some
experimentation like la county
for example developed to what
they call it voters voters
centered i'm system it took them
ten years um from the beginning
it was that it was there is a
lot of public and per they
worked with some for profit
vendors and nonprofit vendors to
develop the system that they
really like.
But you know I think that's kind
of the time when we we'd be
dealing with umm you know to do
some kind of a home grown system
in and again as I said you know
i'm in this position for another
year and a half and all i'd i'll
tell you one of my projects that
i'm going to be working on is is
expanding the options
of evil of election technology
up for this reason.
Oh well thank you miss sherman
thank you also for response
thank you very much will sell us
next we have a center
and then reps i've done
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary state for being
here today
is making a frag.
I just want to point out you
didn't really say it but other
agencies have the ability to if
they're underfunded they just
don't do something there's
something that they just stop
doing i've been in two agencies
responsible for multiple you
know statutory requirements but
if the money is not there then
we have to prioritize and say
these are the most important
things that we do these are the
these are the things we just
don't have money to do and we
can't do unless we get extra
money secretary states office is
not built that way there's not
something that you can just well
we're not going to provide
services for bernalio
we're not going to provide so I
just want to point out that you
have to be fully funded we have
to fully find the work that you
do.
Um I also want to point ask the
question how many school boards
are having to do special
elections because their bond
question cannot be on.
The general election and I
mister chairman secretary
sorry is uh I can we turn out
the the rip represent down.
The.
I think so can somebody grab
representative dow please.
Sorry this is for a very good
thing I apologize I didn't know
that she was headed out
we'll go back to you senator
once we get the representative
in here
okay well yeah hold out from
what represent out we just
wanted to can committee join me
and thanks for some vincent in
wishing representative dow a
wonderful happy birthday
thank you very much
she do
like thank you mister chairman
that was a very important thing
so I appreciate you
madame secretary as you know I
carried legislation to try to
authorize school board questions
particularly behind questions to
be on during a uhm
uh uh general election which at
this point they can't because
their partisan elections and the
constitution prohibits partisan
uh school board questions being
on during participant elections
it unfortunately died in house
due to sherry I mean senate
always gets the blame for bills
dying incentive judiciary but
this time this bill died in
house judiciary so can you tell
me how many schools are still
having to do their own special
elections because they have a
bond question that has to be on
the ballot yeah
because of their bonding.
Um schedule.
And just like a slight precursor
to mister chair and son senator
to answer your question you know
the reason why school board
members in school were questions
were separated out in our
constitution is because we were
very forward thinking in
nineteen twelve and allowed
women to build on issues
pertaining to children in
schools and
we we fixed the school board
member part but we forgot to fix
it in in the last suit this
question and so we we we do
support that constitutional
amendment
so so there are twelve currently
it while the window is still
open are between now in the
early that are planning to do
special elections
and we had five earlier this
year yes several delivery cycle
and and they're having the you
know they're a hundred percent
bill by mail I I doubt I don't
know what the costs are they in
a big because we don't I mean
the only thing that we support
them with is is tapulaters
to tell either results
but I can imagine the costs of
the scoreboards is is extensive
so we I mean your rate mister
chair and and senator we need to
get that constitutional
amendment on the ballot thank
you mister chairs thank you
secretary i've I understand that
it can cost anywhere from fifty
thousand in a small district to
over two hundred thousand in
another district and I just want
to remind the committee that
those money then come out of
school operating funds rate they
have to pay for those
sort of indicated that federal
funds were being cut you haven't
number you talked about this
earlier so that we can know what
is the exact number that you're
going to be missing so
for the last six or seven years
mr chair and senator we have
received approximately million
dollars a year in.
What's referred to his hobba
funding funding pursuant to the
help america vote act it comes
as through the election federal
election assistance commission
and they have a formula based on
state population so seeds the
bigger populations get a little
bit more but we've received a
million year we've used that
money almost exclusively for
cyprus security and grounds to
count is for cyprus security or
physical security purposes.
The continuing resolution that
was passed earlier this year
included two hundred and seventy
seven thousand dollars
and
basically everything that we're
hearing from you know our
national association of
secretary of state staff and
washington our national
association of state election
directors in washington all the
national groups were working
with we're hearing that that
funding is is highly unlikely to
continue to come through
senator and matter
I mean doctors mr chair and
senator wow.
Yeah I just wanted to add a
chair and senator to hear if you
look at it pindics e this lists
out the income services that
that the students receiving from
cisa and that it counts uh that
aquiss to roughly two point six
million a year so that gives you
some additional account
thank you for pointing that out
mister chair secretary so is the
as funny first late way clerk
training is that something that
are community colleges can
provide.
So
mister chair and senator there
is currently a training program
a called new mexico edge and it
goes through actually and the
mess you believe and and so
whether it's the albuquerque
location
the training tends to focus on
you know clerks have a way range
of responsibilities just like
our office does
in so
you know getting election
subject matter experience to
address specific issues doesn't
happen as often and see folks
coming in and talking about well
what if a tax lean is filed how
do you deal with notary issues.
You know title searches those
kinds of things which is you
know the recording and filing
pieces as I well aware
another big half of the office
so
you know the challenge for us is
that we work so closely with the
clerks and then when we're
running an election and then
postal action
for example the way we canvass
the election each county
campuses and consistently.
I'm one of the things that we're
trying to do is train the mall
to take to canvas consistently
so that when they're there
data comes to us because then
we're required to do a level of
the campus then we can
understand what's happening read
and it looks the same and it and
and so I mean that's just one
example that's not the kind of
thing they're getting through
new mexico edge you know so
what we would do is it you know
we would just have a monthly
you know at zoom or teams
meeting or whatever and cover a
particular issue um thank you
mister madame secretary security
stuff
that's a good point to so the
edge classes are open to the
public and there's also some
some security issues that we
would need to cover with the
clerks i'm directly that really
shouldn't go out of a need to
know basis thank you mister
chairman and uh secretary I just
have two more questions in
regards to the cyber security
medic migration are are you and
I mean no disrespect but do it
struggles trying to get all of
our state agencies into a secure
location is that really.
Where are you feel like you need
to go and what does that look
like and what's the cost.
There's a I mean we've just been
believed that there's all of
those state actors are in fact
attacking state government and
i'm sure secretary state.
So
we
have been fortunate and now for
the last year so have
not just a cio but a chief
information security officer
whose handling the cyber side of
security
this is his recommendation
he has a detailed plan to
transition
frankly I
I know what the challenges are
would do it
and I am not here to criticize
them but in his opinion
they do it environment is the
more secure environment
and yeah thank you thank you on
that and secretary so mister
chairman surgery last question
would it be cheaper.
Cost effective for us to go
hundred percent fault by mail
that other states have done and
what's stopping us from doing
that quite passibly and I think
I think a couple there are a
couple of challenges and I think
you know with the next secretary
of state is probably going to be
the one you know if the state
decides to move to all by mail
lake org in washington
california you tar and colorado
a couple things to think about
first we have challenges with
male service delivery in a lot
of rule and tribal areas we did
try to fix a lot of that issue
with the native american voting
rates act in two thousand three
now tribal
government buildings can be used
as places to both receive and
return balance
were doing a major push this
year with the tribes to trade a
start implementing those
resources it's a challenge
because as you know with a lot
of the you know some of the
tribes they have consistent
tribal leadership every year and
sometimes it just changes over
completely every year so we have
to you know be constantly
reaching out
um
on that point the second issue
is that
you know so the way the way
colorado does it frankly I think
is a really good model everyone
gets me all the ballot that we
know for sure they live there
right
because if we ever get returned
mail.
Then we know that voter doesn't
live there anymore and we mark
that addresses not a biable
address for them
so we know we need an update
from them for their address so
they wouldn't automatically get
a lot they'd have to update but
regardless we'd mail about it
are to people who we know live
where they live and then they
could choose how to return their
ballot they could put it send it
back through the mail they could
put it in their dropbox or we
could have a much more limited
number of boat centers where
they could go in person you know
go into a booth and you know do
the thing and get their sticker
you know that people like to do
that you know even some people
on my stuff still vote on
election
because they just like to do
that
so
that would I I think be a good a
model that we're definitely safe
costs I mean just the pole
worker costs alone you know we
would still need a lot of people
to help process those ballots
but you know it wouldn't be the
number that were using now so
thank you very much we're going
go to represent dunkin and
represent ada and just a quick
note to members nor some voting
members will have to take off
we're going to take up committee
business right after this
hearing so that we make sure and
get that and we'll represent and
can thank you mister i'm i'm all
for voter
so if the administration helped
they do get it if this
administration passes something
on the federal level what will
the expense be to your office I
was I was thinking mister chair
representative I was hoping you
would ask that question
it's going to be a cost will
have to work closely with with
mb
to make sure that everyone and
and we are where this
possibility and where we already
just we just had a meeting with
them last week
to talk about okay if the
seaback passes you know what is
this mean i'm because there's
multiple implications.
But there would be a costs to
provating free and it's it
mandates free
for anybody about and so and
then we we would also have a
responsibility not just we would
also have a responsibility and
ensuring that voters you know
had the information about how to
get it we may be responsible at
least in part in terms of
distributing those
so we know we're looking at
additional costs we just don't
know what that looks like quite
yet
thank you mister
i'd heard rumor probably several
different
areas that said you know it
could be up to twelve dollars
paridy could be eight dollars so
I am just curious if you had a
number yet that but with with
distributing it and getting
information I understand that it
could be so i'd love to know
that as you get a sherman mister
chair and representative
and will work with me on that
just um just the last point on
that there is no appropriation
from the federal government so
that's something that in fact I
don't think there's any
appropriations to that bill at
all so if it does pass you know
all of it actually in reality
new mexico does probably already
about seventy five eighty maybe
even ninety percent of what that
bill requires
but it you know it would be that
extra piece that we would have
to implement um so we're worried
about time frames are more
worried about money.
Thank you mister thank you for
that i'm glad it's not going to
be that much then
great thank you very much for
dunking representative
thank you thank you mister chair
and thank you team a great job
for everybody are.
Mm secretary I guess I really
want to thank you I know they
call on you a lot on uh on
national networks to speak about
the problems of being as
secretary of state and managing
voter requirements and managing
elections and what the impact of
of uh federal policy has at the
local level
especially when their problems
like um well there are lots of
problems but a.
You're always there to answer
and I think you do a great job
and representing our state and I
just want to compliment you on
that because uh like a lot of
our leaders and state agencies
they are called upon in
different ways and and and some
really rise to the occasion so I
want to thank you for that
i'm also curious about voda
registration and voter ideas
if we do that really I really
think that problem lies at the
local level when you have voter
registration
is probably more important than
a voter ID and and if we go to a
voter I do how would you handle
that through photo registration.
The.
Thank you
so I think there's a couple of
things first of all as you are
may remember you pass
legislation a couple years ago
that requires us to
automatically register voters.
Differently through motor
vehicle division so starting.
And
five days four days now when you
go to mv to get or update a
license or a d you will be
automatically registered to vote
and then you will be sent a
letter by your county clerk a
month later saying if you do not
want to be registered take me
out for
so I think that will be part
that will be through the regular
process
it will be very costly I think
for clerks and our staff and mb
to figure out how to manage a
system because the other
challenges you know we're we're
yes we're looking at registered
voters but then we're also
looking at
potentially the non registered
voter population needing ids as
well and then we have to make
sure that we are separating
known non citizens out from that
group which is a challenge that
we've been having with
d
it's not a challenge it's just
one of the things we've had to
work out with mv on the
automatic piece so
we envision it being kind of a a
burden seminasly process and
what I think a lot of them
unfortunately a lot of the the
weight is going to lie on the
shoulders of the county clerks
excellent
sorry we're we do need to move
quickly
apologies but back to you snap
secretary and then we've said
that ever and my last question
will be how did same day but a
registration uh voter voting
work
it works basically a a voter is
required and statute to provide
certain identification
you know preferably a driver's
license with your current
address on it you can provide
your photo id with a bank
statement or a utility statement
with your new address if
necessary basically so that we
know who you are.
And that we know what you live
in the county
the
there's currently
a dedicated individual that puts
all the information into the
system sends it to the county
clerks office the county court
processes it
and then sends it back to the
polling place and then when the
polling place gets it back and
sees okay they're a registered
roader now they can go in the
line to go got a ballot.
Huge process so how many people
actually voted in the last
selection on the same day
we had unprecedented number
fifty thousand voters in twenty
twenty and twenty twenty four I
weird that we've never seen
anything like it and any
previous election I highly doubt
we'll see anything like it and
then the future election I think
it's an anomaly
but it it will end and you know
what a lot of it is a lot of it
is that you know the folks that
work you need they spend half
their year down in the permean
be sen you know the rough nax
you know those guys that are
working on the rigs and that's
where they're living when the
election happens and the deserve
to vote where they left you now
and arm so a lot of that is is
that activity yeah
well mr chair and r and team
thank you for your presentation
I I always learn a lot from you
if I could just ask the chair
when do we embargo i'm when we
let go these these reports
yeah what
matter secretary if you could
turn off your mic or I guess I
can turn it off you got it okay
generally speaking I mean this
is sort of a a weak of process
that I think often times folks
will sort of get the sense that
it's because of who we are that
that we whatever the timing is
that timing is sort of a weak
ahead if and then the week of
when we're up here it goes
online and is shared so it's
I think staff has always working
to get things out we can look at
trying to get things out sooner
than sense that things are being
uh kept from people being able
to see them is not the case but
I I think we all understand that
the more preparation the better
so we're gonna.
Will take that and
consideration.
I think you missed your share
because we were a week
legislature by nature we're not
paid people have jobs I mean we
do the best we can that if if we
don't really have this out a
week before for everybody
really.
Ah we also because it's
important for people on the
other side of the of the you
know of the document to be able
to have their chance to put out
a statement saying what it is an
and for us this legislators I
think that's even more important
because if if we don't get time
equally on both sides for people
to really kind of look at this
it it's it's it's it's not very
too really the citizens of new
mexico who we represent sounds
good we're gonna director solely
address so the agencies are
provided draft reports better in
bargain.
And we have extra conferences
with the agencies to get their
feedback is the report accurate
do you agree disagree with the
recommendations do we need to
make is it not workable and that
case do we need to make changes
to the draft report.
We take that feedback from
agencies and in some cases do
make changes that they requested
in other cases maybe not all of
them and finalize the report and
then the agency has an
opportunity to provide a written
response which is included in
the report.
And then that report is
finalized and then usually
released to the committee during
the hearing we've been releasing
that uh bargain basis to the
committee uh in advance of the
hearings and it passed not and
then it's released to the
public.
As you hear the the report.
At your public hearing.
So the the public has an
opportunity to see the report
see the agency response have a
public hearing here the
presentation of the report.
Here the public presentation of
the response from the agency to
the report and then the the
committee has an opportunity to
review it.
Did I i'm just thinking about
the alc a report where where we
had oil and gas say they just
saw it that morning.
I mean where is so you're saying
that's not.
Those are those were private
entities that are part of the
public and that would have been
the first time they would have
seen the report they would not
have been part of the drafting
of that report.
And I guess when I am saying
mister chair and and charles is
that I think it would be a good
for everybody to see it because
that way I think we have better
input to the committee if it if
it if you embargo anything and
you don't have the general
public involved I mean it is it
is their state we just start the
representative so I would just
like to see that if we're going
to have it have it open to the
public to.
Thank you represent chatfield.
Thank you mister chair.
Maps actually i've had a
question for a long time and
just done on me right now as
much yes to ask
same day voter registration how
do you
ascertain that that person meets
all the qualification to be a
legal voter in this day that you
mentioned about a a bill that
proved you lived in the county
with an address that that
doesn't even I mean that's
how do you ascertain that they
are qualified a qualified voter
so yet you do have to provide
that varied in the proof that
you live in the county
the reason we send that
registration to the account and
clerk cyprus is because they run
their usual.
Process which isn't just.
You know pressing okay were good
they were in a search first
first they're checking for
duplicate registration to see if
he's registered somewhere else
and needs to be transferred
secondly they're looking at
social security number to make
sure it's valid third they're
checking against
an mvd data is gonna tell us
whether we're dealing with the
citizen or non citizen and so
they're doing all those searches
and real time super fast to get
it learned to be able to process
it to send it back that's why we
do it that way and that's why
sometimes the voter has a little
bit of a week between when how
the info gets sent to the clerk
and the the clerks office has to
process it and send it back
because we do want to make sure
that we're running those checks
before we fully register those
owners so mister chair
membership to the car vote till
all those checks come back that
is absolutely correct and if we
can't verify them than
unfortunate they can vote a
provisional ballot
you know and and we can go down
that road
but that that would be their
option at that point thank you.
Great thank you very much for
some chat field center what's
just a quick question of the law
changed and we are now going to
issue voda registration with
driver's license so
you know I can order to hear my
guys back home reason came with
me on the deal so just assure me
real quickly on the the d
registration
how that qualifies because you
disadd it qualify them through
the check on same day so this.
Reassure me on how that is
safeguarded so that we have the
proper people voting that's
actually
sure legal to vote briefly there
are three tiers of folks at mb
there are folks that provide
documentation that proves their
citizen including a birth
certificate that they were born
in the united states or passport
so that's the first year voters
they are automatically
registered there is a second
tire voters that could be
american citizens or might not
be depending on the
documentation they provide they
are provided information with
how they can register to vote
they're not automatically
registered so if they want to
register to vote it'll have to
go through the regular process
and you know the county clerical
you know check all the data and
all that then there's the third
tier and these are folks that we
know for sure or not citizens
because they've provided foreign
documents
like their foreign passport or a
visa card or whatever in order
to receive their license or ad
and those folks will not be
offered the chance to vote at
all and they will not be given
any information about how to
have a registered about that's
how the process of work
so it's just a little bit of a
misnomer to say anybody that
renews will get that uh sim out
that they would be registered to
vote that's correct only the
people for which meeting has
documentation and can verify
that citizenship will be a
offered what will be
automatically registered.
And then we always have the back
check of the county clerk that
that's correct and then there
and then they're going to
process you know that on their
end and then there are also
going to send that letter out
seeing hey you've been
automatically registered vote
if you didn't fill out
information there about your
party or your phone number or
whatever you want to send it to
a sat screen or if you don't
want to be registered just send
this to us and it'll be
automatically in a prepaid
envelope and all they have to do
is send it back to the clerk and
in one last question if we send
these out in the address is
wrong.
What happens at that point in
time so it's it's returned to
the county clerks office and
they'll be marked
as having a not non verified
address.
Umm and so unless an until they
vote again or something like
that or we get an update from
there from them on their address
eventually they could be
canceled from the photo but but
the question I have if that
dress is not their address at
present.
The.
And it goes to say a post office
box or something.
And get returned or the
automatically taken off the road
how does that work now they're
just flagged as having it that
we know the they're not living
at that address or that they're
not receiving mail at that
address in your example
and so that's you know something
we would need to get updated by
the voter arm at some point in
order to you know ensure that
they're not removed the removal
process is a two year process
it's a two general election
cycle process of of night voting
not updating etcetera etc so
there would have there would be
like multiple things that would
have to happen before they would
be removed.
So do we need some kind of
correction and statute on that
because that is really the
backfall as to the district they
voted in everything else uh so.
I know we don't need to take
care of that right now mister
chairman but I just wanted to
bring that forward thank you
very much thank you very much
senator woods okay that takes
care of the questions ma'am
secretary thank you doctor
densis and of course uh oh sorry
represent little please.
Thank you very much
mister chair madame secretary
and and your step think you so
much free presentation this
morning ah I think I first began
really quickly mister chair
begin working with traveling
rural communities and voter
engagement in voter in
parliament I believe in about
the early two thousand so after
this last twenty
years almost twenty years i've
seen i've had experience at with
many different
err secretaries of state and
counted clerks throughout the
state and the uh engagement has
been hum positive and not a
positive depending on uh
just in my experience and so
would I want to see is that all
of them have tried have worked
to
ensure that those who want to
vote are and are eligible to
vote can vote so to that I just
want to say thank you so much to
you and your staff for the
outrageous that has been
completed for the innovation
that have been innovative ideas
that have been generated from
your office and for a specially
for the response to.
Um under represented voices
voters individuals who want to
vote who have been able to come
to the forefront so first of let
me start by saying that secondly
I think it's important that we
insure that there is a adequate
funding and i'm.
Encourage to hear that there may
be some movement towards that
have to the budgets were
separated into two but I think
that because of the
need for
the growth in our state and rule
and trouble communities the
information that's going to be
put out there especially after
the recent changes that have
been made are going to require a
lot more assistance and in order
to adequately carry this out
mister chair and madame
secretary we are going to need
to insure that outreach which is
a central to these voters is
being confirmed is being done
and the that the goal of
registering.
Of having more people
participate is going to.
Happen again I am very hopeful
that it's not err
of look.
In yours as it has been years
pass I was just a surprises
everybody else but i'm i'm
hopeful that that is going to
continue to happen mister
so I would encourage that we
continue to support the request
for an operating increase in the
operating budget
I want to
also ensure that with.
That the information is
presented to us all of us are
trying to work smart are not
harder and so I just wanted to
take this opportunity to thank
you again
oh members of the body of this
body and the legislature is well
for seen recognizing the
importance of making sure that
under representative communities
are do have access to voting so
thank you very much thank you
mister chair that's it great
thank you very much
mister chair could I make a very
brief final statement
I I just wanted to say you know
thank you for the opportunity
for us to kind of dig into this
a little bit I know.
They're calling me madmages in
the office so I you know I know
some of my comments
you do today are coming out a
little harsh and I think the
irony is it's it's not because
we we disagree with the
recommendations so much it's
that we disagree with some of
the assumptions and some some of
the way you know the process was
undertaken and and you know
we have a collective of election
expertise that we just don't
feel was fully related we're
very open to working with lfc
i'm to trade or accomplish some
of these recommendations because
we do agree uh with with most of
them um we just need to figure
out a way to get there and so
we're looking forward to working
with them and you all on a train
to get these done thank you
mister chair excellent thank you
ma'am secretary that's a
wonderful way to wrap up thank
you doctor denses and I think
this that's the stage for us to
work closely over this interim
thank you very much okay now
we're gonna ask director solely
to go up members we're going to
take up our
under our action items
and thanks everybody for stay in
west so that we can have our uh
form.
So mister chair under tab or the
meeting minutes for me we're in
muscar and to come care if we
can get.
Motion to approve those please
great and we have emotion okay
been moved by senator
saying by representative chat
field there any opposition to
approval of the meeting minutes
from saying none
those are approved the next item
under tab p for a pole are the
professional services contracts
were asking for.
Two to be approved to get going
on the year the first is with a
beeber for our economic
forecasting.
This is a contract where we is a
joint contract with TRD and the
department of transportation we
had a desire to go back out for.
To see if there were other
potential vendors that could
help provide this service before
it has a good job but you know I
periodic basis you want to try
to go up back out to to bin.
The other participating agencies
were not inclined to do that so
we are kind of left in alerts
the last went that have and just
proposed to go ahead and and
approve this contract and then
continue to work with beeber to
make sure that we're getting the
best deal that we can get in
terms of price we don't think
there's a problem with the the
price of this right now but i'm
constantly looking at uh cost
effectiveness in inefficiencies
and
will continue to do that on this
particular contract again I
think we're getting a a good
deal and that the service is
good but I believe in
competition in will continue to
work with the other agencies as
we move forward over the next
year on that.
The second one is for ralph and
sent who provides our budget
system and it support
this is a critical contract he
also works with dfa we've got a
joint budget system this is how
we produce the budget
recommendations for you and
ultimately the house bill to so
this is a a very important
contract for us to to get into
place.
With that i'd be happy to answer
any questions great any
questions
okay we have a motion by saying
that solid student by
representative vincent is there
any opposition sitting on that's
proved and mister chairman we
had draft work plans in the
maid meeting for folks to start
reviewing we held off the
approval that's in tabu and
director I want to speak on this
I want to really note that on
the house side we sent these out
sort of uh questions about
inclusion on work plan to both
the majority of minority offices
uh in appreciate minority leader
garmes from setting it out to
the entire membership this me
want to think by sure when you
also know the keys had to head
out I know he's worked with all
of the members for the senate
LFC in
in modifying and looking even
deeply more deeply and so I
think the ability sort of more
folks having eyes on the work
plan is something i'm super
proud of uh in just one and note
that great and we also had a a
team's meeting to get feedback
from folks that were able to
attend those have been
incorporated and your tap q
already and then as a chairman
small said we just received some
additional feedback from the
senate and a deferred to you on
how you like us to proceed great
I think we i'd like for us to go
ahead and take a vote we've been
able to look at these senate by
partisan feedback and
incorporate the vast majority of
that some of this will look to
lfc uh the sort of whether it's
an evaluation or
sort of how lfc looks at that to
respect that but you know going
into sort of the rest of the
year good to get this going.
Well now open up for a motion
for approval.
Okay it's been moved by servings
all this.
We have a second.
Keep saying by center woods
alongside some near any
opposition signal we've approved
the workplace.
Okay okay with that I think that
takes care of our action items
it does mister chair
I just wanted to point out
you've had.
Before you in all of your paper
post session review report it's
a spiral bound report I would
recommend taking out with you
it's a really good reference
documents particularly for the
big agencies i'm what things you
ended up funding as well as a a
narrative on kind of big tapical
uh issues that you tackle during
this last session you've also
got our budget status report
under tab or.
Uh the final me bar reports and
under tab s as the informational
item t
employment levels of all the
major agencies receiving at
about the same levels as we were
back in twenty thirteen.
Um and then there's also some
correspondence that we had
received for the committee and
in the staff evaluation work
plan was in the
the
just adopted overall committee
staff work plans.
With that mister chairman i'd be
happy to answer any questions or
quickly go through the can a
federal budget reconciliation
and where were at.
Great
I don't see any questions let's
go to the federal funds and
reconciliation of the great
mister chairman you should have
a a powerpoint presentation i've
left some of the slides that
were in the last one.
Uh in there just because I think
they're important to help kind
of frame what we're seeing at a
at a national level so for turn
to to slide through this is my
big slide and.
You know annually right now
congress in in the federal
government is running a one
point nine trillion dollar
annual deficit.
Where they're spending more than
the revenue they're bringing in.
What's important to understand
is they're working on this
budget reconciliation process
which allows them to buy past
the normal appropriations
process but it comes with and
the normal
ability to filibuster an
appropriations bill in the
senate so you just need you know
fifty one votes.
So that's that's important to
understand and that's a ten year
window we'll get a little bit
into that there's some
additional data on the debt in
its history on slight for.
Where we get our revenues on
slight five from the federal
government again the vast
majority are individual income
taxes so income tax policy is
driving whether you've got a
revenue that's insufficient to
support the level of spending
and that's a big part of the
reconciliation bill is is to
maintain revenue levels that had
been acted back in twenty
seventeen or tax income tax
policy that had been act inacted
in in twenty seventeen and I go
forward basis permanently uhm
slight six in seven give you an
idea about where the big cost
centers are like how would you
solve a budget deficit of one
point nine trillion dollars
where would you go well a lot of
the items that you're seeing
being discussed nationally are
not the big ticket items that
are going to have any anywhere
near closing that that gap and
that's that's an important
backdrop it's it's sort of like
if you get rid of all foreign
aid as an example that's like
such a very small portion it's
it's not gonna allow you to get
get to a balanced budget if
that's what you desire mandatory
outlays these are things that
are like entitlements they're
almost on auto pilot they're not
subject to the normal and annual
appropriations process on slight
seven even within their very
quickly once you get past so
security medicare medicaid is
your next biggest cost center
that's why congress is focusing
on uh ways to get savings there
but even into snap and then
after that it becomes you know
nutritional programs you know
better and services other types
of things the numbers just
aren't there that to close that
big but that big of a gap
so I think that's an important
backdrop you can get rid of like
a whole host of these.
Ah mandatory programs and you
wouldn't even make it dent in
the overall annual deficit.
Discretionary outlays I think
what's uh important to point out
here you know it's one point
eight trillion you can get rid
of the entire all discretionary
outlays and you still wouldn't
be solving
the that that problem you'd
still have a slate revenue
issue.
But what's important here is
like the amount of money if you
go back a couple of slides that
were spending annually on the
national dead is more than our
entire defense budget.
And it's almost as much as what
we're spending on domestic
programs.
I mean so there's some big
structural issues going on at
the national level that you know
debt at the national level.
Allows us to do things in times
of emergencies like a pandemic a
war.
Or other things to to that crush
the economy further or further
harm people in times of
recession or depression
but as a matter of course of
business year and in your out
that's pretty rough to be
accumulating as much dead as we
are as a country.
The.
We did a bunch of work looking
on slide nine how does federal
money come into the state of new
mexico some of it will come
through your appropriations
process a lot of it will totally
bypass your appropriations
process and so this is kind of a
a graphic.
You know we get in new mexico
direct payments
there's direct grants to go to
our universities there's direct
payments like so security and
disability payments that or
medicare payments on behalf of
new mexicans
sometimes business uh payments
sometimes organizations will get
direct payments from the federal
government like impact aid is a
good example that totally
bypasses a state government goes
directly to uh our school
districts for
compensating them for land that
would otherwise be taxable.
In like again individuals and
sometimes local governments get
direct
payments from the federal
government then there's a slew
of things that do come through
state government and sometimes
we're just a pass through a good
example of that our snap
benefits the actual benefits
themselves are paid a hundred
percent by the federal
government under current law.
We have a partnership with the
federal government to help
administer that where the
federal government will help pay
for those administrative costs
and a fifty fifty rate and so
our income support workers will
have new mexicans come in to
apply for those benefits they'll
determine if they're eligible or
not and in the federal
government will give a flow that
money through hst out to our
communities and those
individuals in other cases
you've got greater policy
decision making in that
partnership medicators are
really good example other cases
agencies will apply for a
federal discretionary grant
sometimes we'll get a formula
grant like temporary assistance
for needy families which
provides cash assistance to very
low income individuals but
you've also got broad discretion
over how to use those federal
dollars for everything from
child care we used to use it for
pre k on visiting for idea of
different things so there's a
lot of different ways that money
from the federal government is
coming in and affecting the
state of of new mexico and we've
tried to total up all these
different pots of money and and
how they come in and the best
there's no single website that
makes that easy by the way to
had to search a lot of different
ones in and we estimate nearly
forty billion dollars comes into
the state through these
different mechanisms in entire
state when you consider that the
state's gdp is about a hundred
billion that's a a sizable chunk
of money that's
coming in and so you can see the
federal major major federal
entitlements and slate ten make
up the vast majority there's non
defense contracts
there are defense contracts this
doesn't include I don't think
like payroll for no it doesn't
include military wages and
salaries but you know the the
labs are you know major
contracts that come into this
state that national security and
other good things we're going to
uh visit sandia national labs
um.
When we go down to albuquerque
next month to see some of the
work that they're doing which is
very expensive
wages and salaries for federal
employees other grants and other
support services but.
Again through all of these.
Everything kind of pales in
comparison outside the big three
so the security medicare and
medicaid when it comes to what's
coming through and you can see
some more details and slide
eleven.
I'm kind of the impact of what's
coming into the the state just a
reminder on slide twelve again
the budget reconciliation
process this is where.
Congress is allowed itself to
sort of bypass and fast track
spending items for only
mandatory programs so that
except for social security.
They they can't do that by
passing the according to their
own law that they created they
can't do that by passing the the
senate's fill a buster rule.
But from medicare and medicaid
and all of those other mandatory
programs that are kind of on
auto pilot they can make changes
and by la to those in fast
tracket
through the the process there is
something that's really
important in the senate it's
called the bird rule former
senator bird traded pretty
complicated template they
basically said.
These policy changes have to be
tied to something fiscally
related to these mandatory
programs you can't go in and
raise the minimum wage and sort
of by pass what we would do
under a normal bill.
And so you're seeing causes
could be subject to a point of
order and then it to overturn a
point of order you need the
sixty votes in the set.
And so what's happening now is
the parliamentarian who's been
charged not an elected official
but
somebody that elected by the
body to sort of either the.
Uh unpier I and whether they're
following their own rules and
they have been that office has
been making decisions even just
this morning that some of their
provisions that they're trying
to to put in their budget
reconciliation don't comply with
that bird rule there's something
extremely us to the budget there
is a really big one that i'll
talk about that we just got news
of this morning
that are going to have
implications for them to be able
to push out the senate version
of this
next week so again the
advantages
slide thirteen the limited bate
you saw these voter romance that
are going to happen in the
senate where they can offer
amendments they're going to do
it in a truncated amount but
they're going to be going all
night he saw that in the house
where they were just go all the
item and and pass out the the
different
provisions of the bill that they
then consolidated into a package
and sent over the senate
and again in no file buster and.
The other thing that's important
as you're not supposed to
include annual discretionary
items in the budget
reconciliation process there's a
handful of pretty big ones that
are included in in this bill
right now and the biggest is the
defense uh spending increases
that the majority want to do
that should normally be part of
the appropriations process it'll
be interesting to see if anybody
raises a point of order on it
because when the current
minority party was in the
majority they ran through
appropriations theft and
normally wouldn't be part of
reconciliation and nobody raised
the point of order and now that
the majority of minority of
flipped the other party saying
we'll now we're going to do it
and that way we don't have to
get sixty votes when we do the
discretionary budget on big
increases on defense and the
kind of reductions that they
would like to see in some of
that discretionary.
At blank slides fourteen and
fifteen.
Just give you kind of big
picture differences and and
approaches that they originally
had for instructions to their
committees to develop their
various packages the senate
version is very different than
what you see here they ended up
with much bigger savings that
were going to little bit more
detail under boasts and areas
there's an expectation that they
would raise the debt limit which
is an allowable uh part of
budget reconciliation to four or
five trillion dollars that's
basically going to get them
through the next two years
because the annual deficit is
running at about almost two
trillion.
The kind of the other thing
about the budget reconciliation
when you hear numbers coming out
of washington and this is I
think confusing sometimes for
the public and others is when
they're throwing out numbers
they're using a ten year window
that they're trying to
estimate that they they need to
either get savings from or have
a increased cost recognized on
the books.
So when you see
an in some cases like the armed
services that's like a four year
window.
Sometimes there will be other
provisions that are don't kick
in until year five of their ten
year window and that's what the
house did they pushed out a
bunch of
projected reductions that
weren't necessarily reductions
from today's spending they were
reductions from tomorrow's
projected spending.
So that's even more confusing
because you put together a
budget what's the year over year
delta that the projected your
five.
Delta from these protect is
projected savings and so it's
kind of hard to tell what what
the true overall magnitude of
the cut would be to say medicaid
is at an eleven percent is that
equivalent to like thirteen
percent annually to medicaid or
if it's.
Back loaded.
Will that be twenty five percent
when we get to that point it's
it's difficult to kind of tease
out you know when we've looked
at it over a ten year window the
house is targets for medicaid
reductions total between eleven
and thirteen percent but by
pushing out kind of the the
bigger cuts into the out years
it could be a much larger
percentage reduction to spending
when we get to those points so
those are important things that
we're going to continue peeling
back to young year nine to come
up with a continued
car saving or cost estimates so
slight sixteen gets into the we
talked about what the house was
placed to do
in may
we've got some information on
what the senate is looking at
doing uh as of the end of last
week.
I raised the potential for snap
changes in the committee the
house and it ended up doing
pretty
big change in snap policy
that i'm very concerned about.
Uh one because there's near term
potential impact I said that the
federal government pays for a
hundred percent of the benefit
costs the proposal coming out of
the house was depending on how
you were how well your
administering.
The snap benefit program at the
state level they've got
performance metrics and one of
the key performance metrics they
have is called an error rate
where a state is either over
paying or underpaying.
What should be owed to the
individual under the under the
rules so that somebody is doing
some auditing saying you
calculated this slightly wrong
by five dollars doesn't tell you
if it's by a hundred dollars a
month but there is an error
there.
And our error rate was placed in
a in a tiered system where the
federal government see well
because your error rate is at
thirteen percent the state needs
to pony at twenty five percent
of the total cost of snap
benefits.
That would put us no by the way
we're going to make states pay
for seventy five percent of the
cost of administration up from
fifty percent.
That would have on our budget
probably in FY twenty seven if
you wanted to back fill all of
that and it was unclear like how
that would really work in the
house would we have to put up to
twenty five percent match would
you have a policy decision to
say while your benefits are just
reduced by twenty five percent.
Regardless of how the committee
feels about that is that a
policy option or not.
A very unclear but that would
cost well over three hundred and
twenty five three hundred and
thirty million dollars if you're
to back fill dollar for dollar
what that's looking like.
Is that affordable in our
current environment there's a
huge opportunity cost to spend
three hundred and thirty million
dollars for benefits that new
mexicans are getting today that
they would continue to get
tomorrow at no no change to the
individuals but change to your
budget change to what taxpayers
in mexico we're having to foot
for no net benefit increase for
those individuals on the program
so that one i'm very concerned
about the senator said they've
improved it that they've lowered
the cost maybe by a half or
third but still that's a major
change to social welfare policy
in the state that has frankly
thrown me for a loop because
i've never seen those kind of
proposals coming out i've never
seen that kind of pay for
performance hard pay for
performance kind of a policy
proposal from the federal
government that would tie that
much money.
In all different states I mean
there's a lot of big states that
are have majorities in their
legislature that is same as the
majorities and congress that
would get hit with a huge change
but that's in in a grand scheme
of things again it's like that
really closing that much of the
budget deficit
but it will have a big impact on
state so that ones out there uh.
I felt in may that we had dodged
a bullet in many ways on
medicaid policy they pushed out
some of the more challenging
policies or they didn't do them
like changing the matching
rates.
They still had some things that
would decrease the number of
people that are going to be
enrolled the increased what I
call the hassle factor how often
you have to reapply for
for being on medicaid planning
work requirements to able bodied
adults without kids that will
decrease the number of people on
expansion you don't have to work
very much to not qualify for
that they made it very very
difficult
in the senate version as well
for people to.
Work get more income move into
the health exchange and get
health care it's going to help
exchange we are going to project
will have fewer people on it
once the the provisions that
they've applied to the health
exchange they've narrowed when
you can come on they've
increased a lot of requirements
made it more difficult to
continue health care so we
expect helping exchange to
shrink um as well.
The house had said
there's a a mechanism that
states have been using uh where
providers are paying a specific
tax.
That's dedicated towards
bringing in medicaid revenue.
And the feds have had rules
around limitations for that like
you can only hold harmless up to
like a certain percentage of an
entities revenue you know they
don't want this to be kind of a
money laundering thing that's
costing the federal government a
lot and there's been concerns in
congress for years about these
kinds of taxes.
Uh we have two one is we've
instituted one for nursing homes
and you passed one just recently
for hospitals and a hospital one
is going to be significant
because it's going to provide a
major financial backstart
because you know our medicaid
population is so large.
Um to primarily rural hospitals
but also it's basically going to
help shore up our tire health
care system.
So in the house they said no new
ones starting in year acts I
can't remember the year but it
was it it was a couple of years
out.
And so that got savings because
the congressional budget office
had assumed that states would
continue to anact those types of
provider taxes it would continue
to have a growing impact on the
federal budget and by just
freezing that you'd save money
because it wouldn't grow as
fast.
In the senate they said no
not only can you not institute
new ones we're going to
accelerate the date when that
goes into effect and we're going
to start phasing out how much
you can do.
That would have a you know
basically cut the hospital
revenue almost and half of what
we're expecting.
You know from one point five
billion under about seven
hundred and fifty million
potentially over a multi year
period.
The senate also had a new
provision that kind of through
folks for a loop.
That said you know we've been
making a changes to how much
we're paying providers in our
state where we say we'll pay for
primary care providers not to be
at ninety percent of of medicare
but will pay it a hundred and
fifty percent behavioral health
infant maternal care
the administration previous
administration had approved that
hospital provider tax to pay
hospitals up to three hundred
percent of what medicare was
paying so basically at the
commercial market that way you
have your health care system
where you're not looking at your
panel a potential patience and
saying well i'm going to lose
money on forty percent of them
because that they're on
medicaid.
Oh maybe get cost on another
thirty percent of them in
medicare.
I've only got like ten percent
in commercial I can't squeeze
them anymore and then the other
folks are walking into my
hospital door and they're
uninsured and i'm just losing
money that's just doesn't the
math doesn't add up to that so
that's kind of the rationale for
having medicaid be a better
payer.
Went the provision in the senate
says is you can't do that
anymore.
You're gonna have to bring for
sure the hospital impatient and
outpatient rates down to what
medicare pays.
That would be a another big hit
the hospitals just barely got
this uh program up and running
with medicaid program payments
are starting to go out this last
quarter they've got approval for
the rest of the fiscal year to
go out
but that's a big unknown if
they're you know have a nice
influx of revenue that's helping
stabilize particular real
hospitals if that's going to be
abended in the next federal
fiscal year or or or not.
The healthcare authority brought
up
a concern and we're researching
this and i've got a meeting
request with our
senator hands office next week.
That they feel those
what are called upper payment
limits would also apply to other
types of services including the
investments that you made in a
primary care in fact maternal
and behavioral health and if
that's the case we're looking in
totality over multiear period
you've invested two point two
billion dollars and all funds.
In provider read increase
actually more than that that was
that it was excluding the
hospitals putting up their money
but for those other kinds of
services you put up about two
point two billion dollars that
would go away.
So that significant implications
for our health care system going
forward.
This morning the parliamentarian
apparently ruled that one
provision dealing with a feesing
out there are phasing down the
caps on the provider taxes was
dot your main to the bill will
see if that applies to the upper
payment limit the upper payment
limit is a bigger issue to me
on us being able to do that
policy that you've been acted uh
it's unclear right now if if
that was part of the parliament
to ruling or not so this is a
moving target will it pass next
week
will have another update for you
in july but those are some of
the big things that that we are
seeing
between the bills
so that's some more detail on
that on slight seventeen um.
Work requirements again pretty
similar except there were some
changes I think with expansion
of
a work requirements for people
who also have kids but they may
be older kids.
Um and you can see some of the
other changes and slide nineteen
one thing that's actually an
interesting policy that you know
could reduce our cost as well
is prohibiting pharmacy benefit
managers from using this
mechanism called spread pricing
basically we're were not
benefiting from the rebates that
they manufacturers are giving
through our health care programs
that's probably a good policy
all around that would receive
bipartisan support I think to
try to drive down a drug cost
for
nature states but even
individuals in in their
different markets.
Let's see
we've got a table showing the in
the house committee version on
slight twenty.
Again.
One of the details it's not in
this table is like when these
things would kick in so some of
these are going to save a little
bit of money for the state if
there's fewer people enrolled
and medicaid expansion will save
ten cents on the dollar the
federal governments can save
ninety cents on the dollar for
those individuals not being
enrolled what are the impacts of
having a higher uninsured
population on our health care
system as well as society those
aren't factored into any of
these estimates but again these
are also like.
Multi year impact so let's
assume that
the
energy committees in the house
their proposal of seven hundred
and eighty nine billion scored
over ten years that's seventy
eight billion.
That they would say if that
spread out evenly over the ten
years at seventy eight billion a
year.
Out of one of the biggest
entitlement programs that we
have.
Where we have a one point eight
trillion dollar deficit on an
annual basis I mean even these
things are seeming like once you
get the apples to apples
comparison it's like.
Yakes we've got a a big annual
problem and this ten year
solution that there's big
numbers coming out in the media
for us.
Actually or not that.
Big I mean that can slice two
ways when you can say what's the
big deal uh but you can also say
like when you get into the
details I mean it does have an
impact you know on individuals
and and states.
So slight twenty one again i've
talked about this uh the one
thing that didn't show up that
we were a little bit worried
about are the last bullet any
effect changes there is a
provision that is proposed out
there that if states are
providing health care benefits
to immigrants that wouldn't
otherwise qualify for benefits
anywhere else I mean legal
residents can qualify for public
assistance after a five year
window of when they had their
status uh implemented.
But if you're not documented
there are some states that are
using their health care system
in the states paying a hundred
percent of the cost for their
health care.
Congress is proposing to dark
federal medicaid
matching rates by ten percent
for states that are providing
that kind of assistance even
though it's coming at a hundred
percent of state cost.
Uh we have a program you heard
just yesterday through the each
call that you would authorize to
implement that it hasn't been
implemented yet we are concerned
on how the feds would view that
even though it's totally
separate from the medicaid
system.
Whether they would say whether
they were docus ten percent that
would be a huge.
I mean that that's a really big
policy change on the part of the
federal government to say a
states policy affecting somebody
not on medicaid would affect
your medicaid.
The other thing is.
Congress proposals are treating
states that have enacted
medicaid expansion versus states
that have not handful of states
that have not inactive medicaid
expansion differently.
So in some cases they're saying
if you
expanded medicaid under the
affordable care act then your
upper payment limit goes to a
hundred percent of medicare.
If you didn't expand medicaid
then you can pay ten percent
more than medicare at a hundred
and ten percent.
So depending on what policy
choices states made congress is
saying we're going to either you
can take it as a penalty or
benefit depending on what those
policy choices are interesting
to see how the app plays out
again with the parliamentary
ruling that is a very different.
A policy strategy that we've
seen out of the federal
government ever before um.
The thing that I would like for
us to start looking at more as
it as a committee uh there's
this is not going away but the
the idea of trying to restrain.
Spending growth on a per person
basis over time.
And so you've got the expansion
population you've got elderly
you've got disabled you've got
kids who were very inexpensive
to cover you've got a parents
there's different categories and
groups and congress was looking
at basically trying to come up
with some growth caps like let's
try not to increase spending on
these certain populations by
three to five percent or
whatever they are.
It's an efficiency metric that
is not bad to look at that
whether you want to restrict and
understand what's driving that
growth is it because people are
getting more and better care
that's resulting in uh because
the primary care visits
resulting unless e r and other
kinds of things that we could
have been at fifteen percent
rails rather than seven but it
it's a good matter to look at we
look at it in dd waiver where
the per person cost have gone
from seventy five thousand to a
hundred and fourteen thousand
some of that is policy driven by
the stay where we said we want
to increase how much we're
paying providers.
Others is because people are
using more and expensive
services some are using services
at a much higher level of care
than we had anticipated not
saying that on its face it's bad
but we have to ask what's going
on there and have a deeper
understanding of it and I think
having a regular look at those
metrics would help her says that
committee and it legislature to
continue to do deep dive on how
do we appropriately constrain
spending in health care which is
a you know very expensive but
still make sure that people who
need it get the services that
they need at the right time and
annan affair price that um
uh results in good outcomes for
the state more detail on the
fiscal impact on slide twenty
two and twenty three for snap.
Same thing with the
twenty four has got more detail
for what the house committee
had.
In terms of other other
different provisions and cr-
including reinstating work
requirements that were in place
before the pandemic expanding
them to more individuals instead
of uh telling individuals about
like say fifty five they don't
have to work well you got to
work up until sixty four in
order to get your snap benefits
a certain amount or participate
in some other kind of related
activity.
So in closing mr chairman on
slight twenty five.
Budget reconciliation's
different in the annual
appropriations process this is
supposed to be dealing with the
mandatory spending that's where
the big ticket items are they're
dealing at ten year windows when
things kick in you know
increases or decreases the cost
of their their package
uh that fast track legislation
doesn't need a super majority in
the senate just needs a majority
vote they can't touch social
security through that.
That process.
Favor spending.
And this is what's kind of
playing out right now.
Is
the.
Tax provisions that were putting
in place for twenty sixteen had
a sunset day and they put a
sunset day.
Uh at you know for next year.
Because scoring the cost of that
over the fourteen year window or
making a permanent would be
would have made their their tax
package too expensive.
And so it was less expensive to
sort of sunset it and then come
back and revisit it and and if
you're in the majority van you
hope you're in the majority
again with
your majority partner in the
white house and then have
discussions about making it
permanent.
But having what's weird is like
those are already in place and
they've been in place from
twenty seventeen until now
but the way it set up it's set
up to say well this is going to
cost money because we by law
expect that revenue to come back
into the treasury and close that
one point nine trillion dollar
deficit and so there's that
there's been
in the house they want to score
it that way and recognize that
yeah there's a cost.
To us ability being able to
close that one point nine
trillion dollar annual deficit.
And needing to take out debt and
they want to focus in the house
on bringing down spending more
in line with what those revenues
are in the senate they just want
to ignore it.
And say it doesn't actually cost
money because we are it's
already on the books.
And so that's the kind of AAA
big difference between what's
going on at the level the annual
deficits are not going to be
solved by this budget
reconciliation it won't be
solved through the annual
appropriations process.
Because your big spending items
are in mandatory spending and
their big three ones and so
eliminating head start is
proposed in the in the the
president's budget eliminating
you know I was just thinking the
other day if they eliminated
work force investment act job
training program that's a twenty
five million dollars federal
grant that most people don't
know of the vast majority of new
mexicans you get job training or
go to work don't participate in.
It would be you know difficult
for the individuals that are
part of that program but in the
grand scheme of things it's not
having a big effect on our
economy it would if it went away
but you've already started a
program that we heard about
yesterday at twenty million
dollars a year for the next
three years to get people
certificates in an employee
quickly outside of that entire
federal program without any of
the federal regulations.
The.
So you're going to hear a lot of
discussion for
budget proposals that are not
even started in the
appropriations process for
things going away or being cut
dramatically we have to wait to
see if those are going to happen
before you may kind of back
filling discussions and I think
it's a committee when we get
into the budget guidelines
that you're on a create kind of
a framework of do you want to
automatically back fill some of
these things or do you want
analysts to view them as
you need to justify your general
funding appropriation just the
same as if you are coming in
asking for a general fund as a
as a new program.
You know performance research
evidence those types of things
so that's going to be an an
important thing once we know a
little bit more about
reconciliation and what kind of
changes were looking at a bunch
of it's not going to hit the
next budget cycle is going to be
outside of that uh some of it
may move into it but we don't
know right now but then once we
get into the appropriations
process what are they really
going to be able to to muster
with sixty votes in the senate
in terms of changes to annual
appropriations for again like
work force investment act kind
of programs so with that mister
chairman that's a lot before you
get on the road to think about
but i'd be happy and answering
questions excellent thank you
very much director silly will go
straight to questions.
Thank you all mister chairman
enough thank you charles.
You're right it's a lot
and it gives us a lot of to look
at
all I guess were or i'm looking
at a senate all the different
parts that you mentioned.
And then in some cases within
our state.
Were at the crisis mold you know
for example housing.
And so if we push more just give
you an example say.
See like section eight.
And then that forces more
homeless
more you know so
I really don't have though the
right question mister chairman
bed I guess we would have to be
here in a position for back
filling.
I think mr chairman when it
comes to annual discretionary
spinning which that would be a a
good example for some of those
housing
programs I have expectation of
at best flat.
For the next federal fiscal year
and remember the federal
government has not been able to
pass a budget in time.
You know maybe twice in the past
twenty years you know so they'll
potentially and I haven't
started yet they're supposed to
have everything wrapped up by
september for an october first
start of the federal fiscal
year.
They just barely got the
president's skinny budget
proposal.
So you could be looking at
canada continuing resolution
that freezes whatever level they
had agreed to and the current
fiscal year and it got foreign
basis does that meet the need.
Of communities that are changing
while budgets are flat.
Probably not but a bigger
question that i'm kind of
raising is are these federal
programs.
At a scale that it's impacting
a big outcomes that you care
about is a committee do we have
state programs that are at scale
that are moving the needle on
that kind of the statewide.
Outcomes that you care about.
And if we're tinkering around
the margins then maybe we want
to have that discussion about
what would it take in order to
move the needle on
folks that we see in our street
corners that desperately need
assistance and how do we get
them to help that they need.
Mr chairman of thank you charles
all
your idea this is a lot to look
at too but I guess what i'm
seeing is also one
say another example say like
with our education program that
we just heard yesterday they
before of all going into that.
Big increase that we have had on
k twelve.
So does that mean that.
As a state we will move to have
you know see that as a flat
budget.
So mrperiod chair that's a
really good example of where as
a society we have scaled you
know to.
Almost three hundred thousand
kids its universal for everybody
and you've pumped in a seventy
percent increase over the past
couple of years and are seeing
some metrics move in a direction
that you want to see but at the
same time.
Maybe not as as income is right
with the amount of investment
that you've made this is a
really good example as well
where.
You may have the tail wagon the
dog where the federal government
is giving us
I think around eighty five
million dollars a year for a
special education services and
in our funding formula we're
probably spending close to eight
hundred million.
And the regulatory framework
that comes with at eighty five
is pretty significant and is it
really benefiting kids is at
moving the needle for special
education and that same thing
for at risk where you've pumped
out up to over four hundred
million and we get about a
hundred and ten hundred and
fifteen million for title one.
Like if title one took a ten
percent clip would you need to
back fill that when school
districts have seven hundred
million those are going to be
the kind of things that will be
looking at once we know whether
the federal government's going
to make changes to those if it's
flat you know maybe not.
Well mister criminal the less
part is so I guess i'm looking
at.
You know if you're looking at
all fifty states.
And they'll say i'm just giving
an ill you know just thinking
out loud.
Say that for whatever reasons we
were be able to back feel say
maybe ten of this initiatives.
Could they come back and see
your only medicine doesn't need
it.
You know.
The following ear you know they
can they can fund themselves so
I mean the union I think they'll
start a lot of things we have to
look at.
You know is
might come to us like.
You know it's we go forward you
know what can we afford.
Thank you and thank you
challenges it is a lot of
information very very good thank
you
thank you very much
nexus senator hew.
Thank you mister chair think you
charles for this presentation it
is a little daunting
and a lot of information to
leave I I think I just want to
point out that the difference
between like title one
and those kinds of other
services that we get money from
I agree there's a lot of strings
that are attached to that and I
sometimes wonder whether it's
worth it or not
but special ad is the last it's
the law the land and even if we
don't get federal funding
parents unchildren still have
rights and they're still going
to be lawsuits if special ad
students are not provided the
federally mandated services that
they require so that's a little
bit different than some of these
other programs at a I would like
to hear because they didn't see
in here like what are
individual schools looking at a
loss of that money and will it
impact albuquerque santa fe lots
cruises farmington more than it
does jaw and clovis and carls
bad or is that the other way
around are those smaller
districts going to be impacted
more
mr chair senator.
Those programs
aren't part of the budget
reconciliation process so you
don't have
not as concerned about that
there could be some smaller
nutritional programs that may go
to schools that are getting
caught up in it that we haven't
gotten to that level of a detail
but those would be things too
that we would be watching for
through the annual
appropriations process if
there's going to be changes and
again.
You know a ten percent clip to
some of them we can run that
analysis of what that would mean
cause again your spreading
eighty six million.
Across three hundred thousand
students in two hundred
different school entities and it
starts getting real small real
fast and so maybe it's not as
big of a hit.
As it gets distributed out
in the grand scheme of things
thank you mister chairman
charles so on this on page
sixteen it indicates that the
snap changes for the fifty five
to twenty five percent and then
the reduction down I think you
said to fifty percent instead of
seventy five it indicates that
it would start in fiscal year
twenty eight is that october of
twenty seven so we've got a
little bit of time to go to work
through that wouldn't be
necessarily a special session
correct and I might in that seem
like
things in either proposal.
That way give me alarm that
we're gonna need to do something
like this I haven't seen that
that was in the fact most of it
is not even showing up in this
budget cycle.
And some of it well the vast
majority of coming out of the
house is showing up in budget
cycles two or three years down
the road and again it's like
well the state's going to
probably ask for the agencies
may ask for more money for
administration in order to check
people's eligibility more
frequently in get ready for it I
would anticipate that but the
big dollar amounts of fewer
people are medicaid you know
it's not even going to be an
action you're going to need to
take in the budget it's going to
be will recognize the potential
for lower enrollment and lower
our general fund.
Figure.
Uh and figure out what you want
to do with with the balance to
make sure people have health
care thank you mister chairman
so I was a little confused about
why does the federal government
care if we have fifty percent of
the actual cost is because they
match that.
Gotcha yes particularly for
medicaid expansion think about
the federal government is paying
ninety percent of the cost for
able biting the dogs without
kids they're paying here maybe
seventy two percent of the costs
for people and development
disabilities are there elderly
and interesting and so that's
kind of their the majority is
thinking and congress is like
but I should repay so much and
then to pay that much more about
what they're paying in in
medicare
mister chairman draws it almost
sounds like maybe the thought
was to try to level out expenses
from state to stay and i'm not
really sure where they think the
savings are going to be but is
there that thinking that it
would then make the cost of
health care across the country.
More even and doctors won't go
from one state to another is
there any benefit there well
the.
The previous administration had
issued a new rule.
Increasing what's called the
upper payment limit.
To try to help use medicaid
financing to stabilize and
improve the health care system
particularly coming out of
covered.
As a as a administrative matter
so it wasn't something congress
that taken up
the projected out year cost are
pretty significant because the
feds are assuming that states
like new mexico are going to
take advantage of that and so we
are just barely ramping up are
there other states that are
bigger more costly to the
federal government like a
michigan california starts doing
it texas unlikely florida likely
new york potentially likely you
know that dacken start having an
even reimbursement policies
across the state and you can
make an argument for evening
about but states have very
different.
Enrollment levels of their
population in medicaid as well
they're their whole mix of
payers is very very different
and you know it's something i've
been
as a policy near kind of concern
we're not having like a more
discussion about how to.
Some of the deep deep seated
policy issues it's sort of like
all the coverage is on horse
trading and what the the process
is in that and the latest but
these are you know health care
is expensive in a increasing the
rates that high or accelerating
that expense and that's why we
have that legislat to say okay
we're putting in a lot more
money into our health care
system are people is our network
increasing our people able to
get doctors is that helping
decrease other costs in the
system because you're able to
get primary care not delay it
end up with more expensive care
those are the kinds of questions
we're tearing up
to to see if we're getting a
good bank for the but because
it's costing state government
money as well
mister chairman charles so on
the page twenty three the
elimination of snap nutrition
education is that going to hurt
programs like cooking with kids
as it can hurt our food banks
you indicated that there could
be some impact summer in school
programs what about like farmers
market doesn't that money help
funds some of those programs
I need to look into more detail
mr chairman senator estimate is
it's like three point six
million dollars and I think this
was a a new thing that had been
started under the previous
administration I I think that
the case and still was like
something new that just came on
board and they're like well
that's get rid of that and so
but I will figure out who it
might impact but a grand scheme
of things small dollar amount
thank you mr chairman I will
just say I have the opportunity
to meet with legislators from
around the country a couple of
weeks ago and alba kurki on the
subject of early education and
new mexico was really in a good
position most other states are
budget deficit just on their own
in their own rates right there
already washington state is
cutting their budget I mean you
just look around the country and
we're in a.
Much better position and have
been four years now because of
the work that this committee
particularly is done so you know
III just think we're in a much
better sheep than most states
are because of the way that
we've been invested our excess
money into funds that then help
us pay for these things so I
know it's really dire but I
think we need to remember that
we're not in his battery shape
as other states thank you
well said thank you very much I
don't see any other questions
directorously thank you for the
update
one of the big takeaways from
this meeting is very much the
focus on upper
provider limits that could be a
a very negative essentially pay
cut to all of our health care
professionals in the state and
as we've seen
it something on the order of
over almost twenty five hundred
new health care professionals
have signed up for medicaid in
the last year twelve months
you know largely are likely
connected to our ability to
increase those reimbursements so
this is something we definitely
have to keep an eye on wrestler
with in a big thing's director
silly for your work in your
staff's work on uh tracking this
in where we look forward to alva
kirky uhm.
You know it's likely that we'll
know many answers although not
all into the point of the upper
provider limit we heard
yesterday and appreciate going
through the research that that
may be sort of at risk by agency
rule and not sort of as tied to
the reconciliation build that
we're all focused on now thank
you very much
helen will turn over to you
thank you very much and this
will be our final presentation
members on the report codes and
just real quick mister chairman
on a related item in in your tab
why I would take this with you
usually we don't get started on
a budget gain lines this early
but we have a cover sheet on
items that we just wanted to
raise for the committee to start
thinking about do you want to us
to incorporate these types of
things and it go forward basis
the copy of the budget
guidelines that are in here
where last summer's budget
guidelines so no changes this is
just sort of previewing do you
what kinds of direction do you
want to start contemplating as
we get into july and then
adopting them in august mister
chairman thank you.
Good afternoon i'm helen
gosforward i'm an analyst for
lfc
today I am presenting the report
cards that is at tab n in your
binders I want to start out not
on the report cards exactly but
on a new idea a new feature of
report cards that we've been
working on and that is
dashboards that are online um
you will see and for report
cards that there are codes and
if you point your phone at the
code it will bring up a I data
sheet that will provide you with
more data than we've been
providing with you routinely on
the hard copies but it also
allows us to reduce the size of
the hard property for those
docket for those agencies to one
page which means you will know
you should no longer get a
daunting eighty five page report
card report but i'm something
that's a little easier to get
through
as part of your hearings
the
overall we see on the report
cards that we didn't really see
a lot of change between the
second and the third quarters
and that was also true between
the first and second quarters
that means that for the agencies
that are doing well tourists on
transportation the course in
judiciary it's agencies they are
continuing to do well but that
also means that the agencies
that were not doing well from
the very start of the year are
still not doing very well i'm in
a jump you over to page six this
is where we do a table that
shows you the ups and downs from
a quarter as you can see there
isn't a lot of movement there is
however fifty six of the sixty
seven that we measures we track
quarterly or either yellow or
green and that's a pretty good
sign the yellows more there are
more yellows than greens but
that does mean that they're very
close to meeting the measure
that meeting the target and so
that's that's a pretty good sign
for us
on page seven the public
education department.
This is a limited amount of
information because they are an
annually reporting agency so
this the important information
on student performance is not
here but we do take every
quarter a chance to point out
something in this case we talked
about graduation rates being
the best they've been in fifteen
years but also slightly out of
alignment with academic
performance which may be an
indication that the academic
performance at the academic
standards are not quite well
aligned with the graduation
rates also notable in the public
education department is that the
did not conduct any audits of
district or charter schools
related to funding formulas and
program compliance it is
important given the independence
of the school districts that we
keep that their department keep
track and and so that is for us
signal of
that's a troubling signal higher
education institutions are also
like public schools mostly on an
annual basis but it is notable
that but notable item out of
this report is that the uh
you have done an immense amount
of work making college
affordable in the state but our
retention rates are still very
close to what they were in two
thousand nineteen before the
bank inflects that as a
suggestion that tuition is not
the primary is not the only
barrier to to staying in school
and it's something that you
might want to look at in the
future
I know the early childhood
education and care department
which is on page twelve we are
starting to see better
performance on medicaid funded
home visiting the they are still
not hitting the target but they
are doing better every quarter
in so we're hopeful that maybe
we're gonna start seeing some
performed better performance
there soon.
The also in the early childhood
education and care department
however is that we are start
that we there's a measure under.
Early education care nutrition
having to do with how many of
our students in child care
assistance are
above or below a hundred and
twenty five percent of poverty
level because they do let in
families up to a fairly high
income level we are seeing that
forty percent which is them
missing their target and also
sign that you have sixty percent
that are above that target that
low poverty level and that may
not be the exact audience that
you want to target with
subsidized child care
in children you can families
department which is on page
sixteen i'm not going to spend a
lot of time on this or health
care authority cause you spent a
lot of time talking about them
yesterday but I do want to point
it out that they are doing that
the juvenile justice program is
a little bit out of the norm for
them they are doing well
performing well and even of just
the services whereas they don't
really perform very well in
their other areas specifically
on residentials and rates for
youth just charged from active
filled supervision and user by
the um and you've just charged
from secure facilities the
research of us and rates on
those two are.
I did the math on this and now
i'm not going to be able to do
it quickly in my head
fewer than eighty seven percent
return and and the other number
is seventy six percent do not
return and that is a really good
sign that those programs are
getting kids on the right track
on healthcare authority I just
uh i've just want to point out
in the isp there is a concern
because snap currently has a
fourteen percent error rate and
in the house approved federal
reconciliation bill which
charles was just talking about
that could um force us to
responsible for carrying two
hundred and eighty eight million
additional costs for snap.
The.
In behave your health which is
on page twenty five the the
what's notable is that we have
had a massive investment but we
are not seeing a lot of change
yet there is a lot of parts
moving right now in behavior
health with the creation of the
executive committee and with the
money just coming into the
system so we're still hoping
that we're going to see some
changes there in the department
of health on page twenty seven
we're seeing the mixed results
but um
about demealogy and response
program is not
doing great distance is a
program that's primarily focused
on improving health status and
so it's worth keeping an eye on
that we're going to jump forward
to.
Page thirty three which is the
economic development department
and uh of concern in this agency
is that they are seeing we are
seeing a red program reports for
job creation and film and the
reason why these are
particularly concerning is
because these have formed the
did perform well in twenty four
twenty th I mean i'm sorry in
twenty three and twenty four and
so that is the fact that they
were seeing a decline that in
those programs um means that we
need to pay more attention I do
wanna just take one second here
to point out that reds don't
need a program as failing
necessary and it's we don't see
it as this program house failed
we see it as a red flag because
it just tells us that they're
not missing that they're missing
the target and while they might
be missing the target it might
be that the program isn't funded
properly or that it's a good
program that is not being
implemented properly so it tells
us we need to look at it it
doesn't necessarily we're not
trying to say that the agency is
failing although obviously an
agency that has auto reds has um
problems that need to be
addressed
in the department of public
safety that you'll see that
there aren't a lot of readings
and that is because they are
primarily inexplanator in agency
that uses a lot of explanatory
agencies and we do not set
targets for explanatory account
which means that it's a very
hard for us to see whether or
not they're going up or down but
I will point out that in under
investigations they are trending
above them of above last year
for percent of total crime
scenes processed further law
enforcement agencies which is a
good sign and they're also
turning just slightly up on
their vacancy rate which is a
bad
time
their crime report we always
track whether or not they have
a concease other police agencies
involved in our neighbors that's
the new crime database that the
fbi put together and with the
organic closer to being able to
make that data reliable.
Are the forensic library has to
uh troubling performance
indicators one has to do with
the percent of reds of case per
completed and one has to do with
the number of sexual assault
examination kits completed with
a hundred and eighty days and
they are starting to build up a
backlog in those programs again
i'm gonna jump all the way to
page
fifty eight further where the
environment department is and
that is because for the most
part the natural resources
agencies are doing well but
environ department is not among
those that's doing well despite
your huge investments in that
program after the last few years
of particular note is that under
the environmental protection
program they are in the red
particular for
primarily because of their
inspections of immediating
sources of pollution resource
protection is also when the red
because of the failure to
inspect enough
petroleum storage tanks.
General services the department
in which is on page sixty one I
want to point out that they're
the liability fund is still
struggling
that that's been discussed with
you in the past
they also were a little bit
behind in the purchasing
division this year in terms of
getting
invitations to bear the words
were not put out as quickly as
they should be done and i'm in a
stock there because all of us
want to get home I will point
out that emily is still here if
you have any questions about the
IT report cards and I am in very
back you will see the
investments report and of
interest to me as that over over
time we usually complain about
the funds under performing their
peers because they have risk of
investments but that has now
been a positive for us because
of the performance of the stock
market and with that i'm
available for questions great
thank you very much miss goes
water I don't
quite question great reps
senator hill thank you mr german
for this information so on page
one you indicated that you
thought the recitivism rate for
juveniles was somewhere in the
eighty to eight eighty nine
percent
yeah yeah yeah no III I non
residential I will just say like
I question that I I think a lot
of our are kids that are
probably being counted are you
now so my question is what's the
residentism rate of those kids
who end up in our prisons or or
jails I think we need to know
that information to know whether
or not even i'll justice is
actually doing a good job
and that that's harder to get
because those those names and
numbers are confidential and I
don't know if we can actually
get it but.
My I also do not know but I will
pass on the message to the
children youth and families ms
analyst um as you know we're
getting carly malone who was
with us in the past is coming
back and we're looking forward
to her being there well rachel
can transitions over to program
evaluation thank you thank you
mister thank you senator you
represent little.
The.
Thank you mister chair quick
question on the deperman of
public safety page forty two.
Uh if you're able to am looking
at the forensics laboratory
the number of sexual assault
examination kits not completed
within the one eighty days of
receipt of the kids can't is it
possible previewed provider.
Reason
the background on this and if
not direct me to directors to
mister chairman who might be
able to provide this
information.
Ah.
I don't know that answered the
only way that I look at looking
at the explanation from the
analyst it just says that it's a
it's a troubling trend about we
will i'm looking to it for you.
Thank you thank you so much with
the amount of many that were
trying to put towards to do this
to bring justice to those
individuals who have victims um
this is um troubling to me
so I would really appreciate a.
Some information about that
think mister chair thank you
very much for
have some duck
thank you mister chair just one
quick question economic
development you said they were
in the red on job creations was
with the film industry it was an
overall the film the film
industry in particular is
struggling right now and there
isn't an explanation for it just
that after having basically
recovered from the pandemic and
the strikes the numbers have
started to go back thank you
thinking
thank you very much
for you I don't see any other
questions
thank you miscos watch
whirl
yep we'll look forward to this
and also appreciate a note that
much of this information is
being made more accessible
online in various fashions so as
we go through the summer they'll
be more ways to access it to
share it and and for us to diven
okay members I do say that at a
reminder me yesterday and it is
a practice where we like to do
public comment as folks have to
head out we totally understand
this will be on the record we eh
in the house we do public
comment for up to two minutes so
raise your hand if you're here
and you'd like to give public
comment.
Okay great please come on up
you'll want to press the button
the right hand button that'll
put the microphone on and then
will ask the director to start
the two minute timer and please
go ahead
thank you my first time doing
this on a little nervous
but I my name is penny holland I
have helped in towards county
for the last three and a half
years to organize the towers
county community school
coalition similar to abc and
last crucials
that partnership to coronate
community schools for long term
sustainability i'm also a
traumatherapist for the last
twenty five years and worked in
the schools and a school based
health center in some arm south
valley available so this is a an
issue that's near and dear to my
heart i'm actually have been
volunteering because i'm mostly
retired i'm sure today because
i'm very concerned about the
cuts to community schools
funding that has happened over
the last couple of years or the
dilution of it by making it one
of a category of multiple seg
funds which puts world community
schools in a bind because they
have to choose between important
educational
supports that they may need for
their kids and split it with a
community school coordinator or
they've got community school
coordinators who are doing maybe
two three jobs which is against
all the protocols not to mention
it violates the act that was
passed here in new mexico many
years ago so make my concern is
that a promise had been made
initially that there would be a
a one first year implementation
grant and then at least three
years possibly four years i'm
sorry a first year planning
grant and then a 3-4 year
implementation grades of a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars per school assuming
people are meeting their
deliverable as best they can
this began during covered so
things were already being done
somewhere with someone
difficulty and also a lot of
creativity and yet there is
still some.
Really good success but
two years into it for some of
our implementation grants that
money started to get cut and
half which meant that the
foundational work that needed to
be laid to really make these
programs successful just it is
not realistic and and we've and
a lot of our schools have really
struggled to provide the kinds
of services the programming to
implement the strategy according
to fidelity so that we could
actually see the kinds of
results that research across
this country of shown it happens
when you implement the school
strategy I have a couple copies
here that i'm happy to share
talking about the reduction of
chronic absenteeism from
community schools as well as
other important
benefits that are kids and
families receive so I think like
two minutes is price close to
being up but thank you thank you
for your time please reconsider
full funding of the community
schools
thank you very much miss
well as staff to grab them
deputy director courtney will
grab them
and and direct sleeve confirmed
no share with the committee okay
that concludes our meeting
members thank you so much for a
lot of hard work thank you
against are going to sauce for a
very special time here in tales
