Testing, testing, 1234.
Visitors, testing tests.
All right, we're back. Uh,
Tracy.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Speaker, I'm, I'm wondering,
um,
I have one specific suggestion
and uh you can take that under
advisement since you're going to
do that with other.
ideas and that would be on um
page 3.
Subsection D.
The last, um,
The, the, the red line sentence,
a legislative employee shall
resign upon being elected to a
partisan political office, I
would suggest that you consider
changing that to sworn in.
Because the election occurs at a
certain time and then they
actual taking office may occur
on more than 2 months later. And
um so that
Um, I, I just think that that's
only where the conflict would
arise at that point, so.
And I then, Mr. Speaker, I also
wondered if the changes that you
made, um, I had suggested that
we look at the state personnel
Act.
For the um judiciary personnel,
um, practices or even the
federal um
Uh, the hatch act with relate
with um as it relates to
congressional employees. Did you
make changes on those bases.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chasey, uh, so
the original policy was largely
based on what is already
existent for other state
employees and also federal
executive employees, uh, to the
best of my knowledge, the Hatch
Act um does only apply to
executive level, um, but the
court cases that have
interpreted such pro uh
executive branch I should say at
the federal level. Um, but court
cases that have interpreted uh
such prohibitions, uh, for the
executive branch, essentially,
um, leave the
discretion to the branch itself
to determine the contours. So
while the working group believes
that these are kind of best
practices to put forth for your,
your consideration, really the
legislative branch has the
authority to um construct these
restrictions as, as it sees fit.
So thank you very much for that
and um Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker,
um, and, and, um, this case
here, I guess I think that we
should not be overly
prescriptive, um, elected
officials who've been elected by
thousands of their constituents
and, um, while you might make
them aware of what the patch
access with regard to executive
employees, um, I, I, I just
don't think we should be
prescribing as um
Restrictively as we are. Thank
you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you.
Uh, Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I'm
curious, I mean,
On D
It it says that, but then on
I
Uh
Not the new eye, the old eye,
which is kind of confusing. Uh,
it says or attending events and
support or opposition of a
particular candidate, ballot, or
party issue. So if they are
running for a.
Artisan political office.
It's kind of contradictory.
And I wonder if it shouldn't be.
As soon as they decide to run
for the office.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, um, this will be
while somebody's on duty. So if
they were running for the
office, they would be on a leave
of absence. So I think that
would take care of that
contradiction, because they
technically would not be on
duty, um, as they are running.
or C Lopez.
Um, it's
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
This is just, um, I was thinking
through what it means to receive
uncompensated volunteer
services.
From a legislative employee
who's a subordinate. Sometimes
people go out and walk precincts
for a group of people.
Um, and so you might be, there
might be somebody that you're
not aware of who is who is
spreading your literature, and
so you you're sort of
unintentionally receiving
volunteer services. The other
two things solicit requires you
to do, you know, to be aware and
accepting requires you to be
aware, but this receiving you
might not always be aware. Um,
so,
I guess I would suggest either
taking out receiving.
Or maybe putting in
unintentionally receiving.
You know, just to make that
clear, like if, if somebody's
doing a whole walk for a slate
of candidates, and you weren't
aware that some subordinate was
also participating.
I, I, you know, I just be uh.
I just think that that you
shouldn't be punished for
something you're not aware of.
If I may, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Sadia Lopez, um, so subE would
not apply to a legislator vis a
vis their district legislative
aid, um, because the legislature
is not a legislative employee,
so this really would be limited
to that. I, I don't know if that
would alleviate your concern,
but this person had become a
candidate. This is what I'm
thinking too. They decided to
run. They took a leave of
absence, and then they're part
of a slate.
And somebody's who
Well, I guess they wouldn't now
be a subordinate, but somebody
who had reported them before.
Would it be clear that this
would not apply to them? Yeah.
Mr. Center City Lopez, I would
offer that this provision really
is to um prevent against an an
abuse of power between a manager
and a subordinate. And so if
that, um,
Manager was somehow receiving
unintentionally receiving
volunteer services. I think
that, um,
That pressure uh is not existent
in that situation.
That would, that would be my
suggestion.
I, I agree, but the language
there isn't clear. I mean, I, I
agree that that's how it should
be interpreted.
Absolutely agree with that.
I'm done. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Uh thank you, um, Mr. Speaker.
Um, also, if you look under
I think this is an actual contra
uh contradiction.
If you look at the new G letter
I.
It says in the G, um the last
sentence of the initial
statement there shall not at any
time.
Under eye it says distribute
flyers printed by a candidate's
campaign committee, political
party, so if they're running for
office,
You're gonna assume they're
distributing campaign.
paraphernalia or
And that, and it states there at
any time, that's not just on
duty.
So I, I think there's some other
Potential contradictions.
In the document.
Yeah probably need to be
addressed.
Right?
Um
His kids were taking diligent
notes over there, um, seeing no
more comments. We'll move on to
the next agenda item.
Use of capital policy.
Take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the council also in your uh
folder is a proposed a proposal
for you to consider regarding uh
the legislative space policy,
which is policy 12, Legislative
Council Policy 12.
Um, the reason we are bringing
or I am bringing this uh
recommendation to you today is
twofold. As you're likely aware,
uh, during session, groups, uh,
individuals, community members,
constituents can uh reserve
spaces in the rotunda and the
halls of History to do tabling.
Um, there's also various, uh,
events that happen in those
spaces. Under current practice,
uh, the day after Labor Day at
midnight, this reservation
system opens, and, uh, members
of the public can call it.
to building services and
reserve, uh, those spaces. There
are 24 spaces available, um,
often one single group will
reserve all 24 of them, um, but
come the day that they have
reserved the tabling use will
not use all 24 of them, they may
use a handful of those spaces.
So in the meantime, while
they've reserved all of them,
other members of the public have
been denied an opportunity to
similarly reserve these spaces.
So there is a proposal in here,
um.
I hope you have found it. The
new language is highlighted, um,
and it clarifies that space may
be reserved for use by members
of the public that are attended
in the halls of History, subject
to approval legislative building
services, which is current, um,
implemented policy. He goes on
to say a single person or
organization may not reserve all
available space in the Rotunda
or halls of history during
session.
Now the last sentence here that
I'm going to give a little
background on, um, but the
sentences, members of the public
may not sell items or otherwise
use reserve spaces in the
rotunda or halls of history, or
private pecuniary gain. Um, it
recently came to our attention
that uh a group that has
reserved all the spaces and the
rotunda and halls of history,
um, is using these spaces as a
fundraising mechanism for their
group. And so they are
essentially offering to other
members of the public, the, the
ability to use one of these
reserve spaces in the rotunda,
if the member of the
Provides a donation to their
group. And the donation amounts,
um, are $300 some dollars up to
$1000. And this came to our
attention because another
individual, um came to building
services and asked if they could
reserve a table in the rotunda.
This group had already reserved
all of them, so building
services recommended that this
constituent go to the group and
see if the group would be
willing to give them one of the
tabling spaces, and the group
advises this constituents that
they would do so.
If the constituent donated money
to the organization.
So we believe this is
problematic on a number of
levels. Um, I really have no
idea what the um scope of this
issue is, um, apparently the
group has been doing this for a
number of years, unbeknownst to
um building services or the
council service.
Um, but we believe there is
definitely an anti-donation
clause, um,
Problem here uh with a group,
um.
earning income off of public
space without consideration
being given back to the state.
Um, they're also obviously
fairness concerns, um, that, you
know, space that is freely
available for all members of the
public is now being used to um
fundraise for a particular
organization, um, to the
detriment of other individuals
in the public that might want to
also um use that tabling space.
So, in order to kind of clear
this prohibition, it's already,
um, within, um, building
services policy.
that is given to the public that
you can't sell items and make
money off the space. And this
additional sentence is intended
to make clear that a group
cannot um realize a private
pecuniary gain from the use of
these reserve spaces in the
rotunda.
And halls of history. So with
that, I stand for questions.
Representative Zansky. It was
not me, OK
Promise. That's a good idea.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, always
impressed with the people's
creativity, um, I, I just wanted
to raise that, um.
Uh, while I understand the
spirit of this, there are a
handful of statutory holidays.
In which, um, traditionally, I
believe most of the space has
been reserved, so American
Indian Day, African American
Day, Asian American Pacific
Islander native Hawaiian day,
um, and
I just wonder if you would
consider adding the the council
would consider just adding a
little language to, I think it's
reasonable to expect.
Um, the, the group who would
want to reserve the entire space
for a statutory holiday to
provide documentation that they
will use all of the spaces, um.
But I do know, um, particularly,
I think American Indian Day, but
also certainly Asian American
day, um, a lot of that space
will be utilized, if not all.
due to the diversity of the
groups involved.
Um, so Mr. Chairman, I don't, I
don't know if I should.
Make a motion to that effect,
but I, I can.
If needed.
Um, I, yeah, and, you know, I'm,
I, I am wondering as I read that
section, um.
Peter Zansky that
Um
And I'll, I'll, I'll be curious
to hear what the committee
thinks, but
It seems to me that the
The main issue at hand here is
selling items or otherwise using
reserve spaces for
gain.
Um, and even though the a single
person or organization may not
reserve. I don't know that
that's.
The
biggest issue here. I mean, it
doesn't seem like it's been an
issue in the past.
Other than
In this particular case, tables
are being sold, um, on the
secondary market.
Um
So if, if we remove that line
with that.
Would that deal with your, with
the concern that you're raising.
Mr. Chairman, yes.
Yeah
Uh, Senator, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Chair, just on that
point, I do think that removing
that line basically says the
space is now subject to the
approval of legislative building
services, and I just think
there's a whole bunch of
different hypothetical scenarios
that could come up. I mean, I
was looking at the line that
we're talking about, you may not
reserve all available spaces. I
mean, I get to reserve 23 of the
24 spaces. I mean, I just think
if you take the line out, you've
got the discretion to then be
able to
address this in a way, cause I
do think that there's going to
be times that it makes sense,
but I also I I do hear though
that we've got right now, groups
that are reserving the whole
thing and then not using it. And
so that is problematic to me.
Um, the charging, obviously,
it's not as a no go, but
If someone reserves all the
spaces and then takes two of
them.
That doesn't seem right, so, but
I think that giving you that
that language in the first
sentence at the end gives you
the discretion to do it, so.
I do think you should remove
that.
That second. Uh, Senator.
who went first, I don't know.
Senator, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
So are we talking about, are we
worried about people that sell
items.
In the roundhouse.
are just in this particular
space in the roundhouse. Are we
worried about people
Uh, reserving more spaces than
they need.
And
It, and then selling those
spaces to someone else.
Uh
I don't, I don't know where the,
the
The, uh
Particular
Bite. I don't know how you're
going to restrict that.
Um, are you going to say, well,
if you don't use all those
spaces, we're gonna, we're gonna
find you.
You reserve them and, and all of
a sudden there's a punishment if
you didn't use them all.
Uh, uh, uh, see a pretty big
circle here, uh.
I know I'm
Talking amongst a few attorneys
here, so I, I may be
overstepping my legal bounds
here, but uh
I don't know how the hell you're
gonna administer this thing, uh.
Yeah
So, I would like for you to tell
me, are we talking about
Sailing items in the roundhouse
for personal gain. Are we
talking about?
Anyone setting up anywhere in
the roundhouse, selling items.
Are we talking about just
reserving spaces? Are we talking
about?
How can we
Force people to use the spaces
they're reserving.
This is all pretty vague, so my
two cents, so that's a good
question. I think going back to
to leader Saansky's point, I
think that
The issue, as I understand it,
the, the reason we're talking
about this is there's a
situation where.
Particular organization reserved
the entire space for a
particular day.
And then
Is fundraising or has
fundraised.
Uh, by selling.
Table space to others.
Um, which
As Ms. Casby pointed out, has
all kinds of issues with it,
including potentially
anti-donation clause issues.
So the policy that is being
presented.
I believe in, again, this goes
to Spansky's point, uh, really
should be.
Um
Prohibiting
The use of those reserve spaces.
For private
Financial gain.
Now, which is, which is the, the
last sentence of that paragraph.
I think that the reason we're a
little confused right now,
myself included, is the prior
sentence where we are proposing
that no no single person or
organization will reserve all of
the space.
I think that while that might be
something we need to address at
some point. I don't think we
should address it now because I
think it's creating quite a bit
of confusion, uh, including what
leader Suansky brought up,
right, when you have American
Indian Day, it would make sense
for the entire space to be
reserved for that purpose. We
wouldn't want to have a
checkerboard of different
entities or issues or or
whatnot. So, uh, what I'm gonna
propose is that we remove that
second sentence.
Starting with a single person.
All the way to the end.
session.
And leave it to read. Space may
be reserved for use by members
of the public in the rotunda in
the halls of History, subject to
the approval of legislative
building services.
Members of the public may not
sell items or otherwise use
reserved spaces in the rotunda
or Halls of History for private
pecuniary gain.
And that I think takes care of
the issue.
Now, folks who come in and sell
jewelry around the building or
they sell tamales or burritos or
whatever.
We're not touching that.
And, you know, that's a question
for a different day, but you
shouldn't reserve the space in
the rotunda.
And then make money off of it.
Does that make sense?
I'll do away with the tamales.
There will be a riot if I do
that.
So
yes, Mr. Speaker, um, I just had
a question, um, Mr. Speaker,
about private pecuniary gain
and, and what that means and
then um I don't think this is
selling items, but sometimes
some of these organizations have
like a box for donations, if
somebody wanted to donate to the
Sierra Club or whatever and so I
would assume that that would be
OK. Um,
I think that that's probably
fine. Yeah, I think so, but I'm
just wondering if this would may
not.
Sell items like if they give a
little teddy bear for the, I
don't know. I, I think Senator,
I think the problem here is, is,
you know, my
Little League reserving now this
didn't happen I'll be really
clear, and it's not gonna
happen. But my league reserving
the whole space.
And then selling individual
tables or 24 tables.
Selling 24 tables to all 24
other leagues for 1000 bucks
each.
And then my little league makes
off like mandates. Now if my
little league happens to reserve
a table, and they have a little
box that says please support
little kids and you know have
them buy a new baseball glove. I
don't think anyone is gonna come
down hard or frown upon that.
Um, and I, that's how I read
this, and I think that's the,
that's not the intent of this.
Um, any, uh, well, there is a
motion on the table is,
Mr. Speaker, I move.
That we accept this policy, the
first sentence and the last
sentence.
And the middle.
Is there any
Question debate, is there any
opposition to that?
OK. Policy has been
Amended and adopted.
Thank you, Ms. Kins.
OK.
Apologies, uh, Senator Shedo.
Thank you, uh, I just want to go
back to, um, I hope to
representative Binsky made uh
about the specific days, uh,
adding that specific, uh,
Maybe uh sentence in that first
sentence or I'm not sure what is
that something that we just want
to leave as a description of the
elections to the council. Is
that, is that what the
recommendation is? And uh also
thank you Mr. Speaker for, you
know, uh, you know, those
burritos, and gua tamales.
Don't touch those
and then of course, and then of
course we also have on any day a
lot of uh folks that come in and
sell jewelry and walk and it's
always been something I just
wanted to make sure that we were
not, you know,
Infringing on or touching those
things. I appreciate that. Thank
you. Yeah.
All right, let's move on to the
next agenda item, uh, approvals.
books we have uh two approvals
and I'm gonna ask that we do
them all in one motion.
And I'll start with the first
one, the radioactive and
hazardous materials Committee
met on November 15th.
But much to our frustration, was
enabled to establish a quorum or
even a subcommittee, Legislative
council approval is required.
For LCS to process mileage and
pervim request for legislators
who attended this meeting.
Um, the second approval request
is for the public school capital
outlay oversight task force,
which was scheduled to meet on
November 7th, but that meeting
was canceled the evening before
due to the snowstorm that we had
that week.
The task force intends to hold
its final meeting on December
17th, at least one legislator
was unable to cancel a hotel
reservation made for the
meeting.
Legislative council approval is
required for the LCS to process
mileage and preme requests for
legislators who had already
traveled to Santa Fe or were in
the process of traveling to
Santa Fe when the meeting was
canceled.
Um, is there a motion to approve
both of those requests.
right? Is there opposition to
that motion?
OK see none.
to request are approved, uh,
Senator, uh, Prote Stewart.
Uh, so Mr. Speaker, uh, I don't
think I heard it, but the other
part of that is approval for the
final meeting on December 17,
which is after the date. So is
that part of the motion.
I had not included that as a
motion because the statute
regarding um this prohibition as
you described only applies to
council created committees and
the public school capital outlay
Task Force.
is a statue.
Uh
So they don't need approval to
meet in December after our
deadline or supposed deadline
and our approval of the previous
OK, good to know.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Right, um, next, we will go to.
Staff reports, um Miss Kis beer,
take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the council, uh, couple of
updates as Mr. Speaker announced
ethics training will be this
afternoon at one o'clock in this
room, uh, followed by financial
disclosure training by the
office of the Secretary of
State, and I'd also like to, um,
have members take note that the
next meeting of the Legislative
council was scheduled for the
afternoon of January 20th, LFC
and LESC will be meeting that
morning, uh, and then after the
council meeting, there will be a
harassment and Americans with
Disabilities Act training for
members.
Um, also just brief staff
updates, uh, council service, of
course, has been hiring and
training session staff and
proofreading word processing
bill clerk's capital outlay and
generally gearing up for
session, in addition to our 13
full-time build drafters and
stop attorneys. We have 3
contract drafters on staff
currently, and a 4th contract
drafter will start after the new
year, and she will focus
primarily on memorials and
certificates.
Um, an update as to district
legislative aid hiring, they're
27 district legislative aides
have been hired for the House
members and 12 for the Senate,
and of course, as I'm sure you
know, um, the program is, as
it's been established, many
questions are arising and the
working group has discussed the
need for additional training and
resources for legislators and
working and managing um district
legislative aides.
So while the council mandated
legislators to attend a human
resources training. Uh, this was
really just pertaining to that
hiring process, um, we would
like to suggest that a more
robust training be provided to
legislators and um currently a
PowerPoint and Handbook are
being developed for legislators
as a resource, which would
include the hiring process in
addition to work schedules, pay,
benefits, employee policies, and
onboarding, how to go about uh
securing district office space,
um, evaluation.
and discipline, um, if needed,
and guidelines and guardrails
for the position. Um, so these
resources when complete will be
provided to the district office
liaisons and chiefs of staff,
and we'll be vetted through the
working group before distributed
as well. Um, and also after
session, we do intend to hold a
life training on this issues.
And while I'm not requesting a
formal motion on this, but I
would like the council to
consider either mandating this
training in addition to or
instead of the HR training that
was originally mandated. And
with that, thank you, Mr.
and they stand for questions.
Senator.
Um. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Through this discussion, we've
talked about legislators, as
opposed to House members or
senators, and
Currently we have several
Current House members.
That are going to be senators.
But they are legislators today
and will continue to be
legislators.
We have any consideration for
allowing legislators.
You have
District staff to
And sort
So previously before your
attendance on this committee,
uh, we have approved a timeline.
Uh
Actually, you know, the new
house members, the old house
members becoming new senators,
um, are able to hire their
district legislative aide on
April 1st, along with other new
members. But what they may not
know is that in the Senate,
Everyone gets to share a
legislative aid.
So they will be able to do that,
um, on, uh, when they are sworn
in, um, they will can work and
they can do it before, uh,
certainly can work with someone
to have a joint legislative
aide.
So, uh, during this, this is for
during this session.
So they will have a half of a
legislative age during the
session.
Uh, in the Senate. So for those
4 new House members, they'll get
something that they haven't had
before. And then April 1, like
all other new uh newly elected
folks and higher district
legislative aid.
So uh senator, Mr. Speaker.
Yes, in, in this case, I'm only
talking about the district.
Legislative aid, not to session
uh aid.
Um
But they are legislators today.
That's why I bring it up,
because they are legislators
today.
Just in the wrong house.
All right, uh,
Any
Senator, just a question, Mr.
Speaker and, and Ms. Casebeer,
can you clarify for members that
aren't able to attend the
trainings in person, what's the
process? I know a lot of people
are watching this and aren't
going to be here today. Uh,
what's the process to, is there
gonna be a
Zoom links sent out, is there a
Way to watch it later on, just I
think that would be helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Worth. Yes, the trainings are
going to be recorded. They're
not going to be um done live via
Zoom, but they will be recorded
for later viewing. And, um, I am
maintaining a list some
legislators have already reached
out and let me know that they
will not be able to attend, so
we'll make sure to get that
information to them. But
essentially, we can, you know,
take a look at the list of folks
who, uh, legislators who
attended today and, and in um in
January as well, and then get
that information out to those
legislators who were not.
Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ethics training.
Why, what is the policy of not
using attorneys to do that.
When, when do we use attorneys,
when we do not use attorneys for
ethics training.
Uh, so members again, our
attorneys.
And they can use this for their
continued education.
Or or whatever.
Deals they need to do. So why
wouldn't we use attorneys to do
this.
And help them take some of their
volunteer time and
And have a benefit from it.
Mr. Speaker.
Good looking out, Senator Woods.
Mr. Speaker, Senator Woods, uh,
so 22 thoughts, uh, the
governmental Conduct Act
mandates that ethics training be
provided to legislators every 2
years and uh that statute
specifies that the training must
be provided either by the state
ethics commission or a national
and I'm forgetting the language
exactly, but a national
nonpartisan organization that is
focused on legislators, so such
as the National Conference of
State Legislatures. Um, this
year, the training will be
provided by the State Ethics
Commission.
As to your second point about
continuing legal education, this
training has been submitted to
the state bar to um be approved
for two ethic CLE credits for uh
New Mexico bar attorneys. If uh
a legislator who or staff member
who's an attorney attends this
training, and there will be a
sign-in sheet for them to put
their name and bar number, um,
which I will submit to the bar.
The individual also need to give
me $5 so that I can submit that,
remit that to the bar as well to
pay for the credit. It used to
be $2.
Mr. Chair, yeah, inflation, uh,
the bar is raised their, their
prices and um it is a two credit
hour and the bar chart is $250
per credit, so $5. Senator
Woodson for the non-attorneys,
you can transfer your credits to
the attorneys and then we can
double our credits. So dibs on
Senator Woods' credits.
Never thought I'd say this, but
we don't have enough attorneys
in the legislature anymore.
What's going on? OK, um, thank
you for that, uh, last agenda
item, facilities review
subcommittee, uh, Ms. Kids we
brought to our attention the
need for, uh, more flexible
space for particularly the human
resources staff that they've had
to
um bring on board, um, to
Um, you know, uh, help us with
our staffing and whatnot. Uh, we
are working at the, the protein
and um Miss Kiber are working on
a couple of um both short and
midterm fixes that uh we uh
cannot be you all on at the next
council meeting, but I think
we're pretty close to
identifying um those solutions.
So we'll we'll bring those to
the council for your information
at the next council meeting. Um,
Is there anything else, uh, Ms.
Kiser, that you need to bring to
our attention or it looks like
we're at the end of the agenda.
Mr. Chair, there are 2 projects
that I would like to apprise the
facilities review subcommittee
on, um, I'm not necessarily
requesting that a motion be
taken today. I understand you
all may need uh more information
in order to make that
determination. So if that's
unable to be accomplished today,
I can bring it back, um, at the
January 20th meeting, but there
are a couple of big projects
that um legislative building
services, legislative council
service, would like to get a
jump on and have teed up so we
can.
You know, break ground right
after session starts, or session
ends, sorry for that. Um, so the
first is a capital concourse
renovation. Um, so this is the,
uh, concrete cement area that um
is all around the Capitol
building and um essentially what
is happening is that there are
cracks within that, um, that
deck, that over time has um
created a uh leaking situation
into the underground garage, and
so there are, there's water.
damage that is happening in the
under underground garage. Um,
and in order to remedy this, uh,
we need to remove all of the
concrete around the Capitol, um,
put on a new rubber roof system,
um, and then put the concrete
back on top of it. Um, so to
replace the membrane, we would,
we would need to replace the
membrane on all the top layer of
concrete in order to do that,
you have to remove the concrete,
etc. um, in order to protect
that parking area underneath. So
we would um also likely look to
increase the snow melt.
print as we are removing
concrete around the building to
um just create greater safe in
grace ingress and egress, uh,
when there are icy conditions.
Estimated cost of this project
is about $4 million and it will
take approximately 8 months to
complete. Um, but given that we
are seeing leaking into the
garage and there are structural
issues, um, that will only be
exacerbated if this is not
addressed, um, I would like to,
um, get the subcommittee's
approval to move forward with
this project sooner rather than
later.
So I'll be happy to stand for
questions on this at this
moment, or if you go on to our
second ask as well.
I think we should try to improve
this as we can today. Are there
questions from the committee?
So, uh, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, I've also noticed
buckling of the of the um
stucco.
where the water's leaking down,
does it include any of that?
I noticed it during the fire
drill.
Going out of out of the door,
there's big bubbles in the in
the uh stucco, so uh I know it's
water damage, but I just
wondered if it included that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong. So
this project would not include
that. However, we are looking at
an upgrade of the entire um
stucco, uh, and the columns to
fix the issues that you um have
raised. Um, it's my
understanding that a lot of
those issues are more aesthetic,
uh, than they are, um, say
structural.
which this Concourse project
would really be addressing. And
so in discussing with
legislative building services
and um our um
Engineering firms that we
contract with for advice. It was
determined that the Concourse
project was of a more critical
nature at this moment, and the
two projects can't be done at
the same time because they will,
um, necessarily they may impact
each other in a negative way, so
they need to be done separately.
Um, so looking at both of these
projects, um, it was my
determination that the Concourse
project was more critical at
this moment and wanted to bring
that forth.
Proton to
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that we
approve this project to go
forward at the end of the
session.
Is your opposition to that
motion?
You see none. You got approval.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the subcommittee. Um, I have one
other project that I'd like to
bring to your attention. It's
another space issue, um, as we
all know, um, all of the
legislative agencies are, are
strapped for space. This is a
pretty discrete project uh
involving the legislative
Finance Committee uh area on the
first floor of Capitol North.
There is currently um a
legislative finance, uh,
committee storage space and a
legislative building services
storage space that we would like
to combine into
office, um, so that 2 more
employees could be placed into
that space. Um, the project
would also convert a small
alcove that's currently being
used as a coffee station into a
storage area. Um, estimated cost
of this project is $250,000
depending on mechanical and
lighting systems, HVAC systems,
um, given that these are two
storage spaces that would be
combined, um, there are some,
um, structural mechanical
systems, etc. that would need to
be improved upon in those spaces
in order to make
get a comfortable office for
employees to to work in. Um, so
we'd like to, uh, look at
approval for this project,
estimated time for completion
would be 3 to 4 months. Uh, and
we would also like to begin
working on this as soon as
session ends as well.
Right, Senator Woods.
Um, I should ask this sooner.
But uh when, when you call these
estimates out.
So how do you go about getting
these estimates and how do you
solicit contractors to do the
work.
The two questions, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods. So the estimates are
based on a number of factors.
Um, one is looking at similar
projects that have been
accomplished in the capital or
capital complex over the last
couple of years. Uh, we also are
working with, uh, various
engineering firms to get plans
together or to uh kind of assess
the space and see what it's
going to take, um, in order to
complete the project and those
estimates, or I should step
back, those engineering firms,
um,
Cost of project is based upon a
percentage of what the total
project would be. So while I am
kind of throwing out estimates
here, they're not set in stone,
um, these prices may be a little
bit more, maybe a little bit
less, depending on um what is
determined needs to happen once
those plans are actually
developed, uh, with the
engineers. So it's, it's a
little bit of a guesstimate,
quite frankly, um, but these are
kind of our best estimates, uh,
based on all of the knowledge
that we have at this moment. Of
course, all of these projects
have to go.
through procurement code
processes. Um, so either we
would need to go out to bid
through a competitive process,
um, or there may be a statewide,
um, purchasing agreement, um,
through which we could
accomplish the procurement.
And that was my other question,
Mr. Speaker, was this uh
General services.
Uh, some of their
Some of their staff or some of
their procurement code can be
used in some of this stuff, and
keep it away from the other
procurement code or whatever,
that's, that was the general.
Question that I had. Thank you
very much.
Right, there's.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So
what's currently stored in these
spaces and where are those items
gonna go?
Your office.
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Wirth, uh, the one space that's
currently used is LFC storage,
they would be able to use the
newly created storage space from
this alcove to store equipment,
um, that they have in there. So
it's a
Books and records, uh, etc. that
would be able to be transferred.
Um, you do raise a, a very good
point though, because one of the
spaces is legislative building
services space, uh, that is
going to be combined to create a
space for LFC, so we will need
to look at um additional spaces,
um, hopefully in Capital North
and a couple of areas have been
identified that could be
transitioned into a little
additional storage space for
building services. It's my
understanding at the moment, I
believe, um, it's, it's mostly
chairs and
and folding tables and, and uh
equipment specific to Capitol
North that is in this, this
space, but it's a fairly small
space, um, so not too large of
equipment is being stored there.
Uh, proton stewart.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move it, uh
approval of this project to
happen after the legislative
session ends.
Is there opposition to that
motion? See none your request
has been proved.
And I believe we are now at the
point where we
We'll adjourn. Thank you,
everybody. Have a very merry
Christmas, Happy holidays, and
uh we'll see you in a couple of
hours for the ethics training.
