who ICASA is and then jump right
into uh this project's funding,
uh, the current purpose of this
project are stakeholders, uh,
some of the data issues that
we've encountered over the past
year. And finally, we want to
demo for you the first version
of our dashboard that we've
built throughout this last year.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time today. Uh, we're very
excited to present, uh, before
we get into that, I just want to
give a little overview of the
institute and who we are in case
you're unfamiliar. So ICASA is a
RPSP uh attached to New Mexico
Tech and we were founded in 2001
and have that line item still
there that give us our funding
to this day, uh, we spent a lot
of our, uh, history working on
critical infrastructure problems
and very technical problems with
three-letter agencies at the
federal level, DOD, DOE, etc.
And we've taken that technical
skill and now have turned it
into our state and have been
working to solve a lot of these
technical issues with partners
across the state that maybe
don't have the resources or the
people in their organization to
actually do some of that
technical work and we've spent a
lot of that effort, uh, since
2018 working with partners in
the criminal justice space.
People like the Sentencing
Commission, AOC, AODA, etc. um,
we've deployed a number of
dashboards and tool.
rules for those partners, and
this is our kind of first
entrance into the health care
space and so uh we've taken
again that technical expertise
and have partnered with a lot of
people across the state to try
to get um more expertise in the
space of health care. We're not
kind of tied to that in any way
and so it was very critical for
us to find partners to work with
and Mary will talk about that a
little bit more, uh, so that's
just a little brief overview of
the institute. Uh, we'll go
ahead and pass it back to Mary.
Apologies. So this project was
uh funded through 2024
appropriation, uh, we
appropriated $750,000 to
establish and maintain a state
healthcare workforce dashboard.
This funding is good through
2027 as we continue to work
through this dashboard.
As far as project purpose, uh,
this purpose of this project was
to create an interactive
dashboard that examines the
healthcare workforce data within
the state of New Mexico. Our
stakeholders who I'll talk about
in a second, uh, establish kind
of three main targets that we
should try to focus on for this
first initial push of the
dashboard, which was nurses,
physicians, and EMTs, uh, within
a initial focus on three what we
call data families. So that
included retention rates,
thinking, who's going to school
in New Mexico, who's
sticking around after they go to
school, how long they're
sticking around in New Mexico,
um, FTE and PTE or full-time
equivalent or part-time
equivalent, uh, for instance,
it's great if you have 5
physicians in your town, but if
all 5 of them are only part
time, that's a lot different
than having 5 full-time
positions, so we wanted to look
at that as well as supply and
demand, looking at not only the
number of physicians, nurses
that we currently have, but
looking forward to see uh
prediction of how the demand
would increase at a 35.
and 10-year interval.
So as Draya mentioned, we are
not, uh, specialists in
healthcare data, which meant we
needed a large group of
stakeholders to help us
understand and make sure we
weren't misrepresenting data as
we gathered it and analyzed it.
Um, I have a few of the
stakeholders, uh, legislative
Finance Committee who are here
today. We're very influential
board of nursing, New Mexico
Medical Society, Healthcare
Association, um, Department of
Health, uh, Department of
Education, um, all of these
institutions helped us
understand.
and helped us so we weren't
misrepresenting anything along
the way.
As far as those stakeholders,
their overall mission for this
dashboard was to make New Mexico
an attractive place to practice
medicine. They wanted to see
where we were, uh, as far as
healthcare workforce and how we
could make it better.
Um, as far as data, it was a
year-long process. We started
this project on July 1st of
2024, so it's been a little over
a year now since we started this
project. A lot of this project
has been data procurement, uh,
and with that has come a lot of
issues and um struggles in
procuring data throughout the
state. After a year of going
through and uh procuring data we
currently only have 3 data
sources that we're using for
this uh dashboard. The first one
and our largest
uh, data set is from 3D Health.
This is data that we paid for,
uh, this was at the
recommendation of multiple of
our stakeholders as they are
reputable source that had worked
a lot with healthcare workforce
data around the nation, but we
specifically bought data from
them, uh, occurring in New
Mexico.
We've also been using NPI or
National Provider identifier
information, individual numbers
associated with providers within
New Mexico and finally Board of
nursing did provide us, uh,
their board of nursing data
overview, uh, for this past
year.
As far as uh additional data we
had talked to so many
institutions and we did have
leads for a lot of data. None of
them have come to fruition yet,
but we've met multiple times
with hospital association,
Department of Health,
specifically looking at their
EMS data was something that we
really need because we had, uh,
reached out to other
organizations to get EMS data
and no other organizations had
this data other than Department
of Health. We still do not have
data from Department of Health
with EMS, so you'll notice that,
uh, even.
even though I mentioned
physicians, nurses, and EMTs,
our dashboard currently only
reflects physicians, uh, and
nurses, uh, we would still like
to include EMTs as soon as we
have the data available, we'll
be implementing that in the
dashboard.
We've also met with New Mexico
Healthcare Authority and the New
Mexico Longitudinal Data System,
um, to try to access data we
have not procured any data from
those individuals yet, but we've
had contact and we've had
conversations about that.
Um, I would now like to switch
to the demo. I will warn, uh,
members of the committee that
this demo is going to be taking
place on the projector behind
you. I'm very sorry we did not
realize that you'd have to turn
out in your chairs.
We are nothing if not.
Flexible. Thank you so much.
I will.
So
Maybe.
Here we go.
So this is the first page you'll
see when you enter the New
Mexico healthcare Workforce
dashboard currently, we only
have down here the legislative
funding that funded this
dashboard. Uh, we've also listed
our partners that have helped us
out. These have all been linked
to their um own web pages to
give thanks for their
recommendation and their
expertise throughout this
project.
Another thing to note about this
dashboard is that we build it
from the ground up using open
source libraries, so this is not
anything through Microsoft BI or
Tableau, uh, that would have a
reoccurring subscription fee. We
do not have that. We build
everything from the ground up.
So it's owned by the state
because we use open source
libraries. So this page is
really just referencing all of
those open source libraries that
we're using so we give proper
credit.
The first page we'll look at is
our attention page. Uh, this is
using national provider
identifier numbers, so I want to
specify that national provider
identifier numbers can be not
only for physicians, nurses, and
healthcare workers, but also
people who drive ambulances,
people who fix ambulances. So
I'm gonna first and foremost
kind of drill down to something
a little more relevant because
the overall number can be a bit
misleading. So we'll go to
family medicine, perhaps, and we
can see that within the state of
New Mexico.
We currently have a total number
of 10 1845 uh family medicine
practitioners who have an NPI
number. Now, what we've created
and it's kind of with the
projector, it's a little hard to
see with, um, colors, but this
is what's called a sany diagram,
um, and it's breaking out and
showing when people have left
the state. Now, within the NPI
data, we can see that it's a
national provider identifier
number within New Mexico, once
they're no longer practicing in
New Mexico, it will leave the
system, which is how
We're tracking, uh, in theory,
when people are leaving New
Mexico. So we can see we have
currently leftover after 2
years, 3 years, 4 years, 5
years, and a 6 year rate, um,
with their attention over 5
years of 1,256.
We also have KPIs or key
performance indicators at the
top of the page. For instance,
we have undergraduate medical
education, um, according, and we
have all of them um cited within
the KPIs as well. We can pull it
down and see this was um from
the AMMC or the American.
Association of Medical Colleges.
They list that there are 1,116
undergrad medical education
students in New Mexico and we've
also included indicators of
whether this is higher or lower
than the national average. Um,
on most of our KPIs, we've
included that and if you hover
over, there's also sources for
that for the um average that we
are using. This one is also from
the uh association of American
Medical Colleges. We've also
included physician retention
rate, physician.
who've completed graduate
education in New Mexico, the
percent and New Mexico graduates
practicing in new medical, uh,
New Mexico and the percentage.
Next, we'll look at FTE and PT
or full-time equivalent
part-time equivalent. This is
when we're using um that 3D
health data that we had to pay
for this one we can drill down
to an individual level. So if we
wanted to look at Bernalillo
County, we can scroll down to
Bernalino County, and we can see
primary care specialties and
looking at the FTE count is 666
with the PTE count of 328. If
you did not want specialty
groups, because as we can see
they're primary care, uh,
surgical, all of that.
can also break this down by
specialty. It's just a much
larger graph, and you can scroll
down uh through these as well,
and we also have a table if it's
easier for you to access tables
for overall numbers of FTE PT.
You can also do multiple
counties at once. We could do
Bernalillo as well as Santa Fe
and combine those numbers or you
can also select all of your
regions.
We also of course have KPIs for
this page as well. Percentage of
FTE in all appointments is 64%,
uh, which is actually according
to uh
I'd have to look, but um, I
don't want to misquote that.
We got from the Health Resources
and Services Administration from
their healthcare workforce
analysis report. They report
that 64% of um or that's a a we
calculate the 64% of all FTE
employment of physicians in the
state of New Mexico and
according to the health
resources and Services
Administration that is 27% below
the national average.
We also have primary care
physicians at an FTE count per
10,000, uh, which is at 5.2,
which is 6% below average.
Finally, uh, as far as physician
data, we have supply and demand,
uh, something I want to speak on
with the demand is, it is based
on an algorithm from 3D health.
This is a proprietary algorithm.
We do not have access to it, but
there are stakeholders, uh, was
one of the largest reasons we
bought this data was because our
stakeholders believed in the
accuracy of this uh demand
algorithm that at 3D health
operates. Uh, so as we can see.
This currently gives us in the
year 2025, if we, this is for
all uh physicians we can see
supply is 3400 in the state of
New Mexico, the demand is 4300
with a need of 951, I think, my
vision is not great. Apologies.
Uh, but as we can go on, we see
there's a 35, and 10 year
prediction rate that we can go
through like our previous page,
we can also drill down by county
and by specialty.
Specialty group.
And we can see even drill down
into further of that. And as
before, we have provided a table
below if it's easier to use a
table than it is the
visualization.
Finally, we have nursing. Now we
heard from a previous, um,
Session earlier today, the
mention of compacts uh within
the state of New Mexico, New
Mexico is part of the nursing
compact, so they're one of, I
believe, 48 states. We are one
of 48 states to be in the
nursing compact, so it's
difficult at times to get
concrete numbers on how many
nurses we actually have working
in the state. We currently have
4 44,000 active licensed nurses.
This is not necessarily mean
that we have 44 active nurses
working in New Mexico as they
could obviously go to.
New Mexico or um Texas,
Colorado, any of our surrounding
states and work there without us
knowing, uh, so we've tried to
drill down who we know is at
least active licenses and can
only work in New Mexico, and
that is a number of 13,900. Now,
of course, there are people who
have a compact license that are
on top of that 13,000, that
13,000 are people who only have
licenses for New Mexico.
We also have it broken down of
how many
individuals have active
licenses, uh, RNs uh CRNAs.
What have you. We've also given
a Sankey diagram as we have in
the first retention page of
overall how many total nurses
have ever been licensed in the
state of New Mexico and uh when
their NPI numbers are leaving
New Mexico as well.
Finally, I wanted to mention
with this dashboard that a large
part of it has been.
Powered by that 3D health data
that we had to pay for. This is
not the goal of this dashboard.
In fact, our goal of this
dashboard would be that it's not
only funded by the state of New
Mexico, but that it's powered by
data from New Mexico. We really
bought this 3D data because we
were having such issues
procuring data within the state
that we felt the only productive
way to have this dashboard have
real and accurate numbers was by
buying data, but this is not our
end goal. We would really prefer
to have this dashboard powered
by New Mexico data and we've
continued to work towards that,
as I mentioned, this funding is
good through 2027.
we still have many things we
want to add to this dashboard.
Many data sets that need to be
added to this dashboard, and we
look forward to adding them, uh,
in the coming years. Thank you.
So thank you so much. Wow, um.
Wow, shucks and wow, great, um.
So
Who doesn't have questions?
OK, well, so we will start with
uh Senator Block, go that way
and go around, um.
I'll just stick with 3 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
phenomenal brief. This is right
in my wheelhouse on the
dashboard side. This is exactly
the type of information we need
as policy makers, um, to see
where we need to go, and I
understand when you do the data
analytics, it, it's just as, you
know, the data is only as good
as you, you got, and I
appreciate that cause there's so
much potential in here to show
what we need for required
treatment or providers versus
what we have and you you
drilling down to the specialty
into the
County. This is a tool, um, that
I, uh, come see us in the
legislature because we have to
sustain and maintain this tool
and update it. Um, I'm curious
about the access to the tool and
how fast the data is um in
regards to real-time data and
what type of platform is this
gonna be on?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
yes, so currently this dashboard
is just hosted locally on my
machine, however, we do have
plans to go public with this to
open internet by the end of
September is our goal for this
project, um, as far as when data
is being updated, it's different
for each of the data sets. The
NPI data we can receive updates
quarterly at the most recent,
uh, none of them are real-time
data is what I.
should specify first and
foremost. We have the the
closest we have come to
procuring real-time data was
when we had talked to Department
of Health with um Kyle Thornton
about EMS data. The data is real
time, but we have not gotten
access to that. But in the
future if we do, that would be
the only real-time data that we
have. Thank you, thank you,
Madam. Yeah, because I, I think
that one of the limiting factors
here is we have, you might have
a nurse who's licensed in New
Mexico or or a PA, but they
could work close to the border
where they're going across their
license.
here. So the numbers, they might
look good.
But they're really not. Um, and
we have to figure out a way to
get the, the accuracy of that
data to the policymakers, us, so
we can look at that and provide
incentives and, and things like
that, and we got to drill down
on the PAs, the X-ray techs, the
physical therapists,
occupational therapists, I mean,
this, this is to me, this is
like phase 0 and uh please come,
come see me for any help I can
do to, to keep this thing funded
because
This is is critical to the state
of New Mexico to help us
understand where the problem is
because you should be able to
pull out and extract some trends
and analysis because I would
argue as we're getting older,
you're gonna get more stressors
on the healthcare system,
especially at the PA nurse,
well, physical therapy, uh, as
well. Um, and that can skew skew
who's getting the care based on,
on the, uh, the age group as
well. So looking at the
counties, the rural ones
especially, uh,
really great job. Once again,
New Mexico Tech just comes
through. Um, you guys are
phenomenal. So, um, come see me
up at the roundhouse for funding
to keep this thing going. This
is phenomenal. So thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, right on
time.
There you go.
So a representative block, let's
see if you can do it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm sure I will
cause I'm usually pretty good,
but I'm just gonna start, uh,
thank you both for your
presentation. I won't smoke up,
whatever. I wanna say thank you,
uh, first of all, I'm just
wondering how expensive is the
data? And I know that we paid
for it or you guys paid for it
through the state dollars
technically everyone paid for
it. But can you tell me how much
that was? And then also, does it
go back retroactively because I
saw it starts in 2025 with
trends in the future. Is there
anything backward that you have?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, it's so we
paid, I believe, what was it
5950 $59,000. Now this was again
a one time fee for that data if
we wanted updated data in the
future, we'd have to pay an
additional, not $60,000 but I
think, I believe you're quoted
for about 20,000, which is why
we're so eager for this to be
state data instead of private
data, uh, as you can imagine
because $60,000 out of a budget
is not nothing. It's an entire
developer for one.
on this project, so it's
definitely significant overall.
Uh, that data does not go
backwards. It starts at 2025 and
we have the demand going
forward, but they did not give
us any data going back from
2025.
Madam Chair and thank you for
that. So does it exist at all?
Because I would love to see what
certain policy decisions when
they were made, what it
Ended up with now where we are
in 2025, so we can see what we
did terribly wrong and why we're
purging nurses, doctors, etc.
and how we can reverse that, I
suppose.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, yes, I don't know, but
I'm happy to reach out to 3D
Health later this week, and I
can get you an answer to that
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. Great to put a big
appropriation to get all that
data in one file swoop. I don't
know how many years, is it
annually 50,000 bucks every
year, or is it just all the data
from the future, maybe?
Madam Chair, Representative
Black, it's that we paid the
initial amount of $60,000.
That's the majority of the leg
work that's needed going
forward, if we wanted a yearly
reoccurring, I believe we are
quoted for $20,000 for a
reoccurring fee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think that would be a good
investment. That's all I had and
I had extra time, so I'm gonna
give it to the chair because I
can't give it to anyone else, so
thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, may I
respond to that as well? Oh, go
ahead, Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Block, uh, I
would also just like to note
that ICASA would be very capable
of doing the same analysis,
should we have the data, uh, as
far as I'm aware, and I might be
slightly off here. From what I
remember, the way that this
procurement process works is
that, uh, 3D health buys their
data from Milliman, who gets
their data from providers in the
state. So through a roundabout
process, I believe we are
purchasing our own data back
from somebody who's doing
something with it, and we
would be very happy to try to
get that same all payers claim
data, etc. uh, which are some of
the people we've reached out to
uh to try to get this data and
then work with it. Uh, we're
very capable to take this
personally identifiable
information of the providers and
then extract that out. All the
data we have here doesn't
necessarily have that at this
point, but in the future we're
capable of kind of extrapolating
that information out so that the
data we're providing to the
internet on this public facing
dashboard would not be able to
be hacked and like exposed.
people's information and so
that's one of the things we've
actually wanted to do is to push
into this space, make it all
from our own state, from our own
funding, so we're not wasting
resources so that to kind of
keep this going forward, it
would lower that overhead cost
uh and so that's one of our kind
of overhead goals is to
facilitate data sharing between
these partners and see if we can
automate some of these processes
so then you remove that overhead
you don't have somebody going
and making an Excel spreadsheet
every year or every 4 months if
you can automate that machine to
machine.
Access, then you could have
real-time data and you're
removing some of that human
element that you have to
continually pay for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good job
I will jump in here and say this
committee has been begging,
whining, crying, demanding for
all payer claims data for
It feels like decades, um,
forever, and uh we're very
frustrated, so maybe this is,
this is, uh, maybe we can work
together and finally get what we
should have had decades ago.
That I'm Chair, that would be
incredible if that were
possible. Representative
Herndon.
Thank you
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
and thank you for this
presentation. I just wanted to
uh think about if we could add
some aspects to this. I
hopefully, on your first
picture, it was, you know, how
wonderful it is to work in New
Mexico. So if you're able to
send this out to like all of the
medical schools, so when they
are getting ready to decide
where they're going to live,
that New Mexico number becomes
number one. And then the second
thing is, uh, you know, we have
a there's a lot of
hypothecation.
Around why doctors are leaving.
So it would be wonderful if you
could do focus groups to
determine actually talking the
real doctors who are deciding
that they are going to leave. So
we have those data points right
here and if there's something
that the legislature needs to do
that we can absolutely do it.
Now one thing I, um, my final
question is looking at these,
uh, the doctors that are here.
Are you able to segregate them
into those doctors that will be
providing service.
is for children, those that'll
be providing it for seniors so
that we can see where there is a
real uh lack of doctors in a
particular area. Is that in
here?
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, I don't know if we can
separate by age group, we do
have, we can drill down by
specialty, so it might be senior
medicine is a specialty. There's
quite literally hundreds of
specialties within this list,
uh, I do believe senior care is
one, I don't know about, um.
Child, but I know that senior
care is one.
OK, that would be really good as
we were looking at our aging
population in the state of New
Mexico. Is this gonna be a place
where people can get the medical
attention that they need, so we
can see that is what you're
saying, and share that with the
rest of the aging and long-term
services, for example, as they
can use it when they put out
information.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, um.
Yes, I believe so because
there's a senior care specialty.
Now that would just be for
physicians, it would not be for
any others within that group
because the data that we're
using only includes physicians
at this time, but that's very
good to know. I'll make note of
that as that is something that
seems very important for this
dashboard to include.
OK. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um, Senator Pinto,
and if you could introduce
yourself.
Madam President, members of the
committee, I am Senator Shannon
Pinto I represent District 3.
Um, this, um, does this include
IHS employees?
The Indian Health Service.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, uh,
as of right now, we do not have
any data related to that that we
have looked, uh, that was one of
the things that we wanted to
spend some time on, um, I'm
native and so that was one of
the things I wanted to bring up
was, OK, we have a lot of native
individuals across the state, so
how do we uh work to figure out
how to get data from those
subgroups and those specialties,
uh, so that we didn't have a big
gap in our population, uh, and
so as of right now we don't, but
we have been looking into who we
might contact to get information
in that space.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation and um
I
Could you repeat
What you were saying about the
end of September, this would go
live for the public and there's
no way for the public to see
what you're doing now.
That's a question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, Senator
Stephanics.
Apologies, um, yes, so currently
this is just running on an
individual laptop, so it's not
open to the internet, so no one
would be able to see it right
now, but as of the end of
September, we would have it have
its own web address so you could
type in a web address and anyone
could access it online.
So, Madam Chair, for the end of
September, someone could go to
New Mexico Tech and find a link
to get to this.
That is correct. So, um, maybe,
Madam Chair, um, not necessarily
another presentation, but maybe
just a handout about that when
it comes time. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. I'm gonna have you
guys present because the
questions are.
I'm not even having to have my
timer go off so I could get used
to this. Yeah, yeah, don't get
used to it. It's the, is the
lesson here. Representative
Torres Velasquez.
Um,
let's see.
Madam Chair, um, my question has
to do with the data that you
provided and, and I'm sorry to
hear that we won't be able to
access it either, it looks like.
Um, except for what you show us
here. Um, I don't think I saw
this, but I was wondering if you
disaggregated for demographic
information such as age, um,
gender, um, ethnicity and um
location, um, so that, uh,
Senator Pinto's question
answered part of what I was
gonna ask, but so that we can
look to see if there are um
If, if, who are the doctors that
are serving our various rural
and city communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Torres of Velasquez, yes, so two
of our data sets do include age,
gender, and location. That would
be the 3D health data does
provide age, gender, and
location of practice of
physicians, so we do not have.
Personal addresses, but we do
have the addresses of their
practices for as far as the our
big data set, uh, as well as the
board of nursing data does
provide age and gender, but they
do not provide location. But as
far as physicians, we do have
age, gender, and location that
we could add to the dashboard in
future.
Madam Chair, I'm also interested
in ethnicity. I'd like to know
if you could collect that and
information and provide that
with the rest of the
information.
That you have available.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair um.
And thank you presenters uh I
had to step out for a second and
I don't know if you covered this
issue or not.
But uh I did hear that you were.
Wanting to kind of specify.
The certain factors.
Um, why physicians are leaving
New Mexico.
Um
I'm, I'm not exactly sure what
those factors are that you've
identified.
But 11 concern.
That, uh
I think it's real important.
Uh, for us legislators and for
the public in general, uh, is.
Um
Uh, there's a, a very heated
issue before the legislature
regarding malpractice insurance,
Madam Chair.
And uh
There's not really specific
data.
On that item, um.
And naturally.
People of different uh.
Takes on that issue kind of use
that lack of data.
Uh, to maybe make their argument
or not make their argument, so I
wanted to ask Madam Chair, if
That's one of the factors that
you kind of are wanting to
develop.
In terms of the reasons that
physicians are leaving New
Mexico.
That specific factor in terms of
That they are leaving.
Because of malpractice insurance
in terms of the cost.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, currently we do not have
enough information to make
recommendations on why
physicians are leaving the
state. Uh, we do not have any
current plans to look at or
include medical malpractice data
within this dashboard.
Thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you all for your
presentation. I have actually
heard about this over the course
of the last year or so and I was
really excited to see this and
also really, really disappointed
and quite honestly, like pissed
off.
Not at you, clearly, you're just
doing the work, but I'm like, I
really wanted hyperlocal data.
Like that was the point and so.
As I look at the stakeholders
page, I'm going, are these
really stakeholders or are they
just telling you what they want
and not giving you information.
So I'm pretty pissed about that
because I've also like.
I've been trying to crack this
workforce nut as well,
especially having a bunch of
friends my age who are in the
medical fields, you know, we
want to bring them back home and
also knowing that the people who
I know are leaving for various
different reasons, right?
They're like, I fell in love
with someone and their family
lives somewhere else or I was
treated like absolute trash. Why
would I want to stay here? And
so, you know, as we're talking
about this, it, I have to
express my disappointment and
Um
As we're still searching for our
local data because you can find
all of this nationally on a lot
of different websites. It
exists. It just is. But
I have a couple of questions,
like, one, what's the holdup?
Especially, you know, if you
have MOUs that are pending, are
there particular
Segments of the MOU's that folks
have trouble with and they're
not wanting to enter an MOU and
why, um, can you answer that?
And if I have time, Madam Chair,
I have a couple other questions.
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya, thank you for your
question. Um, I would say as far
as the holdup, we have just run
into a lot of roadblocks as far
as communication. I think a lot
of our communication happened
around the beginning of the end
of last year and so we reached
out to a lot of individuals. We
started the ball rolling and
then the power vacuum of the
session happens and everybody
falls off the map because
they're paying attention to the
bills they're working on and
these kinds of things. And so a
lot of people said we'll follow
up with us after the session and
we'll get back.
with you and we've continued to
email and call and try to follow
up to see if we can get some of
these meetings set up, you know,
us being part of New Mexico Tech
allows us to do IGAs and MOU's a
lot easier than kind of outside
sources, uh, and so really the
hold up is just trying to find
somebody who will contact us
back and then start that ball
rolling. Uh, we have people in
our legal team at New Mixotech
who is very ready to get MOUs
going, um, and I also think that
there is maybe been some of the
way we communicated initially,
uh, we're
learned we had to specify, we
weren't asking for HIPAA data,
so when you reach out to people
and ask, well, we would like
data related to doctors, a lot
of people go straight to hipA,
and we did not know that, so we
had to learn how to communicate
in this space effectively so
that we weren't immediately
scaring people off.
Um, and as far as the localized
data, if we are able to get data
that has um data kind of
granular enough where we can see
addresses and stuff, we would be
happy to do that, um, and we
have the ways to do that. Is
there a way in which we can get
data from employers as well
because as I'm thinking about
this, you know, there's so much
more we need in terms of the
quantitative data, like our
folks leaving particular job
sites at a much larger rate than
others, right?
But the other piece is, is like,
who are these people on the
chart, right? How much do they
get paid?
What debts do they have? Like,
you know, are they stuck in
student loan debt where their
families here? Are they from
here? Like because we have to
know who these people are in
order to start
Assessing why people are or are
not leaving.
Also thinking about the timeline
on that, right, right now we
have information over the course
of how long?
Or is this just ever?
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, what section of the
dashboard? I'm thinking about
the number of actual providers.
Is this over the course of the
last year or 2 years, 10 years
from 2024
only. Thank you. Yeah, and I'm
also thinking longevity wise as
well, Madam Chair, if I can just
suggest uh timeline as well and
letting us know, Madam Chair,
um
How we can help in this. I know
IPRAs have been
Requested before.
But I'm also like at a point
where I'm like, do we just
subpoena, we just need this
information in order to crack a
really hard question that we're
facing in our state. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Vice Chair Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Wow.
This is information that we have
been asking for for so many
years and I just appreciate that
there was some funding
appropriated, of course, um, but
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
point out and
As we're looking at this on page
3, it says to establish and
maintain a state healthcare
workforce dashboard, right? So,
Madam Chair, it's when we look
as to how we define healthcare.
Does it also include behavioral
health.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Lopez,
this is something that we've
thought to include within this
dashboard. If we were to obtain
behavioral health, we currently
do not have any behavioral
health specialists within the
data sets that we're working
with. However, if we were to get
that data, we would be happy to
add it. It's something that many
of our stakeholders have
expressed interest in, in adding
to this dashboard in the past,
ICASA has worked on behavioral
health projects and we've
struggled to procure behavioral
health data.
Due to oftentimes HIPAA
requirements, uh, but if we had
the data, we'd be happy to add
that to the dashboard.
Madam Chair, I asked because
part of our conversation talking
about workforce.
Um, in addition to the
physicians, nurses, all the
other um
Providers of, of healthcare,
behavioral health, you know, the
brain is not separate from the
body. So when we talk about
healthcare, we still need to
talk about the continuum, so
let's see how we could assist
maybe legislatively, but I think
behavioral health needs to be
part of this, and then just a
couple, um, on, on your pending
MIU MOUs, excuse me. Has there
been any outreach also to the
primary care association.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, I do
not believe so. OK. And I, I
bring that up, Madam Chair,
because they're also associated
with our federally qualified
healthcare centers and others
who are also providing care um
throughout New Mexico, primarily
rural.
Um, so that may be another
consideration, Madam Chair, for
you to add to um a consideration
because they too also have um
Physicians and others which
could be captured, but I think
that they may be um add value to
some more of the other
healthcare community healthcare
workers and others who are also
part of the mix. That's all,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank,
thank you so much for your
presentation. Um,
As, as has been stated, this is
exciting and extremely
frustrating um because this is
what we've been trying to get
for, and this is my 11th, 11th
year, and since, since I've been
here, which is kind of
ridiculous, um.
So in terms of, in terms of the
pending MOUs and I'll say what
I, what I have frequently been
saying
um organizations say that data
is proprietary and what I've
started to say to them, now
whether I can make this stick or
not is then so is state money.
If you a hospital association,
if you want us to fund your
hospitals, then you need to
provide us with some data, so
we're not just throwing money
into the wind, so I'm saying
that again to the universe, you
know, this whole proprietary
thing, um.
Move, move along, move along.
Um, and then in terms of HIPAA,
I mean, it's like healthcare.
Oh, HIPA can't, I can't, I
can't, I can't, I can't, and
you're not, we're not asking for
anything patient identifiable
and so that HIPAA is just a
defense and I'm tired of it, not
that anybody cares, but I'm
throwing it out there, I'm chair
of this committee now and, and
people need to understand what
HIPAA is, it's not that you, you
know, you can't.
say anything about anything,
it's it's about patience and
that's not what we're looking
for. We're not looking for
patient data. We're looking for
workforce data, so, um, in terms
of the MOUs are they
I and I see the 4 here, Hospital
Association, Department of
Health, EMS, uh, Healthcare
Authority, and the longitudinal
data system. Are you hearing
back from them? Are they saying
we need more time, are they
ignoring you?
Well, and, and they all may be
different, but what are you,
where are you on this and what
can we do to help you?
Uh, Madam Chair, the biggest one
that we've been stuck on, as I
mentioned earlier, was getting
access to that EMS data we had
met with Kyle Thornton and
Doctor Jose Acosta at Department
of Health, um, a couple of times
last year, um, they last emailed
me on in October, early October,
I believe it was October 7th.
I've since emailed 5 times and
called 4 times with no response
to any, um.
We really want to include EMS
data. It's not for lack of
trying. We've reached out to
ambulatory services in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, um,
trying to find any data uh to
include an EMS, uh, and while
that is not the rule for all of
these organizations, um.
It's oftentimes that this
project is not a top priority
for them, which is fine. They
don't get paid like we do to
work on this project so we
understand, um, but oftentimes
it's just um
Lack of communication that's
been tying up these MOUs.
And that is unacceptable. Since
October, I mean, admittedly the
session does suck the air out
of, out of all of us. But, but
that's not an excuse for not,
um, you know, I mean, especially
here we are, end of July, we've
been out of session for 4 months
plus and October was well before
session, so I, I would ask that
when you send emails,
particularly to state agencies
that youCC Xander.
And the vice chair and I, um,
and hopefully we can uh no
promises, no, uh, but just, and,
and sometimes in my dreams I
feel like having us on there.
Uh, means something. Most of the
time I know it doesn't mean
anything. It means something to
me, so.
I have to keep, I have to keep
on trying. Um, and I'm
wondering, um,
If we need to mandate, if we
need to start, we need to pass a
law that says, OK, I mean, and
we have done this with all payer
claims data and it but we, we,
as, as a body have no um
enforcement abilities and that's
I've said this before, that's
one of my um things that I'm
really gonna work on is, um, we
are not a co-equal branch with
the executive because we can beg
and ask and plead and threaten
and that's all we can do. We
send our
strongly worded letters
frequently and we get nowhere,
so I um one of my missions is to
give the legislature some power
so that we can, we can get what
we need to do our jobs. I mean,
we're trying to do these things
with no data, you know, we're
having this malpractice debate,
the hospital association won't
give us data, so we're going
blind and that's a waste of time
and a waste of money, so again
I'm throwing it out in the
universe that someday.
Someday we're gonna have the
ability to say, you know what,
we need this data and you will
provide it. So this is a great
step in the, in the right
direction and please know I
would, I, I'm not gonna speak
for all my committee, but I'm
betting that the vast majority
of this committee would stand
strong and since we have the
Secretary of Health here. I'm
wondering if she'd want to come
up and talk about why it's been
so difficult to get the EMS
data.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Vice Chair, um.
Jose Costa, Doctor Costa's no
longer with Department of Health
and I did hear about this last
week or week and a half ago when
Jason Weeks, uh, reached out to
me, so we're on it and I'll
reach out to Kyle Thornton over
at EMS.
So, Madam Secretary, give us a
timeline, please.
I need to understand what the
data request looks like before I
can give you a timeline, but you
can, I can send you an update in
the email letting you know what
how soon we can get it to. That
would be, that would be much
appreciated. And again, there
ought to be, I mean, he's gone,
but
There should be some carryover.
I mean, there should be a
written plan, there should be
someone within the department.
It shouldn't be that every time
we get a new secretary or a new
head of whatever that we go back
to ground zero. That's
unacceptable. It's a waste of
time, a waste of money, and New
Mexicans are suffering because
of it. I mean, and I know it's
not on you. I know you got, you
got, um,
Selected for this position or,
or forced, I don't know what the
deal is, but, but um I, we just,
we have been playing this game
for far too long we're we are
wasting health care resources
for wasting healthcare dollars
and we're losing professionals
that we can't afford to lose.
So, um, with that, I think, um.
Well, I will ask you, um.
So
Do you see a place for the
legislature to pass bills to
mandate data.
Madam Chair
Well, I cause it, I don't feel I
can comfortably make any
statements. Lots of our
stakeholders have expressed that
they feel that.
This data sharing will not
happen without legislative
help.
OK, thank you for that. So, uh,
looking for bill sponsors.
Maybe, maybe we'll all
co-sponsor. So thank you so much
for your work. Thank you for
your presentation, and I hope at
some point, um, October or
November, we could maybe have
you come back for a brief, um,
kind of a public.
What will happen, what do they
call it, um, a red carpet event
where we roll it out, you know,
get ball gowns and all that, so
thank you again so much and
thank you committee Madam Chair,
if I may say one last closing,
um, I guess, as far as the data
goes, we have designed this
dashboard in such a way that uh
it's highly extensible and so
any data that we get in, we
would be happy to do all of the
technical work to clean it and
get it into a usable state and
put it into the dashboard and so
while we don't have a whole lot
of
Data sources now, all of the
back end work has been designed
as such so that when we get
data, the moment we get that we
can start implementing it into
this and our framework will kind
of streamline that process and
so we'd be happy to work with
our partners to do all of that
technical work, and it should be
a lot shorter of a process than
this last year, uh, because it's
just gonna be taking that data,
cleaning it, and inputting it,
and so uh that's kind of a
positive side of this, that if
we can get those things in place
and get some of this data shared
which.
Historically has been difficult.
Uh, we would be able to pretty
quickly turn around and get that
out to the public and deploy a
new version of the dashboard
with those new uh analytics and
those new visualizations.
Thank you for that. And, and is
there a plan or is there funding
or gonna be a request for
funding to include more
professions. I'm thinking about
regulation and licensing. I, I'm
a physical therapist and the
question they give us these
gigantic questionnaires, 90% of
which isn't relevant to what we
do, but in terms of where we
work, you know, what, how much
we work, etc. so is there, is
there a plan or
Hint, hint. There should be a
plan to include more
professions.
Madam Chair, yes, we absolutely
want to include more
professions, um, within this, as
we said, if we get the data,
we'd love to, as far as funding,
uh, it's good through 2027.
However, we have around, I
checked this warning around 300K
left of that spend, uh, that
will not last through 2027, uh,
but we will use it for as long
as we can and include as many
professions as we can as well.
Hope and, and also hope to get
additional funding along the way
and
I
again, I use a
as a resource to help you get
more funding and of course it's
gonna have to pro you said our
our our PSP so work, work with
your um administration and let
us know how we can help you if
we need to be a carrot or a
stick or whatever we can be. So
thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
OK, and we will move on to, uh,
and this, oh no, that's
tomorrow. I'm moving ahead. I'm
saying, oh, the next one is
behavioral health providers. You
should listen, but that's
tomorrow, we're not there yet.
So we are on a New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute, um,
Nicole Mandel and Tim Shields,
if you could come forward.
And um we are ready for you.
And Matt's back. Matt, you're
involved in everything.
Go ahead whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for allowing us to present
today. So mostly what I wanted
to do is just give a broad
update about Mexico Behavioral
Health Institute where we are,
progress we've made, um, and
then we're gonna talk about our
psychiatric residency that we're
very excited to be starting this
year. Can you please introduce
yourself? I apologize. Yes,
madam Chair, um, my name is Tim
Shields. I am the hospital
administrator here at NMBHI.
Madam Chair, committee members,
I'm Nicole Mandel. I'm the CEO
of New Mexico Primary Care
Training Consortium.
And we know Matt
So go ahead.
All right.
Well,
Again, Madam Chair, thank you
for allowing me to be here
today. Um, so really what I
wanted to discuss and you should
have handouts here are just a
brief overview of our services,
some census updates, uh, House
Bill 8 that was passed that
we're excited to, you know,
start implementing some of those
things. Um, our new forensic
building that is under
construction or substance use
treatment facility here in Las
Vegas that we're working to open
and then just kind of an overall
state of where we are. Um.
So just brief reminder for
people who maybe don't know what
we do at NMBHI. So we're the
state hospital, we actually do 6
different things. So we have a
long-term care facility or a
nursing home there called
Meadows. It's licensed similar
to any other nursing home here
in this state, but we do take a
higher number of people with
psychiatric conditions, and we
have a psychologist there, some
psych psychiatrists who go and
support that, uh, that division.
We have an outpatient
clinic here and also in Pecos,
um,
Just down the street actually
where we serve people who are,
you know, in the community, we
call it community-based services
who receive uh community-based.
Psychiatric treatment for their
mental illness. A lot of people
have been discharged from NMBHI
over the 130 years you've been
there, but, um, kind of just a
generalized outpatient provider.
Then we have our small
adolescent program called CARE,
which stands for Center for
Adola adolescent relationship
exploration. Um, it is for males
between 13 and 17 who have some
type of sexual harmful behavior.
It's about a year-long program.
It's licensed through CYFD as a
residential treatment facility.
And then we have some of the
more well-known service lines
for, for kind of what you guys
look at. One is our, we call it
adult psychiatric division.
Those are people who are on a
civil court commitment, so not
in the criminal justice system,
but they are on a court
commitment to receive treatment,
they can't leave until, you
know, our treatment team says
that they're able to do so,
those commitments can be 30
days, 90 days, 180 days, um, and
then we can renew them. So these
are people who are in some type
of psych.
catch a crisis and their
symptoms are making it where
they can't um care for
themselves in the community at a
lower level of care.
We have our forensic division,
which is the division that does
two things really. One is treat
to competency. So people are
alleged to have committed a
crime, and they're unable to go
to trial because their mental
health condition is um
interfering with their ability
to aid and assist in their
defense, they can come to us for
competence restoration
treatment.
We have up to 9 months to
provide that treatment and
restore them to competency. If
they are restored to competency,
we send them back and they
proceed with the trial. If
they're unable to be restored to
competency, there are select
number of crimes that get put on
what we call a 1.5 commitment,
which, um, essentially they stay
with us up to the amount of time
had they been convicted of the
crime, which they were alleged
to have commit.
So apologize, it's a bit of a
mouthful, but basically, if
someone is, um, you know,
charged with murder and they're
not competent and not
restorable, they would come up
to, to us for as long as if they
had been convicted of that
crime. There's a big legal
process to that, you know, they
have to have been more than
likely to have committed that
crime, but they stay with us for
up to that amount of time. So
that could be
You know, for the rest of their
life. So if you hear me refer to
1.5 commitments, sometimes I, I
forget that, you know, that
that's what they are, but that's
what they are. The 1.5s are
people who are there. And then
our 6th division that we are
very happy to start here soon is
substance use treatment. So
we're gonna do a detox and
substance use treatment
facility. So the county along
with Matt's help, you're right,
he is in everything. Um, kind of
got some funding to renovate a
building that's basically on
NMBHS.
Campus and the county was gonna
look for someone to operate it
and I, you know, went to some
meetings to help them with
planning, and I said, well, we
can provide food, we can provide
pharmacy, we can provide
security, and they said, well,
why don't you just run it? So,
um, I went back, of course, to
DOH leadership and ask them, you
know, kind of their thoughts and
then this last session we did
receive some funding to run that
facility. So I'll talk a little
bit more about that, but that's
gonna be the 6th thing that we
do at an MBHI.
Uh
So I did want to go over our
census update.
So, I don't need to go through
each of the
The numbers specifically, but I
will say that overall we've seen
an increase in the census at
NMBHI on the hospital side. Um,
We trending up even from the end
of the fiscal year data. So what
I gave you is the average daily
census for each of the 5
divisions and the hospital
overall. I'll say our adult
psych side, which is that civil
commitment side has gone up
pretty substantially and right
now we're at the point where
basically all of our operational
beds are full, and as we're
discharging, we are bringing
more people in. So I'll talk a
little bit more about when we
get to House Bill 8, how we're
gonna try to expand that
capacity. Our forensic division
is
also, um, operating at a higher
rate than we ever have before.
So we're still able to kind of
meet that need, but as we kind
of move forward, we're watching
that really closely to make sure
we continue to, to watch those.
So overall we've seen an
increase in the census that
NMBHI over the last 3 years, a
smaller increase at um Meadows,
which is the nursing home, um,
but we're still kind of working
towards building that up.
Um, some clinical highlights,
I'm just gonna jump in here. I
had to, I had to Google House
Bill 8 because I don't even
remember my own bill number, so
that's criminal competency and
treatment for, so um that was
sponsored by
uh Rep Reps Chandler, Garrett,
Barrego, Cates, and Little.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair, and
when I get there, I do have a
slide just on House Bill 8. So
that's interesting cause yeah,
that's, I've read it probably
200 times. So we just call it
House Bill 8 now, um, that
we're, we're excited to kind of
put into place and see what we
can do. So I'll go over, I can
briefly go over what that bill
did here in a minute. Um,
definitely.
Uh
Some clinical highlights, so
We are part of a group called
Whipshot, which is the Western
psychiatric State Hospital
Association, and what we do is,
is we share data. So interesting
following the presentation you
just had is, is we do share
data. We do de-identify it,
cause I don't want them to take,
you know, New Mexico State
Hospital in comparison to Oregon
and then everyone in Oregon
knows it's us. So I did
de-identify it on this, but what
we do is, is we compare us to
the other state hospitals. It's
the most apples to apples
comparison we can make. And
there's some highlights that I
just wanted to point out. One
is our seclusion data, so we try
really hard to make sure that
we're treating people, you know,
with, with dignity, with
respect, and trying to not put
them into seclusion. So we
actually have one of the lower
rates of seclusion for any state
hospital. The ones who are above
us are actually people who don't
exactly do what we do, so that's
the closest comparison, but some
just take, you know, a subset of
people who are not quite as
acute as we take. So those are
the ones that have no seclusion,
that's, that's who they are.
But if the people who do use
seclusion, we are at one of the,
the lower rates of use. So I
like to kind of flip it instead
of saying, you know, 6% of
people, I like to say 94% of
people who come to us never have
a seclusion event while they're
with us. Um, and given the
acuity of who we take.
Meaning if you go to the psych
hospitals across the state, your
UNM Central Desert, places like
that, we take the most acute
people that they have, that's
who they send to us and we still
work really hard to not use
seclusion and restraint up with
this. So I'm pretty proud of
that data. Um, the next one I
talked to our staff a lot about
is, is, is we can control kind
of a lot of things and how the
patients feel when they're with
us, so that felt safe in the
hospital. I'm really proud that
we were number one in that um
that
So of all the state hospitals in
the western part of the United
States, and I should have said
this earlier, we're talking
North Dakota, South Dakota,
West, including Alaska and
Hawaii, they are part of it. All
of those states, um, our
patients feel the most safe out
of any state hospital.
Um
And then
I did put in some restoration
data.
So, reason being is, is the
competence restoration bill and
Competence restoration in
general across the country right
now is getting a lot of
attention.
So it's different states have
been sued for a number of
different reasons, all sort of
revolving around competence
restoration. So, I just like to,
to bring this out to say that on
average, the rate that we do
competence restoration, we are
restoring the competency again
above average, and I don't have
good average data on there, but
we are
Restoring most people back to
competence restoration. So if
the people who sent us somewhere
between 75 and 85, 80% of the
time, we're gonna restore those
people to competence and send
them back to the judicial
district that sent them to us.
And then I didn't include it
because it's a small number, but
a lot of times people will, will
ask, you know, hey Tim, how many
people then?
Aren't competent, you know, or
is, are they challenged and of
the entire fiscal year, we only
were challenged 6 times and 6
out of 6 times the judge agreed
with us that they were competent
to stand trial. So that's, you
know, just credit to the
clinical team there in that
division that we do a pretty
good job. The people that are
sent to test us for competence
restoration, we do a pretty good
job and when we say they are
competent and ready to go to
trial. Most of the time we are
correct in that judgment.
Um, so some other division
highlights that I wanted to say
is, is, you know, kids in state
custody right now has a lot of
attention, so our care program
is a specialized unit, like I
said, where we, we look at
adolescents who
Um, have some type of sexual
harmful behavior, and I've
worked with that team there
where we're pushing it to try
to, you know, expand and maybe
take some kids that maybe we
would have said no to in the
past to make sure we get kids
in.
In New Mexico, keep them in New
Mexico, so we've today we're at
6, we have an interview for
another kid tomorrow and we're
trying to get up to 8 or 9,
which is not a ton of kids, but
when we were at 4 for the last
number of fiscal years, we're
trying to double the number of
kids that we can take and we're
on pace to be able to do that
here in the next couple of
months. We'll probably be at
that 8 to 9 mark that we're
really trying to set.
Um, community-based services,
so.
Uh, assisted outpatient
treatment or AOT has been in
existence for a while. It's been
in law for a while and some
areas of the state have been
more advanced in that. And what
we're trying to do is start it
up here in the 4th judicial
district. So our outpatient team
is working with the courts to
be, so we will be the service
provider for that. So it
assisted outpatient treatment
is, is
Essentially, it's, it's similar
to a court order to continue to
receive behavioral health
treatment in the community. So
instead of having people at the
hospital, we can put them into
the community, but they still
have some kind of legal
oversight. And if they stop
taking their medications or they
start using drugs, they can
re-hospitalize them a little bit
quicker. And um people kind of
say, you know, it's the black
robe effect as well where you
put someone on a court order to
do something, they're more
likely to do that. So there's a
good program, um, in Las Cruces
and Albuquerque and Santa Fe,
and we're trying to set it up
here. And, in this area for the
whole 4th district. So they've
had meetings last week, this
week we're trying to get that
kind of pushed forward so that
we will be the provider here for
the 4th judicial district to be
able to do that.
And then our long-term care, so
this is a
Uh, challenge that we've been
working a lot with the state on
and how to solve is how do we
get people out of the psych
hospital who have sort of aged
out and need some assistance
with their daily living and put
them into nursing homes when as
you guys know, nursing homes are
the most highly regulated
outside of nuclear facilities,
their most highly regulated
place in, in the country. So we
have successfully in the last
few weeks moved to 2 from our
adult psych division to help,
you know, take the next people
who are up for that and put them
Over at Meadows, and we have a
list of another number of about
7 or 8 that we're trying to work
with. So they're expanding that
as well to try to move that
forward.
Uh
So those are all the updates.
Now we'll talk about House Bill
8 a little bit, so House Bill 8
was the, the competency bill.
And essentially what the bill
did is a number of things is the
main thing that it did though is
throughout the process, it
forces people to look at civil
commitment as they go along in
the competency process. So,
There's a whole group of people
that are sort of blind to us at
the state hospital that
Um
They commit a crime.
We only see them if it's a
felony and if they're considered
dangerous. Those two conditions
are met, they're sent to NMBHI.
So that's sort of my life. I
could tell you everything there
is to know about them.
There's also a push, so what if
they're not dangerous and not,
don't have a a felony, are they
just sent back to the streets.
So what they did is they started
this bill pushed it so that
people have to be evaluated for
a civil commitment. So before
just releasing them, they're
gonna be evaluated for a civil
commitment if they come to
competency and they don't quite
meet criteria for a 1.5
commitment. They can also be
looked at for civil commitments
there and with the civil
commitment, it's not just
inpatient, there's also
outpatient.
Um, that AOT that I was talking
about, assisted outpatient
treatment. So at multiple times
in the competency process,
they'll
forced to evaluate now for
That criteria to see if they can
come there. The other thing it
does is it adds outpatient
competence restoration. So
Full disclosure that doesn't
exist in the state yet, but we,
you know, that the argument was
if we don't have it as an
option, then there's no reason
for people to build it up. So
now, if it's a non-dangerous
felony people could be sent to
outpatient competency
restoration.
Which different counties,
different communities would
start to be able to provide that
service so they wouldn't all
come to NMBHI, but really what I
think the focus of this was
There's a lot of people that
don't come to NMBHI. How do we
make sure that they get the
services that they need, who
don't quite meet criteria to
come to us. So with that,
Um
We want to be ready, right? So
it went into effect June 20th,
so, um,
With that, what we wanna do is,
is we wanna be ready. So if
there's an increase in referrals
of civil commitments, where do
they go? Now the bill is silent
on where they go, which means
that if someone's say in San
Santa Fe County Detention
Center. They have a felony,
they're not competent, but
they're not considered
dangerous.
So they're evaluated and they
say, but they do meet criteria
for a civil commitment, meaning
that, you know, their psychosis
is coming to the point where
they can't really care for their
own basic needs.
So they need to be hospitalized.
Well, where does that go? The
bill doesn't say that they have
to come to NMBHI, but I'll just
say in practice, I'm
anticipating that they're gonna
come to NMBHI. So what we're
doing is we're going to get
ready, so we have um civil
commitment units that are
essentially full. We have 2.
Cottages that used to be kind of
lower levels of care, but our
licensed under this, so what
we've done is, is we've secured
them up a little bit and gotten
them ready. So one is almost all
the way ready. It's a cottage
that we had to fence. It didn't
have fencing. Last time we used
it for the adult psych
population, someone hopped a
fence, um, I'm getting old, I
have bad knees. I could get over
the fence and got out of that,
which is not what we want. If
someone's on a court commitment
to us, we want them to be there.
So we've kind of put some
fencing around that unit. We're
leveling it out. We're
going to be ready to open that
unit here soon. And the other
one didn't have a seclusion
room, so I just said a few
minutes ago, we don't use
seclusion a lot, which is true,
but when you need it, you need
it, um, you know, you can't hold
people for forever. You need to
kind of get them into a secure
place. So that one's gonna take
a little bit longer. There's a
lot of rules around what a
seclusion room has to look like.
So we're gonna add that one, but
that, that's in process, and
I'll say Department of Health
Leadership jumped on that as
soon as I said, hey, these are
the two things lacking we had.
We had it like uh within a week,
which I've never seen in state
government. It was great. So we
are trying, we are getting ready
to be able to provide services
to more New Mexicans as we get
these court orders.
I will say I'm also working with
um hospitals and CEOs and
Central Desert and other places
and had a constituent complaint
that came to me not, it wasn't
about the state hospital, but it
was about this process, and I
said, you know, the best thing
you can do is just call your
local hospitals and see if
they'll take them. And if they
can't stabilize them in 7 days,
30 days, send them to us.
That's, that's who we are.
That's why we exist. But if they
don't need to be with us, then
let's stable.
them in the communities that
they're in. So again, because
it's silent on that in the bill,
they can go sort of anywhere,
and I'm trying to help the
state.
I understand that, not because I
don't want them to come to us. I
do, but I want to do what we
need to do. And if we take the
most difficult people in the
state, which I'm proud of that
that's what we do.
Then
People need us to take the most
difficult people in the state.
We don't need to take people who
maybe could be stabilized at a
lower level of care.
So we're working hard kind of
across the board to make sure
that we're getting New Mexicans
out of jail, not back into the
community, because that was sort
of the point of this bill is to
get them services when they need
services at the level of care
they need in their communities
and then kind of, like I say,
let us be us, let us do what we
need to do, which is take the
most difficult people who are
the take the longest to
stabilize and we're kind of
happy to take that on.
The forensic side of this.
There's not any real substantial
changes from this bill to who's
going to be eligible for
inpatient competence
restoration. So like I said, it
added outpatient competence
restoration inpatient.
Before June 20th was they needed
to have um allegedly committed a
felony and be considered
dangerous, that state, they
added some language, I guess you
guys, you added some language
about, um, what, what that looks
like to kind of clarify it a
little bit. And there was a
change to 1.5 commitments, so
they're not dangerous, or sorry,
the dangerous felonies not
competent, not restorable
population, so.
It expanded on that a little
bit. It added things like human
trafficking and a few other
other crimes.
We don't have great data on
that, but personally, I'm not
super worried about it because
if you're capable of pulling off
some of these crimes are
probably competent. We don't get
a lot of not competent people
charged with human trafficking.
That's a fairly complicated
crime to pull off. So we're not
as worried on the, on this side.
I will say that LLCP side is
also, sorry, Los Lunas Community
Program who works with the
developmental delays.
That the 1.6 is similar to what
I kind of described for the
people with mental illness, if
they have a developmental delay
or intellectual disability, they
go to Los Lunas and they're also
preparing for that expansion
there and they're ready. So as a
department, we're, we're ready
for this.
Not knowing what it's gonna look
like, right? We don't know the
numbers till we know the
numbers, but we're, we're just
gonna be ready, um, kind of
across the board. So that one
might have a little bit more of
an impact in terms of there
might be more people who fall
under. It's the same list of
crimes, but they might have a
little bit more, and that list
expanded. So previously it
wasn't the same list for uh
mental health 1.5 and a
developmental delay intellectual
disability 1.6.
Um, this bill.
Made it equal, so they are, it
has exactly the same crimes now,
so they're ready for that, um,
and they've done a good job sort
of prepping for that.
They also have done, um, a good
job of taking a couple of our
people who could go to LLCP so
as we're ready and we're, we're
expecting a big influx in
referrals for civil court
commitments, so we're trying to
work with people who don't
necessarily need to be with us
to discharge into lower levels
of care, and we had a few people
who were not on the DD waiver
who we felt like we should so
our psychologists tested them,
worked with, um, DD
SD and got him on the waiver and
we've discharged about 4 who are
all doing exceptionally well in
the community settings that they
have there. So, um, that's just,
I just wanted to give a shout
out, I guess, to our LLCP people
cause they've taken a few of
ours and they've done, they've
done really well over there.
Um, the next few slides are
regarding our new forensic
building.
So quick backstory on the
forensic building is is we are
joint commission accredited.
Um
And with that accreditation.
It was put at risk with the
current forensic building that
we have.
Because it doesn't even meet ADA
standards. It was built in 1972.
It was well it was opened in
1972, and their ligature risks,
and by ligature I mean in the
hospital settings, you can't
have places for people to tie
off of and try to commit
suicide.
Well, that wasn't the case in
1972, so the building is just
full of them to the point where
we couldn't even retrofit it or,
you know, renovate the building.
We had to build a new building.
So we broke ground here this
spring on that building, um,
after years of planning and a
lot of work, um, gone into that.
So super excited.
Um, people who live here have
seen lots and lots of dump
trucks go. We had an average of
80 dump trucks in and out every
day, um, for the last number of
months. So there's been a ton of
work to get to where the second
picture is, which doesn't look
like there's that much work, but
trust me, to get the wall
starting to go up, they've had
to do a lot of work, um, so
we're super excited that that's
where we are and then I did put
a rendering of what the building
will look like at the end. Um,
so we've received a
a lot of funding and I know we
received a lot of funding and we
need a little bit more and by a
little bit, I mean, probably a
lot more. Um, so this upcoming
session we're asking for more
because we really want to
complete this project without
having to stop construction, so
we can phase the finding of it
and we can work around that.
If we get the rest of the
funding, this upcoming session,
then construction won't stop,
it'll be seamless and we'll be
able to hit that substantial
completion date of the end of
2027.
And if we don't hit that
substantial completion date, we
will get into some issues with
joint commission and
accreditation. So as long as we
sort of
Meet these these timelines that
we've set out, we'll do that.
And joint commission is watching
this instead of coming every 3
years, they now come every year.
Um, so we get the privilege of
welcoming them every year now,
where they get to kind of come
and look under the hood and look
at everything they want to look
at, but um right now they're,
they're pleased that you guys
approved that project that you
funded that project, we just
need to keep it going.
Um, the substance use facility.
So there is a picture of the
outside of that building. So
what we're trying to do is
provide a level of care that
doesn't exist currently in this
part of the state. So right now,
the hospital provides what's
referred to as 4.0 or medical
detox. So these are people that
might need IVs, might need some
really intensive medical um
assistance in helping them detox
off of their substances.
Once they're done to go to
continued treatment, they would
have to go somewhere else in the
state. So this is part of why
the county wanted to do that is
to keep them here. So what we've
done is we're gonna work really
closely with them. We're gonna
work really closely with
detention, um, Sheriff Lopez was
also an integral member in
getting this off the ground, so
we have a lot of partnerships
going, so what we wanna do is we
wanna provide a little bit lower
level of detox, so people can
detox with us as long as they
don't need medical, um, IVs and
things.
like that.
And then we're gonna do the
continued treatment, the 28 to
30 day ish treatment, we're
gonna um provide that
residential treatment here and
then we have outpatient
providers in the community that
we're gonna right now just team
up with and they can continue
outpatient after. So, we're
gonna kind of
Focus on this part of the state,
but also as a as a state
operated facility, it's open to
anyone across the state who
refers to us.
So we've been doing a lot of
work, um, just kind of had an
official that we would operate
this, this facility.
After this last session. So I've
been involved and toured the
facility many times throughout,
but
Officially that's where we are.
So what we worked with the
county. The county had some
money to buy, you know, they
didn't have beds and furniture
and all of that cause they
wanted to see who was gonna
operate it, so we worked with
them and bought a bunch of
stuff, so the reason there's not
a picture of the inside of the
building is this because it's
full of boxes right now, as our
team is working on putting the
beds in and putting the
furniture up and doing
everything we need to do. We do
have to notify during
commission, which we've done
that we're gonna do this, so
we'll get a joint commission
accredited and then we'll work.
With um the healthcare authority
to get it licensed as a
residential treatment or
accredited adult residential
treatment center and just
Friday, coincidentally, Nick
Bucas was in this room and, and
he and I talked and he said, as
soon as um as soon as you guys
are ready for us, you let me
know and I'll fast track it. So
I appreciate his support in
that, so we're gonna do that. So
that's sort of where we are.
We're starting to post some
positions and higher. I have
some interviews this week for
the, the main director of that
division and then we're gonna
start
Posing some of our medical
providers and nursing physicians
and things like that. So best
case scenario, I think about 8
weeks. I've been kind of joking
somewhere between 1 month and 11
months will open. I, I, I want
to give myself a wide range
there, so I don't miss. Um, so
best case scenario would be 8
weeks.
Probably not too much later than
that. I'm hoping we can get it
done right around there. But
until I know and um know when
joint commission is gonna come
look at the building cause it's
a new service line so they do
have to physically come look at
it. If I was gonna open another
forensic building, they'd say,
yeah, open it, and we'll, we'll
check you next time that we come
out, but with a new service
line, they have to come and look
at it as we open. So we've
notified them of our intention
to open and then we'll notify
them when we have a date that
will open, they'll come out and
then we'll get it.
licensed.
So we're very excited to do
that.
Um
Thank goodness, right Academic
partnerships for these guys.
I've been talking a lot, so
Quickly, big picture, NMBHI
works with a lot of different
schools. We have nursing
students come from all over the
place for a week or 2 weeks, um,
eastern New Mexico, but our big
people that we um partner with,
of course, are Highlands. We
have social work students, we
have behavioral health
therapists, students with UNM
we've had medical students come
up, we've done residencies. We
do have an APA accredited
psychology internship, and then
what we're very excited to work
on now is um a psych
residency, so here I will kick
it off to everyone else to talk
about that a little bit more.
All right, so, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
community. My job here is just
to help show how this connects
to other parts of the
presentations. We just finished
talking about workforce and 14
years of blood, sweat, and tears
of my blood, sweat, and tears
and Sheriff, Sheriff Lopez and
others, um, to see this
facility, this residential
treatment center, get to this
point that has furniture and
beds and they're being put
together and we hope within not
one month, but maybe a year or
so to be, uh, placing our first.
most vulnerable patients in that
treatment center. Since the
beginning, uh, in, in its in its
design, this Northeast regional
crisis and treatment center, a
huge component of it has always
been workforce. So the idea not
only that we will treat our most
vulnerable patients and have an
inpatient facility here in our
region for doing that, but also
that we will be a location where
students can have clinical
rotations specifically in
substance use. So all students.
So that, that is a huge
component of it and just as you
heard me speaking in, in the
previous presentation about
Sami's the salute and how these
young students become our future
health professionals, the idea
here is a similar program, which
uh we called a spinoff, Samis de
Esperanza is that now here's
another entry level into health
careers that folks in recovery
who need sustainable employment
to be able to stay in recovery
that they will all that will
this will.
be another stream for us of
healthcare workforce,
particularly those, those entry
level positions that we need to
keep facilities like this
operational in, in our, in our
local communities. So I'm super
excited about that component of
that, everything from our
certified nurse assistants to,
uh, community health workers and
peer support specialists and
latex and LSAAs and social work,
which you already heard about in
counseling all the way to, we're
just coming off of a year of
planning.
of having a planning grant, uh,
for uh uh uh residency planning
grant in here in our community,
Mora San Miguel and Guadalupe in
this region, these counties, we
looked at planning being, is it
feasible to have a family
medicine residency here. Is it
feasible to have a psychiatry
residency here. So we looked at
both. The reality is it's still
feasible. It's just not in reach
right now for family medicine.
Uh, there's just too many holes
of the special.
Trotations that are needed, my
partner Nicole can explain a lot
more about that. um, and GME
requirements, but what is
feasible in partnership with the
University of New Mexico and the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute is to set up a
psychiatry residency here in the
north. So with that, I'll hand
it over to Nicole.
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you for having us here
today. Um, so take a step back
really quick and just explain
New Mexico primary care training
consortia, and we're a
consortium of all of the primary
care residencies in the state.
Uh, so this is family medicine,
PEs, psych, and internal
medicine. And we work with the
state, um, to provide technical
assistance for developing
residency programs with uh
institutions that might not have
the knowledge or the
infrastructure to do so
themselves. We also run and
operate our own programs. Um, so
we are working with uh the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute and UNM, um, for a
psych residency here. Uh, so
this is going to be a
partnership, uh, and it's kind
of got precedences with you and
him. They are currently
developing and coming to the
closing lines of uh psych
residency program in Don.
Anna County.
Um, so this partnership with UNM
allows for those specialty
rotations that uh Matt was
alluding to before to be
fulfilled, um, in the more urban
developed UNM setting and then
coming out, um, kind of in a 1 +
3 program is what we call it, so
one year at UNM and 3 years, uh,
uh, San Miguel for this program
or Donana County for the other
program. Um, and so we are
coming to the close for the
Donana County program, um, and
just kicking off this program,
but something I wanted to talk a
little bit more about with you
guys is a roadblock that we are
facing now that we are getting
up and running and I'm sure you
may be able to guess. This has
to do with financing. So, um,
one of the big challenges is.
Well, let me, let me step back
really quick and I'm gonna throw
some jargon soup at you. Uh,
bear with me for a second and
I'm happy to answer questions,
um, residency programs that post
medical school training are
funded by Medicaid, Medicare
majorly.
They come through two different
streams in each one called
indirect Indirect Medical
payments.
Because of the regulatory
language, independent psych
hospitals, facilities or units
are not eligible for that
indirect payment. And this is
one of the larger payments that
provides funding for residency
programs. Um, so there are a few
avenues that we can go about
trying to work around this to
allow these residency programs
to exist because they're so
needed here. Um, and one of them
is to change the regulatory
language, so put
the State plan amendment uh with
HCA working with them to change
it right now. It just says that
those payments can go to DRG
Hospital.
And as you may or may not know
psych hospitals are paid on a
per diem rate. So that's why
they are ineligible, just that
one wording. um, and then the
other avenue we've been
exploring is last year we worked
with our partners, uh, to put
forth a piece of legislation to
provide a permanent fund, uh,
for the state and this permanent
fund would be ran out of HCA,
um, in 2019, House Bill 4
80 provided the creation of a
graduate medical expansion
committee so that committee
would really help oversee that
permanent fund, and it would
look at residency programs who
are struggling due to geography,
regulatory language, that kind
of thing to provide extra
financing to help them meet that
need. Um, so those are a few,
uh, avenues that we are looking
at and um I'm just talking about
psych right now, but there
There's also issues around rural
rural rurality, um, and then
FQHCs have similar limitations
due to regulations, uh, which
I'm happy to talk about at
another time.
Yeah, so I'll just wrap, wrap up
the presentation briefly. Um, so
yeah, so we're very excited with
that partnership and like I
said, we have a lot of
partnerships going on right now
that we're trying to continue to
build the workforce. Um,
I still on Matt's line that he
kind of sold me on is is what do
we do in Las Vegas is is we
build healthcare professionals.
So, um.
I think that's something that we
can do here, especially with
NMBHI we have a lot of people
there that we can take a lot of
students, so we're trying to do
as much of that as we can.
Um, so just kind of overall to
summarize kind of what what
we're looking at is the census
overall at NMBHI has grown,
especially over the last 3
fiscal years, um, specifically
on the psych hospital side.
That's where we've seen the
biggest growth.
We've had joint commission come
out, and we've had lots of
different licensing come out,
um.
Last week I had licensing at our
adult psych division and at our
adolescent division at the same
time. So there's some things
that I like, you know, a double
dose of. I said double dose of
licensing was not fun. We're
running all over the place. One
has already left no citations at
all. CFD is still there kind of
completing it virtually, so, um,
we'll work with them. Nothing
major, but we've had a lot of
really good positive surveys
recently, um.
The only major thing that Joint
Commission found was that our
forensic building does not meet
code for suicide risk.
We're building a new building.
There's not really anything else
we can do with that. So, other
than that though, they had some
minor level findings. Um,
And then our biggest need.
Since I've been here as across
the country with healthcare is,
is more the entry level
positions, so certified nur
nursing assistant on the, you
know, long-term care, nursing
home side, that equivalent
position on the hospital side
used to be called Py texts, now
they're called direct care. Um,
we're working really hard to be
able to build that workforce up.
We've done some, some
initiatives recently with
Department of Health Leadership
has really helped to push
forward, we increased shift
differentials from $1 to $3 even
$3.50 if you work weekend
nights. We've just done an
appropriate placement of our
direct care staff. They were all
at the, you know, bottom end of
the pay band because the pay
band goes up, which is great. We
appreciate it, you know, instead
of the minimum being $11 in the,
in the state, it's 15, so we
bring everyone up and everyone's
making $15 an hour, whether
you've been there 1 year or 30.
we just placed them so people
got some pretty significant
raises. So we're really excited
um to work with that and see how
that, that helps us, but yeah,
that's kind of the thing that
we're most focused on right now
is is increasing the number of
positions we have there so that
we can make sure that we're
increasing the census and we're
ready for, you know, whatever
changes come. So thank you all
and any questions, I'd be happy
to answer them.
Thank you. Um, again, is there
anyone who doesn't have
questions.
OK. So we will start with um
let's start with Senator Pinto,
and we'll, we will have 3
minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
your presentation. So you, could
you explain how the child,
children's the, the separation
and why there's a separation of
and where it occurs between the
children and adults.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, um,
Not exactly. I can't explain why
I have the predates me, but what
I'll say is, is that, that New
Mexico right now does not have
like a long term psychiatric
hospitalization level of care,
but we're actually working, I
was appointed to a committee. We
had a meeting last week and
we're working really fast. I
have another meeting tomorrow to
look at. Is that something that
we need to have a higher level
of care. So you have psych
hospitals for adolescents.
Some might need to stay there
longer, but they're not designed
for it. So we're working on kind
of a solution for that with
CYFD.
Um
And I'm not saying that's the
answer, but that's what I saw
over in Washington state and I
ran one of them, so I think
that's how I got put on this
committee. So historically, the
state hospital here has had a
hospital level of care for
adults and a residential
treatment, which is a lower
level of care for adolescents
and
The exact makeup of that has
changed when I got here almost 5
years ago, it was this kind of
sexual harmful behavior focus,
and that's what we are right
now. But I've worked with um
Secretary de Blasi and Mr.
Morgan, the director of
facilities of the state needs us
to be something different. Let's
be something different. So we're
open to that and we're looking
at that right now is what, what
makes the most sense for the
most New Mexicans, but that's
the history, it's predates me
why they separated it. So Madam
Chair and presenters.
So it's not clearly saying,
well, they turn 18, we're gonna
move them with the adults. It's
an understanding of the sexual
harm or their understanding of
the aspects of the
Sex, basically, yeah, some madam
chair Senator,
yes, so when you discharge from
a program, it's, you've
completed the treatment.
I don't, I don't think we've had
any go from there to the adult
side since I've been there.
It's, it's not that, it's not
the pipeline, it's, it's more
they would go back into the
community after treatment.
So, Madam Chair and members, so
is it like a questionnaire, is
that like an evaluation of their
behavior that's um
Sends them to the the next.
Upper facility. I mean, cause
you know you're talking about
the competency of the mind that
that's my thing too with the uh
they talk about juvenile justice
is that we have some young
adults in there that are very
vulnerable and yet we're gonna
say, well, you're 18.
Go go next door to the next
building. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So, Madam Chair, Senator
Pinto, I will say that we cannot
admit someone after their 18th
birthday, but we don't have to
discharge them when they're 18,
and we have kept people past
that to make sure that
treatment's completed. So it's
not on their 18th birthday. Good
luck to you. We do keep them
until they're done with the
treatment.
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna follow up on the same
topic, um.
Are there any other facilities
in the state that could be
contracted with to do work with
forensic, um, needs of children.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Stephanics.
I'm sorry, could you clarify
what you mean forensic needs,
you mean competence restoration
specifically, or more broadly
behavioral health treatment.
Uh, not, not broadly behavioral
health. I'm talking about
children with crimes who need a
psychiatric evaluation and
forensic treatment.
I just, if you're not speaking,
can you turn your mic off? We
get beat.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator
Stephannis, not that I'm aware
of. I don't believe that that
exists in New Mexico.
So Madam Chair, uh, does you and
Hospital still do children's
psychiatric work?
And are they a possible option?
Madam Chair, Senator Stefanis,
UNM definitely has an inpatient
psychiatric hospital for
adolescents.
That I know
I, I feel like I might be out of
line to say what they could or
could not do in the future.
Yeah. That's fine. Thank you,
Madam Chair. There's one other
thing, OK, we
In our state, we have made some
uh hard decisions about
Adolescence, not 18 year olds,
adolescents who commit serious
crimes.
To be evaluated and they might
end up in an adult setting.
How does your facility handle
that? And I'm talking about 13
to 15 year olds.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Stefaniks,
I will say that we don't admit
them to our facility because we
do only work with the adults.
What we have done is we have
offered our expertise, and I
don't mean my expertise, I mean
our our psychologists to help,
um, if we're, if we're called on
a case and if they want, you
know, competence restoration or
should they raise competency. We
have been brought in for that. I
would say, um, sister facility
for the Department of Health,
um, Sequoia Adolescent
Treatment.
They probably would be better to
answer that question, and
they've done a lot more in that
area than, than we have here at
NMBHI.
One last question.
Um, while the forensic, uh,
building is being completed, uh,
I'm assuming that the adults are
in the old.
Forensic
Facilities
Yeah, Madam chair, Senator
Stefaniks, yes, and that's why
we get the pleasure of joint
commission annually instead of
every 3 years. This is because
they're still in the old
building, yes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you
presenters.
Yeah, it's OK, um.
Yeah, the, the
I don't know if we get an extra
round of questions, but I do
have a few questions, Madam
Chair. This is, you know, uh, an
area of, of legislation that
I've been working on heavily and
but I'm just gonna get to some
of the, the points and, and
issues that I'm hearing about,
um, as far as, you know, with
the,
The structure around the
evaluators when it comes to the
competency and those sorts of
things, it's come to my
attention that we've lost the
contract or two or if you
evaluate or so I want to know
how you're um
Dealing with that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, that contract is held at
at HCA with the community, um,
evaluators. So
In terms of NMBHI, we have not
lost anyone.
So I think I, I, I don't want to
speak for you, that's fine. I
was directly of how this was
impacting you, if at all. Thank
you. That's the right answer.
Um, if that's the answer, um,
so,
What I'm seeing here is a big
plan and overview plan and all
of you working together. What I
didn't hear too much about. I
heard about the AOT that you're,
you're, you're developing around
a plan around that as well and
really bringing in
infrastructure with your local
government. Congratulations. I
think that's essential and
important. But with SB3, which
has not mentioned in here, how
is that coming into play with
the work that's in front of you,
Madam Chair.
Um, yeah, Madam Chair
Representative Lu Han.
That's gonna be an integrated
into all of this, right? SB 3 is
how this region is going to use
the funds and all, all of those
things, um.
I believe it says the Department
of Health will have
representation on those
committees. I would venture to
guess that I'll be on it, um, or
someone from Department of
Health. So we have not, I've not
been in any of those planning
meetings yet, but I believe that
they're just starting to happen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. They
have begun. Yes, they have an
executive committee, and I would
hope that is essential as what
the work is here in Las Vegas
and the way that you're, um,
planning that you are going to
be, have a have a a front seat.
So to speak, and how this is
going to be developed because
from what you're presenting
today, you're looking to be a
hub, you're looking to to take
leadership and I want to commend
you on that, and I want to see
how that's going to unfold as we
are looking at
competency, forensics, AOT, all
these things and really how this
is going to develop here and
what you're presenting with us
throughout the day today and,
you know, for the future, but
there are some concerns that I
have, obviously, um, other
things, Madam Chair, I don't
have time for and looking at,
you know, definition for
recidivism and things of that
nature and how that goes into
some of the way that some of
the, the, the questionnaires
that you develop when you're
looking at um
How you're, um,
How you're dealing with the
population that you are and
getting the numbers that you're
getting here, which are good.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good timing, Representative.
Taurus Velasquez.
Hey, Madam Chair, I don't know
if I can beat that timing, but
I'll try. Um,
As a hub, as I understand what
you're presenting here, um, as a
hub, I'm wondering if Madam
Chair, I'm wondering if you all
have thought about implications
for your institute, um, based on
what the federal government is
doing in terms of the special
education department.
And where it might be housed in
particular for students with
behavioral disabilities. I'm
wondering if um if you might
have any answers for me on a
question that we received at uh
A community gathering yesterday
on um public education being at
risk and that was what's going
to happen with our severe
emotional support services for
students with disabilities, and
I'm wondering if you have
considered not only the funding,
but how children with behavioral
disorders will be housed, um,
home, home base in terms of.
Services, but also for the kids
that need further, further care.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Torres Velasquez, um.
I've been asked
Not just about this, but about
kind of big Medicaid cuts and
how that might impact NMBHI. We
do get a pretty substantial
amount of state funding. So we
do also bill Medicaid for
certain services, Medicare for
some services.
But it's difficult for me to say
exactly how that will impact us
until I see a little bit more.
Um, in terms of special
education, we have a really good
relationship right now with the
West Las Vegas School District,
so small town but two school
districts here. West happens to
be the district that we're in,
and they, they work well with
us, and they provide a teacher
for adolescents, um, so.
That's, that's kind of I guess
the extent of what I would know
about that. I don't want to say
too much cause I'm not sure, but
maybe
you jump in? Yeah.
Madam Chair, Representative
Torres Velasquez, I think it's a
great question and back to that
intersection of health and
education and and partnerships,
uh, uh, even, you know, when one
partners with funds are, are at
risk, how it infects another.
So, uh, again, we have a
presentation coming up at 3:30
regarding more regarding uh
youth center programming and
specifically leveraging opioid
settlement fund dollars and so
there may be more that comes up
in that. I, I don't.
know any more specific about the
risks, you know, my wife is a
teacher at West Las Vegas School
District. I know there's lots of
concerns there, but I do not
have more specifics.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You, you also win the prize for
timing.
Uh, I don't know what the price
is, but, uh, Representative
Garcia, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, panel. Madam Chair,
uh, Ms. Nicole kind of raised
the need to change regulations
regarding residency within a
psychiatric setting. I like to
recommend to uh.
Um, Sandra that uh he looked at
drafting some legislation along
those lines.
And he can get the specifics
from Miss Nicole in terms of
what that would look like. Um.
Also, Madam Chair, um,
Tim, um
The behavioral health institute
and state hospital on the same?
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, yes, we were at the
state hospital forever and they
changed the name to the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute that's a good,
uh, Tim, uh, can you kind of
share with us in terms of the
history of uh the uh executive
directorship of a hospital and
let's say going back 20 years.
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia.
Are you asking the history of
the, of my position. Yes, sir.
Yes, OK. Um.
It had some turnover before I
got here and there was in a
couple of interim people and uh
someone that was there for a few
years. But yeah, I've been here
almost 5 years.
And I'm hoping to be here 20
it's up to Secretary de Blasio
as long as she wants to keep me,
but um, yeah, so it's, it's
changed a little bit in terms of
at one point, it was a governor
appointed position. Now it's a
state position, um.
And yeah, it's.
I guess, does that answer your
question is
that you've been there the
longest in terms of the last 5
or 6 directors. One last
question, Madam Chair, and I
applaud you for that.
I think your commitment to this
community and that institution
is a viable one.
And uh and it shows your
dedication and commitment. One
last question, Madam Chair, um,
how do you restore competency?
In terms of the process itself.
And uh if you could give one
example.
And how that happens and uh.
Do you start from a certain
category and then try to
increase that to another
category, but how do you restore
competency?
The process, yeah.
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, great question. So if
someone comes in on a competence
restoration order, they're gonna
meet with the interdisciplinary
treatment team right up front.
So that's gonna be a
psychiatrist or prescribing
psychologist, psychologist,
social worker, behavioral health
therapist, nurses, and the whole
team is going to meet with, with
you and we're gonna develop a
treatment plan on what you need
to
Um, be restored to competency.
So basically it's gonna look
like, how are we gonna reduce
the symptoms of your current
behavioral health condition. So
let's say you're psychotic and,
you know, I walk into all subs
and I say, I'm just gonna take
everything because I'm the king
of New Mexico, and that's my
delusion, right? And then my
attorney meets with me and says,
Do you want to plead guilty or
not guilty, and say, well, I'm
the king of New Mexico. I, my,
your laws don't apply to me.
So that's what's standing in, in
place from my ability to proceed
with my trial, right? This is my
attorney can't have a
conversation with me because my
delusions are at the point where
it's interfering with, with
that. So what we're gonna do is
we're gonna target that. So of
course, there's gonna be some
medications that we typically
start. We're gonna provide a
safe and secure environment,
reduced drug use, and I say that
like that's kind of an obvious
thing, but we're not gonna, you
know, people stop using
methamphetamine or fentanyl,
that really helps their
behavioral health condition. And
then we do what's called um
Courtroom knowledge, symptom
recognition, so these are groups
that are led that kind of
explains what is a judge, who is
the prosecutor, what does it
mean to plead guilty. So we
provide some education around
those as well. So it's kind of
individualized from that entire
team. And then our psychologists
would then evaluate someone and
say, you know, yes, this person
now understands the process and
can assist in their defense, and
that's when we would um
discharge the person.
Thank you for that, Tim.
Madam Chair. Representative
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for, you know, since I've
got in place, excuse me, um,
being able to to work with you,
going to you for any questions I
may have. You've just been a
truly valuable resource and I
would also like to see you there
up to the 20 years, but, um, I
guess my question is in light of
more the community impact. So,
um, with the, I say the changes
and things that are going to
increase, you know, traffic to
BHR, the increase of services
that BH BHI is looking to
increase, um, how do you look at
that impacting the
local community and maybe what
are some thoughts, particularly
we already have an abnormal
amount of boarding homes here in
the local area just because of
the nature of work that we do
here, um, our ER visitations,
you know, have been reported,
you know, maybe what are some of
those possibilities of, um,
maybe the collaboration between
Our local hospital in the BHI
being that, uh, we do see a lot
of there we are not by we, by
the community sees a lot of
patients that do require
behavioral behavioral health
assistance, um, and also regards
to public safety, um, I am very
proud of our local law
enforcement and our public
safety personnel, um, you know,
it's, it's common, common
occurrences here in our local
community, um, just the ability
to work, you know, with possibly
inpatient um clients.
Patient, um, you know, from,
from the area, but how do you
see with this increase in
service both with the, the, the
detox center as well as now, um,
The changes to competency where
we are, we are expecting
inflicts in traffic. How do you
see that affecting our local
community?
Madam Chair Representative
Gonzalez.
Limited. So I think that we have
a disproportionate number of
people with serious and
persistent mental illness in
this town in this county because
of the history of NMBHI being
here since 1889. And if you look
across the country, I don't know
if this is purposeful, but
almost every state hospital is
about 1.5 to 2 hour drive away
from the main metropolitan area.
Um, so as I keep visiting, it
keeps just shocking me that I
have to drive to Albuquerque,
fly, and then drive about the
same distance to get to that
state hospital. Um, so I think
with that way.
you see is, is you see an
increase in behavioral health
treatment and providers and all
of that around those state
hospitals. What we have done
In my time and even before that
is, is we work really hard to
discharge people back to the
community they came from. So we
want to discharge them back to
where they have connections,
back to if they have family or
whatever their connections are.
So if we get someone sent to us
on a civil commitment from Las
Cruces, we're gonna discharge
them back to Las Cruces. There
are exceptions to that, but it's
really rare that there's an
exception to that. It would only
be if they're from a really
small area that they just don't
have any resources, then we'll
look to where else I might be
able to.
Yeah.
So that's the, what we do now in
terms of like hospitalization.
That, that's our philosophy.
Um, the assisted outpatient
treatment. We're already seeing
them at our CBS clinic or
outpatient clinic. So I'm not
anticipating a, a big influx.
What I'm hoping is, is that this
helps keep them out of the
hospitals, out of the ERs
because if we can keep them
stabilized in the community,
then they'll visit the ERs less
frequently.
And the new detox facility that
is a new service line and that
is something new. I would argue
that they're probably still
already in the community, um,
and we're gonna be able to
provide treatment and hopefully
at a pretty successful rate, um.
I have met with the CEO of
Altavista. I've met with um
Sheriff Lopez a number of times
I've met with county officials a
number of times that we really
wanted to do this well and if we
do take admissions from
elsewhere in the state. I'm also
kind of building into the budget
and the planning and the
treatment that we're going to
discharge them back to where
they, they came to us from. So
historically, and this is again,
not just New Mexico, this is
across the country. The state
hospital became a hub for it,
and I think we're working hard
now.
To make sure that we discharge
people back to the community
they came from.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you to the presenters as
well. Somebody who worked on the
house before I believe it was
side of House Bill 8,
It's really nice to hear the
update, um.
But I was wondering, you know,
as we were building out that
part of the bill, um, we heard a
lot from providers who, um,
we're concerned that there
weren't necessarily enough
evaluators for competency
itself, and I was wondering, is
that an issue at BHI? Is there
some kind of waitlist? Is there
any sort of backup?
Um, that was something that we
heard from providers themselves.
Madam Chair Representative
Anaya.
Historically we had 30 days to
get people admitted into the
forensic portion and that now is
15 days after this, and we have
hit it 100% of the time. So we
do not experience the delay at
an MBHI. We get them in right
now, we have capacity to
continue to do so. That's why we
watch this so carefully is is we
don't want to put the state in a
position where we're not meeting
that time frame. Now, in the
community, I don't really wanna,
I don't know because that again
that those contracts go through
healthcare authority, but I will
say if they are found not
Competent
Alleged felony dangerous, we do
get them in within the time
frame.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And then
the other piece, um, that I
found interesting that you
didn't really talk about as much
as your last slide on the state
of the institute, um, it looks
like you all are successfully
recruiting for many of the like
the license positions, clearly
you still need direct care
alongside everyone else, you
talked about um some of the
changes that you've instituted.
Can I just ask, um, you know, we
just got done with the
workforce, a look at the
workforce itself, but I'm
wondering how is it that you're
thinking about
Changing um.
Some of these working
conditions, how is it that you
thought of that and can you tell
me a little bit about how it's
working because clearly here you
have seen success.
Yeah, so
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, I think that we put money at
the problem, and thanks to you,
we were able to get funded, so
when I first started 5 years
ago, I said we, we can't pay
people $11 an hour, and they can
go to any fast food restaurant
in town and make 15.
We're not close. You have to at
least make me competitive once
I'm competitive.
Then I'm, I'm good with it. And
not only have you guys made us
competitive, you've, you've
beaten them in a lot of ways, so
thank you. Um, so that was, I
think the first step. The second
step is, we do have to have a
working environment that is
supportive. So historically, you
know, some of these positions
were seen not in the best light,
like, you know, kind of.
Beneath other positions and what
I've worked hard on
trauma-informed workplaces.
There is, there is none of that.
We all are equal, um, some jobs
are gonna be compensated
differently due to education and
experience, but every job is
valuable and important, and, and
what I've said
Repeatedly is, if I don't have
any direct care staff at NMBHI.
You sure don't need a hospital
administrator.
Right? I, I'm looking for a new
job, so we need to value those
jobs that make all of our other
jobs possible. So I feel like
that's on us is just to create a
culture there that we do that.
The other part that I routinely
hear is is it's not safe to work
at the state hospital. It's not
safe to work with people who
have these psychiatric
conditions, and I didn't include
it in this data, but we have
data to show that we don't have
A high number of incidents where
staff get hurt. It happens. I
don't want to say it's zero, but
it could happen on any job,
right? Um, so trying to help
shift that narrative a little
bit that this is actually a safe
job. And then finally,
What job?
Has more intrinsic value than
working with New Mexicans who um
are the most vulnerable and in
most in need, right? Like,
That's what it says, you don't
even have to volunteer or donate
money if you come work at an
MBHI because you're doing your
do good, you're good, um, so
those are kind of the things
that we've worked on to try to
get some success with that.
Senator your block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
first, thanks, thanks for the
job you do. It's very difficult
job and complex job for you and
the secretary, uh, greatly
appreciate and I hope, Madam
Secretary, you're feeling better
now.
Yeah.
Um, I'd like to talk just a
little bit about um the
workforce there, um.
percentage of government versus
contractor.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, Senator Block.
I'll give you numbers. I, I'm
trying to do the math in my
head, so we have about 100, sir.
I don't, it doesn't have to be
exact, just, just a guess. I'm
just curious. So for, you know,
the physician level we're about
80 to 85% state employee for the
direct care level, we are
I think we have probably about
110 state employees that are in
that kind of CNA level, direct
care level, and we have about 20
contracted and for nurses, it's
probably around that same
percentage, right around 20%,
maybe a little less in the
nurses.
Thank you man, and that's, are
you, are you looking to keep
that stable? Are you looking at
going a little bit more one way
or the other because sometimes a
no brainer contractor on is a
little bit faster than trying to
hire people. If you have
personnel gaps.
Yeah, so, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, I will be honest. I'm
looking at both all the time
trying to expand our workforce.
We have a little bit of a
waiting list on our civil
commitments, and I don't like
that. So I'm trying to get as
many people in as we can. OK,
thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to ask about
recidivism. Uh, what is your,
what is your rate?
And how do you get it better and
what type of cross talk of best
practices are you doing, uh,
within the state or even outside
the state?
Yeah. Madam Chair, Senator
Block,
I said of level is very low.
Meaning probably about 5% less
than right around 5% are
re-hospitalized within 180 days
of discharge. So I could end the
sentence there and say good job,
but I will say it also takes a
little while to get back to us,
right? Because you have to be in
the community, you have to have
your symptoms increased, you
have to be hospitalized. So,
I also look at how many people
are then incarcerated or go to
the ERs and it's hard to exactly
know that data. But what we're
doing is, is we're working
really hard with the AOT teams
right now that we're building
out the assisted outpatient
teams, so we've connected with
the one in Albuquerque, the one
in Santa Fe, to try to build up
um those resources to make sure
that when people are discharged,
they have the resources that
they need.
Madam Chair, Senator Block
Sheriff Philus is uh delayed uh
performing, uh, public safety
duties, but that's where this
started. So 14 years ago I
mentioned, uh, two wrestling
coaches after practice, youth
wrestling coaches, and uh the
sheriff in near tears if he
would cry, he was probably as
close as he would get, um,
saying there's got to be a way
than arresting people over and
over again till they die of an
overdose. And I said, there is a
way and uh it's called trauma
informed care and we
started looking at all of this,
putting these resources
together. There are still many
and fruits that need to come,
including the youth center,
which you'll hear about later,
uh, hopefully he can make it by
then. But this residential
treatment center is that way.
And through diversion efforts
and working with the uh courts,
uh, uh, we are hoping that, um,
To have less obituaries.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, sir. These people,
they have value no matter what,
and uh we gotta remember that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys. I will not berate you
with too many questions, but I
had a few. So first of all,
going to the, the slides here, I
don't know if you have copies,
uh, looking at page 5 and 6. I'm
not really sure what they mean
particularly. I know on the
bottom of the graph it says ABC
through Z or it goes to V. So
I'm just wondering what that
axis means on both 5 and 6, just
so I understand what we're
looking at here.
Yeah, so, Madam Chair,
Representative Buck, those are
the other state hospitals that I
don't want to identify. I really
can't identify, so that's um
South Dakota, North Dakota,
Utah, Arizona, California,
Oregon, Washington, Hawaii,
Alaska, and I'm sure I forgot
some, but those are without
saying which specific hospital
those all represent one of those
state hospitals. And some states
have more than one. OK, great.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for that, Tim. So
another question I had, I think
you referenced 80% of the time.
Your clients are restored to
competence in one of your
programs, I believe you said,
which one was that? And uh what
does that look like pertaining
to national averages.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, uh, yeah, that is what I
said and that's our forensic
division for people who are sent
to us for competence restoration
and the national average best I
can get is about 65 to 70%.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much for that, Tim.
And then of the population you
have in the forensic unit, how
many are quote unquote lifers,
as in they will be there until
the end of their sentence. Maybe
it's a life sentence.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, the best way for me to
answer that question is how many
are on the 1.5 commitment, and
that could not be life, that
could be 1215 years, but that's
still a really long time to be
in the hospital. And we have,
last time I looked, which was
not that long ago, I think we
have about 23 of those
individuals.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all the questions I had.
Representative block, I could
get used to this.
Representative Herndon. Thank
you, Madam Chair. And one of the
biggest, uh thank you again for
you all being here. One of the
biggest issues that I have found
was the, the lack of ability to
help adolescents who needs uh
behavioral health care. So there
was a big push to look for the
uh to try to convert the
facility at 5200 Socorro on the
west side of town, and I see
that there was lots of new
building that was going on. Why
wasn't that building considered?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, I'm not familiar with
that. I apologize. I'm not sure.
OK. Well, that was something
that we've been working on a lot
to try to get the state to
purchase to it was there and it
would actually take care of
children and uh the way the
facility was set up and I'm
looking at all the new building
and I was just wondering why it
wasn't, it wasn't being
considered. The second thing is,
is that as we look at um people
who are going into our state
facility. What I am not what I'm
still not clear about, and if
you have any type of
intervention.
Our action with uh helping those
people who have been, um, have
been sentenced to a state
facility and then trying to get
off of drugs. They've not been
the uh the, I guess the
medication to assist them to do
so in a way that's not, uh,
that's least harmful to them.
How are you working with that,
if at all.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, so if someone comes to
us on medication assisted
treatment or MOUD for an opiate
use disorder. We keep them on
that medication. So that would
be like Suboxone, for example.
We would keep them on that
medication. With the new
treatment facility, we will have
the ability to initiate people
onto that medication assisted
treatment and then we will look
to expand that across the other,
the other places. I will say.
Medication assisted treatment
saves lives and it is
incredible.
And we
are able to keep people off of
drugs because of our
environment, because we're
locked. So it hasn't been as
high of a need for us to do MOUD
if someone's on an inpatient
psych hold because they're
there. So we help them with
their cravings and with all of
that in a different way with
different medications we can
offer them and support, um, so
it hasn't been something that
we've pushed on a, on a
psychiatric hospital, but it's
something that we're looking at
doing.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
with respect to Meadows, you
indicated that there would be,
there are Medicaid beds,
Medicare beds there, I think.
I'm, I'm trying to determine how
many do you have and how likely
are, are you to be affected by
these bigger cuts. I know you
mentioned it slightly, but I'd
like you to be more specific.
Madam Sherpresentative Herndon.
About 90% of our residents at
Meadows are on Medicaid. That's
an institutional version of
Medicaid.
Um, it might even be 95%, a vast
majority are on Medicaid. When
looking at the cuts,
The reason that I'm not 100%
sure how to answer that I can
answer the question is, is I
think most of the people will
remain on Medicaid, meaning
these are the most vulnerable
kind of lowest income people in
this state who from what I can
tell and what I've read, will
likely remain on Medicaid, but
until we see who's cut, I guess
I'm not, I'm not sure.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Rogo Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your
presentation. I, you know, in my
imagining mind, um, I
I would like to imagine the
perfect um
holistic approach.
To, uh, all that you have
presented today, being under one
hospital, uh, psychiatric
hospital, whatever you want to
call that, whereby we have a
floor for adolescents, a floor
for adults, a floor for
children. We have clearinghouse
of services, uh, to handle
social, economic, emotional
support and referrals, you know,
that it seems that
Whether we have a little pot of
money or a large pot of money,
Madam Chair, we're still
piecemealing how we are
delivering services and how we
continue to um
Try to address a major, a major
problem. And so I, I just wanted
to, to start with that because
at some point we need to start
thinking bigger, more
holistically, not necessarily
bigger in, in volume but uh well
that too because we have to
address the social problems that
our community is facing, but
looking more creatively and
innovatively because we're going
into the world of needing to be
more sharing. We need to be
sharing more services, sharing.
providers, sharing everything so
as to be more cost-effective,
but also more importantly, more
clinically effective in the
outcomes.
Um, and that's what concerns me
the most. So I, I really felt a
need to say that because I've
been here for 13 years and we've
been tackling uh this major
problem, and we just keep
piecemealing it and now we're
involving the courts, which
Logically so, but um, anyway,
my, I have a question. The
question is, um, reference to
language.
And I want to know right now how
many languages, uh, are, or how,
yeah, how many languages are
being offered, uh, to our
populations that you serve.
Uh, I'm assuming that they're
coming in, um, they may be
coming in, uh.
fluent in um their home
languages. Can you?
Tell me now, how many you serve.
Madam Chair, Representative Roel
Cao Caballero, um.
Any language that someone needs,
we would provide translation
services for them. So we have
contracts with people to
provide.
Services in whatever language
they need.
In regards to how many specific
patients right now, we've
provided those services to, I
can't answer that, but I could
get back to you.
That's fine. I just wanted to
make sure that we're uh in
compliance with our language
Access Act, uh, because I, I'd
hate to be in a position to have
to compel our state agencies at
this point. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
But Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again thank you to my colleagues
who've asked a few of my
questions already, um, but I
would just like to add and say,
uh, ditto with regards to
Senator Pinto.
Her question and Senator
Stephanics with regards to our
juveniles, as they call them,
but I still call children, uh,
brain development and all of the
other issues where, um, Madam
Chair, I still have hope that
with the advances that we have
in brain development and such
that we can still help.
Um, our young people.
And, um,
I, I guess, Madam Chair, you
know, for me it's, it's, it's
always, and it's been a question
that's come up and this is
mainly a statement of when we
try to um
would I say, make someone
better, well enough to stand
trial.
Um
Because of a decision that
they've made, disaster it may
be, but
It, it's the bringing somebody
up to a level of competency,
Madam Chair, for them to, to
stand trial. Yes, I'm, I'm going
over this in my mind.
And then
When they
stand trial and then go back, do
we continue?
To keep them at that level.
Do they go back into that abyss
that they were in.
Um, you know, Madam Chair, those
are just questions asking, um.
You know, there's
Questions to ask as to what we
do.
Um
And it's a concern that I've had
for just because of, you know,
Um, persons that I've known
within my own family who've had
issues.
Um, medication does only so
much.
They come off medication and we
know and they go into the abyss,
and what do we do as a state,
right? They're convicted and
such, do they go back and do we
continue to assist them, help
them, or do they just disappear
into that abyss again. It's just
a question, Madam Chair, that I
struggle with in many ways and
still goes back into with
regards to our young people.
For those who have issues, um,
again, all of us have issues at
some point in our lives.
Um, as to what we do to provide
them support.
But also working with the
families because no matter what
we do,
How do we go back and work with
their families, um, if they
actually are able to go back
home.
Because as the other support
service, um, Madam Chair, that
we also have to look at and see
how we can assist, um,
Those in our community who are
vulnerable.
Um, so it's a question I have,
Madam Chair, then the other one
too, um, it is, we talk about
the biggest need for the
positions that are coming in,
everything costs money.
So I hope, Madam Chair, that as
um your particular entity
working with the secretaries
that were asking for the real
dollars.
I understand, um.
You know, there's budget
constraints, uh, restraints that
come from the executive level,
etc. but
To recruit somebody and to keep,
it costs money.
And as you mentioned, Madam
Chair, and, um, you know, in
your presentation, why would you
work someplace for, you know,
$11 to $12 when you can go earn
it someplace else.
Um, valuing the people that work
for us, for those who are giving
of their time and their talent,
Madam Chair, we really have to
invest in them.
So it's just a statement, but
again, I hope that the request
coming up this time, um, in
front of the LFC really is the
real dollar.
As to what we need to pay our
people.
Thank you.
And I do have a few questions.
So you have 44 youth in care,
correct? And you are hoping for
8.
Madam Chair, average was 4.
Today we have 6. And we have a
probably a likely admission this
week and we're hoping for 8.
Yes, yes, ma'am. So, so is 8
your capacity?
Uh, 10, Madam chair is our
capacity, but I'm hoping to get
to 8 quickly and then let the
the stable, you know, stabilize
it a little bit and then get up
to 8, Madam Chair, or to 10,
sir. And then going to page 15,
the workforce. When we toured
your facility of, I don't know
when that was with Senator Ortiz
Pino and you, you told us that
you, you know, you, you weren't,
you weren't having so much
difficulty getting the
psychiatrist and the psychiatric
nurses and that was an
eye-opener to a lot of us, and
I'm glad.
To hear that the pay is, is
making it easier, but you, from
what I see here, you are still
having trouble filling the
non-professional and
roles
Uh, Madam Chair, short answer,
yes. OK, thank you. Um, and
Is that, I mean, you talked a
little bit about it. Do we need
to increase the pay? I mean, it,
it, or I know there's not a
magic bullet, but if you, if you
had a magic wand, what would
you, what would you tell it to
do?
So Madam Chair,
I would say through DOH
leadership and Secretary de
Blasio. We've put money at the
problem recently. Um, not just
recently, we've, we've
worked on it for the last number
of years, you know, you wait for
the next session, you get more
money, and then you kind of put
at it. Uh, as of last week, I
told my team we've put all the
money that I think we need to
put at this problem. We need to
now do our job.
And make sure we have the right
working culture. We also need to
figure out how to get people
interested in healthcare, and I
think this goes to what Matt was
saying, right, is this how do we
build people to know that, you
know,
It's a great job. I was just
talking to someone yesterday.
I'm always recruiting, you know,
what a great job you come work
for us, you get shift
differentials, and whatever job
you go to after us.
You will have this incredible
experience, whether you want to
go be a nurse, you want to go be
a doctor, or you wanna go work,
you know, at Costco.
And they say, can you deal with
an upset customer. Well, yeah, I
mean, I dealt with an upset
psychotic person on the forensic
unit at MBHI. I think I can
handle your customer, right? So
whatever your job is, is we will
make it better, and I think if I
had a magic wand, it would be
helping the world see that that
working in healthcare is a
really good job.
For a number of different
reasons. Um, and then in terms
of page 7, where your clinical
data on the forensic. The
falloff for April and May, is
that a not yet factor that they
haven't reached um restoration
cause that looks like, oh my
gosh, from 100 to 55, I'm
assuming that's because there
hasn't been enough time to get
them.
Restored.
Madam Chair, I would say it's
probably more small sample size.
And if we didn't have one that
we discharged that month and it
really impacts the numbers, all
right, thank you for that. And
then in terms of the joint
commission, um, what do you,
the, the um accreditation, do
you have a, a
Since I'm the timeline there.
Madam Chair, I, I'm not sure I
understand your question for,
I, I didn't, um.
The new residential treatment,
is that gonna be, is that gonna
slow you down or do you feel
like it's, it's within it, it'll
work within your timeline.
Madam Chair.
That will not slow us down, so I
have the support again from
Department of Health Leadership,
Mr. Morgan and Secretary de
Blasio that we're going to open
and then we notify joint
commission because we kind of
have to be open. So we've told
them we're going to tell you
when we're open and they and
then they have 90 days to send
someone, but we're gonna open
anyways, even though we can't
bill yet, and we're gonna do it
so that we can uh move forward.
Thank you for that. And then um.
How many substance use facility
beds, if you are fully staffed,
but what do you have now and,
and what will you have?
Yes, Madam Chair, we don't have
any that are licensed to
substance use treatment and the
new facility will have 28, 4
detox mail for detox female and
the rest were kind of on
continuing treatment. And do
you, do you have a catchment
area for that?
So, Madam Chair, what we've
agreed to because this came from
this kind of region is is we're
gonna prioritize this region. So
if we have, you know, one bed
left, I might say let's leave it
for this tri-county area, you
know, um,
That's a problem that I hope we
have, honestly, that all of our
beds are filled and we're doing
good work. Um, but if, you know,
if we have capacity, we're gonna
take from anywhere across the
state, I'm sure.
In terms of your adolescence,
um, do you know how many of them
have IEPs.
Um
Madam Chair,
Of the ones that are currently
with us, I believe 5 out of 6
have an IEP.
And the reason I'm asking this,
we did a tour of YDDC some years
ago and I was shocked at the
percentage of, of the people,
the kids there who, who had
IEPs, so I'm, and you did talk
about West Las Vegas supporting
you. So do you have a classroom
or classrooms within your
facility or how, how does their
education work?
Madam Chair, exactly, we have a
classroom at NMBHI and they send
the teacher to us. Now, we do
range in grade level, so it's
some, a lot of online work, but
the teachers right there to
assist them.
And then um do you have?
Ancillary services. I mean, if
the if the child needs um speech
and language pathology or
physical therapy or anything
like that. Do you have a method
to do that?
So, Madam Chair, if it was
physical therapy, I would say I
would probably use our physical
therapist from NMBHI right now,
we're, we're about to contract
with a new one. So today, we
don't have one, but typically,
historically, we would have our,
our physical therapist go with,
with, with them for speech
therapy, we would work with the
school district and they would
provide it. OK, thank you for
that. Um, and I think that's all
I have. Thank you, thank you all
so much for the work that you're
doing and for your presentation.
It always seems like it's a
bright spot, um.
Maybe that's why we keep coming
back to Las Vegas cause we are
the health and human suffering
committee, so it's nice to come
back and get some uh get some
positive and and you are moving
forward, please don't go
anywhere. Gina, don't let him go
anywhere. Um.
And thank you all.
Madam Secretary, I'm sorry.
OK, now we have transitionally
transitional housing and
support, Ruby Anne and Emily.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Good to see you all as always.
Um, I'm Ruby An Eske Bell. I'm a
principal analyst with the
legislative Finance Committee,
and I'm
Happy and honored to introduce
somebody new to you. This is
Miss Emily Hela, and she, uh, it
was an LSD analyst with us
before, but she has taken over
the Department of Health and all
of Kelly's block, so she's a new
member of our Health and Human
Services Committee. So yeah,
we're very excited. Welcome.
We have fun, we work hard, but
we have fun.
It's a good, it's a good group
and continues to be a good team,
so we're really happy that
Emily's Emily's joining us. So,
um, what we have for you this
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee is
Really kind of a comprehensive
overview and look at.
Many many multiple housing
initiatives, projects, funding
initiatives throughout the
state. So we're gonna be
throwing a lot of information at
you, a lot of, as we always do a
lot of numbers, a lot of data,
but, uh, hopefully, uh, it will
coalesce together and make some
sense. So with that, um, what
we're gonna talk about is,
overall the housing landscape
nationally and how New Mexico
fits into that. We're gonna talk
about
the leadership is right now, it
changed, um, in New Mexico where
the uh the new housing offices,
it's in Workforce Solutions now,
so that's, that's something new.
And we're gonna of course go
over some of the funding, the
non-recurring um funding for,
uh, and the appropriations and
lastly we wanted to kind of give
you some, some local snapshots
and we all know that, you know,
Albuquerque and Bernlio County
have the biggest incidences of
unhoused individuals, so we
picked those accordingly to look
at the initiatives there and
then we'll look statewide as
well. So let's dive in. I'm on
slide 3.
This gives you two pieces really
of data, a snapshot one is from
the nat the Federal housing of
um Department of Housing and
Urban Development HUD and
basically you'll see the graph
over here and you'll see it's
kind of been up and down, but,
um, you know, Albuquerque is
pretty high, the state's pretty
high, so, um.
Specifically, we, um, in New
Mexico, we increased by 11% from
2009 to 2023 in terms of the
number of unhoused individuals
and just in the latter more
recent years, 2022 to 23, we saw
a spike, you see it there on the
table. Um, we increased by 48%,
so there was a big jump. Now, I
know this committee has
mentioned before the Department
of Health analysis, Madam Chair,
you, I
asked a question about that last
month, um, he said, oh, are you
referenced that report? So I
didn't want to not include that
data as well because that shows
a significantly higher number.
So the HUD data looked at a
point in time, so it looked in
the in the winter, it looked, it
did, it looked at all who was in
shelters and all, and it looked
in the winter when the numbers
are highest. And it was showing
that we had, um, you know, a
large amount. We had, you know,
4000, but um.
Comparatively, the Department of
Health did a contract, um,
evaluation and they looked at
hospital data, hospital records,
and what people put on when they
um were admitted into the
hospital. What they put is their
address and if you didn't have
an address and all, then they
counted them as in-house. And so
that number was much more
substantial. It was, um, 10,000.
So that gives you sort of a
range in the data and what are
some of the challenges?
all know this intuitively, but,
um, in New Mexico, we see, we,
we know we have a lot of
generational poverty. We have
geographic isolation here, we're
a rural frontier state, all the
social determinants of health
that you've been hearing from
all these panels just before us
and limited affordable housing
which we'll touch on more later.
And then just what is needed,
HUD is saying that we need about
40,000 rental units in the
state. How do we compare? I'm on
slide 5. How do we compare
regionally?
So some of the factors again
that influence our housing needs
in New Mexico are the cost
burdens for much of our
extremely low income New
Mexicans, so that can be rental
rates, wages, the affordability
of housing, zoning, you're gonna
hear a lot about zoning as we go
particularly into the all the
elections, you're already
hearing a lot about it. And
here's something for that in New
Mexico, the household
composition, are you taking care
of children? Are you taking
care?
an aging member, are you taking
care of somebody in your
household who's DD or or has
other special needs. So those
all impact also, um,
In New Mexico, another
interesting factoid. We tend to
have a higher composition of
mobile and manufactured homes,
so then our regional neighboring
states, so that actually helps
us in terms of affordability,
um, so, uh, usually people who
own their house, whether it's
house, Mo, whatever, tend to
have a little bit lower out of
pocket expense for housing, um.
So, uh, and then our rents are
probably a little bit lower.
do on slide.
6, Madam chair.
So, um,
I just wanted to mention a lot
of other states, there are state
legislatures are looking at an
array of housing initiatives
now, this is obviously an issue.
In the, in the world, it's not
just in even in the US. This is
always a perennial issue, so
what are some of the things that
are being considered and some of
that.
I
That
Zoning, as I said, looking at
what are ways we can zone to do
more infill and to build more
houses and to build more
affordable housing.
So that is one thing. Another
thing is just looking at
regulations, rules, regulations,
and a final thing I wanted to
mention because it was just
apropos to the governor just um
housing the er hosting rather
the Western governors, um, they
all announced this building
resilient and affordable new
developments West initiative, so
that's trying to look at what
partnering with the federal
government to streamline and
reduce the cost of housing
developments, improved rental
assistance.
and expand pass towards home
ownership. So that's something
that's going on national. I
think I slipped a
Uh, went by a slide man and
number 4. Let me do that one
real quickly. I, I referenced
how we compared to our, our
neighboring states, but I, I
really should just highlight
this slide. UNLV, University of
Nevada, Las Vegas. They did a an
an evaluation and they looked
at.
New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado,
Nevada, and Utah.
And they defined um extreme low
income as um it's at or below
the federal poverty level or 30%
of the area's median income, and
I specifically pointed that out
because for all of the
initiatives that we're talking
about here and a lot of things
you'll hear about in Albuquerque
and Las Vegas and Socorro, they
always talk about the average
median income. So the percent is
30%, so that's just something
for us all to be aware of when
people talk about that in terms
of
Affordable housing, that's the
number they're referencing, um,
and so New Mexico, we had 65,000
extremely low income households,
um, and that was about 68%, um,
having a big housing burden in
our state, but guess what?
We were not the worst in our
neighboring region, Nevada,
believe it or not, had the
highest housing burden at 88
86%. We were at 68%. And again,
the, the factors were the things
I said we have more um
Of the modular manufactured
housing, probably our rents are
lower, those kinds of things.
OK, so I just wanted to go back
to that slide. So we hit 456.
Now 7, and with that I'm gonna
turn it over to Emily.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, as reinstated. I'm
Emily. I look forward to working
with you all. Uh, moving on to
slide 7, just kind of giving you
a brief history of where we are
at right now with the uh office
of housing.
Last year, the governor created
the Office of Housing is
attached to the governor's
office and legislation this past
session attempted to attach the
office as administratively
attached to the Department of
Finance and administration, but
this legislation died and so it
ended up happening post
legislation, the governor
decided to move the Office of
Housing to be under the
Workforce solutions department
on Wednesday at the Legislative
Finance Committee hearing, we
will actually be getting the
more of the plan of the Office
of housing from the.
Workforce Solutions department,
so we're happy to pass along any
information to you all on their
specific plans, um.
But what you all did as a
legislature this past session in
the general Appropriation Act,
also known as House Bill 2. You
all provided $1190 million to
the Department of Finance and
Administration for housing and
homelessness initiatives, um,
that's mostly towards 110
million appropriation,
non-recurring to support
affordable housing, with an
emphasis on transitional housing
and facilities that support
behavioral health services.
However, there was some language
that was vetoed when House Bill
2 was signed, specifying 80
million for housing services.
In Albuquerque and 10 million
for Las Cruces and Donana
County.
Um, there was also vetoes of
other appropriations um for
streamlined housing placements
and funding for housing
navigators, what you all have on
uh slides 23 and 24 is a list of
appropriations that you all as a
legislator have funded since
2023 and the status of those
appropriations, I will say if
you look on page 24, which has
the uh totals and the balances.
The balances is a little bit
skewed because um we transfer
funding to the New Mexico
Finance Authority through House
Bill 2, and so that shows up in
our state's accounting system as
expended. So that's why it's
showing as a total spent of
250.5 million, whereas money
that has actually gone out the
door that we know of is 75.5
million, um,
And so if you have any questions
about specific appropriations,
I'm happy to walk over those
with you, um, but quickly moving
on to slide 8 before I turn the
presentation back over to
Rubyan. Something for you all to
think about moving forward with
the office of housing being
moved under the Workforce
Solutions department, uh, in
2004, the Affordable Housing Act
was passed and ratified by New
Mexico voters in 2004.
Um
Creating New Mexico Mortgage
Finance Authority as the charged
entity responsible for
implementation and oversight, so
this is how we receive a lot of
federal funding through the uh,
um, something for you all to
think about moving forward is
how do we not duplicate efforts
that uh MFA or Housing New
Mexico is doing versus what
workforce solutions intends to
do with the Office of Housing.
So we're still kind of getting
into that with the interim of
what that duplication, um,
preventing what that might look
like moving forward. So with
that, um, I'll turn it over back
to Ruben to slide that.
So
Like Emily just said, we, you
know, designated the mortgage
finance Authority as the state
specific lead and state entity,
they're using, doing business as
the term New Mexico housing, so
what are they doing? What kinds
of things? So these next slides
are gonna be looking at.
City of Albuquerque initiatives
also Berlio County, but then
we're gonna be talking a lot
about New Mexico housing or
talking some about New Mexico
housing or MFA I'll maybe use
the terms interchangeably and
also some of our other
initiatives and other funding
streams because we have many
funding streams in the state
that support housing and
unhoused individuals. Um, so
with that, we'll launch into
City of Albuquerque on
9.
So, um,
The city of Albuquerque created
the health, housing and
homelessness department, and
that was based on, um, visits
and models from San Antonio,
Miami, San Diego, and Denver,
um, specifically regarding how
they were dealing with their
unhoused individuals. They are
building and, and built a
coordinated system with that
includes medical respite for
unhoused detox, of course,
housing and wraparound services.
and multiple partnerships with
treatment providers including
both physical health and
behavioral health.
The Albuquerque Community Safety
Department is up and running and
it's a 24/7 full-time emergency
alternative to 911.
So that, um, includes a civilian
team that responds to the whole
array of SMI SUD, so, um,
serious mental illness,
substance use disorder, so
behavioral substance use and um
and housing, housing issues. Um,
so they have taken ACS has taken
over 100,000 calls they report
and uh each one of those calls
diverts someone from the
previous system that would have
gone through 911.
And, and pulled out regular
first responders, um, policemen,
you know, pulling them away from
maybe another public safety
emergency, so it's diverted all
these calls to this civilian
team that actually treats SMI
SUD, so that's, I think that's a
huge win and they also created a
new um uh employment program for
unhoused individuals, which you
may or may not have heard of.
It's called the Better Way
Forward Program, and it pays on
housed individuals.
Who are in the system integrated
into these systems to um work in
downtown Albuquerque and clean
up and water plants and do all
of that and then they're
connected to the gateway center
and the gateway housing, but it
provides them a, a, a small
wage.
So that is currently happening
on slide 10, we couldn't, of
course, not mention the gateway
Center. Everybody, you hear
about that all the time in the
news, so, um.
We have done multiple site
visits over the last years,
seeing sort of the iterations
being built out at the Gateway
Center and right now it's, it's
great. They've got a lot of uh
contractors in there, the
medical respite is up and
running when we went last summer
to visit the medical respite.
Was like barely being
constructed. I was amazed when
we went like a month ago, yeah,
but it's like it's totally up
and running. It has all kinds of
clients. So yeah, they, they got
it done quickly. So, um, there
are multiple contractors doing
um uh multiple medical respite
there with 50 beds that have
served 48 people in FY 25.
They have now a first responder
area to drop off people
overnight and connect them to
services, so this is like when
you get people, you pick them up
on the street at 23 o'clock in
the morning. What do you do? So
they can bring them in now in
this setting and you're not
incarcerated and bring them into
this setting and then also
connect them to services. Next,
there's the 50 bed medical
sobering unit, um, and again
they come in, they get sober,
they get treatment and they get
connected to services.
There's a family location you
ask about children all the time,
rightfully, and so there's this
family location which is in a
separate location from Gateway.
They're not commingling the
populations there. So, um, it
serves 64 families, um, it can
serve 64 families at a time and
it's served 827 people and FY 25
and fiscal year 25.
They have the expanded, this is
just the expansion. They had the
previous pallet helms, they
expanded with an additional 46
recovery palate homes and those
allow you to go for 2 years.
To do, um, substance use
disorder services, so you can't
just be in these pallet homes
and just live there. These ones
are actually dedicated to SUD
and you're getting services and
you, you have to participate in
programming.
And then, um, lastly, the, the,
the big.
Shelter is Gateway West and
that's our state's largest
shelter and, um, they, they say
can serve 660 people per night,
and they've had, you know,
upwards of 3400 people served in
FO 25. However, when we've gone
to do site visits and all.
Multiple times, especially in
the winter, what are you gonna
do? They've had more than like
800 people there. So 7 to 800
people on a given night in the
winter at Gateway West. Just
think of that unhoused
individuals in our state.
So those are the numbers that we
are looking at.
Um, slide number 11.
There's also housing forward
Albuquerque. They um added 5000,
this is housing, so they've
added 5000 housing units that
they have built and developed
with the city and with other
partners, um, the initiatives
have included
3, they're trying to address the
13,000 to the 28,000 units that
are needed in Albuquerque, of
course, including low income, so
there have been two big
initiatives that yes.
Housing Incorporated, which is
working on two projects which
I'm sure you've heard about, and
one is the um Calle Cuerta in
the North Valley, which is 60
living units, um, and it's 4
live live and work units for
retail units 21 town homes, and
it's available for uh renters
making below 80% of the area
median income, and there's also
the West Mesa ridges, um,
development which um was cost 43
million.
and it's um funded partially
with housing forward
Albuquerque, the 8 million and
then other partners, and that
adds 1281 to 3 bedroom units,
and it's for people making at
60% of the area median income,
so you see this is above the
extremely low um income
households that we reported on
earlier that we looked at the
comparative region, so this goes
all the way up to 80%.
So that's some of the housing
developments and then just
wanted to touch on one other uh
for Albuquerque and uh slide 12.
This is the soul housing
partnership with the Greater
Albuquerque Housing Partnership,
um, and this was funded with 6.1
million in HUD funds and some
ARPA funds, um, for 70 units,
um, Somos, and these are mixed
again, they're mixed use,
they're housing and commercial
space, and they're dedicating 59
of these units for affordable
housing, and then there was the
3 million and ARPA funds left
over ARPA funds dedicated for
the fatal.
those senior community housing
which will have 82 units, and
that's for all income levels. So
that's just a kind of a brief
snapshot of Albuquerque.
Madam Chair, if you go to slide
13, I have just one slide here
on Burnleyo County.
And infern Leo County.
Which you take the larger.
larger region they've
experienced 100% increase in
unhoused individuals from 2022
to 2024. So that's kind of
another startling statistic, you
know, exponential growth really,
um, so, um, they, they're
working along with City of
Albuquerque to try and move 1000
people off the streets and into
housing, that's their targeted,
um, uh, kind of benchmark and so
Berlingo County has Ber Bernco
builds communities initiative.
Which is looking at affordable
housing and also doing
expansions and renovations and
transitional housing, and then
as Emily mentioned with the
funding that was in House Bill
2.
I'm Berlio County actually
requested a large, they, they're
targeting 150 million and it's
um looking to fund, get that
funding for 2,038 residents and
transitional housing for 1050
residents. So, um, the
legislature will be seeing, I
think, uh, of course, more
requests for housing as we move
forward into FY 26, um, and then
another, um, just more recent
thing is the renovation of the
Wells Fargo Tower.
Um, this is actually Burnleyo
County and um they uh approved
$35 million in project project
revenue bond, um, and they're,
um, get using federal and state
tax credits to basically kind of
retrofit, redo that and to um 61
bedroom and 42 bedroom units, so
that's just pretty much right in
the heart of Albuquerque.
So those are the initiatives
that um we highlighted it
highlighted on Burleyo Can. So
if you go to slide 14, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Let's look at a little across
the state.
So, um, the federal government
offers low income housing
vouchers and housing tax credits
through again, Housing New
Mexico and housing in Moscow MFA
so you can get there's multiple
paths here.
Housing development tax credits
vouchers. So in the past
decades, um.
I think New Mexico, these are
their statistics about what
they've accomplished, so I
thought I'd highlight this.
They've preserved or built
61,730 homes. They provided
rental assistance for over
122,000 people. They've um
diverted people from
homelessness, um, to the tune of
about 20,309,000 people.
Uh, housing New Mexico or MFA
mortgage Finance Authority
launched this recently, this is
recent, the statewide landlord
incentive program and with this
they're partnering with the
healthcare authority, the state
department, the healthcare
authority, to increase rental
units by offering landlords,
$12,500 per unit per occupancy.
So as you're cycling through
people, you can get it repeat
times, um, to
step for landlords to offset the
cost for them participating in
voucher rental programs, so what
they can do with the funding,
the landlords is um, if you're
accepting people who have
vouchers because as you know,
many landlords don't want to
take HUD vouchers and all, so
there this is an incentive
program to get landlords to do
that, so per unit per renter,
you can get this 12,500 and you
can um basically.
Fix up your rental unit. So if
maybe someone.
Punches a hole in the wall or
whatever, you can use some of
this money, that's what it's for
to to to fix up the rental
units,
to me that seems like a perverse
incentive if you get $12,500
every time you have a new
renter, um, that seems like an
invitation to evict people. Is
there anything um to prevent
that.
Um, Madam Chair, I think you
have to, there's criteria to all
of this and it and it is
targeted, you have to have
mitigation to the unit, so it's
not just to.
you know, pocket the cash in
your pocket, so you have to show
that you are gonna do
rehabilitation, you know,
building rehabilitation.
Thank you. Sorry to interrupt.
No, that's fine. And then, uh,
madam too, the last thing on
here is a a new initiative that
they're doing, which is called
the Zero Inter Homebuilder
program. So this is yet another
thing they're trying to do, to
try and build up our stock of
housing.
So, uh, these are just some of
the initiatives through mortgage
finance authority.
So that's slide 14. So, um,
Madam chair now to kind of look
at some of those.
State state departments and all
on slide.
Uh, 15.
The healthcare authority and
it's using opioid funds, and
they've directed 2 million of
those to a new program called
um, Fresh Start Rental
Assistance, so you know, this is
tied, it has to be tied to
opioid and substance use
disorder, people with that, but
that people who experience that,
but this is a new rental
assistance program.
Um, here are some of the
providers we just listed them
out for you can read those and
you can see they're across the
state, you'll recognize some of
these providers in your own
individual communities.
And what this does, it provides
up to $10,000 for moving or
rental assistance, eviction
prevention, um, due to, due to
opiate use and then it targets
at 60% of the area median income
and in FY 25 they served 113
people. So that's some of the
state's opioid use dollars, um,
being, uh, deployed.
Um, for slide 16 madam chair,
something that you all talk a
lot about and and ask a lot
about is uh the justice involved
population, people who are
incarcerated or jailed and um
the healthcare authority is
working with um a $2.5 million
special appropriation to.
Do a re-entry support pilot
program, uh, for people who are
incarcerated and to help them
not only get.
Their medications and all you've
been hearing about that it's uh
60 days prior to release, but
also to help them with housing
and uh wraparound services.
Uh, HCA is also collaborating
with the corrections department
to work on uh uh focusing on
these um uh housing services for
individuals with serious mental
illness, histories of sexual
offenses and geriatric parole as
well, which we don't often hear
about, um, and these efforts,
this project is, uh, they're
focused on Berlio, Donana, and
Sierra counties, and so far 200
clients have been served and I
just want to do uh
a note here, Madam Chair, um.
You maybe don't always hear
about community corrections, so
within the corrections
department there's a program
called Community Corrections. It
gets 100% general fund and helps
expands on these initiatives. So
that has existed long before
Medicaid eligibility. We just
got approval for that for
incarcerated individuals. So
we've been funding.
General fund directly to
To, on top of the, the medical
contract that we find all at
corrections. We also have this
community corrections to try and
bridge these services for people
who are paroled and released. So
just wanted to to.
Make note of that as well.
And
Just have a few more. I'm trying
to kind of go through these
quickly. I know it's a lot of
information, so Madam Chair, um,
the last slides here, I'll try
not to go through all the
detail. Slide 17 lists some of
some of your favorites that you
ask questions about a lot, so I
wanted to include sort of
multiple years of funding and
numbers of people served and you
can look at this on your own,
but the program's highlighted
here on slide 17 are the
emergency homeless assistance
program.
The rapid rehousing, um,
homeless prevention program, the
The home, this was funded
through ARPA, the home
supportive, um, supportive
services program linkages, uh,
linkages program which is housed
out of the healthcare authority,
the behavioral health Services
division. Again, for a lot of
people don't always understand
languages uh real quickly.
Linkages doesn't have all the
requirements that all the HUD
voucher programs require for
Section 8 HUD vouchers, you have
to meet a lot more requirements
and it's limited where you could
use those vouchers.
For the linkages program, it's
100% state funded general fund
and we have a lot less strings
attached, so if you are, they
call it precariously housed, so
if you are couch surfing.
Or doing something like that,
you know, you're.
Camping out on your friend's
couch for a while versus, uh,
you know, just totally unhoused,
you can still get rental
assistance through linkages if
you're couch surfing, so it's
with HUD, Section 8 vouchers you
could not qualify, so that gives
you a real life example, um, and
then the other programs here are
the youth, uh, homelessness
demonstration project and the
continuum of care. So the
program descriptions are
provided here, funding over
years and the numbers served. I
won't go into the details.
That
So that's slide 17, slide 18.
Is um the mortgage Finance
Authority Housing New Mexico,
their permanent supportive
housing, so we look across the
state here at some of the
different projects from Dona
Anna to Grant County to Socorro
County to Santa Fe, and you see
that there's been 299 units
supported and um the cost here
62 million and then, you know,
the contributions from other
local providers, so that gives
you a snapshot of a permanent.
supportive housing site 18,
slide 19, transitional housing.
These are all variations on the
theme, right? So transitional
housing and housing innovation
programs. There are, um,
4 major programs here with up to
108 units being supported, uh,
you see the names here and this
is over at a cost of over $3.5
million. So, uh, yet another
array of programs with, uh,
different types of services and
different types of requirements
to qualify.
On slide 20 and 21, Madam Chair,
these are the last two slides
before questions.
We have another entity in the
state, of course, that helps
with housing that not MFA
mortgage Finance Authority, but
NMFA, the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
So Ina and Fay also does
housing.
So again, see so many places
where we're touching on housing,
corrections, healthcare
authority, you know, uh, MFA,
uh, you know, all over. So, um,
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and MFA, um, the 2024
legislature passed and the
governor signed House Bill 195.
I'm sure y'all remember it and
it authorized the the existing
opportunity, enterprise and
housing development program and
it expanded it.
And it funded 125 million
administered through NMA to help
families that do not ordinarily
qualify for traditional
affordable housing. So the
housing it created the housing
development revolving loan fund
and it builds on the work of the
opportunity enterprise program
to address the state's housing
shortage for workers, workforce,
one of, one of our favorite
issues here, right? Workforce.
Um, prioritizing communities
where local governments are
seeking to reducing housing
barriers to help with workforce,
helping to recruit.
Teachers, you know, when
teachers can't find housing in
Cuba to help um in house.
There's one for uh Holy Cross
Hospital because there's not
affordable housing in Taos, you
know, that's a tourist bill,
right? So, um, yeah, so that's
what that this initiative is, is
focused on, so the NMFA they
approved housing loans for 4
housing developments and one
commercial project through this
um this new program.
and the loans carry a 4.5%
interest rate. So on slide 21,
those projects were again,
there's a 125 million and this
um housing development revolving
loan fund and the projects that
were funded were 6.3 million for
an 80 unit workforce housing
project in Taos, and it's
estimated to cost 26 million $4
million was funded for a 40 unit
workforce housing rental complex
in Albuquerque.
The rentals will be restricted
to New Mexico residents making
between 61 and 120% of Aryan
median income. There's 15
million for an 80 unit workforce
development in Alamogordo near
Holleman and 3.6 million for an
11 unit multi-family infill
development in Santa Fe with
rents below market rates in
Santa Fe, which that's golden,
right? And then, um,
And then lastly, 4.6 million for
a 50 unit office and warehouse
development in Albuquerque, so
that still leaves um right now
unless there's some projects in
the pipeline which I don't know
about, which may be the case,
but still 90 million in this
again re revolving loan fund
that was created out of New
Mexico Finance Authority, so
Madam Chair, that was a lot of
information, but I think that
gives you an idea of all that
we're trying to do, and it takes
all of all of this, right? It
housing is tough, so.
uh, gives you an idea of what
we're doing all around the state
and kind of how we compare with
our region and we'd be happy to
answer questions.
Thank you, Ruben.
And
Emily.
How do you spell your last name,
Emily?
Hello.
Hello. OK.
OK, so we will start with
Representative Roel Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not.
Getting set up here.
OK, thank you. This was a lot of
information and, and uh I do sit
on the mortgage finance
Authority, so this is hearing it
again, but I still feel that I
need to, for the record, ask a
couple of questions, um, to
dispel some um misinformation or
misconceptions.
First question.
Do any of our
Housing, um,
programs
Serve those that are
non-citizens.
Madam Chair Representative Royba
Caviero. I actually don't know
the answer to that. I'm not
sure.
Madam Chair, and um
Uh, may I call you Ruby?
That's how I know you, um.
I asked the question because
these are federal money,
subsidized monies for the most
part because how HUD moneys are
federal monies.
And I understand that.
a non-citizen cannot.
Receive federal.
Benefits in terms of social
services, in terms of Medicaid
in terms of any of that, is
that, do you, you're not
familiar with that provision.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
I am very familiar with Medicaid
and.
previous, we do have certain
components of Medicaid that um
non-US citizens like, you know,
emergency OBGYN, that sort of
thing, but in regards of
housing, I don't know the
answer. Thank you. I, I just
wanted to, again, I
I, we get criticized over and
over and over again that
immigrants are using our um
social services or housing
services or medical services,
all of our services, so, um, I,
I'll, uh, I'll move on from that
question since um
I think it's similar to, to
other types of services. I know
emergency room and hospitals
cannot deny emergency care, that
part I understand, and so, but
I'll move on from that. So my
question, another question I
have is on affordability.
What exactly or how do we
exactly measure affordability.
So I see that there's a lot of
funds that are going forward and
I ask these questions in
mortgage finance also and I
don't seem to get
Quite a
The answers, um
To the questions, but how do we
or does your office at all look
at
The charts and um.
The whole affordability factors
that go into making these
requests affordable.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
R Caballero, the, the housing
depends on the different
developments. That's kind of why
we tried to highlight it
throughout the slides here. So
some have, it can just depend.
Some are the extremely low
income, which is that 30% of
average median income somewhere
up to 120%, so it, it just
depends on the different
initiative and to answer your
question, I was just given help
here from um the director of
housing at uh.
Labor Health Services Division
and she noted that if we use
100% state funds, so I think
it's exactly to your point. So
if we use 100% state funds like
in the linkages programs, then
we can help people who um are
non-citizens, but if it's
federal funds, we cannot. Thank
you and I just needed that, uh,
Madam Chair, to go on the record
just to dispel some, some uh
Um
Uninformed individuals. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Herndon, uh.
