So Senator Hickey?
We'll turn it over to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
colleagues.
Um, I know some of you get the
New York Times and you may have
seen the uh section on uh PBMs
and their impact on local
pharmacies, which is only one of
the issues that we're having.
The costs are huge, um, I, I've
been told by people at United
Healthcare that essentially all
of their profit, I believe it
was in 22, maybe 23 came from
their PBM, uh, that allows them
to sell, uh, health insurance
products a little lower, but
again, um, the, the traditional
PBMs found in a niche, they've
exploited it. They play a lot of
cat and mouse games. They do a
lot of
Um
Hiding and uh
Money in administrative services
continue to ramp up their, um,
Administrative services that had
no value. There is some value to
what they do in terms of drug
selection and, and negotiating,
but uh the FTC and others are
now coming down on him, so in
America, uh, being an
entrepreneurial country that we
are, uh, some folks who are who
know what PBMs are doing and and
know the functions that are
necessary and the functions that
are fluff, uh, have developed.
But they, uh, would call them
PBAs, pharmacy Benefit
administrators because they are
um
Quite different in their
approach. And so I asked them to
come in today to inform us of
how that approach is different.
What kind of savings can be had,
and also as a uh being part of a
learning curve where if in New
Mexico, we were able to take all
of our public employees.
That's the eye back plus the
universities, colleges, and the
voluntary municipalities, um,
that number is somewhere around
350,000 to 400,000. And if we
did ultimately add into
Medicaid, um, and that's another
900,000. That's a lot of
bargaining power. I mean,
basically, low cost size bigger
than the size, the lower the
cost and um but
It's not just the cost factor,
it's the patient service factor,
and you, I know we've all been
frustrated at pharmacy counters,
uh, with the traditional PBMs
and how they deny and so forth,
so service is a component and
then the other one, coming back
to where I started and that's
how can a PBM help serve New
Mexico and actually retain our
rural pharmacies since the rural
pharmacies really in many
instances are the only.
any point of care. So, uh, I've
asked 3 of them, uh, that I've
become familiar with in in my
travels and different places
they all have different
approaches. They will describe
that today. Feel free to ask
questions of them and uh again,
this is really to introduce the
idea that we as a state could
save significant money if we had
a, uh,
Um,
pulled together large.
Service group and have someone
who's serving that, then, um,
and then in time joining with
other states which would almost
get to to a point where a large
Uh, pharmacy Benefit
administrator could negotiate
directly with the pharmaceutical
companies, which is where a lot
of savings could be had. So this
is a step in the process. There
will be PBM legislation, but um
it's a cat chasing its tail
cause everything we do, they
find another way to get around
it, uh, the traditional ones,
uh, the 3 big ones make up 80+%
of all pharmacy benefits
services in the country and.
And uh hopefully organizations
like these will begin to break
those up in the larger they get,
the more power they're gonna
have, um, so again, they're out,
uh, and they'll tell you who
that they've been working with,
but, um, again, this is an
opportunity for lower cost, much
better service, and what's so
important to New Mexico,
preserving our local pharmacies.
So,
Good. Well, thank you for
setting the stage, and we'll go
in, we have 3 different uh
companies that are going to make
presentations. The first one is
Right Way Healthcare. So if
you'd come on up.
Um, we have James Powell, Vice
President, Enterprise
Partnerships, Ashley, Elizabeth
Hassel.
Haley or Hazel Hazel and uh
Scott Musi.
Um
Chief Pharmacy officer and
general manager. So come on up.
Uh, the only thing I would say
is make sure only one mic is on
at a time. Otherwise, we can
start getting feedback and it
creates painful experiences.
So we'll turn it right over to
you, Mr. Muscio.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for the, um, opportunity to
discuss pharmacy benefit
management, um, and its impact
on New Mexico and its citizens.
Um, as, um, as I was introduced,
Scott Muzzi, I'm the chief
pharmacy officer and general
manager over rightway's, um,
pharmacy benefit, um,
management, um, program, and we
consider ourselves an innovator.
TBM. We don't run away from the
uh nomenclature around pharmacy
benefit management. We just like
to, um, uh, stress that we take
a much different perspective on
how we do that job with a very
important job. Um, perhaps most
importantly, besides just being
a pharmacist. I was a former
rural pharmacy owner that
experienced the negative impacts
that the traditional PBMs, um,
can have not only
on the patients that we would
serve in the pharmacies, but the
pharmacy itself is, um, Senator
Hickey had alluded to. Taking
that we've taken that
perspective at right way and
brought it into our design and
architecture, um, to really
focus on a perspective of making
sure that the member is at the
center of everything we do. We
fundamentally believe that the
patient is the most important
constituent that we serve, not
the drug, not the prescription,
none of that.
Which is what the traditional
PBMs would do. We want to focus
on the member and we want to
make sure that the member always
has access to, um, pharmacists
and pharmacy care whenever they
need it, especially what we
would, um, consider moments that
matter, times when they're in
discussing with a physician.
Maybe they're experiencing
affordability crisis and they
can't pay for their drugs. They
need to turn to somebody who's
gonna
Be in their corner there to help
them support, um, all of their
needs, and that's what we've
really focused on, um, at right
way.
We are a full service PBM. We do
everything that you would
expect. We negotiate with
pharmacies. We pay those
pharmacies. We answer phone
calls from the member. We, we
help interact with doctors to
drive um individuals to, to the
rate drugs that they should be
using. We interact with the
pharmaceutical companies. We do
all of that in a very,
um, technology-driven modern
way, but most importantly,
again, it's always
about what are we doing in
service of the patients that
we're supposed to take care of.
And right way today, we, um, we
apply this model and we deliver
this service model to greater
than 1500 employers across the
country today, greater than 2
million members, um, and we do
it in a way that drives a
satisfaction around um the
member experience at a level
that is not typically seen in.
Healthcare. We use a term called
net promoter score, that's just,
uh, how well do you like us if
we get an 89 or 10, we're
looking pretty good. If we get a
6 or 7, it's average and
anything else is negative to us.
And when you look at the um
healthcare industry in general,
insurance companies might be in
the 10 to 15 range. Traditional
PBMs are often negative, and you
can actually get a negative
score in MPS so we're really,
really proud of our focus of
um, supporting that member and
delivering a differentiated
experience. And when we do this,
we are able to save our clients,
um, and those members
significant, um, savings. And
that savings anywhere between
1015, and 20%. And a lot of that
depends on what the population
looks like.
The, the thing that I, I further
would stress is that only right
way, um, is, um, is the PBM that
is focusing on the member to
drive this differentiated rich
member experience.
If we think about traditional
PBMs, especially as Senator
Hickey has alluded to, they've
really left New Mexicans behind.
Greater than 60% of New Mex uh,
New Mexicans living in rural
areas have very limited access
to pharmacy, uh, today.
90% of New Mexicans, um, report
that they're concerned about the
cost of their drugs, and they
don't know where to turn.
44% of New Mexican skip or don't
fill a prescription because of
cost. And when they don't fill
those prescriptions, the
downstream effects that it has
on overall healthcare cost is
very significant.
As, as Senator Hickey alluded
to, New Mexico is one of the
states that has a very
significant problem that is
being called pharmacy deserts,
where there literally is no
access to pharmacy care and
likely then no access to care at
all in those areas. And in New
Mexico is the 2nd highest, you
kind of pharmacy shortage, um,
in America today. Uh,
additionally, you continually
see the impacts that
um, traditional PBMs have had on
um the community and rbased
pharmacies in New Mexico just
recently, a couple of months
ago, Del Norte Pharmacy closed
because they could no longer
stay in business because of the
reimbursement and the challenges
that the traditional PBM model,
um,
Represents.
Senator Hickey also alluded to
the Federal Trade Commission.
They are looking at the PBMs,
um, the traditional PBMs very
intently and they're really
looking at it from 3 lenses. One
is the PBMs, uh, those
traditional PBMs make money and
you don't know how they're
making money, nor do you know
how much they are making, um,
they hide it in ways that are
very creative, um, and very,
very advanced, and they continue
to do this in, um, in a way that
is excessive and as has been
alluded to, those large 3 PBMs,
which are owned by um health
insurers, so that would be
UnitedHealthcare owning OptumRx,
that would be Aetna owning CVS
Health, um, CVS Caremark, and
that would be Cigna owning
Express Scripts. When you look
at any of their
Financial statements greater
than 80% of their net profit is
being driven out of their
pharmacy benefit manager. And
that is, that is, you kind of,
that is dollars that is coming
out of citizens' pockets. That's
dollars that is being, you kind
of take it away, um, from, um,
hardworking pharmacists, that's
dollars that plan sponsors such
as IBA are paying that they
shouldn't be paying.
Um, second is they have
misaligned incentives, these big
PBMs. They make more money when
more drugs get dispensed, even
if they're not appropriate. Um,
and they make more money when
more expensive drugs get
dispensed when cheaper, um,
absolutely, um, valuable drugs
could be utilized. We have to
eliminate that. We can't be
tying our economics toward
rising healthcare costs. We
should be tying our
Economics to taking care of
people and making sure that they
are getting healthier.
And the last thing that we
would, um, that the FTC is
looking at is these PBMs have
what are, what's what's known as
vertical integration in that not
only do they have the health
insurance in the PBM, but
they're actually their own
pharmacies, and they drive a
preponderance of their drug
spend to their own pharmacies in
a way from the state of New
Mexico. Um, and, and this is
very, very significant in terms
of how it.
the traditional PBMs economics
and how it um represents a lost
opportunity for states such as
New Mexico.
At right way, we've eliminated
all of those. We have a very,
very simple, um, administrative
fee.
Excuse me, we take care of
people.
We charge you per belly button
fee to take care of the people.
And when we do really well on
that, everybody's happy. Um,
We, um, align our risk around
the performance that is expected
by the plan sponsor. So an
organization like IBAC, they
have a budget that they try to
hit every year. Our goal is to
align and deliver against that
budget on their pharmacy spend.
And we put, um, significant
risk, um, our own financial risk
to make sure that we accomplish
that activity. Um, and then last
thing that I would say is.
We don't own our own pharmacies.
Unlike other PBMs, we really
want to make sure that, um,
drugs spend is directed to
where, um, where the patient,
um, seeks care and accesses that
care.
I think one additional point as
we think about I'm so sorry.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and Madame
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, I think one
additional point related to this
as you think about, uh, bills,
uh, trying to drive
transparency, which is a really
important step forward. A PBM
can be transparent, which means
they're disclosing.
Um, what they are charging, but
they can still.
Um, trap, uh, pricing with
pharma
Sure.
Yeah, yeah, yes, the point I was
making is one, a PBM can still
disclose and be transparent, um,
but trap money with pharma. They
can still be transparent and own
pharmacies and dispensing sites,
they can still be transparent
but have their fees based on
utilization, so there is um a
very distinct difference between
the model that uh Scott
described this aligned model and
and that of transparency. Does
that make sense?
We have 3 stated goals for the
state of New Mexico.
Number one is we fundamentally
believe that the pharmacy
benefit is a healthcare benefit.
And they're, there, therefore,
our primary job is to make
healthier, happier communities.
Number 2, we believe that we can
use, um, you kind of pharmacy
benefit, uh, management is a way
to create job creation and
financial stability, um, for New
Mexico.
And uh within this financial
stability, it also includes
savings, and folks might ask,
well, how do you generate those
savings? Well, if we take a look
at one of the big 3 on average
on a per belly button basis for
people that they take care of,
they may, they may earn 20 to
$25 of revenue, profit.
Her belly button per month. Our
fee structure is in the 5 or $6
range. We're pulling all of that
revenue away from you kind of
those larger organizations and
we're giving it back to the plan
sponsor and we're giving it back
to the members so that their
drug costs go low. You do not
need $25 per belly button per
month to deliver exceptional
pharmacy benefit management.
We have a, we have a simple
prescription that we, um, that
we've designed for New Mexico.
Number one, we want to create
complete financial alignment and
guarantee, um, financial
performance for New Mexico.
Number 2, we want to make sure
that we're bringing our game
changing member experience to
the citizens of New Mexico so
that they benefit from that and
always have access.
to the healthcare experts that
they need to manage, um, not
only their pharmacy benefit, but
their health.
And we utilize modern
technology, um, to help augment
and deliver those services. And
that technology is both
important in terms of how we are
efficient compared to the bigger
PBMs, but also how we can be
more targeted and um tailoring
our ability to serve the
population of New Mexico.
When we think about unmatched
care, um, for all New Mexicans
and thus you kind of their
health improves. It, it centers
around making sure that the
member always feels supported
when they are accessing pharmacy
benefit. 50% or greater of
physician visits result in a
member getting a prescription.
And at that point, they are.
kind of, I guess I just go to
where I've always gone and
sometimes that is the right
choice and sometimes the, um,
the situation is much more
complicated and they need help
doing that. And as Senator
Hickey alluded to, it's pretty
hard sometimes to walk in to an,
um, a Walgreens or a CVS and,
and be able to have that
conversation with the pharmacist
who may or may not know you and
is really forced at trying to
fill a whole bunch of
prescriptions.
to stay in business and not
deliver, you know, kind of
personalized care. And the thing
that is really, really
frustrating to me is the state
of New Mexico is one of the most
advanced states in terms of the
practice of pharmacy care. He
only 3 other states in the whole
union that allow their
pharmacists to do what
pharmacists can do in New Mexico
in terms of the pharmacist
clinician certification. We have
to figure
route, how to bring that into
the mix and develop a new, more
innovative way to not only keep
those pharmacists, you kind of,
um, delivering great care on a
broader, um, on a broader
extent, but that they stay,
you're kind of financially
stable so that they can thrive
and deliver this, um, this
service. We do this today, um,
um, in, um, in our current
model.
Utilizing pharmacists and
interacting with those members
and delivering this
differentiated care. And
sometimes it's as simple as a
member calling us up saying,
I've got these 3 drugs, and they
cost me $500 a month, and I
don't know what to do, um,
because I can't afford $500 a
month. Is there something that
you can do, and that's when our
pharmacy team leans in and we
look at that and we work with
their physicians and their
caregivers and we say, OK, here
are some options for you. And
then we don't stop there,
because if you stop there, the
member's gonna go, right, this
is great, but I don't know what
to do. We see all of that
activity through by engaging
their doctor to get new
prescriptions, by enrolling them
in cost savings programs that
might be available to them that
are in the marketplace today. We
do all of that work by getting
them, um, getting all that
information to the local.
pharmacies so that they take
advantage of that, and it's that
last mile work that is so
critical to making sure that the
members, those patients really
are, um, receiving exceptional
service, but more importantly,
you kind of generating the the
type of health care, um,
experience that will lead them
to healthy, productive,
financially stable situations.
Uh, Mr. Charon, Madame, Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, one additional point
there that I think is, is really
important. Um, our model also
does not require a member to
make an inbound call for that
activity to happen. And so, um,
a really core component of our
platform is proactively
identifying lower cost pharmacy
options, lower cost drug
alternatives and teeing those up
proactively to a member and
showing them the
direct impact on their
pocketbook.
Right? So, um, rather than an
inbound, which it requires
reactive, which we can take um
the platform proactively
provides this transparency and
these recommendations and shows
members, um, the impact, um, for
their families, uh, and the
cost, and so I just wanted to
call out that differentiation.
I just, just on that, so how
would, how would you know doctor
gives me a prescription.
I go to Walgreens. There was a
better way of dealing with it
than this.
But how would you even know if I
didn't call you to check first,
to 22 things. One, a lot of the
prescribing today flows
electronically and we have the
ability to tap into that to see
what that looks like. Number 2,
because we are the PBM when the
pharmacist is back there typing
in that prescription in their
computer to send it to the
insurance company that goes
through our systems and at that
point, we can, we, we see that.
We can message to the member and
say, hey, wait a minute, um,
oftentimes they're not at the
pharmacy. Oftentimes, the
pharmacy said, I need you to
come back in 3 hours, which is
really frustrating. We can
enter, um, intervene in those
moments to then engage the
member. And let's just say the
member happened to get that
filled the first time, we can
still change that on a go
forward basis and because we
have access to all of that
information, we're able to do.
then do the outreach, and we can
do the outreach in many
different ways. We can do the
outreach by pinging the pharmacy
themselves to say, hey, would
you engage kind of patient XYZ,
we can, um, we can, um, phone
the member if they have access
to a phone. If the member has
access to, um, you kind of, um,
a mobile environment we can
message them that way, but we
know those things are challenged
in a rural state like New Mexico
and
we recognize that the key for
New Mexico is always going to be
how do we create, um,
Those rural pharmacies to be the
health care hubs for those
individuals, leverage those
pharmacists to, um, interact
with the member, um, those
patients in a way that delivers
that care in, in this, this
works naturally when you
incentivize the pharmacist the
right way, and I'll give you an
example, and no pun intended on
the right way, um, uh,
nomenclature. When I owned my
own pharmacy.
I would be sitting in there and
all of a sudden, a patient would
come in in into me and they
would hand me a prescription and
I knew that the pharmaceutical
reps had gone through town
because the docs had said, hey,
here's a new antibiotic I'm
going to write for you, Mrs.
Johnson, and it would come in
and, and back in the day, it was
$50. It's not super expensive
today, but back in the day, it
was expensive. And Mrs. Johnson
will go, I don't have $50. Wait
a minute.
Call up Doc Verker and I'd say,
hey, Doc, you wrote this
prescription, he said, I didn't
know it was $50. I'm like, can
we go with something that's a
little bit less expensive and he
go, yeah, that sounds great, and
then we substitute and I go,
Mrs. Johnson, it's 399 in Ego.
Thank you very much. We have to
utilize an incentivize the
pharmacist to do those sorts of
activities because they see it
all the time today, but they're
not incentivized to do that
because the PBS.
s that exist today just pay them
a, a, a fraction of a dollar to
just get that prescription out.
And so they're, you know, kind
of, there's nothing in it. We
have to change that and we have
to change that by working and
building a new different
approach to pharmacy benefit
management in New Mexico.
We touched on a little bit that
New Mexico is, uh, has its own
uniqueness around its rural
populations. Both you kind of,
um, with, um, with the
challenges of, of leveraging,
you know, um, we'll call it
technology like mobile
applications or, you know,
ability to interact with, um,
you know, web tools. Those
things are gonna be really,
really problematic for a big
swath of the state of, uh, New
Mexico and
So we know that, um, driving
parity between how we interact
with somebody that might be in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe versus
somebody that is, you kind of
out in the remote pueblos is
going to be different and it has
to be driven based on who the
healthcare providers are and
mostly pharmacists serving those
communities. We want to give the
pharmacies that are in your
state, the same tools that we
utilize to engage and interact
with.
members, um, patients, give them
the same sort of thing to allow
them to do the activities that
we do.
We know that when we do this,
that we're able to reshape
individuals, um, health. We're
able to drive them to be much
more adherent on their
medications. So, we don't see
the downstream impacts of
diabetics not being adherent or
an individual on blood pressure.
All they do is end up either
kind of in emergency rooms or in
hospitals, and they drive
downstream care that is not, um,
is not.
Helpful to you kind of the
financial survivability of the
health plans that, um, New
Mexico is, is involved in.
The other thing that we're fully
committed to is making sure that
we design this in a way that
meets the needs of the commu the
diverse communities that exist
within New Mexico. Um, I'll be
the first to say that you're
kind of I'm, um, I can only
imagine what challenges exist in
the Pueblo communities. I've, I,
I, I don't know firsthand, but
what I do know is we're
committed to working with those,
um, leaders and making
sure that they have access, um,
and their members have access to
the type of care that we believe
everybody should have as a basic
human right.
We also fundamentally want to
protect New Mexico's precious
financial resources. We believe
that
Changing how New Mexico manages
pharmacy benefits with an
organization like Right Way will
allow us to do a number of
different things. Number one, we
can stem the tide of pharmacies
going out of business. We want
to leverage them as part of our
um business, um, we want to make
them a more important component.
We want to financially reward
them for doing all the great
work.
that they're doing and helping
us deliver, um, health outcomes
and cost savings. Number 2,
We are frustrated that, um, many
of the activities that are done
supporting your members today
are not done in your state.
They're done by call centers
that are in different, um,
communities, um, they're done,
they're prescriptions being
filled in different pharmacies,
all of those sorts of things, we
are committed to addressing. We
want to build, um,
A, um, a service center in New
Mexico that's built for New
Mexico, staffed by New Mexicans
to deliver care for New
Mexicans. Um, we fundamentally
believe that, um, that type of
job creation, um, it's not gonna
be Intel, but it's gonna be very
important and it will also um
contribute to keeping small
rural community pharmacies.
very financially stable, so that
they are themselves, continue to
be an important part of the
local, um, economies. And the
other thing is we don't want
today using your kind of Senator
Hickey's numbers of 400,000-ish
lies. That's probably 4 or $500
million of drug spend that's
going outside of uh New Mexico,
maybe even more. Let's bring
that
in, in, um, into the state.
You've got great facilities that
are already stood up, whether
it's at University of New Mexico
Health or whether it's at
Presbyterian, they have the type
of resources for like delivering
specialty pharmacy or and other
services we can expand how rural
pharmacies support mail order in
a way that doesn't exist today.
And let's have those dollars
stay within the state of New
Mexico and not go to where
benefits the PBM. It really
needs to go to where it benefits
you, um, and the citizens of New
Mexico.
Well, one additional thing that
we recognize is the incredible
talent you have through the UNM
pharmacy school, right? It is
one of the top pharmacy programs
in the country, but we recognize
that um some of that talent is
leaving the state. And so part
of our vision, if we were to
pull up in a number of years in
partner with you would be to
build a preceptorship program to
give advanced credentialing so
that those pharmacy leaders have
incentives.
to stay in the state and take
care of New Mexicans and we can
keep that talent pool.
Uh, Mr. Cher, if I may, um, as
we were preparing to come here
to speak with all of you, you
can imagine we did quite a lot
of research on New Mexico. We
spoke with a number of New
Mexicans, um, learning about
some of the challenges serving
the rural communities out in the
pueblos. We spoke with several
independent pharmacy owners to
hear about their specific
challenges and, uh, fortunately
or unfortunately, a lot of what
they had to say was very
familiar to us.
Um, we also got to learn a lot
about the innovative things that
are already happening here. Uh,
Scott spoke about the scope of
service here, which is
absolutely nation leading. We
also learned about efforts in
rural communities like local
public libraries who understand
that so many of the people in
their communities don't have
broadband access, might not have
a smartphone, and so they stood
up the ability to do telehealth
visits inside the public
library.
That's really important and
really groundbreaking and from
our perspective, it's really
heartening and encouraging, and
it got us thinking about, well,
what can we do to partner with,
say, independent pharmacies to
help them stand up mobile
facilities or maybe facilities
in those very same libraries
where they can provide pharmacy
care where they can be a point
of healthcare in those local
communities, there seems to us
to be so much opportunity for.
innovation in New Mexico to
address the very unique
challenges that uh that exist
here and if that serves a segue,
well, there you go.
We have a vision, no.
2027, 2028, 2026, we don't know
the exact date, but we decided
to, you know, kind of plant a
flag and we want to partner with
New Mexico to build an ecosystem
that empowers local pharmacies,
creates in-state jobs, retains
pharmacy dollars that will drive
the New Mexico economy and most
importantly, we want to just
make sure that every new
Mexican has access to a
healthcare expert. That's our
vision as a pharmacy benefit
manager, which is way different
than you'll hear from kind of
any traditional, you know, kind
of PBM or those big
organizations in closing, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you for allowing us to
present today.
I applaud, um, your willingness
to look beyond the traditional
big 3, PBMs and into the future
to see what could be
accomplished with Buchan of an
organization that is willing to
think outside the box and
deliver kind of something new.
Well, thank you very much. Um, I
think rather than ask questions
now, we'll hold for after all
three. What do you think, uh,
Senator?
Um
There is, I've got
OK. You, why don't you go ahead
and ask your questions and then
if there's anybody else, but if
you could also stay around till
after all three companies have
presented.
Go ahead.
The, the games that get played
on on local pharmacies that the
Um, the cost to the pharmacy,
the reduction in the cost for
filling the prescription as the
usual PBMs do. How is it that
you make it a better financial
situation for the independent
pharmacist. Are you paying them
more per script fill, um, and,
uh, do you pay them for any of
these interactions. Um, so two
questions there, um, Senator
Ickey, um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair of members Committee.
Uh, I wanna, I wanna pick each
one of those, you kind of
differently. Number one, when
you think about the payment to,
um, pharmacies today. The way
traditional pharmacy, um,
benefit managers work is they
say to the pharmacy, we're going
to pay you, um, we're gonna pay
you X. Let's just say I'm gonna
pick a number. We're gonna pay
you $1. But then they say to the
plan administrator, the plan
sponsor, we're actually gonna
charge you $4.
And they're gonna keep that
extra $3 and they're going to
tuck it in the pocket without
you ever even knowing.
And the pharmacy gets a dollar
and they're trying to survive on
a dollar, and the plan sponsors
paid $4 and the plan sponsor
might be OK with $4 but they
don't know any different. What
we do is we say, how about we
pay the pharmacy uh $2 and we
only charge you $2.
Pharmacy gets more money, the
plan sponsor gets a better deal.
That's how you remove all of
those dollars that the big PBMs
are getting, and, um, and
stabilize the reimbursement in
community pharmacy.
And then in terms of
interventions today, yes. We
have a, what I would call a
small network of pharmacies that
interact with our, um, with our
members and, um, we compensate
them for those point of care,
um, point of dispensing
interventions.
There is a, um, there's a, a
little bit of a trick in getting
the Titanic to turn to get
pharmacies to to think
differently. What we're really
excited about with New Mexico is
that so many of the rural
pharmacists have already
achieved the advanced clinical,
um, credentialing that they're
ready to do something they want
this sort of, um, engagement in
the intervention. And in fact, I
would expect them to be.
Coming to the legislature
saying, how can we even do more,
um, than what they're currently
kind of scoped to be able to do
and we fundamentally agree that
we need to kind of leverage that
and compensate them when they're
doing those things.
Just
Follow up on that, you pay the
pharmacist $2 which is what the
uh plan sponsor was.
OK, how do you make any money?
What, what is your question?
Mr. Chair, we just charge a per
belly button fee.
Across the board, we just want
to take care of the patients and
do all of those activities and
you pay us, I kind of think of
ourselves as Spotify, if you
guys download any music and you,
or Netflix, you pay your monthly
and you get to consume all you
need to consume. That's how we
think about it. It's, it's a
service that we do for the
members on behalf of the plan
sponsors and we take care of
people and so therefore we get
paid on a per monthly basis for
taking care of those bird. Not a
per transaction basis.
I, I completely agree and that's
like it's an excellent question
why we don't do per transaction
basis. There's a whole bunch of
really not good utilization
going on out there. And you're
very aware of one very high
profile example, and that's the
opioid epidemic. The traditional
PBMs were every bit aware of
what was going on and did
nothing to do it because their
own economics are tied up. More
prescriptions,
more money for me. We actually
don't want to be incentivized
that way. We want to be
incentivized for taking care of
people and not driving
utilization. And when you tie it
to a per transaction, well,
you're going to be incentivized
to
Stimulate more transactions, and
we don't want to do that,
actually, we had to be
incentivized to have more people
come to New Mexico.
On that point, um, it was just
clarifying. Did I hear you say,
Scott, that, that there's will
be a small number of pharmacies
in your network.
Um, I was responding to Senator
Hickey's.
Little nervous, sorry, Madam
Vice Chair, a little, um, uh, I
was responding to Senator
Hickey's comment of do we pay
pharmacists for extended
practice interactions. And we
have a small number of
pharmacies that do that today.
Today, our network of pharmacies
that we, um, work with is over
65,000 in America today and
covers almost all the pharmacies
that are in the state of New
Mexico.
You.
Um
The
To that was 2 for 1, 2nd is, do
you do Medicaid?
Today,
today we do not, um, administer
Medicaid for any state. But what
I will tell you, excuse me, what
I will tell you is that we have
a very experienced Medicaid
team. We have all of the
technology that is needed to do
Medicaid today. And the most
important element that um states
should be thinking about when
they're going to be selecting a
PBM is how well they can engage
that Medicaid population.
and support them because they
are generally ones that, um, um,
need the support when they're um
gaining care or, or, uh, filling
prescriptions. And that is the
ethos of our model. We are there
to help support those
populations, those complex
populations.
And last question, how do you
negotiate the cost of the drugs
against some type of standard,
I'm assuming, and do you engage
in the rebate situation. Yeah,
and, and so in terms of how we
think about reimbursement with,
um, pharmacy Senator Hickey, I
think that's, um, the first part
of your question. Is there a
number of different benchmarks,
and none of them are perfect.
You know, all of them have all
sorts of ugly spots all over.
That we actually utilize a blend
of those to make sure that when
we're reimbursing, um,
pharmacists, um, that, that
we're covering costs and making
sure that they're making money.
I in a way that keeps them, um,
sustainable, unlike traditional
PBMs, they will be kind of
makeup, you know, kind of a
number that they're going to
reimburse that and, and that
dollar that they're reimbursing
the pharmacy, that drug might
have
the pharmacy $1.25.
In the pharmacy, either has to
sit there and look at Mrs. Smith
and go,
I'm not gonna fill this, you
know, see you later and Mrs.
Smith doesn't know what to do,
or they're like, I've got to
fill this and I'm gonna lose
money on it. We think those
sorts of tactics are very, very
problematic and can be
addressed, um, with sustainable
reimbursement. And then how we
interact today with the
pharmaceutical manufacturers is
we're a small but growing PBM,
um, and, um,
And you need scale when, when
you're talking with pharma. The
good news with with Pharma is
they also want to, um, lean into
innovation. So for instance, I
had a conversation earlier in
the week with a pharmaceutical
company, um, in which they are
really looking for planned
sponsors that want to do
something more innovative around
weight management.
cardiovascular risk. More than
just how do we get our
individuals on the drugs, but
more on how do we get those
individuals not only on the
drugs, but let's, if they're not
necessary, make them lifetime
drugs. People don't generally
want to take drugs forever. I'm
a, I'm a pharmacist that doesn't
want people on drugs forever,
even though that's how we kind
of make money, but I don't think
it's the right thing to do. And
so, um, the good news that
I would say is while we may not
have the scale, the heft.
We do have, um, you kind of lots
of individuals that are
following what we're doing in
the marketplace today and
partnering with the state like
um New Mexico would definitely
get every single pharmaceutical
manufacturer wanting to have a
conversation with us more
broadly about how can we make,
um, healthcare, um, and access
to drugs more affordable and
more accessible in the state of
New Mexico.
I understand your answer to the
Medicaid question to
Did I understand it correctly?
You're not doing Medicaid now,
but you could in the future.
That is correct, yes, we have
all the capabilities to be able
to do it.
Any other member of the
committee with the question
right now. And, and we will ask
them to stay in after, do you
want to go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. So would, would you be
deciding the formulary?
Generally, who decides the
formulary is what is known as a
pharmacy and therapeutics
committee, which is a group of
doctors and pharmacists. We, for
the state of New Mexico would be
using a committee that is of
doctors and pharmacists in New
Mexico, so they would be
deciding you kind of what that
drug list looks like.
So is this a committee that
exists or that will be Mr.
Chair, that will be today we
have one that covers us
nationally for New Mexico, we
fully intend to leverage all of
the great resources that you
have in the state, such as the
College of Pharmacy at
University of New Mexico, such
is the great healthcare systems
that you have at Presbyterian
and at Loveless and at uh
University of New Mexico Health.
We want them all to be involved
in helping us shape this
program.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. So who owns or invests in
this company. I mean, is it
publicly traded? Is it venture
capital? Is it just you? What is
it? Um, Madam Vice Chair, um, it
is, um, we, we are employee
owned, but we are venture
funded, um, you know, in terms
of giving us the capital that we
need to grow. We have, um, 3
principal, um, venture
investors, um, one of them is,
um,
um, Thrive Capital, which is
based out of New York. Another
is Koshal Adventures, which is
based out of, um, um,
California, and then a, a third,
um, minority investor, um,
venture investor that's based
out of New York City. OK, thank
you, and then where, where are
you located?
um, Madam Vice Chair, we are,
um, we're headquartered in New
York. We have service centers
today in
Um, just outside of Miami,
Florida and just outside of
Denver, Colorado.
We have about 500 employees,
about 300 of those employees
work remotely all across the
United States. I, for instance,
work out of Michigan, James
works out of California. Ashley
works out of Tennessee. Um, our
vision for, um, for New Mexico
would actually be to have an
office and service center in New
Mexico and build and create
jobs.
For that and then on page 7,
Interesting multilingual
support, including Spanish,
which I can understand, and
tribal languages, are you saying
you have people who speak Navajo
or Carris or anything like that.
Um, Madam Vice Chair, not today.
We do have Spanish speakers in
our, all of our, um,
interaction, um, centers, um,
both pharmacists and pharmacy
technicians. Again, our intent
is, if we are going to deliver
something.
for New Mexico, um, we want to
build it in New Mexico. We want
to build it with New Mexicans
that can deliver the service for
them, and we would make a
commitment that we'd have those
sorts of individuals, um, being
able to speak those native
languages in our model.
And Madam Vice Chair, if I may
add, this is something we've
done before for some of our
larger commercial clients who
had populations who spoke
languages significant
populations who spoke languages
other than English and Spanish,
we've already sort of been
through this drill and added
specific language support, so we
know how to do it. So, so, Mr.
Chair, are those tribal
languages or world languages.
They're world languages. Yeah,
things are different with tribal
languages very much so we
completely understand and great.
greatly appreciate, you know,
kind of that, um, that, um.
Nuance and complexity, and we
are 100% committed to helping to
solve, um, solve any potential
service barrier like that.
Thank you. One more question,
Mr. Chair. So, um, again on page
7, so the partnership with
Native American community
leaders is aspirational or is it
undergoing?
Madam Vice Chair, it's
aspirational.
Thank you. Again, not as easy as
it sounds.
Well, thank you, uh, I think
that's, that'll do it for the
time being. We'll listen to the
other two companies and then
there may be other questions for
you following those
presentations. Thanks.
So next we'll hear from ray.
RX and Trevor Douglas, the, um,
Director of the Oregon
Prescription Drug Program.
Uh, is here with us today
talking about uh
Array
Chair, members of the committee.
For the record, my name is
Trevor Douglas, as I was already
introduced. I also am the
director of pharmacy policy and
programs at the Oregon Health
Authority, um, and I've worked
for the state of Oregon, uh, for
about 15 years.
Um, today, I hope my
presentation provides the
committee with an understanding
of how Washington state and
Oregon State have worked
together to forge a multi-state
pharmacy solutions Consortium
over the last 20 years.
Um, I also want to leave New
Mexico with a formal invitation
to join this consortium, and
I'll describe how that can be
done so that New Mexico can join
other state partners and members
like Ohio, Connecticut, and
Nevada.
As you can see on the agenda
slide, I've organized my
presentation to try to give a
really good fundamental
understanding of PBM basics
around how PBM's contract, how
PBMs make money, um, we've
already heard a little bit about
Uh, you have more time to ask me
questions.
I've also, I also will talk a
little bit about the history of
Arax so you can understand how
we've evolved.
Um, also talk a little bit about
the governance, which makes us a
very unique, uh, PBM or PBA uh
solution in the country.
Then I'll touch on the types of
services that we deliver, how we
deliver them, um, and again, how
New Mexico can join, so first of
all, I, I don't think I'll spend
much time on the next slide
because um we've already heard
how everybody already uses PBMs
uh within uh
the plan sponsor environment,
which is really what we're
talking about when we're
speaking about the public
sector.
Um, but as you can see here, uh,
there's really key, uh,
functions that need to be served
and and filled by uh someone
who's acting uh on behalf of the
plan sponsor.
The next slide uh is actually a
a complicated slide because it
has colors of text and it also
has colors or opacities of
squares in a grid fashion. What
this slide is intended to do is
to provide you with uh an easy
to use a guide of the three
different types of PBM
contracting that occurs uh
within our country if you look
on the the the left hand side,
those are represented as either
a traditional model, which is a
spread-based model, which we
heard.
A little bit about
Charging $4 to a plan sponsor
but paying a pharmacy $1
keeping that balance is what's
considered spread.
Then you have on the other end
of that spectrum, a pass
through, uh, transparent model
of PBM contracting. Um, and
then, uh, a mix of those two,
concepts as a hybrid uh
contracting model.
So if you look in this grid, you
can see that in the top left
hand corner is an opaque or a
dark background,
significant
signifying that this is a not
very transparent uh
relationship, all the way to the
bottom right hand corner, um,
and for right uh lower part of
that, that grid being very
transparent.
Um, and then you'll see that the
text um is white or black.
And the, the black text
indicates that this is better or
more advantageous to the plan
sponsor.
And the, the white text means
that it's more advantageous to
the PBM.
So it's, it's really, I'm, I'm
not gonna go through all these,
you, I'm not gonna insult you
all you can read, um, and, and
it, it's very useful for us when
we're talking to folks, um, to,
to leave this behind just so
that they can have something to
refer back to of how these
models work, but those models
are inherently how PBMs make
money, and I'll talk a little
bit more about that on the next
slide.
So traditional or spread based
model contractings contracting
uh contracts are, um,
represented in column one.
And, and as was already shared,
it's where the PBM acts as a
middleman, if you will, and uh.
Yeah, carves off a portion of
what uh they're paid by a
planned sponsor and pays less to
the pharmacy. Oftentimes in
these arrangements, there's less
flexibility and formulary
development. Um, there's more
control around what drugs are
utilized because there's rebates
that can be uh leveraged to
generate more revenue for uh the
PBM um and rebates aren't always
shared.
Uh, with the plan sponsor in a
very transparent way, um, and
oftentimes, as was already
shared, um, payers have and the
plan sponsors have very little
insight as to what is happening
at the claim level at the
pharmacy counter.
In contrast, column 3, is this
pass through transparent model,
which is foundational to how a
rare X operates all of our
participating programs for all
of our public sector partners.
In this model, the, the, the
entity operates in an
administrative in a in an
administrator capacity, passing
100% of that cost that is paid
at the pharmacy counter, uh, to
the pair. There's no markup,
it's just passed through. Same
goes for any revenue and rebate
that is paid to the PBA by a
manufacturer.
Um, also with this pastor model,
these arrangements tend to all
be highly customizable to the
plan sponsor's needs, um, not
imposing a monolithic uh uh
pharmacy benefit solution on uh
a particular program, but rather
being able to customize and
being able to respond to uh
unique state uh statute, um, and
also a program needs whereby
certain populations might be
more prevalent.
others
Um, and then, uh, the, the
second, uh, column on that same
slide is again that hybrid
model, which mixes both of
those, uh, models together, but
that creates complexities,
right? Because the, the plan
sponsor and, and, uh, uh, the
the folks running those state
programs need to understand what
that contract is actually
saying, and be able to
understand uh what the true
administrative costs are and
what the true uh medi medication
and or pharmacy costs.
Are
So who or what is a rare x.
Before I, I talk about that, I,
I just wanna to recognize that,
um,
The, the steering committee that
that operates a rarex fully
recognizes that there is a
tremendous political capital and
lobby that you all face, and I
appreciate that, we appreciate
that. And it's all there and
it's curtailing accountability
and regulatory efforts across
each one of our states, um, and,
and we've already heard what
that's costing us in terms of uh
pharmacy access.
But what a rare X is, is a group
of public servants.
All committed to their
respective public programs that
bring a very, very deep
understanding of what those
entities.
Those public programs need.
And they also are charged with
the same thing stewardship of
taxpayers' dollars.
And they also want to serve each
and every member, like it's
their own mother, father, aunt,
uncle, or their own children.
And it's this fellowship that is
strengthening.
Growing from two states to now 5
and hopefully 6 with New Mexico
joining us.
That could become the difference
maker.
And make all of these state
members within our consortium, a
relevant player that can then
engage.
Pharma and have a meaningful
conversation about drug pricing,
uh.
In
In the aggregate uh across all
of our states that are
participating inside of our
consortium.
I think the, the other thing
that makes a rare X very, very
unique and separate from
anything that you'll hear today
from anybody else.
Is
We have an aligned fiduciary
responsibility.
All of the members within
ArrayRX.
A responsible to the taxpayers,
the responsible to people like
yourselves in the legislatures
in the states that that we
serve.
Um, no one else can say that,
and that brings us to the
mission that um is also on a
separate slide there.
Um, we recognize, um,
That,
you know, it's important to have
a guiding light as a public
uh sector group or consortium.
And we feel that our mission
statement clearly conveys, not
only are you position, but
underscores how nuanced the
public sector pharmacy programs,
uh, sector is, um, and who
better than those that are
entrenched and involved in.
Actually running those programs
with decades of experience to
oversee how those programs
operate and to hold uh a
contracted administrator
accountable.
All with that shared commitment
and shared uh stewardship of
taxpayer dollars.
So, I'm not gonna read the
slide, but it's very
self-explanatory. We want to
bring uh high value pharmacy
solutions, uh, with the
oversight, uh, that, that we
bring, and I'll talk more about
who and, and uh how robust uh
that steering committee is.
But before we do that, I wanna
just talk a little bit about the
history uh of a rare X.
Um, it was created by states for
states.
And fundamentally you'll see uh
Oregon and Washington, uh, broke
ground on developing a solution
prior to Medicare Part D.
For the uninsured population and
for those that were struggling
to afford medications, even back
in the early 2000s.
And right at the same time as uh
Part D started in 2006, uh,
Oregon and Washington decided to
come together because we
recognized that the efforts that
we were uh exercising
independently could be
leveraged.
Uh, and we also recognize that
other agencies had purchasing
that they were doing that was
defragmented.
And it was not appropriately
being leveraged.
But we also recognize that each
one of those state agencies had
unique.
Program needs
And they needed a solution that
would meet each one of those
programs needs.
And so through uh an
intergovernmental agreement, we
developed uh what used to be
called uh
The Northwest Prescription Drug
Consortium and then was
rebranded uh through uh the last
procurement cycle that we have
to go through just like any
other state does, uh, to a rex.
Um, in, in 2023, we were able to
um
Serve over 700 and 30,000 lives
across all five states or 4
states at the time, um, and, uh,
by the end of this year, we'll
probably exceed 780,000 lives
across all five states.
Um, and as one of the, the, the
other thing that's really
important to, to recognize with
respect to a rare axis that as
uh other states join, uh, the,
uh, each state is granted a
voting member on the steering
committee and so that deepens,
uh, the experience and the
knowledge uh of that steering
committee and and brings uh an
even deeper uh level of
oversight uh to all of our
programs.
So the steering committee, uh,
was originally, uh, consisted of
just two states, uh, and 4
members from each.
And uh we that persisted as as
we grew to incorporate the
entire country, uh, and what
we've uh landed on is providing
every additional state, uh, an
additional voting member on that
steering committee that has full
voting privileges, um, on, on
the steering committee.
And if we turn to the next
slide, you'll I'll introduce you
to the steering committee -1.
Um, we were unable to update the
slide because we just had Ohio
join, um, and Tracy Archibald,
uh, who is a farm, uh, has
joined the steering committee
and makes the 11th member of our
steering committee.
But together you'll see each one
of these uh folks, uh, has a
different skill sets, but.
Underscoring the importance of
having clinicians, pharmacists,
um, and others that are
experienced within the delivery
of public sector programs.
In particular, procurement
processes and navigating those
is critically important.
Um, and so all of these folks
are actively engaged in the
respective public sector
programs in their respective
states.
We meet weekly to oversee our
master administrator and ensure
that all of the programs that
utilize our services or having
their needs met.
Um, we also routinely share when
legislative sessions are on, uh,
developments that are happening
across the nation because we
recognize that what's happening
in one of our jurisdictions can
likely influence and or is
visible to to other
jurisdictions and help make sure
that a rare X and the programs
that we're delivering keep pace
with those changes.
So
the steering committee is
committed to operating and
overseeing uh the ARx programs,
uh, along the lines of three
core pillars.
And uh the the the the the next
slide highlights auditability,
transparency, and predictability
as our core operating
principles.
I already stated that a ray X is
fundamentally based upon this
pass through, uh, pricing model.
And that's been the case since
our inception 20 years ago.
So we have experience. This
isn't this isn't a new uh uh
endeavor for us. This is
something that we've been doing
uh since our inception.
We also uh base uh up.
Uh, are, uh, costs on an
administrative fee, uh, that is
known predictable state agencies
love predictability, um, that's,
that's why we went with that.
And we also as a steering
committee value flexibility. We
know that one state program that
calls itself a Medicaid program
in one state is precisely how a
Medicaid operates in that state,
not how it operates in another
state.
Similarly, with workers'
compensation programs.
And also public employee
programs we recognize there's
going to be nuances that require
a high degree of nimbleness and
flexibility.
We build that into our
all-inclusive rate, that is uh
that fixed fee, uh, that, that
we talk about, uh, and that has
been spoken about today.
We also, because we're a pass
through program, we're invested
and have nothing to hide in
transparency, um, and all of the
data that is uh
Transacted on uh our our
participating program's behalf
is visible to the claim level.
And they own their data.
I'll talk more about that in a
minute. We also have extensive
audit rights, we want to make
sure uh that you feel that you
have the ability and can uh
audit uh our contractor and uh
the entities that serve uh your
populations. And so we have
those extensive auto rights
built into all of our contracts.
Um, we, we also have, uh, an
annual market check that is
included and, and performed by a
third party.
Um, and that is done, uh, uh,
routinely to ensure that we keep
pace and remain competitive
within the marketplace.
We also don't impose uh uh I've
already said this in a in a way,
but we don't impose a monolithic
solution on any one program. We
meet with the program. We
understand what they need and we
deliver what they need, uh, and
put into their specific
participating program agreement
or contract, uh, those
provisions with appropriate
performance expectations and
guarantees.
So our approach is principled,
but flexible and public sector
focused and optimized to meet
the state's specific need.
Um,
Again, highlighting the, the
unique uh nature of, of what it
is that we do, um.
It is the the the the the really
unique contract oversight and
management that we have.
Um, with the, the clinical staff
and also with the program staff.
Um, we marry that up with our
Department of Justice in the
state of Oregon and the
Department of Justice in
Washington state and we have
attorneys from both of those
entities review our master
agreements and our participating
program agreement templates to
ensure they meet legal
sufficiency in both states and
generally don't raise eyebrows
for those folks. No one else uh
that I'm aware of has uh that
level of scrutiny brought to
their.
contracts.
I've already uh stated this, but
you don't have transparency if
you don't have access to your
data, and if you don't own your
data and have the capacity to
utilize it.
And so uh we have standardized
reporting solutions that are
required of our contractors that
get issue.
Routinely to our our
participating programs so that
they can monitor their
performance and also their data
is accessible through a portal
that they can easily customize,
um, even I can utilize that data
portal um and create reports
that are unique um to my needs.
Those uh reports also allow the
steering committee to look for
outliers and make sure that uh
the the basis of reimbursement
that is happening across all of
the participating programs that
utilize RX are actually
performing in accordance to uh
how we are telling them they
have to operate. Um, also use
those reports to ensure that we
have uh most favored nation
nation provisions, uh, adhered
to, um, and, and ensure that.
All of our programs operate
under that principle of
Uh, pillar of transparency.
The next slide is a, a helpful
slide that helps really convey
all of the types of programs
that we operate and offer.
So, uh, we have uh a number of
group uh uh uh pears or or uh
insurers that use our PBM
services, and we also have a
discount card operating in
Oregon, Washington, Connecticut,
and Nevada.
Um, we also have voucher
programs that serve unique needs
of of different state agencies,
um, and, and programs.
Even to the county level, um, in
Oregon, um, 11 entity uses a
voucher program.
We also have administrative
services only programs that
primarily serve uh to, to meet
the needs of, of rebate programs
where a state agency might have
a mechanism to pay for claims,
but doesn't have the ability to
collect on rebates that they may
be eligible for. And so uh we,
we offer that service. Uh, also,
uh, some other administrative
only uh services programs we
offer are those where clinical
services might be needed and uh
we can offer those through.
Pass through agreement as well.
And we do also offer a Medicaid
program, uh, which bifurcates
into two major components of
managed Medicaid, uh, space, and
a fee for service space. And one
of the unique things about our
fee for service Medicaid, uh,
uh, product is it was developed
with people like myself who have
the responsibility of overseeing
the Medicaid program. We also
utilized uh our connections
through the country to bring
together, key.
Pharmacy program administrators
from respective Medicaid
agencies from various different
states to understand what their
pain points were.
And understand what needs.
They had to ensure that that
flexibility and uh uh that the
systems that we developed would
actually exceed or meet their
expectations.
So how do we deliver those
services? Well, uh, the state of
Oregon was chosen as the lead
state for a cooperative
procurement.
And through an open competitive
RFP.
Process out of the state of
Oregon in partnership with the
state of Washington. Uh, we, uh,
have routinely, I think it's now
but we're we're entering our our
5th procurement cycle, but, um,
we have successfully uh
conducted for open competitive
procurements uh for uh a
contracted administrator. Each
time we solicited, uh, we did
get responses from
Your, your, your usual suspects,
um but we we also entertained uh
uh applications from those that,
uh, are like mota Health. Moda
Health is a regional health
insurer, um, but they have
developed now a very robust team
to serve the needs of a rare X.
As you can see here, um, they
are overseen by the steering
committee that's representing
the top of that pyramid, um, but
they perform the lion's share of
those pharmacy benefit uh
solutions that we offer.
And they have subcontracted with
Navitas, um, and Nauss is a PBM
uh that fundamentally uh was
built on this pass through
model. So they align very
nicely uh with uh our values on
the steering committee.
Um
I think in the interest of time,
I'll I'll skip that and you can
ask questions of me later, but,
um, I think that the next slide
is important to touch on. Uh,
the steering committee
recognized that, um,
It's important to have someone
else validate that what we're
actually saying.
I actually
What it is and uh the problem we
had was finding a third party
that didn't want to be paid to
do that, um, is, is problematic,
right? And uh if we paid them,
that would raise some
interesting conflicts of
interest, uh, questions. Um, so
we were actually approached
serendipitously by Arnold
Ventures, uh, Arnold Ventures is
a philanthropic organization,
uh, very, uh, very involved in
Uh
The the pharmacy, uh, space in
terms of affordability and
access to care.
And they believed in, in the
model that we had, um, and
offered to pay a third party to
evaluate our participating
program agreements and uh they
did so, and you can see here on
the slide, and I invite you to
visit our website and read the
entire, uh, report, um, at your
leisure, but, uh, essentially
Pillar RX found that the rare X
contract was overall more
favorable to the client than the
PBM.
And that it's a rarity that uh
pillar x applauds the work that
we've done, um, to bring
something that's unique, uh, to
the marketplace and truly puts
uh our clients' needs, wants,
goals, uh, above everything
else.
I think you'll find that when
you do read that report, you'll
see that it really uh resonates
with our mission statement and
everything else that I've shared
with you today.
Um, the next slide talks a
little bit about critical access
pharmacies. Um, appreciate
what's already been shared about
New Mexico, um, and, uh, it's
not lost on me because uh in an
Associated Press article at the
beginning of September rather.
uh Oregon was named 2nd to last
per capita in terms of pharmacy
access. So, um, we share a
similar phenomenon that New
Mexico has, uh, and we're not
deaf or, or blind.
to uh what's happening here.
We're routinely engaged by a
pharmacy organizations in our
state, um, and even, uh,
national chapters, uh, really
advocating for change, really
advocating for something to give
relief to our independent and
even our chain pharmacies that
are struggling to sustain
operations.
Um, it's not lost on the
steering committee either that
uh over half of the adult
vaccines in this nation have
historically been provided by
pharmacists.
Uh, we also recognize that
through uh the recent pandemic,
uh that without pharmacies,
there would have been a real
chore to, to get vaccinations
done and completed. And we also
recognize that when pharmacists
are allowed to practice at the
top end of their license.
There's an ROI uh that benefits
the entire community and the
entire public public's health.
So we adjusted uh our uh initial
uh critical access pharmacy
designation, which was solely
geographic in nature to one that
captures uh a socioeconomic
component as well as uh uh a
frontier and rural and urban
component.
Uh, once a pharmacy is
designated as a cap pharmacy,
uh, we actually engaged them and
negotiate specific uh
concessions on ingredient and
dispensing fee to ensure that
they sustain operations and we
thwart the growth of these
pharmacy deserts that we already
talked about and heard about,
uh, in the prior presentation.
Uh, in the next slide is, is
just a, a quick uh reiteration
of, of the power of an
intergovernmental agreement.
Um, every state, uh, in the
nation allows for
intergovernmental agreements,
um, and, uh, this is precisely
that. It's, it's a vehicle for
uh governments to to work
together, uh, and effectively
leverage uh what has already
been procured uh through a
really robust uh procurement
process across two states and
overseen by two departments of
justice, uh, and experienced,
uh, public.
servants
Um, the next two slides in
summary, uh, and before I wrap
up, uh, are an effort to try to
differentiate and help you
compare and contrast, uh, a rare
X with other uh PBM
opportunities and, and those in
the marketplace.
But I think the primary
difference is clearly are this
unique oversight and the shared
fiduciary responsibility.
Uh, I think the third party
market check that happens
annually is also unique.
Um, and the high degree of
customization that occurs for
each one of our programs brings
so much value that all of our
participating programs are
amazed at, at how uh they are
able to be served effectively,
um, and yet able to appreciate,
uh, the, the leverage purchasing
power of everybody that's
participating inside of a rare
X.
Um, I think that the other uh
couple other little differences
that are uh unique, uh, our
contract language validated by a
third party to be more client
centric uh than anything else
that they've seen. Um, we also
have a unique mail order, uh,
opportunity for folks, we, we
have two partners, we don't just
aren't married to just one.
Um, members can choose how they
want to navigate that, they
could have 1, they could have 2,
Uh, and then, uh,
I think in closing,
I want to just make sure that
you understand that we're ready
to welcome you to the Arax
family.
Um, we, we have, uh, the ability
to very easily execute an
intergovernmental agreement.
Uh, with a lead agency once that
that lead agency is identified,
um, and then within the state of
New Mexico, each agency can then
uh execute a participating
program agreement for each of
their programs to meet their
very specific.
Program needs.
Um, yet still allow each of
those programs, uh, uh, there
to, to have their unique needs
met, uh, and still leverage all
of their purchasing power
effectively. We also inside of
those agreements will have very
clear timeline expectations for
implementation.
Um, and, uh, on top of all of
that, uh,
Welcoming you to the Herreras
family means something that is
different than.
Doing business with uh another
organization.
We become your public sector
partner.
And consultants.
We have, as I said, over 150
years of aggregated experience
at your disposal. And as we
grow, that experience and
knowledge base will also grow.
And we hope and, and would value
to have uh uh New Mexico
participation on the steering
committee.
Um, and, and we hope, uh, that
you recognize that uh with this
uh public-private partnership
that we have with our contract
administrator, coupled with that
robust, uh, public servant
component, um, that we are a
unique uh entity delivering
nation leading oversight over
anything to do with your
pharmacy purchasing in your
state.
Any questions, I'm happy to take
now or wait till let's see,
let's see if we have Senator
Trickey, you have a few.
Uh, yes, thank you and um.
It's good to hear the
presentation again and, and the
concept, uh, on page 13, you
have in a an array of services,
no pun intended, um, PBM
discount card and so forth. Do
all of the five states
participate in all those
programs or they, it's kind of a
pick and choose.
Chair, members of the committee,
Senator Hickey, thank you for
the question.
Um
we allow, uh,
State programs to choose what
they need from that menu. Um,
it's an a la carte menu. Uh, you
can choose any or all of those
services.
OK. uh, Mr. Chair, one last
question, um,
You, do you use, uh, I'm trying
to remember the name of the PBM
that you utilize. Is that for
negotiating purposes with the
pharmaceutical companies.
Chair, uh, members of the
committee, Senator Hickey, thank
you for the question again. Um,
the, the uh, PBM that we utilize
as a partner, as a subcontractor
is Naviitus and um they're
primarily responsible for uh our
pharmacy claims platform, so
making sure that I've, uh, when
someone goes to a pharmacy, they
can actually process the claim,
uh, negotiating uh those uh
contracts with the pharmacy
network, um, and also
negotiating on our behalf with
manufacturers for rebates.
Um, we also have another rebate
program that is independent of
uh Navares that we also utilize
uh for wrap purposes, uh, when
we can achieve uh better terms
on our own. Thank you. And do
Washington last question, do
Washington and Oregon have their
Medicaid, their, um,
generic managed care Medicaid
programs in array. So, um, or
chair, members of the committee,
Senator Hickey, thank you for
the question. Um, uh, Oregon has
a unique managed Medicaid
system. We have multiple
coordinated care organizations,
uh, 17 of them, I think at the
last count. Um, one of those
managed Medicaid programs is
utilizing aAX.
Uh, Washington is, is, uh,
utilizing a rarex for uh uh
clinical services and and uh
helping operate their P&T
committee.
OK. Oh, PNT, um, who makes up
the P&T committee.
Sure, uh, members of the
committee, Senator Hickey,
thanks for the question. Uh,
the, the PNT committee, uh,
It, it, that's a really good
question. So one of the things
about a a rare X is we have the
ability to navigate multiple P&T
committees. Oregon has a P&T
committee. Washington has a P&T
committee and we're able to
adapt to any uh P&T committees.
Directives in terms of preferred
drug lists and uh what's really
interesting um is most of the
time, safety and efficacy don't
change much.
OK
Thank you.
For the benefit of those of us
who aren't
Uh, as informed on this, what is
a PNT committee?
Chair, thanks for the question.
Members of the committee, uh,
pharmacy and therapeutics
Committee is a P&T committee and
um as we already heard in the
previous uh uh presentation,
they're most often made up of
physicians and pharmacists, um,
in, in, uh, organs unique case,
we actually have two public
members, uh, that are neither a
licensed physician or a licensed
pharmacist, and it allows us to
have insights from other
describing uh practitioners like
nurse practitioners, um, and,
uh, naturopathic physicians. Um,
Uh, and, and even
non-clinicians, uh, who, who
have some interest in this
space.
Representative Thompson, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I thank you.
Just answered my first question
in that we can have our own
formulary. It does, we don't
have to all decide on the same
one. Is that correct?
Chair, vice chair, members of
the committee, thank you for the
question, Vice Chair. Um,
Yes.
OK, and then my second question
or it's not really a question,
it's a statement, um, New Mexico
is kind of this the little state
that could, even though we're
not little, um.
And, and we're pretty
independent and so I want, when
I look at at the board that it's
got 4 organ and 4 Washington 1
Nevada, one Connecticut, one
Ohio, and one New Mexico. I can
see some of our colleagues
saying, we're giving up too much
power. I mean, we're just gonna
once again be the little guy
that we're we always are, so if
you could help me figure out how
to, how to make that make sense.
vice chair, members of the
committee, uh, very good
question. Uh, uh, vice chair.
One of the things that's really
important to understand is that
the uh participating program
agreement is actually a contract
between.
The entity that is being served?
So each one of those entities
has full power and authority
over the services that they're
going to access through a rare
X.
And in fact, there is a uh in
each of those contracts, there
is a distinct Schedule one that
gets created that ensures that
each one of those programs that
selects on a rare X program has
the latitude to ensure that
those uh uh needs are being met.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
I think New Mexico, we just have
a chip on our shoulder for how
badly we've been treated for so
long.
So I had a question,
you indicated that you currently
had 700,000 covered lives, uh,
Chair, thank you for the, the
question. Um, we have 775,000
lives across four states
presently.
Yes, and that includes the
Medicaid programs. So we only
have uh one of our managed
Medicaid programs, uh, in, in
Oregon, um, and Washington state
utilizes uh clinical services
through a pass-through contract
to support their P&T committee.
Neither state has yet been able
to respond to uh an RFP or a
procurement in our respective
states for the Medicaid
business. Um.
We are actively in conversations
in Oregon with a number of our
managed Medicaid, uh,
organizations, however, and is
Ohio bringing in their Medicaid
program to the. So Ohio sorry,
chair, uh, members of the
committee, thanks for the
question. Uh, um, Ohio just came
on with their workers'
compensation bureau.
Um, and are utilizing rarex for
workers' compensation. That's
correct. They are examining a
rare for other lines of
business.
OK.
So when you say 775, that
included the workers'
compromise, OK.
All right.
So our Medicaid program would
double your uh.
Coverage, the number of people
you're dealing with. OK, any
other questions for Array RX
before we go to the final
company. If you, if you don't
mind hanging around because we
may have questions for, uh,
Capital RX, uh, Anthony Loycono,
the CEO, is he here?
Is there anybody here from? Oh,
here they are good.
And uh Lloyd Fiorini and Luan
Cuniko.
Thank you for coming.
So if you just touch that little
person icon, it'll come on,
yeah, and.
Just one at a time, otherwise
they get feedback, so.
OK, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee,
um, I'm Louanne Cunico and I
want to thank you guys for um
letting us present today. And
with me is my partner, um, Lloyd
Fiorini, and he's from Capital
RX. He's general counsel, um,
and, um, vice president of
compliance. I'm the vice
president of pharmacy for
Presbyterian Health Plan, and we
want to share kind of our story
of how we got where we are
today, um, because I know you
guys are looking at.
How do you get to a new PBM?
We've just done that. Um, we
selected Capital RX as our
partner. And the reason that we
did it, um, we went live 11 of
2024. We were tired of the same
things that you guys are talking
about today. We're titled the
traditional PBMs. We were tired
of no transparency. We were
tired of the old technology, all
of the platforms, um, are more
than 30 years old. There's no
new technology that.
goes on, so that doesn't allow
you to be creative. That doesn't
allow you to change the way that
prescriptions are adjudicated
within the system or how you
render or manage your
formularies. So, um, we wanted
something that was going to be
really disruptive. We wanted to
make sure that we could pay the
pharmacies what they deserve for
their services. I'm a pharmacist
by training. I am a native New
Mexican. I've been here my
entire life. I went to school
here, stayed here, lived.
here, so I have a great passion
for New Mexico, um, and so we're
gonna go through our story,
we're going to tell what the
difference is and why we chose
Capital RX, um, how innovative,
how change, um, how it changed
the way we're doing business and
how it's completely disrupted
the way that we were doing
pharmacy services before. So I'm
going to hand it over to, um, my
partner Lloyd.
Thanks, Lian, um.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Madam, Madam
Vice Chairman and committee
members, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today.
Um, as I mentioned, my name's
Lloyd Fiorini. I'm general
counsel and chief compliance
officer for Capital RX prior to
joining Capital RX, I had uh
various leaders leadership
positions at CVS Caremark,
Walgreens, and OptumRX. Prior to
joining uh capital X for the
last two years, I've been with
Capital RX, uh, and the reason
I'm there is because I believe
in our mission.
And as you can see, our mission
is to, to change the way that
drugs are priced and patients
are cared for to create enduring
social change.
So what is capital RX? Um, we
are a healthcare technology
company that operates a next
generation enterprise solution,
we refer to as Judy.
We provide full PBM and uh or
pharmacy benefit management
services and are also a PBA or a
pharmacy benefit administrator.
So for us for Presbyterian, it
was really important that we
didn't go with the PBM, um, and
I was really getting hard as we
went over the years to go with
the PBMs because they mandate
exactly what you have to take,
what you have to do, what you
can do yourself, what you can't
do yourself, and so we were
really looking for a partner
where we could still manage
everything internally. Our staff
is, is in New Mexico, most of
them are native New Mexicans,
pharmacists, technicians, um,
and
We do the whole thing. We do all
of the pharmacy and therapeutics
committee, the formularies are
all local. We have all of our
local physicians, um, local
retail pharmacists, um, we have
nursing on it from infusion
centers, we have our array of
different people, but we do all
of our um prior authorization
locally in-house. We do UM, we
do our call center. We have a
hybrid call center model for
nights, um, evenings,
' s holidays, it's hard to get
staff in New Mexico to manage
that volume, so we, we share the
resources with um Capital RX,
but we've isolated and in our
call center, we actually have
what's called a concierge
pharmacy program. So for those
members who are really having
issues or have called back more
than once. We actually do
outreach and we have our
specialized technicians and
pharmacists doing the outreach
to make sure that we're ensuring
those.
patients are getting what they
need, so.
Yeah, and, and a few a little
bit more background about
Capital Rx. We have over 225
active clients. Uh, we service
today over 2.6 million members,
uh, and we we service all lines
of businesses from commercial
Medicare, Medicaid exchange and
discount card.
Um, we, um, are pride, we pride
ourselves in providing excellent
services, uh, to our members and
clients as is evident by our NPS
scores, which exceed 87 for
clients that were member
satisfaction and 97 for client
satisfaction.
This is world class.
When the industry level is 9.
Um, our success today is based
on 3 fundamental core
principles.
Alignment of interests and
avoiding conflict of interest
with our clients.
Excellent service and or
world-class service and
innovation.
Um, if, if you look at, uh,
slide 6.
The traditional PBM model today
is riddled with inherent
conflicts of interest.
If you want to administer a
pharmacy benefit program, you
should just do that.
shouldn't do anything else.
If don't do any other activities
that have the that tend to
foster and create the conflict
of interest at capital X, we do
not make money on drugs.
We do not repack, white label.
We do not own pharmacies or mail
or special delivery, and we do
not own a rebate aggregator.
By the same token, if you do not
want to participate, if you do
want to participate in the drug
revenue and, and, and, and, and
profit from it and just do that.
Um, but once you combine these
activities, you tend to want to
monetize your asset, and this
influences the PBM's decision,
and you are no longer truly
aligned with your client's
interest and this is one of the
major reasons, um, that, that we
actually selected Capital RX.
They are not out to make money
off of the drugs, um, and so
they're not going to, it's not a
transactional piece where the
more scripts they fill, the more
money they make, um, you can do
different models. They have
different models that you can
choose from, but normally what
will happen is you, the more
scripts that are that are
generated, the more revenue
that's made by the PBM by their
if they own the mail order
company if they own the
specialty pharmacy, all of those
pieces
generate revenue for them, and
then on top of that, a lot of
times they'll put a spread in
there between.
Between um themselves, the
pharmacy and, um, and the
clients that they're actually
servicing, so they, they make an
additional money in there that's
funny money going back and forth
and so that was one of the one
of the true reasons that we
really liked their model, and it
was truly transparent, so.
So if you look at the current
PBM industry today, drug costs
have continually increased from
2016 where they were
approximately 450 million.
Uh, you know, projected to be
exceeding 665 million by 2026.
Over this time period, there's
not been any significant
innovation, but just
consolidation among the big
three PBMs.
Under the current PBM model,
there's a lack of transparency.
Um, you suffer today under Mac
pricing for generic drugs.
Where the PBM set the price, and
the pricing is based on
irrational pricing strategies
which are designed to meet their
overall generic guarantees.
Rebate or manufacture
relationships are not fully
transparent.
And fees arrangements are less
than clear and understandable.
A affiliated pharmacies are
preferred over non-affiliated
pharmacies and members are
encouraged or incentivized to
have their prescriptions
dispensed by these pharmacies,
and it's unclear how much margin
PBMs are making off of these
prescriptions, and now PBMs are
also engaging in manufacturing
drugs.
That was, that are being
dispensed by their pharmacies.
This is the current system.
So
Yeah, OK.
Those actually millions or
should they be billions?
Um,
I,
I just bet they're billions. No,
it's 600 millions billions,
you're right. There should be
billions, yeah, because
something like 20% of all of our
health, yeah, my mistake.
I'm still in the, you know, 30
years ago, so
um, so how should pricing work?
The pricing model that works
today, you don't really have to
go further than the front of
your pharmacy store.
OTC products were all priced on
a consistent and predictable
basis. We can walk into any
pharmacy today.
With the intention of buying a
bottle of Tylenol, and we, we
should all know when expected
what to pay.
This is the model, this model
does not exist when you go
behind the pharmacy counter.
Capillar X created the first
national NADA network.
Where NADAC is the national
average drug acquisition costs,
which is published by CMS and
publicly available and is free.
It is used by 42 states for
their Medicaid programs. Over
600 pharmacy chains report their
pricing.
Or pharmacies or chains report
their pricing, and one reason
why that we selected NANAC, it
provides predictability and
pricing for members, as well as
pharmacies.
And lives up to the Tylenol
rule.
The price is the price is the
price. There's no variability
from pharmacy to pharmacy.
So this was one of one of the
other huge disruptive pieces
that we really liked, um, NIA is
NIDAC, and it's reported out by
the retail pharmacies, so one of
the best days of my life was
January 1st when we got rid of
Mac. We do not work under a Mac
any longer. A retail pharmacy
has a predictable knowledge of
how they're gonna get paid for
that drug. They can go online at
any point in time, it's right
there published for them. They
know exactly what.
They'll get paid and with that
because NEA is so much less, we
were able to give them a much
higher dispensing pay uh fee to
pay for their services, the
actual services, uh, filling the
script, doing the consultation
with the member, reviewing their
medications, which is what they
should be paid for. So we are
really excited about that and I
mean all the years that I've
been in this business, it's uh,
the biggest complaint that I
heard.
from the community pharmacies,
and I grew up in a community
pharmacy was.
We were, they were getting
undercut on the Mac and we were
not paying him a dispensing fee
and dispensing fees went down as
low as 70 cents per script,
which is crazy being a
pharmacist and only getting paid
70 cents, um, for your services,
so that was a huge part of what
we've done. And when we've
talked to the community
pharmacists, which we do often,
I think the majority of them are
really satisfied with with what
change has come into effect.
Uh, just for everyone's, could
you define Mac and Nadak.
Yep, thanks son. Oh, Mr. Chair,
um,
Senator Hickey, thank you for
the question. Um, yeah, the Mac
is, it's called a maximumal
allowable cost and it's used on
generic medications. So generic
medications, you could have 100
different manufacturers making
the exact same tablet and the
AWP or the acquisition cost on
it could vary from 10 cents a
tablet up to $10 a tablet.
The maximum allowable cost takes
um the, the PBMs build their Mac
lists, and they take down that
rate so that regardless of what
manufacture you're using for
that same medication, same
strength.
It, it brings it down into the
lowest possible cost that they
could pay the retail pharmacy
for that drug. So, and then what
happens is, um, if you make any
adjustments on your end with
your formulary where you're
trying to change utilizations or
go with the lowest net cost.
The PBM then fluctuates the Mac.
They will change it constantly
on you, so it never stays the
same and so my favorite saying
was I felt like I was playing
whack a mole with it constantly.
You're constantly chasing where
the numbers are going and where,
where they're moving the dollars
on you. Um, does that help
Senator Hickey?
Yes.
OK, thanks. Oh, so needak, um,
thank you. um, NAEC is a um
national average acquisition
cost. This is actually reported
by the retail pharmacies.
There's over 600 retail
pharmacies nationally that
reporting to CMS Center, um, for
Medicare. They report that in on
a weekly basis. Any changes or
fluctuations that they're seeing
in what how they're acquiring
the drug or their acquisition
cost of the drug.
So then CMS, um, takes all of
that data and then they um they
published that out on the
website. It's a free website,
it's updated weekly, so
everything happens out there.
So, um, so it's actually what
the pharmacies are paying for
the drug. So once again, we're
trying to take out any way to
make money off of a drug and put
the money where it goes, so
paying for the services that are
being rendered versus adding
into the
cost of the drugs.
Yeah, and if I may, Mr. Chairman
and and Senator Hickey, the NAAC
is deflationary over time and it
has been shown to be
deflationary as opposed to the
current pricing methodology,
which is called average
wholesale price.
Um, and that is set by the
pharmaceutical manufacturers and
reported to certain benchmark uh
reporters, MetaSpan, for
instance, and it's based upon
what manufacturers set the price
at. NADA by, by comparison is
based upon what the pharmacies
are purchasing the product at.
So therefore, you're getting to
the lowest net cost without
actually dealing with the
pharmaceutical manufacturers.
So, and if I can just explain
the, the average sale price and
so forth. What, what happens
then you have rebates and
usually you have a percentage
rebates
based on the average wholesale
retail price. Anyway, it, it
drives a mutual incentive for
the manufacturer to raise their
price because there's then
theoretically, um, more of,
there is that rebate and because
of the rebate, the
middle man gets to keep that
additional portion, so they're
both working together to make
money off of the transaction.
Um
So we we've we've talked about
AWP as well. So, um, when you
remove the inherent conflicts of
interests under the current PBM
model, you were able to
implement a more ethical
pricing.
And regardless of the channel or
the prescription, a model where
the PBMs only compensation is an
administrative fee you have a
PBMs whose interest is is to
manage the benefit and ensure
the appropriate drug is
available to the patient through
the appropriate channel.
Under the capital RX model, we
charge the same fee regardless
of whether the prescription is
dispensed, uh, what drug is
dispensed I should say, or the
channel in which the drug is
dispensed from. This allows us
to be more flexible and
administer our client's plans to
meet their needs.
want
I, I think one thing that's also
important is we've heard, you
know, pushing through mail order
things like that and how mail
order can um take away scripts
from our community pharmacies,
we actually allow 90 day
supplies at retail pharmacy and
we allow 90 days supply at mail
order. So it's really where you
want to get the drug, and we
talk about New Mexico being a
hugely rural state, which we
are, and we heard the term
pharmacy deserts, which means
there's huge pockets.
where we have no pharmacies.
Well, in those pockets, we also
those people that live in those
pockets also don't have, um,
they can't receive mail, right?
There's all kinds of other
issues, so we have to be really
creative in how we get those
drugs to those, um, members and
patients and, and do different
things. So, you know, are we
sending them to the local clinic
that's there, that's closest to
them, so they can pick them up
there. Are we shipping them
somewhere?
Differently so that they can
pick them up so that we, we
don't have any disruption in
care and how patients receive
their medications. So I just
wanna make sure we went over
that really quick.
In addition to aligning our
interests with our customers
we've realized that current
technology structure for the
prescription industry is
outdated and antiquated.
And prevents the current PBM
model from truly providing an
efficient platform to
administrate, administer your
prescription benefits.
A capital RX recreated Judy,
which is a proprietary
technology and patented.
Judy allows us to unify pharmacy
operations into a single
scalable platform. It is the
only platform that incorporates
all pharmacy workflows into one
platform.
Um, Judy allows us to return to
the roots of the PBM industry
and how it was founded.
Um, modern technology can unlock
significant value from the
supply chain that is otherwise
wasted.
On inefficient and antiquated
systems that are relied on by
the rest of the industry today.
Um,
something
Yeah, and with Judy, um, if, if
you look at at slide 12, I mean,
that's literally all of the
different things we had to work
in um to make a claims
adjudicate or to make sure that
benefits were working correctly
when we moved over to Judy, um,
it, it streamlines everything
and on top of that with the
innovative technology, we're
able to do things differently at
the point of sale, so at the
point of service when you
receive your prescription and
when your physician
sends that script to the
pharmacy when it's adjudicating,
we can remove some of the prior
authorization issues because we
can have some of those things
sent from the e-prescribed
prescription, so if they have a
correct diagnosis on it. Judy
can now capture that and within
our, within her logic, we can
say if this diagnosis is on
there, the claim will
automatically pay if that
diagnosis is not on there, then
it's gonna require prior
ization or some other step has
to happen, but it, it's more of
a smart system that we're
looking at and so there's all
kinds of things, whatever we can
think of, we can build into duty
and it will happen, whereas on
the old systems, we could never
have any of those things occur.
It was just constantly sorry,
you have to send in a prior auth
or we do try to do as much as we
could differently, but it's
really innovative and it it's
gonna, it's
just a huge change in how we
think about um processing
pharmacy claims and making sure
they get to the members quicker
than they were in the past, so.
As mentioned, it allows our
clients to select aspects of
services that they may want
certain vendors or third parties
to provide.
This does not have to be.
Capital RX that provides these
services, it could be any vendor
that could sit on our platform.
Um, in effect, the individual
plans are able to effectively
manage their prescription
benefit as they see fit.
Not as otherwise dictated by an
inflexible technology.
Um
So as Judy acts as our central
hub, basically, right.
OK, so we've provided several
case studies for you, um, which
are starting on page 17, I
think.
Um, these are actual results
from our clients.
Um, over the years, um, we have,
um,
Because
Yeah, Teamsters Union, they
actually um demonstrated that
over, over 3 years they had a 4
year period that a negative 12%
trend.
Um, over the 3 or 4 years that
they've been with us.
Um, as well as I leave, um, uh,
you just talked about PHP but
Saint Luke's, which is uh
another client of ours, they
have uh m-8% negative trend.
Uh, over the years that have
been with us and the MPS scores
are 90 and 96, respectively. And
if you look at our PA approval
rates, um, this is another
example of not having a conflict
of interest, our PA rate is
actually 69% versus the industry
average, which is 89%.
Which means that we're actually
providing a prior authorization
and making sure the member gets
the right drug at the right
time, as opposed to just rubber
stamping it and sending it
through to our specialty
pharmacy, where we get the most
margin. I'll leave it to you.
OK, and I'll talk about um the
Presbyterian case study, so like
I said, we went live 11 of 2024.
Um, we've been in, we've been
doing pharmacy services and um
and medical services for the
Medicaid managed Medicaid
program since inception in 1997.
So for 25 years, um, what we saw
and like I said, we're, we're in
New Mexico.
This is who we are. This is.
What we do, it's our relatives
that are on these plans. It's
everybody we know, so we wanna
make sure that we're getting
them the best possible care at
the most cost effective price.
And when we moved to Capital RX,
we knew we were gonna see some
savings we weren't expecting
what we saw. And so if you look
down at, um,
At what we saw, we actually have
been trending, um.
What we, when we did our RFP we
actually went out to bid, we
evaluated like 20 different
PBMs, different the large ones,
small ones, new ones, everybody.
We actually went when we went to
RFP, we sent out 5 RFPs, um, to
have people come in and and do
their proposal.
The bid that came in, um, 2nd to
RX, we went ahead and we've been
measuring, um, we've been
re-adjudicating all of our
claims and running against with
their best and final proposal
was for us, and you'll see that
at the end, which, um, we've
actually saved in the 1st 9
months, $22 million. It was a
$22 million difference. So if we
would have gone with them, if,
if we hadn't gone out to bid
with Capital R.
and we hadn't allowed them to
bid on the RFP. We probably
would have selected this, um,
this PBM, right? And so over
them we saved already 22 million
from our, our legacy PBM that we
had before in 2023.
We actually have been doing the
same thing, reprocessing the
claims under those rates, and we
actually have saved $42 million
if we would have stayed with our
legacy PBM. So just huge
differences and the majority of
that is driven by NADAC, but it
also allows us, we're actually
around a 10 $10.50 dispensing
fee going out to the pharmacies.
That's with that included.
So it can be done. So, um, I
think that's huge for what we've
seen.
Remember, I am a pharmacist. I
And you know, I know the first,
the first, um, uh, team actually
talked about our pharmacist
clinician act and how our
pharmacists can see patients and
can prescribe, um, in 1997 or
1993, sorry, 1993, there were 4
of us that got that passed in
the legislation, it was myself,
I think most of you know Del
Tinker, um, and then two
professors from UNM. So we
actually got that whole thing
passed and so when
talk about disruption. I really
mean it. I, I have a passion for
disrupting the way we do things
and making sure that we get
pharmacists to um work up to
their highest level on their, on
their, um, licensure, so, um,
just so, but it, it's been a
huge, huge win for the state of
New Mexico. This is just the
Medicaid, our Medicaid lives.
This is only our Medicaid lives,
you see the same thing with our
Medicare.
Um, with commercial and with
their exchange plans as well.
But this is only Medicaid. OK.
I'm sure you have a question or
two, Senator Hickey.
Oh, thank you, um, for that
presentation. I think just one,
Does Presbyterian looking to
move to the Judy platform for
all of its digital, uh.
Information. In other words,
there seems, what I'm hearing
there seems to be a benefit,
particularly for accurate
information at the right time.
Um, if you're, if everything is
on one platform.
So Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Hickey so for
pharmacy, we are on, we, we are
completely on the GD platform.
So yes, um, we, we are now there
they are capital RX is
exploring, um, other
opportunities with medical
claims processing, things like
that, but currently for what's
um a what they uh can give us
for with the vendors uh serves
up under Judy, we are utilizing
all of that currently.
Thank you. Um, and I, uh, on
Medicaid. What is your
percentage of savings, uh, and,
and I, I know you talked about
the, the, the dollar number, but
what percent have you saved in
terms of making the change from
the previous run of the mill.
Um, I won't name them. I know
who they are, but one of the big
3.
Uh, PBMs.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, Senator Hickey,
so if I go off of our 2023
rates, we're sitting right
around 20% if I go off of what
we would have chosen in 2024.
We're sitting around 11%.
Thank you. To Martinez, yes, go
ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We're allowed to ask general
questions for all 3 pitches or
I, yeah, I think at this point,
let's just throw it open and,
and if you have questions on any
of what we've heard this
afternoon, this would be the
time to ask.
Let me preface it by saying not
a doctor.
Uh, number 2.
Number 2, I, I'm not.
Sold on the idea of PBMs to
begin with.
Um
But those two things being said.
It seems to me that, I mean,
they were all 3 great sales
pitches.
And it kind of made me miss when
I was in business and I would
listen to sales pitches.
Um
But I don't
When I look at the bottom line,
I don't know that there's a huge
difference.
Between the three sales pitches
other than management styles.
Um
RX, you did say.
That she used Nadox, so are you
not negotiating the prices?
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, Senator,
um, we, we do not negotiate
pharmacy prices on the drug and
ingredient cost it is set at
NADAC, and that, that is the
negotiation we have our
pharmacies that agreed to accept
that as their reimbursement for
the ingredient cost.
What we do negotiate is the
dispensing fee for them.
So the dispensing fee can vary
anywhere between $8 to $15
depending on the pharmacy.
You sure that I'm an honorary
doctor, and he made me a
senator. It's like my birthday.
Um
one last.
Yeah,
I was gonna say I trade you.
One last question, um.
It seems to me like this is all
about the bottom line.
So when you say,
You talked about
conflict of interest because
Some of the big 3 are doing
other things, but then.
I understand you're pursuing
other options as well, like
billing.
And these other things, so I
don't think it's a bad thing.
When you're trying to diversify.
I think it's a good thing.
When I was in business, I was at
23 year old know it all?
But I diversified the things
that I was selling.
It didn't make my partners very
happy.
But in the end they were
extremely happy that I did that,
so.
Um, I guess my last question is,
what's the sales pitch for, is
the state looking for new
Partners in this is or the
contracts with the other PBMs
expiring?
I, I guess I don't understand
the background of these three
sales pitches.
representative, I think Senator
Hickey is the one who, who, uh,
thought it would be good for us
to hear about alternative models
of PBMs over what we had been
hearing about over the last
several years.
My thought is we would be, we're
not in a position to pick who
the state would contract with,
we would be in a position to
maybe urge.
The Medicaid program or the uh
the general services department
that manages the IBAC contract
that we would urge them to take
a look at these and to make a
selection. What were you
thinking, Senator Hickey?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator.
Uh, the reason I wanted to bring
this forward is because of my
understanding as I have said in
the past, I almost have a
master's in PBMs because I'm
negotiated with him for so much
of my career, um, and I watched
them, uh, blossom from a, a true
service in terms of negotiating
pricing, having volume to be
able to do that, um, some
pharmacy and therapeutics
administration of claims and
And um
Uh, and, and, and again, their,
their ability to have scale, but
since they found it so
profitable, uh, and, and the PBM
that we used at New Mexico
Health Connections was uh uh I
can't remember if it's catamaran
or cataract, um, catamaran that
was purchased by United. We were
originally uh contracted with
them, and it was pretty much of
a basic service. And then as it
got into um
Uh, Optimum Healthcare and then
switching and going back and
forth between them. We weren't
finding a lot of difference and
particularly as we were a
smaller player, we didn't have a
lot of clout, um, but they were
all adopting these unnecessary
services such as the rebate
aggregation and other, uh, and
then the games and, and this,
and the spread pricing in the
white labeling, and I've, I've
written a 60-page paper, I
should say actually my
consultants.
did and PBMs and all the tricks
that they play and uh which is
the basis of some of the
legislation that we passed, but
to see it progressively becoming
such a, a, a consolidated power
center and when you have 3 PBMs
managing somewhere between 80
and 90% of the drugs in the
country. It, they, they, they
don't conspire directly, but
they all know what each other's
doing, and they all play the
same game and they're all owned
by the health plans and
owned by the health plans takes
out a potential informed buyer
who may be would might represent
you or some other interests, but
their interests are all
colluded, and in that collusion
they are driving up the cost of
care. The largest driver in the
fastest increasing cost in
healthcare is our hospitals.
There's no question about it,
um, and hospital consolidation
is an issue which I, which is
one of the reasons we're
starting to address that in this
state.
But the consolidation has
already taken place in the
pharmaceutical, and they will
raise their profit margins at
our expense ad nauseam going
into the future. The reason I
wanted to bring these 3 here is,
is just informative. I mean, we
are now making no decisions, but
we will be asked perhaps or we
will write bills on what our
agencies, maybe we're gonna ask
them all to come together
because if in your business
basically
the more you're sold, the larger
you were, the more market power
you had. And so the larger that
we can come to market, then the
more power we have for discount.
That's the basic under
fundamental underlying
principle, but then, as we uh
started to bring this up and I
can't remember if it was you or
one of your colleagues talked,
talked about when, when we
thought about this and, and we
did have a ray present last
year, um, what, what about the
independent pharmacists and we
You know, and again with the
shortage that we have with
providers, so they're so
valuable in the state. So I,
I've asked each of them to uh
talk about how they're going to
help the independent small
pharmacies in the state. And
then, um, you know, I don't know
how long it's been since you
pounded your fist on the counter
at the pharmacy because the PBM
is saying no, you can't have
that, um, you know, we passed a
bill last year doing away with
prior authorization.
And some classes of medication,
but it, it just, it, it served
to remind me that the other
piece here is the service model
and, and what can be brought to
bear around that. So these are 3
very different approaches.
But they are disruptors. I mean,
basically, you know, we used to
compete with typewriters. Then
we got the computer. Goodbye
typewriters. If we can get
disruptors who are succeeding in
the marketplace, bringing these
kind of margins and maybe I
would ask, uh, ray and um
Uh
Right, I'm, I'm sorry, yeah,
in the right way, um, roughly
speaking, what would you say the
savings you're able to bring to
your customers as well. There's
3 very different approaches, but
that's what I want to make us
aware of that we don't have to
be subjugated to, and I can't
remember my my economics
terminology, but basically a
consolidated monopolistic market
that is just taking money out
and giving it back to their
Shareholders and their senior
management at our expense, so
that's why I asked him to come
today and that maybe sometime in
the future, we will consolidate
the eye back, all the other, uh,
governmental agencies into one
pool, combine it with Medicaid,
and then we come to the
marketplace with 1.4 million.
And then if we do we work with
an array or what have you, we'd
come to the marketplace and
other states besides what array
are talking about doing this
now.
They're actually seeing that
market power.
In terms of size has huge
benefits and so.
If we can move this forward in
our state, we're going to
contain the cost of care. Now I
have one last hidden agenda
here.
We're gonna have to pay our
clinicians more. We cannot
compete.
I mean, we just cannot compete
nationally and it's not getting
any better.
So when I go and say Medicaid,
you've got to look at at least a
200% and maybe even 300% for
specialists to compete with the
rest of the country since there
is no commercial market to fall
back on. And the uh LFC says,
where are you gonna get that
money?
Here
That's where we're gonna get the
money, taking it away from the
PBMs and turning it over to
paying clinicians, so they'll
want to come to New Mexico.
Thank you.
My last question, Mr. Chair. So
it's great that you're saving
$42 million. That's good for
your bottom line.
All these 3.
How do I benefit?
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Martinez, that's a great
question, right? So what we do
with that money um at
Presbyterian, a lot of it
because it's Medicaid, that's
all Medicaid, that all goes back
to the Medicaid as we're, as we
go through negotiations and
everything, all that money goes
back to the Medicaid program for
commercial line of business or a
self-funded plan that goes back
in when we are setting the
premiums. So it offsets your
premium rates. So it decreases
the amount of money.
you pay on your monthly premium.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Doctor mentor.
I could reverse that in some
ways too, seriously, you, you've
been, been doing this for a long
time, um, I, I, I would like the
others to come up and I, I'd
like to get, can you give me
just
A range of savings that you
think you could provide, uh, if
New Mexico, uh would adopt your
services.
And Mr. Chair, if he brings up
ask that one question, and if
you bring them all up,
particularly with the PBM that
does not service Medicaid. How
would that help the state,
particularly when we don't, I
mean, when a majority of our
state is on Medicaid.
Help me to understand that.
They have the capability to
service Medicaid. They just,
they have people who are very
experienced in Medicaid as I
understood. And if they get a
Medicaid contract, they'll be
able to roll into it. So, um,
that's how they would benefit
the state.
And then for uh Doctor Hickey
with respect to what I
understand there about 70 PBMs
in the entire country, you
bought 3 here today. Uh, how did
you choose these three?
Uh, these 31, we got to know a
Ray when we did our research on
the PBMs, uh, it's in that I'll
give you a copy of the paper
again. Um, it's in there, um,
the other two I got to know
through people who are
knowledgeable about disruptors
in the marketplace and these
other two companies are
disruptors. That is, they
provide the same services at
better cost and better service.
And so again, anything we can do
nationally to weaken the three
insurance companies and they're
essential monopoly, um, I think
would be beneficial for New
Mexico.
Vice vice chair, um, I guess
chair is still here, uh, members
of the committee, uh, I wanted
to answer, um, the question
about savings, um, how about I
address it in actual, uh,
savings and, and, uh, realize
savings over the last 5 years.
So across all of our programs in
the last 5 years, uh, we've been
able to save, uh, almost $700
million with respect to uh.
Making sure that we pass through
uh pricing that we are able to
secure uh.
And also rebates that were also
able to pass through at 100%.
Um, and so those, uh.
I would I wanna also uh in
inject pun intended that as new
uh groups come on board. They're
also appreciating savings over
their previous arrangements uh
that are giving them hundreds of
thousands of dollars in savings
for smaller groups, uh, and even
larger for uh larger groups.
you might uh
I think that's one of your
larger employers.
Um, chair, vice chair, Senator
Ickey, thank you. Um, at Right
Way, um, across all of our
clients, um, to date, our
average savings is 22%.
We have a low of about right
around 11%, it was 10.9% in a
high, a staggering high of 54%,
where a plan came to us and
their drug spend went down by
54%, and part of that was just
how bad their um their incumbent
PBM had been robbing them. They
had literally been robbing them
blind for Tyson, um, we were,
we've been kind of
very, um.
You kind of fortunate to win
Tyson, um, it was the first, you
got a Fortune 100 company to
leave one of the big 3 and moved
to an innovator PBM like Right
Way, um, they have almost
200,000 lives.
Spread across the country, um,
in different, you know,
manufacturing sites they
actually have 50 different
languages that we need to
support, um, with their, with
their members. And to date, um,
their drug spend, um, in 200,000
lives is about $250 million. So
in general, just like good round
number, about 1000 to $1100 for
every belly button.
Is is about what you spend on
drugs for most if it's if
they're older people like me,
you're about 3 times that
amount. So, um, but they're
about 250 million to date this
year, we've saved them a little
bit over $35 million in, in, uh,
drug savings and and that is all
not, um,
It it's not because we've paid
pharmacies less. It's that we've
literally, instead of, you kind
of, we've eliminated all of the
profit that was flowing to this
is published CVS Caremark was
their incumbent PBM. That's the
amount of dollars that we're
saving and, um, and we're really
proud of you kind of what we do,
um, and how we do it by making
sure that the members always
stay supported.
Anything else, Senator Hickey?
OK
Anyone else.
Uh, Representative Chasey, then
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
actually, I, I just want to say
this has been very interesting,
but I sort of feel like we need
more study of all of this, um,
you know, with our,
I don't know some advisors or
something.
Let me just ask you if any of
these, um,
plans relate to formularies and
developing formularies and
policy around formularies. Thank
you.
Chair, vice chair.
Um, representative, uh, Chay
happy to kind of weigh in on our
perspective on that, um, num
number, number one, there is a
lot of complexity in, um, the
United States we'll we'll call
it drug system today. We have
over 11,000 prescription drugs
that are available by, um, by
prescription today. Some of
them, um, are used
inappropriately. Some of them
are used exactly
the way they should be. What a
formulary is always intended to
do is to make sure that the
drugs are being used the way
that the evidence has indicated
that they could be, um, um, used
to treat individuals and, and
what I mean by that, because
it's sounds scary and a little
bit technical. The evidence that
gets, um, produced, um, while,
um, studying these drugs.
is very preliminary and that
evidence continues to mount as
the drugs get utilized today. We
need to take all of that
information in and make sure
that we use that to, um, design
the clinical systems and the
formulary to ensure that the
individuals and the physicians
are, um, accessing those drugs
in the most appropriate way.
Um, Mr. Chairman, that was a
really long answer. I want to
reclaim some time.
I actually think I know that.
I'm wondering if any of your
plans look at formularies and
make denials or um or not.
Um, I'm, I'm happy to, to start
again, chair, vice chair, um.
Yes, we do do prior
authorizations. We do review
those requests for clinical
appropriateness and the
redirections, um, for members
are always to more appropriate
therapies that are always of
lower cost to the member. 100%
of the time.
And the others.
Just yes or no on the OK.
And
Members of the committee, uh,
representative, yes. OK, um, I
spoke with a lobbyist in um
September, who is from Colorado
and she was telling me that
because we have a lot of um
people in requiring very
sophisticated psychotic drugs.
And the state of Michigan has
for several years now, um,
Not issued any denials on those
particular drugs and Colorado
just passed a law where they're
allowing for one denial and then
after, if that fails, then they
go to the next thing. What
Michigan found is they've done
it enough years, they're
actually saving money by not
denying on those drugs because
of what it costs society. And
I'm just thinking of a, um,
terrible murder situation in
Albuquerque
Turkey, some of which occurred
in my district this someone who
had never been violent was never
even been, but never been
violent with anybody, but he was
off his meds and trying to get
on them, and he ended up
committing 5 murders in one day,
and it just seems to me that
that cost alone is such that,
um, there's almost no rationale
for trying to save that money.
Um, so.
I, I was wondering if anybody
had had looked at that model,
that Michigan has used and then
Colorado just passed its law for
one denial allowed. And I, I, I
think we ought to keep that in
mind because we have
We're hearing so much about so
many people who are in great
distress in New Mexico. So that
was my only question and point.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative on
that on that point, yes,
Senator, uh,
They actually in the mental
health parity bill, um, there is
no prior authorization for
rehabilitation drugs for drug in
New Mexico. Yeah, it's in the
bill that we passed a couple of
years ago, um, the OSI is
currently working on the
enforcement of of those
standards, um, last year there
was a bill, um, that I voted
against because I had some
safety concerns, um, and but
what we
want to do is look at some
classes of medications that are
highly sophisticated and who can
prescribe him without a prior
authorization or also looking at
if you've been, if, if you
basically if 95% of the time,
what are your prior authoring if
it's, if you're, there's no
pushback, then you get gold
carted and you get to prescribe
it. So those kind of reforms
again as we do the research will
be coming in.
In a bill format either this
year or in the next session, but
the point, but.
Not
Having a a process for someone
who is in a, uh, psychotic
episode, um, not being able to
get a med is abs you're
absolutely right, is, is way out
of bounds.
Thank you, Senator and
Representative, uh.
Representative Herndon, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and uh if we
continue along that line of
discussion where we look at
whether or not the drug is being
used for its most appropriate
uh.
Reason, I just want to take
Ozempic for example. It was,
it's appropriate use was for
type 2 diabetes, but what we're
seeing used for is a drug loss.
I mean, uh, weight loss drug.
So.
Would that be denied under a
PBM?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, um, members of
the committee, um,
representative Heden, yes,
currently, um, Ozempic is not
FDA approved for weight loss.
Um, so anywhere, it, it could
not be covered for weight loss.
You would have to have one of
the FDA indications in order to
have it approved under your um
under your health care plan if,
if I may also, um, uh, chair.
What, um, it's a, it's a
complicated issue because what
the, what
But the FDA allows to be covered
and what might be, um, um,
discovered in the practice, uh,
the course of practice is, is
the kind of part of what makes
America's healthcare kind of
system really challenging to
manage. The way that health
plans in PBMs have looked at,
um, products like Ozempic is the
underlying chemical.
ingredient.
Is a um a manufactured in, um,
and approved by the FDA in, uh,
another labeled drug. And so we
use that for weight loss. We
don't use Ozempic because quite
honestly, the dose that you need
to achieve weight loss is not
how Ozempic is made, which is
the dose that is needed to
control diabetes. There are two
different doses. Same drug.
But we want to, want to make
sure that the individuals on the
right therapy at the right dose
for, um, achieving the clinical
outcome that they.
And
And um I'd also like to ask Mr.
Chair, as we looked at drugs
that are not within our state
right now that we're trying to
get in our state, for example,
isotopes that would help in the
early detection of um
Alzheimer's disease or if we
look at something like uh vagus
nerve stimulation therapy that's
not here at a that's reimbursed,
uh, how do you all help us to
get that within our state?
Uh
Uh, chair, uh, Madam, Madam Vice
Chair and, and Representative
Herndon. Many of those things,
um, if they are experimental in
nature, um, and have not, you
kind of have not achieved, uh,
approval either by, um,
governing medical, um,
authorities, then you kind of,
they're treated as is
investigational and those sorts
of things are typically not
covered by planned sponsors. I
believe. I'm not familiar with
any of the, um, therapies that
you've cited, I believe those
therapies are typically covered
under the medical part of your
insurance and not the pharmacy
part of the insurance. Usually,
the pharmacy part of the
insurance are things that you
get at the pharmacy and things
that need to be administered in
a doctor's office or
administered in the, um, um, you
kind of medical in a medical.
setting. Those are generally
governed under the medical
benefit. I'm happy to discuss
how we need to create, um,
better linkages there, but for
right now, kind of right way
focuses on the pharmacy benefit,
not on medical, but maybe you
want to um.
Sure, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so representative
Herden so two things, so, um,
vagus nerve stimulation, um, is
under the medical benefit, not
associated really with the drug
at all, and, and what, what
would happen if a if a member
did um meet the requirements
under approval for that, then we
more than likely we we have that
happening here all the time,
right? We don't have the correct
specialist. We don't have a lot
of
things. We can't do um
transplants, a lot of we can do
kidney transplants in New Mexico
we don't have any other
transplants we would have to
send them to a center of
excellence, um, to get them that
care and under that depending
upon the line of business, a lot
of times the travel and sending
um a companion with them would
be covered under that for things
like the isotopes and other
things identifying whether um
the amyloid plaques are there
for Parkin um for.
some of the new things that are
coming out.
Um, those still would fall under
um CMS um Centers for Medicare,
they actually have all of that,
um.
The coverage guidelines, they've
written coverage guidelines for
those. Most of the time you have
to send them to a center of
excellence in order for them to
be covered. We wouldn't have a
lot of those centers of
excellence in New Mexico and
they would be sent out of state
for other drugs like gene
therapy or some of the more
expensive things that are coming
out, um, there's a couple of
ways or some of the newer
oncology agents that are coming
out a lot of times we would help
the patient get into a clinical
trial.
if they haven't been approved
yet, final approval if they're
still going through clinical
trial, we would help the members
get into a clinical trial and
help their physicians guide them
to that and then make sure that
they know that it's affordable
to get to the clinical trial and
what has to happen, what can
happen in another state and then
what services could be done back
in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Anybody else
Uh
Thank you.
Uh, I think, you know what, what
we
As Senator Doctor Hickey pointed
out, what we've been doing is
educating ourselves on what's
possible, what we might begin
looking at. Our role in any case
would be not to pick a winner or
who gets the contract, but it
would be to urge or suggest or
if we really get outraged,
mandate, uh, that there be some,
uh, change in, in the way we, we
do PBMs in the state and that
the way that the state programs
uh would, would utilize PBAs or.
PBMs, but all of this has been
incredibly helpful, very good
information, I think, uh,
everybody's eyes perked up at
the uh.
At the cost savings that that
that might be realized through
this way of holding down the
the.
Pressure, upward pressure on
health care expenses and, and
also a way of preserving the,
the, the pharmacies, the
independent pharmacies that are
struggling right now under this
system.
So thank you very much for
coming, uh, and, and presenting
with us. I appreciate you being
willing to stay here as long,
take an extra lunch with you on
your way out.
Um.
Is there anybody who wanted to
make public comment and, and,
uh,
Yes, Somebody from the PBM
industry wanted to come up and
make public comment. All right,
come on up.
We'll accept anybody for 3
minutes or less.
It's always good to see you
whenever we have, uh,
opportunities to reform PBMs
you'll, you're hell to tell us
why that would be a good idea.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
and y'all know me, Jonathan
Buxton with pharmaceutical Care
Management Association, the
National Association
representing pharmacy benefit
managers.
I only rise today to
congratulate this committee on
the work of educating
themselves, um, as
Representative Herndon
mentioned, there are over 70
full service PBMs across the
nation, providing services to
employers, state plans, Medicaid
plans, all sorts of groups. And
so, uh, learning more and more
about the industry, learning
more about what as healthcare
purchasers, you should demand
from your PBMs is a vital step.
It's how you get a better deal.
Um, the only request
that we have, uh, from our
members as we talked about this
is.
Let's compete. Let's open up the
playing field. Let's make sure
it's a fair competitive process
and as you all learn more and
demand more, everyone will be
competing. And if we're all
competing, then you're gonna
save money. Companies will be
able to grow, some will stay the
same size. Uh, but that's where
the great
Evening and the greatest savings
will be found is when all the
companies are competing.
Based on your higher demands.
And so congratulations on doing
this work. I know I'm probably
the last person you wanted to
hear from, but I'm always glad
to be here. So thank you very
much.
Thank you Jonathan and as it
turns out you are the, no, 2nd
to last person we're gonna hear
from. All right, thank you.
Or maybe members of the
committee, good afternoon. Use
your mic.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is John Thompson. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico pharmacy Business
Council. I did not plan to make
any public comment here today,
but I think, uh, one thing I, I
would like to say to the
committee is we have done some
work with Capital RX and from
what I hear, it's been a very
positive experience. It's been,
they pay a dispensing fee that's
reasonable. They pay us back in
NADA. And from what I hear from
our folks, it's been a pleasant
surprise. So for whatever that
may or may not be worth to you
all in this committee, I felt
like I should relate that. So
thank you for the opportunity,
Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon committee
members. Uh, my name is uh
Luuina Mendez Harper. I'm a
pharmacist and I work with Prime
Therapeutics. We are the
pharmacy benefit manager owned
by 19 Blue Cross Blue Shield
plans, including Blue Cross Blue
Shield here in New Mexico, and
again, want to thank I've had
several conversations with um
Senator Hickey, um, talking
about PBMs and and all of the
services that we offer and that
we provide and certainly um
talked with him about the
interest in trying to find a
market disruptor um for the
current 3 large PBMs, um, and I
just wanted to share a little
bit about prime in that, um, we
are very similar to uh have a
lot of the way that we operate
is very similar to what you
heard today and that we don't
have spread pricing, which is
that difference in what we pay
to pharmacies versus what we
charge the health plan. Um, we
also have a 100% rebate pass
through. So any rebate that we
negotiate from a, from a drug
company goes right back to Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.
There's no, um, there.
We don't keep any portion of
that. So, so very similar, um,
to the, the three presentations
that you heard today, but I,
what I wanted to do is just talk
a little bit about, just very
quickly about the difference
that Prime has, so, um, with
the, the three in the companies
that spoke today, I believe
they're covered lives range from
750,000 to about 3 million, um,
patients, um, prime has 30
million patients that we're
negotiating because again, we
have those 19 Blue Cross Blue
Shield health plans and
So, um, certainly one of the
things that that I spoke with
Senator Hickey about is it is
important to have that.
Size matters and when you have,
you know, and, and that's the
exact concept that you're
looking at here for your state
agency is like, can we pull
those, those, um, agencies
together so that you have a
better, um, avenue to negotiate
the best price, and so that
indeed is what, what our
business model is, except that
it's the 30 million lives, um,
that we're negotiating on behalf
of. Um, so I think I just wanted
to, you know, let you know that
we are very similar to the um 3
that spoke, um, you, we do have
a very close
obviously in New Mexico with our
own being owned by Blue Cross
Blue Shield of New Mexico, um,
and, you know, certainly want to
be able to compete.
With everyone else.
Is, is your Blue Cross of New
Mexico, Medicaid program covered
by the by, do you guys service
that one? We have Medicaid and
commercial business that we
support that we provide services
to Blueo.
OK, thank you, thank you.
And then
The retiree healthcare Authority
wanted to speak as well.
Not to retiree healthcare
authority, the director of the
retiree healthcare.
Oh sorry, there you go, uh,
thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, I wasn't
gonna say anything, but I just
did want to recognize that as
you guys are bringing these
presentations up, um, you know,
I hear you loud and clear too,
at least from our agency. Uh, I
will say that we are doing the
same. We have been meeting with
these organizations. I've
actually been meeting with some
of these organizations for
years, uh, I too am familiar
with the ARX, um, having
conversations with them, looking
at how it relates to our
program, uh, they've obviously
are making strides that before
that they didn't have with an
AWIP program, uh, which is one
of the reasons why.
I previously for us may not have
worked, but we continue to
evaluate as they progress into
the market, uh, same thing with
the other NADA models, uh, we're
very closely looking at them,
uh, have had a conversation with
uh Capital RX, uh, to learn more
about their organization. Uh, we
want to be prepared. We want to
make sure that we're doing our
due diligence. So we're looking
at how that NADA model relates
to, uh, the other models that
are out there as they did talk a
lot about AWP, uh, talking about
MetaSpan, um, so that is a
concern to us. Uh, the other
thing that I've done is I've
been.
meeting with, uh, independent
pharmacists as we do hear their
concerns.
Uh, we want to make sure that
there's access, uh, we realize
that insurance is only as good
as the access that our members
have. And so we want to make
sure that there isn't these
desert pharmacies, uh, just as,
as, as, as another concern to
us. So, uh, as I know the
committee is doing, and I
applaud you guys for taking and
listening to this, uh, we, or at
least I should say retiree
healthcare, I don't want to
speak for the other agencies,
uh, even though I know we've had
some presentations, uh, not only
from, from these groups, but
looking at other coalitions uh
from, from around the the United
States and as I
need to go to conferences. I do
talk to other public sectors to
really get a feel for what
they're doing in their states,
um, trying to see how, uh,
they're looking at the PBM
industry, uh, maybe where there
is opportunities to partner as
we continue to look at that
because we do realize that if
there is some partnerships and
if there's something that we
could do that will help, uh, you
know, our members and, and maybe
the state, uh, we look for those
opportunities, but, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and, and thank
you to the committee and uh I
appreciate the opportunity of
hearing these presentations
today and if there's any other
questions at this committee or
anybody
has, uh, I'm always open for
conversation too as far as with
our organization. Thank you.
Great. Thank you for coming in
and sharing your views with us.
Anybody else?
Well, members, it's been.
A very fast, fun-filled week.
We will meet again in Santa Fe
on November 19th for our final
four days. Remember you have a
deadline of the 31st to get
legislation, uh, brought up to
the staff that you would like to
have endorsement if you want to
have any bills endorsed, um, and
any other
closing things. Do we have any.
Do we need to pass approved
We did. We did, yeah, we did the
minutes and we did the letter.
But it was so long ago, yeah, 4
days ago.
Yeah
OK, with that, the
Legislative Health and Human
Services committees, October
