A presentation, um.
And you have.
Uh, we'll try and go through our
materials quickly and before I
get started, I'll just allow my
colleagues at the corrections
department to introduce
themselves.
My name is Weenasongai. I'm the
health services administrator
for the New Mexico Corrections
Department.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Haven Skin, and I am the
deputy director of re-entry for
the New Mexico Corrections
Department.
OK. Thank you, Winston Haven.
Um, again, chair or vice chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us here today.
Um, I appreciate the
opportunity. I know my
colleagues do as well to talk to
you about this really great
opportunity that will be coming
soon to New Mexicans.
Um, and on behalf of my boss,
Secretary Kerry Armiho and all
of my colleagues at the
healthcare authority, we want to
thank you for your service to
New Mexicans.
Um, so if you go to slide 2, we
like to at the healthcare
authority just give a brief
acknowledgement that we are on
the unseeded ancestral lands,
um, this morning of the
Muscalero Apache people, um, and
we granted to we pay our
respects to the land, the people
who call this place home and to
the communities and what is
today known as the state of New
Mexico.
On slide 3, you'll see the
mission vision of goals of the
newly established healthcare
Authority that was formally
launched on the first of July.
I'm scheduled later this
afternoon to talk about another
aspect of the healthcare
authority portfolio, um, the
state health benefits work that
we're doing, um, but we're
really excited with whether it's
that work or this work around
re-entry services for those
exiting incarceration, we
feel that our ability to offer
new and expanded services that
leverage additional federal
funding, um, and
And, and have the potential to
recruit more providers to serve
these returning citizens to
their community really helps us
achieve the goal of achieving
health equity, um leveraging
this Medicaid funding is a
structural way that we can
address barriers to health care
coverage.
On page 4, just some statistics
to levels that are related to
the number of individuals in New
Mexico who are involved in the
justice system. This is at a
very high level. Uh, New Mexico
has an incarceration rate
estimated to be about 647 people
per 100,000, um, and every year
an estimated 49,000 unique
individuals are booked into
local jails in New Mexico.
So, um, I had the opportunity
several years ago to work in
Washington State with the first
primary care doctor establishing
a primary care clinic specific
for individuals exiting
incarceration. That was a really
great experience for me because
I got to see firsthand that just
the really
Significant challenges that
these folks face when they leave
prison or jail. The first two
weeks after they leave
incarceration for the estimated
65% of them, for example, who
have substance use disorder are
the most critical in preventing
an overdose among this
population. And so being able to
link and integrate physical
health and behavioral health for
the justice involved population
is a goal with this.
New Medicaid waiver program and
services.
Slide 5 or page 5.
So this is at a very high level,
just an overview of what we
receive the federal approval
for. Um,
From the, from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Service,
specific to this um waiver.
You know, different states have
the flexibility when they're
pursuing a justice involved
waiver to design their waiver
program differently, but in New
Mexico.
Uh, all Medicaid eligible
members and those eligible youth
in a youth incarceration setting
will be will be eligible for
these services under this
justice involved waiver. There
is a very limited exception of
adults who are receiving family
planning in emergency services
for non-citizens' Medicaid
coverage, but that's a very
small number of people in the
Medicaid program.
So by and large, all eligible,
all Medicaid members will be
eligible for this
justice-involved services.
Um, so what does it look like?
Like, what are they actually
eligible for and what services
will they get, um, the federal
government has required 3
services to be provided under
under this waiver.
The first is enhanced care
management and coordination. So,
To connect this back to my own
personal experience that I saw
in Washington and what will be
happening here, um, when that
primary care doctor would see
those patients come into her
clinic, she would do a needs
assessment. I would work with
her to come up with a care plan
for these individuals exiting
incarceration.
Um, I was that
post-incarceration care manager
and the Medicaid waiver requires
not just a referral for services
such as food support or housing
support, or getting a driver's
license or getting a Social
Security card.
The Medicaid waiver requires
states to do a warm handoff. So
I, I went with several
individuals to the Social
Security office and I just sat
with them while they waited to
be seen to get their card, or to
get their driver's license. I
would make countless phone calls
to try and get them qualified
for SNAP or Medicaid, um, but
Medicaid already have covered
here in New Mexico. So that case
management and coordination, a
pre and post-release camera.
Manager, that will be covered
under Medicaid under this
waiver.
Um, the second required service
is medication-assisted
treatment, uh, not just for
opioid use disorder, but for
alcohol use disorder as well,
which we know New Mexico, um,
is, has a high prevalence for
many people in the state. And so
connecting them to services,
connecting them to medications,
connecting them to counseling or
other behavioral health
therapies will be a covered
service under this waiver.
And then finally the 3rd
required service and that folks
will get under this waiver is a
30 day supply of medications or
durable medical equipment. So if
an individual needs, um, a
wheelchair, you know, oxygen
tank, um, they received those
services in many instances, um,
already, but this time it will
be paid for with Medicaid
funding
when able. And so there are a
suite of additional
Services that could be provided
that we have the flexibility to
provide and I won't go through
all of these, but.
It could include family
planning, um, behavioral health,
substance use treatment, lab and
radiology services, those
additional services could be
provided, but it's subject to
state budget availability. Our,
our ability to leverage those
additional services and the
federal dollars attached to it
are dependent upon us getting
the state general fund to cover
those services.
Um, where will, where, what are
the eligible settings for these
services? Where can people
access them?
If an individual is exiting
custody from a state prison, a
county correctional facility, a
juvenile correctional facility,
a DOH forensic Union State
Hospital, um, tribal jails, um,
those are the eligible settings.
Um.
And then we are able to provide
this coverage for individuals
pre-release between 30 to 90
days before exiting
incarceration. This is an
important, um, time frame, and I
just want to highlight just as
the additional services are
subject to state budget
availability. Our ability, for
example, to give folks what they
need, 90 days pre-release would
require additional general.
Fund as compared to 30 days
pre-release. So just another
consideration.
Um, and then our state does have
the opportunity to leverage, um,
one-time startup funds to plan
and build capacity to launch
these new waiver services.
For example, setting up in
health IT infrastructure. So
that my colleagues are at
corrections have the ability to,
you know, be able to seamlessly
identify the needs and
medications of the folks needing
services, um, this one time
capacity building funding that
we could get from CMS would have
a 9010 match, meaning that the
state will only need to pay 10%
of those costs. Um, this
capacity building
one-time funding could also
allow us to hire additional
staff to just implement this.
There's a lot of outreach and
education that is going to need
to happen to recruit providers,
educate providers,
community-based organizations,
people with lived experience and
just let them know what's coming
and we would be able to do that
more successfully, um, if we had
additional support and capacity.
Before I go on to page 6, I'm
going to turn over to Haven and
Wes and see if they would like
to add any additional
information from their
perspective about the waiver.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee
with respect to required
services within the prison
system, our plan is to have an
in-reach approach whereby we
enable providers in the
community to come in collaborate
with our medical staff in the
prison to be able to link up
those individuals before they
go. That, that is the approach
we are planning to implement.
When it comes to
uh mad expansion we think the
1115 waiver would give us a
unique opportunity to reach a
much broader or larger
population, those individuals
that currently we do not offer
those services, so definitely
the 1115 waiver is a huge
opportunity to expand that, but
we are also mindful of some
significant challenges in
finding staff to be
Able to expand those ma services
as we are planning now, we are
already thinking in terms of
both clinical and correctional
staff that'll be able to support
this expansion because if we
want to expand and definitely we
will need more individuals to be
able to help.
Not only assess the patients but
also um help in the provision of
the medication itself.
Currently we do provide 30 days'
worth of medication when
individuals are living through
the 11:15 waiver, what will
happen is an emphasis on making
sure that we connect individuals
who are on any MAT or MOUD
services to a provider. Uh, my
colleague will talk a little bit
more in terms of the work that's
already been done with community
providers and mapping the state
to find out where those.
are
In preparing for this work, we
are also working with the
medical vendor for credentialing
because right now.
They providers that are
providing services to
incarcerated individuals do not
build Medicaid. That is not a
current practice, but if we need
to implement this, then medical
providers in prison in the
prison system need to be set up
in a way that they can build
Medicaid. That also means
documentation has to be up to
standard, that would be approved
by Medicaid. And so we are also
making adjustments on our
electronic health record
project.
That we have to be able to have
documentation that'll be able to
meet uh Medicaid criteria.
I'll pass over to my colleague
to complete.
Definitely thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, I think one thing
that's really important to note
is most everyone who enters
incarceration in our prison
system is going to exit, so we
see everyone as a re-entry
individual. I think one thing
that's really helpful in the
1115 waiver that we were very
excited about also is there's a
special focus on those with
serious mental illness. SMI
clients who we also serve in
incarcerated setting, as well as
people who have age-related
disabilities. In our geriatric
units. And so
So this would allow us to cover
some specific services, not only
the services that the deputy
secretary spoke about, but also
potentially housing if state
funding exists to support that,
Um, for those SMI cases and
those who are having age-related
disabilities, I think, um, it's
important to talk about the
required services under the
waiver, but I also want to
express the importance of the
need for covered services like
behavior.
health treatment inside facility
within that 30 to 90 day window
that would create a seamless
transition for services for
clients, as many of the clients
that we serve in corrections
have substance use disorders,
and as the deputy secretary
stated, are at a higher risk for
overdose death, especially upon
release. And we'll talk more in
the next section uh about
What things are looking like
currently in the community and
how the extension of these care
services would make a huge
impact on our population and
potentially result in some
really good outcomes, not only
health care outcomes, but the
outcomes that the state likes to
see, um, in dealing with people
who have a criminal justice
history. So I appreciate that. I
think one of the things that uh
I would also add to that for a
minute is is corrections has
already begun working and having
conversations with them.
managed care organizations,
they're justice liaisons and
their care coordinators and
working to see how this process
would happen because what we'd
like to see is the MCO's able to
do all of this pre-screening
from inside to set a plan of
care and the population would
then understand what their plan
of care is and have the case
management piece which is so
important to follow them upon
exit so that they have someone
who is in their court.
Taking them places and doing
things, ensuring that their
healthcare needs and behavioral
health needs are being met. So
at this time I'll pass it back
to Deputy Secretary.
Thank you. So moving on to page
6. he did a nice segue to our
implementation timeline and
again this is at a very high
level. I'm happy to, we're happy
to answer any questions you
might have in just a moment. Um,
so we just received Medicaid
approval for the service on the
twenty-sixth of July.
The next step is to develop a
more fully fleshed out
implementation plan in
consultation and collaboration
with many of the stakeholders
that Haven and Wes were speaking
about the current providers who
serve the justice involved
population perspective, possible
new providers that we can bring
in, um, people with lived
experience, um, community
support workers, other
community-based organizations,
housing providers, parole
officers. Um, there's
A whole slew of stakeholders
that need to be consultant and
we need to collaborate with as
we roll out this new service,
um, you all, I'm sure will be
reaching out to all of you and
other members of the
legislature, um, to get your
feedback and input, um, and then
of course, members of the
legislative Finance Committee
staff as well.
Um, that plan, that
implementation plan is due to
CMS the first of January of
2025.
Um, in the meantime, we're also
working to develop all of the
rates because as you heard We
say these providers do not
currently bill Medicaid for
these services and, and as we're
thinking about what do the rates
look like in this specific
setting, um, we're working with,
um, CMS and others to develop
actuarly sound rates, claiming.
Protocols identifying the
provider types in these
settings, um, and then, you
know, refining any contract
language that may need to be
refined and revised with the
managed care organizations. Um,
we know the individuals that are
eligible for these services, but
codifying that and formalizing
that in writing, um, you know,
and one other thing I should
mention, one of the positives
where we have, we're sort of
ahead of the curve is in
establishing presumptive LG.
determinners. That is a
technical term, but what that
means is folks in the community
who can presumptively determine
eligibility for someone for
Medicaid. These are not folks in
a healthcare authority office.
These are people who work in
hospitals, schools, and we have
126 of these community-based
determinners already in our
jails and prisons. And so that's
great, um, that.
Helps us to get ahead and the
goal will be to even to identify
even more of those determinners,
um.
Between January and June of
2025, um, since we have
submitted that implementation
plan to CMS, we then will begin
the work.
Of providing that education and
technical assistance to the
community members, really
preparing to go live with these
waiver services, um, in July of
2025. And of course, um, what's
inherent about a waiver covered
service is that we have to
demonstrate the efficacy of that
service to the federal
government for it to become a
permanently covered benefit and.
Service. Um, so, ongoing
monitoring and reporting will
begin in, you know, in the fall
and the summer 2025 to CMS, um,
so that they can work with us to
determine whether or not this
will become a permanent part of
the New Mexico Medicaid benefit
package.
Um, once or even anything else
you want to add from your
perspective about
implementation. Definitely, New
Mexico Corrections department
obviously is going to be a
stakeholder in this. We have a
the first working group meeting
scheduled on Friday of this week
to begin discussing um all of
these timelines and I just want
to let you all know that from,
from the New Mexico Crections
Department, we're approaching
this from two angles. Um, first
angle once spoke on briefly, is
working with the current medical
contract inside to work on, uh,
what that would look like to
become a Medicaid biller, how is
Medicaid, uh, process, the whole
process, how does that work? But
we're also working on it on the
outside. We've already begun
discussions with our behavioral
health and treatment providers
in the community. Um, what we
would like to have is we would
truly like to see the 11:15
waiver, create a better
coordination of care for the
population, where things like
assessments and treatment.
Relationships are built prior to
their exit from our facility. We
would like to see a current
process that allows the clients
to feel invested and engaged in
treatment services before they
leave the facility because in
the current system that we have
in the current situation that
we're seeing with behavioral
health is that we are providing
services while they're in
facility.
They exit facility.
The time for them to assess
again with the treatment
provider. get in for actual
services is running 1 to 6
months. And as you all know, for
someone with tance use disorder,
1 to 6 months without getting
treatment, sitting in front of
someone and talking about the
issues and it can be devastating
and can result in that person
committing new crime or having
other issues with their life.
And so what we're hoping to see
is that with this
Service being allowed to
potentially begin inside
facility and our medical
Medicare.
Excuse me, are providers having
the opportunity to be able to
bill Medicaid for those
services. That seamless
transition could potentially
happen from medical psychiatry
and behavioral health services
before they even walk out. We
are going to continue to track
the timeline and work with HCA
across this process because
obviously billing protocols,
Medicaid billing in itself is an
extremely complicated system for
the pro on the provider side.
Making sure that providers have
some education and some
engagement in this process so
that their questions can be
answered about what this would
look like.
We're also actively working on
recruitment of new provider
services already across New
Mexico to increase the
availability of those services,
um, as you all are more than
well aware of the state of New
Mexico struggles with behavioral
health providers, especially in
rural portions of New Mexico and
working on ways to incentivize
provider participation would
help along with potential
legislative assistance of bills
like supporting licensure
reciprocity so that people in
other states.
could provide services in New
Mexico to fill the gaps that
we're seeing in behavioral
health services. Um, one of the
challenges I think that people
don't often think of when
looking at this process in
dealing with providers is we
have a lot of providers who do
work with us, but a lot of
providers don't want to work
with the criminal justice
population. They don't want to
come into the prison facilities
and serve this group. And so a
lot of what my group, especially
in re-entry and our transitional
coordinators unit have been
doing.
I messaging and working on the
messaging of having people want
to serve this population because
the outcomes that we see when
this population is served, is
improved lifestyles, improve
communities, improved
employability, lower substance
addiction, family histories of
criminality can be changed. I
mean, there are huge positive
outcomes that could come as a
result of having people engage
with this population in
behavioral services in a way
that truly matters. In the 115
waiver, the second that it was
approved and we received a copy
of it. We began having those
conversations with these
providers to get them excited,
to want to do these services and
to see the value that it could
potentially place, um, and be
for our clients.
So I'll pass it back to you.
Uh, thank you, Heaven. Um, a
couple of other things that just
to note in terms of what we'll
be working on over the next 11
months or so. And we're really
proud that New Mexico was
selected from one where one of 7
states to be part of a national
learning collaborative
about how to roll out these
services for the justice
involved population. Um, we were
selected by the National Academy
for State Health and state
health policy in the health and
re-entry project. Um, so we'll
be coming together
and learning from other states
to address some of these things
at Haven and ones were talking
about, you know, I'm reminded of
the conversation that you all
had with Secretary Gruginski
this morning about the
difficulty providers are having
in becoming a Medicaid provider.
Um, I think we will likely
encounter some of those
challenges with this population
of providers as well. And that's
why that one-time capacity
building funding could be so
important because it could give
us um the resources we need to
hire the additional staff or to
develop the resources or tools
we need, um, to provide very
intensive technical assistance
to providers so that as they are
learning how to enroll in
Medicaid.
Um, they could do it in 21 days,
um, as they are working with the
MCOs to become credentialed, um,
and I neglected to mention this
morning that we are anticipating
that single credentialing system
to roll out in January of 2025.
So that should be in place by
the time these services go live,
um, but the technical assistance
that these providers would need
in order to serve the justice
population, we'd have resources
available for them to help with
credentialing as well.
Um, so then finally, on page 7,
I'm just at a very high level,
our goals in estimated
projections for the number of
New Mexicans who would benefit
from these services.
Um, we think, um, you know,
around just under 52,000 New
Mexicans a year would receive
services covered under this
waiver. Um, that's a very large
number of New Mexicans where if
we can get in and do that kind
of pre and post-release work
that once and Haven were talking
about, could make a very big
positive difference in their
lives. Haven was alluding to the
wait times.
Um,
for many folks for behavioral
health services, one of the
other things that's coming, um,
is the certified community
Behavioral Health clinics that
are rolling out throughout the
state, that will be an important
resource in connecting the
justice involved, returning
citizens, um, two important
behavioral health supports. Um,
so we are excited about that.
And so I think ultimately,
You know, our goal is to make
sure that these New Mexicans who
are enrolled in Medicaid and
coming back to their community,
um, maintain their Medicaid
coverage and that they have a
plan of care up to 90 days prior
to release. Um, you know, we
want to help the counties and
other stakeholders, um, figure
out how to implement this. Every
county facility is different. I
am not an expert.
in that, but that is part of the
learning that we're going to
have to do over the next 11
months is figure out what their
unique challenges and situations
are and how the state can be in
the best position to help them.
And then, you know, we want to
add more detention centers as
partners if we're able to. And
so doing that outreach as well.
Um, when I think about, there's
just one person that comes to
mind that I worked with really
deeply um several years ago, you
know, he, he wanted to get a car
and he needed proof of
identification to get the car.
He was able to have some family
members who were able to help
them financially get this car.
And, you know, we sat in the,
the MVD for hours and this was
after I had secured his Social
Security number, we had to show
proof of his identification. He
got his driver's license. He
connected with his family, got
his vehicle. He had family out
of state, um.
He was excited. He felt like he
had some dignity restored. Um,
that
Those supports were provided in
my capacity as a graduate
student. Um, so I was not a
professional, but I'm excited
about the possibility of New
Mexicans having professional
supports and high quality
supports here in New Mexico. Um,
they're needed here and now
we're lucky to be able to have
the ability to leverage
additional federal funding to do
that. Um, anything once or haven
that you all want to add.
Sure, thank you. In terms of
goals. What we are really hoping
that the 1115 waiver would do to
our
Prison system, uh, individuals
is that it would prove adherence
to post-release medical
appointments. So if we
successfully establish the in
reach.
What that means is before an
individual steps out of our
facilities, they will be able to
know which clinic they'll be
going to, which provider they
would be meeting that would be a
game changer right now, we
encourage them, we tell them,
you need to follow up with a
family doctor to continue on
your blood pressure medications
and all of that, but really.
It is difficult for them to go
out, get that appointment, and
show up. But if a community
provider reaches in either
through telemedicine or in
person, they've already
established a face to face
relationship and hopefully some
trust will be built that will
help make sure that post to
release those appointments to
actually take place.
One other area where we think as
a state that the work done on
11:15 waiver would impact us is
reducing reliance of our
Incarcerated individuals once
released on our emergency room
resources.
It is a critical issue that we
often receive Individuals don't
go for the appointments. They
wait until they are very sick,
either a loved one takes them
there or something happens and
they end up in our emergency
rooms. Those resources.
are very, very expensive. If we
can successfully have this in
place, it would mean that we
would divert a lot of these
individuals from the emergency
room and instead go to community
clinics. That is way cheaper,
that's way safer for our
population. I think heaven would
run us through the last goals.
Excuse me, as once said,
obviously the transition having
the care coordination and the
transition of services being uh
having a better process in place
would hugely help the
population, I think oftentimes
people
People forget that people are in
prison and what it's like to be
in prison. And this is not a
forgotten group of people. I
think what Wen's just said about
inreach and and how that matters
is a really important thing to
note. It matters that people
continue to care about these
individuals while they're
incarcerated. It shows that
they're cared about when
providers build those
relationships starting from
inside before their release. I
believe this would make a huge
difference in the population if
people had those personal
relationship started, especially
not just for the medical care
services, especially when you're
talking about substance use
disorder, behavior health
treatment. A lot of those
services are based on trust
between you and that individual
service provider. And if we
could build that trust up while
they're inside prior to their
release when there's all these
distractions of re-entry, it
would help a lot. And I think
one of the things and one of our
goals for for the corrections
department would definitely be
to see an overall
recidivism rate reduction as a
result of these services
happening, because I'm gonna
tell you right now, if you have
someone who comes out of
facility and is waiting 6 months
for treatment services at this
point, but could come out of
facility under this waiver and
walk into counseling the same
week of release, that may have a
dramatic impact on that person's
potential success in the
community on the reduction in
crime in general overall better
health. So that's definitely
something that
The corrections department will
see and would like to see from
this waiver, we appreciate you
all um giving us your time,
especially um on a topic that
we're excited about. Um, I know
that there's such potential for
what this could be for New
Mexico, especially when you look
at not just the required uh
eligibility, uh, sections, but
the ones where we could
potentially have people helped
uh for services, for peer
support, for case management,
all those pieces that
Make a difference on for a
client in re-entry, uh, we are.
Looking forward to this next
year as the process of this goes
into place and we will
definitely um make it a priority
to ensure that our community
partners are contracted
providers and all of the other
individuals that we deal with
with corrections are engaged and
are educated on what this could
mean and how this is going to
potentially change the system.
OK, thank you guys, that done?
Senator Shindo.
Represent Pettigrew.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I've got 2 questions, um, the
first question is,
Whose budget will it be in for
the setup costs to get the
staff.
Uh, chair and vice chair and
Senator Woods, that will be part
of the healthcare authority
budget, um, as we can leverage
federal Medicaid matching
dollars with that, OK. And have
you got an estimate on what that
cost will be? I don't. What I do
know is that, you know,
Though we intend to launch the
services in July 2025, um,
there, for example, the work
that the corrections department
may need to do to strengthen our
health IT system that could take
several years. And so we do have
the opportunity to leverage that
one-time capacity funding for
more than one year if we need
to, but I can follow up with my
colleagues and get you an
estimate of those costs.
OK, and my second question is.
And I don't know whether it
pertains at all, but
What do you expect the operating
cost to be?
After the staffing, what do you
expect the operating cost to be?
You're, you're saying on page 7,
you're estimating 52,000.
Um
Chair and vice chair Senator
Woods, I don't have the details
on the annual operating cost. I
can, I can find that though and
follow up with you.
OK, well,
we don't have any cost, I'm
sorry, Senator, I'm being told
my colleagues are sending me a
message that we should have
estimates of those costs um
within the next 6 months. That's
part of the implementation
planning that we're working on
with CMS.
OK, so tell me this then.
Tell me about your reinvestment
plan. Have you got it started?
Have you got, you're gonna have
to submit a detailed
reinvestment plan according to
the information.
Just tell me, have you got that
started? How close to the
submission?
On that.
Uh, chair, vice chair, center
was the reinvestment plan will
be part of the submission we
share with CMS on the first of
January of 2025. So we've
started, um, but it will be
submitted in January.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for your answers.
Reverend Armstrong, do you want
on the list? Let me get to
Representative De la Cruz and
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
that this is a new effort, can
you give, expand a little bit on
the genesis of the concept for,
uh, and how long it's been in
play.
Chair, vice chair, and
Representative Dela Cruz, you
know, California, I believe, was
one of the first states to get
this federal waiver approved for
re-entry services, and when the
federal CMS uh review their
plan, you know, there's, at
least with the current
administration at the federal
level, they've long recognized
the need to achieve health
equity for more marginalized
populations, and this includes
those in the justice system. And
so they've been thinking about.
You know, what structural policy
changes needed to be made at the
federal level to best meet the
needs of people in the
incarceration system. And so
then the waiver from California
came to their desk, they
reviewed it, and, and they liked
many aspects of what they saw.
And so New Mexico and other
states who now have this waiver,
you know, use the California
temp like use the California
waiver as a template, um, but,
you know, we make it unique
and specific to what we're
seeing in New Mexico. And so
that's what I think the genesis
is, is this um commitment and
this priority from the current
federal administration to better
meet the, the structural
challenges that are preventing
people from accessing healthcare
and important safety net
services.
Mr. Sherman, and how long has
this ever been in play in New
Mexico?
We just uh chair, vice chair and
Representative de la Cruz. We
just received federal approval
to do this in July 26th of this
year.
And so these services have not
rolled out to New Mexicans yet.
They will be beginning July
2025.
Thank you. Lastly, Mr. Chairman.
What will constitute Medicaid
eligibility?
Is there already a set formula?
Uh, chair, vice chair of
Representative Dela Cruz, yes,
there is um a federally um
outlined criteria for receiving
and being eligible for Medicaid
services. So that standard set
at the federal level does not
change as it relates to this
Medicaid waiver.
Thank you, Chairman.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, my, uh, one of my concerns
is at the county level, um, on
your last page 7, it says add 19
more jail and county detention
centers as partners. How many do
we have across the state?
Right now.
Total.
Um,
Unfortunately, we don't have
anyone from the jail system
here, so I would not want to
provide information that's not
accurate, ah.
Chris Philip is usually our
point of contact when we need
information.
OK, thank you for that. Um, my
concern is that it's gonna cost
my county more.
And the implementation of this
without uh.
Some kind of state help uh to
stand it up and to implement it,
uh, you know, I have a jail in
one of my counties that might
have.
One person a month.
In it. And so, please keep in
mind that
Not all jails and detention
centers house multiple.
Uh, people and rural New Mexico
and the cost of implementing
something like this in uh rural
New Mexico counties when right
now uh the other part of the
problem I see is the, the
problem in delivering the
services, Mr. Chairman, we, we
can't deliver services to, to
people right now.
And so in if whether you've been
incarcerated or not, it's hard
to deliver the services, so
that's a concern. But also, Mr.
Chairman, the counties can't
even get reimbursed for
transporting state prisoners
right now.
They can't even get reimbursed
for that.
And so this is costing our
counties a lot of money and in a
from counties that don't have a
lot of GRT, uh, it's an issue,
so I hope that you uh take that
into consideration when you're
rolling out this process. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Is small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all. This is encouraging, uh, to
that point, I think it seems
like the uh scale is this will
be this will and probably should
be limited to a few places with
larger scale and the provider
network that can do it, um.
One other quick, I guess a quick
question, how will, will this,
uh, I, I'm encouraged by the
Matt expansion discussion with
the corrections department. That
was one of the biggest
challenges last year in HAFC,
um,
Does this
I guess how soon can you start
providing Matt through this or
is this, how does this help?
During sort of a lot of the time
that folks are in correctional
in, in these facilities, get
them started on Matt so that
we're actually fighting
addiction in as many ways and as
quickly as possible.
Thank you, um, Representative
Small, I, I think where this
would play a role is towards the
end of incarceration and also
while they are out, um, without
this,
He would have ended the day you
leave our doors and, and so
where this will come in is
really extending that beyond our
doors, um.
Separate from this, uh, Matt
will be starting as soon as we
get our rules promulgated uh
from my understanding that
should be happening next month
and once those rules are
promulgated, we will start some
form of treatment for
incarcerated individuals. Got
it. OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, Deputy Secretary.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you. You, you mentioned
you may not be able to stand
this program up until 26, 27.
Uh, chaired the the benefits
under the waiver will go live
July 2025.
Next year. But you won't be able
to run the program till 26, you
said 6 months before you get the
numbers for actual funding
costs.
Uh,
Senator Moniz, I'm not sure I
understand, um, we're doing the
implementation planning now and
we'll submit the implementation
plan to CMS in January of 25,
with the intent to launch these
services to folks in incarceral
settings to provide them those
services in July of 2025.
And but if you don't have an
implantation numbers, how are
you gonna launch that?
Inside the inside it well it's
in the healthcare authority.
Right.
Where's the money gonna come
from?
We intended Senator Moniz, we
intend to ask for the funding
that we'll need um in our fiscal
year 26 budget request. We're
still finalizing those numbers.
Um, and, you know, to a comment
made by representative Small.
Uh, these are, this is a
demonstration waiver, and so we
have the flexibility under a
waiver to design these waiver
services as we think best meets
the needs of the state. And so
thinking about um Representative
Armstrong's comment and some of
the other comments I've heard
today, if we decide as a state
that maybe the best approach um
to launch these services may be
across just a targeted number.
of, of counties or prisons,
that's something we can
consider. Um, we have the
ability to design this waiver in
a way that best meets Mexicans,
but we do intend being able to
do this is subject to budget
availability and, you know,
we're
You know, we plan to include a
request for this in our 26th
budget request.
Do you have an estimate for that
request?
Uh, ceremonials, I do not at
this time it's going to cost
1050, 2 million.
You don't have any idea what the
cost is today.
I don't have those numbers
today. However, I know that um
my boss secretary Armijo has
sent the email um to Adrian and
Amanda requesting a meeting with
you and Representing Small next
week to talk about our budget
request.
You have them next week, but not
this week.
OK, thank you.
Other questions. Thank you for
your presentation.
The state forester next and.
The birthday girl coming up too?
Yeah.
Who's gonna start us off.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Austin Davidson. I'm the
natural resource analyst for the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Joining me today on this panel
regarding best practices for
wildfire funding is the state
forester, Laura McCarthy, Ronna
Joyce Sen, and Peter Muller from
the Pew Charitable Trusts behind
tab H, you will find the LFC's
hearing brief looks something
like this. I will be going over
the current emergency landscape
that exists in New Mexico
specifically.
funding that's related to it,
and then I will go over the
recommendations of the brief.
Also in front of you, there'll
also be a two pager that goes
specifically over conversations
that was had between LFC DFA
Enerd and Pew regarding a fund
for emergency wildfires. That's
in tandem with a lot of these
conversations we're going to be
having.
New Mexico's system for
allocating emergency funding has
not been substantially updated
in decades, revealing its
deficits during recent
unprecedented crises. The
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020
exposed significant flaws,
including vague language and a
lack of transparency and
accountability. The
legislature's efforts in 2022,
2021 session to address these
issues through legislation and
appropriations were largely
unsuccessful, with no
significant reforms passed and
disaster appropriations.
Quickly exhausted.
Now fast forwarding to 2024, the
situation has not improved
significantly.
New Mexico experienced another
catastrophic fire season like
the one we saw in 2022, leading
to additional federal disaster
declarations and highlighting
the continuing need for
comprehensive reforms to the
state's emergency funding
system. The issues with the
existing system emphasize the
need for developing new
mechanisms to better replace and
prepare for further crises.
The primary statute that allows
the executive to allocate
emergency funding has changed
little in the past 69 years,
despite the changing nature of
emergencies and the contemporary
structure of state finances,
specifically emergency and
executive orders are allowed the
governor to allocate emergency
funding in increments of up to
7,750,000 for each eligible and
qualified applicant impacted by
declared emergency, the governor
has deemed beyond local control
and requiring the the.
Sources of the state.
This funding is to be drawn from
the surplus unappropriated money
in the general fund and
undefined to an account.
Simultaneously.
The uses of this appropriated
money comes from the
appropriation contingency fund.
In the event there is no surplus
of unappropriated money.
Specifically in the
appropriation contingency fund.
There's a disaster allotment
that the governor can use for
these executive orders to then
give to these agencies.
However,
From there if this disaster
allotment is used, it then goes
to the operating reserve. This
practice is not enumerated in
statute, but it's been the
existing landscape that we have.
Turning to the 2nd page, it goes
over specifically how in the
COVID-19 pandemic, the executive
allocated disaster funding in
amounts far in excess of the
750,000 limitation and began
drawing from a source not
authorized to provide emergency
funds, all without notification
to the legislature or reporting
on expenditures. The legislative
council hired outside counsel to
investigate the legality of
these actions and required
reports from the legislative.
council service and LFC staff on
legal and financial impacts.
The council chose not to pursue
legal action against the
executive for these actions, but
did encourage the legislature
and the executive to work
together to develop a new
emergency funding system.
This resulted in the LFC
endorsing Senate Bill 295 in the
2021 session.
This bill would have revised the
system for executive allocations
of emergency funding from the
general fund.
By clarifying the emergency or
disaster situations for which
such funding would be allocated,
restricting the allowable
funding sources.
And the amounts that may be
allotted and establishing
requirements for reporting and
allocations on these
expenditures.
This bill did not pass.
Despite the appropriation
contingency fund being specified
in statute as the source of
emergency funding, the executive
has drawn from the operating
reserve for these purposes since
FY19. Now this process happens
once the executive has drawn out
of the appropriation contingency
fund, their disaster allotment
and will then dip into the
operating reserve.
The operating reserve, as you
know, is the state's primary
reserve fund and it's typically
used for non-occurring
appropriations.
The legislature allocates funds.
To the ACF in these levels, but
when this fund is exhausted, the
executive uses the operating
reserve.
Since FY 19 $203 million has
been drawn from the operating
reserve for disaster allotments
and funds continued to be drawn,
which circumvents the
legislative appropriation
process. If you look on the left
hand side of the page, you will
see a cha a chart that goes over
the specific number of orders
and the amounts that go with
that.
Now
The other sections of this brief
go over a brief history of
wildfires in New Mexico, that's
going to be on pages 3 and 4.
Page 4 then goes into the
associated costs that come with
wildfires. If you'll now skip to
the 5th page. That's the
recommendation for this brief.
The current structure of
emergency funding in New Mexico
should be improved to meet the
task of diligently funding the
state's response to disasters.
From funny mitigation and
suppression within state
forestry, to planning and
operations at the Department of
Homeland Security and Emergency
Management, and these are both
then augmented by these
executive orders. The current
system creates an emergency
funding landscape that lacks
proper transparency, tracking,
and efficiency.
Following the National Emergency
Funding best practices, the
legislature should consider the
creation of two emergency funds.
One of these funds would be for
state forestry and another for
the Department of Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management following further
discussions and further uh
workshops about the specific
uses of this fund.
These funds would only be
accessible and spent during
emergencies and would be the
only allowable funds eligible
for withdrawals.
The funds should be used on
suppression efforts, i.e., the
fighting of the fires and the
floods.
Uh, and then the funding for
mitigation and recovery that
currently resides partially
within the emergency response
agencies, recurring budgets, and
our costs that would not be
supplemented.
these funds.
These funds would improve
tracking and transparency of
spending while also allowing the
responding agencies greater
flexibility when funding
disaster response efforts.
Further and finally, access to
these funds would be predicated
on the governor declaring an
emergency order. The legislature
could consider allowing uses of
these funds to be at a higher
threshold than the current
750,000 cap.
For example, if adjusted for
inflation when the 750,000 cap
was decided 69 years ago, the
cap would now be closer to 8.6
million in the current state.
I'll now turn it over to State
Forester Laura McCarthy.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm gonna give you uh
an overview of what kinds of
activities and the timing of
those activities and how we pay
for those activities that are
currently funded by executive
orders and hopefully you have my
slides, um, there's a lot of
detail on those slides. I am not
gonna read them, but I am gonna
pull out some highlights for
you. So.
If you go to the 2nd slide, uh,
already this year we've had more
than 300 fire starts, in fact,
just since I've been sitting
here, one popped up and our
ground crews are going out to
check it out.
We uh
We have two primary kinds of, of
ground crews. One is hand crews
and crew modules that includes
the two hotshot crews that you
all funded. We've named them
now. They are the MIRs crew and
the Pecos River crew, they are
both up and running, and they
are working toward their hotshot
status. It is gonna take them a
couple of years as we said at
the very beginning, and the hot
shot.
Community kind of got after us
for using the hotshot term
before they're qualified as
hotshots, so we now refer to
them as Mimris and Pecos River
and they uh the member's crew
was already gotten to the type 2
initial attack level. We also
have modules of fire
suppression.
Uh, individuals that are a
combination of our FTE and uh
people who are hired on an
emergency basis. So they come in
uh when we anticipate a high
level of fire activity, we bring
them on and they uh are usually
uh pretty quickly deployed to
respond to a fire. That's what
you see on this slide as
emergency hires.
We also staff wildfire engines,
and that's important because the
the key to keeping the 500 or so
fires that we have every year
that none of you are ever gonna
hear about because that's what
we're here to do is put them out
when they're small.
Uh, we, we need people on the
ground and we need a water
source and so the engines are
the type of engine that can go
off road that can get into
remote places, uh, and you've
been, um, we've been very
grateful for the continued
capital investment in those
engines so that we, you know,
we're in a good place in terms
of our statewide coverage. Go to
the next slide. I know there's
A lot of interest in aviation
resources and we are part of a
master cooperative fire
agreement with the US Forest
Service and all of the DOI
agencies that allows us to share
resources. So the state of New
Mexico does not own any
firefighting aircraft. We do
have extensive access to
aircraft on a call when needed
basis.
And uh what you'll see on the
right that uh table there shows
the different kinds of aircraft
we have access to and what we
pay cost per flight hour and we
are only paying for the hours
where they are directly
responding to our fires, um, and
you can see there's a lot of
resources. In fact, if anyone
has uh flown lately out of the
Al.
Albuquerque airport, you can see
the, the VATs that are parked
there.
On the left, you'll see our
annual expenditure on
On aviation resources, so it's
pretty cost the system we have
now is somewhat cost effective
for the state.
Our next slide, slide 4, we are
very reliant on local
governments to respond to
wildfire and um we, you, you
have an expert among you in
representative Vincent, uh, who,
um, as you know, was fire chief
and led a team that was part of
the local first responders for
wildfire. We help them out with
training. We have
Agreements that we uh refer to
by an acronym of RMP, which
means resource mobilization
plan. We agree on rates ahead of
time. Uh, we have uh 29
different units of local
government with this capacity
and they are often the first
people on the fire, and they are
part of the team that puts out
that 500 fires you're never
going to hear about.
Uh,
we, uh, do reimburse them out of
executive orders and it is our
goal to reimburse them with
within 45 days, um, we're very
good at that unless there's a
billing error, and in that case,
we have to do our due diligence
and make sure that what we're
turning in for reimbursement is
accurate. So those are the
situations that take longer.
Uh, on the next slide, you'll
see a slide about our
facilities. It is really
important that we have working
facilities for these ground
crews and fire engines to work
out of and we are um we've got
some real challenges. The, the
top one is, is our WRP
challenge. That's um kind of
most of the way down on the
slide there and that's the two
hand crews that are based out of
Santa Fe. They are
Getting kicked out of the
property that they've been based
in since they were created in
2014, and we need to move them.
We really want to keep them in
Santa Fe because with the
hotshots now located in Vegas in
Socorro, having that Santa Fe
location has just, it's really
working well in terms of good
statewide coverage. We would
like to move them to the
National Guard complex and uh
we've been in conversations.
With General Aguilar about it.
Um, it all looks good, you'll
see it in one of our capital
requests, we hope.
Um, final thing to, to cover in
terms of the, the landscape of
wildfire response is that FEMA.
Certain fires if they threaten
homes and meet the criteria that
FEMA has set for wildfire
response.
They will be reimbursed by FEMA
at 75%, which then lowers the
dollar amount that the state has
to cover. We still have to put
the money out initially to to
hit payroll and to reimburse the
local resources, but if it's
qualified as an FMA fire or fire
management assistance grant fire
FMAG, uh, if it qualifies, we
will eventually like could be 5
years later, get paid back and
currently that money.
Goes into the treasury, it shows
up.
On Ener's budget as a reversion,
it is not a reversion, it's a
reimbursement.
The map on the right, I thought
you might find of interest, um,
as soon as we know of a fire
happening and we are concerned
about homes being threatened, we
create a map like this. The
purple dots are 911 numbers that
are within a five-mile radius
and then on this map on the
right, you can see some yellow
dots. So those are also 911
addresses, but they are outside
of 5 miles, increasingly fires
are spreading 5 miles.
In a day easily. So, uh, this
Blue 2 fire, which was uh down
here in the Riodoso area uh did
qualify as FMAG. And then my
final slide number 7 is um just
a summary of uh what Pew found
uh in terms of like their
evaluation of, of the strengths
and weaknesses of the current
state system for funding.
Fires and um
You know, one of their findings
is around transparency.
We can, if you ask, drill down
into every single expenditure on
any fire that is paid for with
an executive order, but that is
not information that the
legislature is getting on a
regular basis. You would have to
ask us for that. We would have
to generate some tables. Part of
what Pw is uh has found is that
because the fire suppression is
paid for out of this
essentially.
Of budget
Emergency contingency fund that
there's not the level of
transparency, um, on an
immediate basis.
Uh, as well, the executive
orders are challenging to
implement 2 years running, we've
had to request 40 executive
orders in the late days of June.
June is our fire season. We have
to have budget to cover all our
fire liabilities, including
those reimbursements to local
governments. And so there's a
lack of efficiency there. Um,
with that, Mr. Chair, I am done.
And I believe I pass it uh to
Pew.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Ronna
Joyce Sen. I'm here with my
colleague, Peter Muller, and
we're here for the Pew
Charitable Trust. We'd like to
thank the members today for
inviting us to speak. We are
coming from a nonpartisan
nonprofit organization with
several government performance
initiatives.
And an area of focus has been
the impact of natural disasters
such as wildfires on long-term
outlooks for state and local
budgets. Peter and I were
actually here in front of you,
uh, last fall in Las Vegas,
where we presented findings from
a report that we released called
Wildfires Burning Through State
Budgets. And after our visit, we
actually began a work group with
the State Forester's office at
Ener LFC and the DFA.
Today we wanted to provide some
high level information on
wildfire budgeting, place that
into context as to what's
happening here in New Mexico and
then provide some examples from
other states on how they're
budgeting for fires. Hopefully
you have a packet of our slide
deck in front of you. It should
have a title on it that says
managing New Mexico's wildfire
costs.
If we go to slide 2, I want to
jump in with the big picture
context, which is that disasters
across the country are becoming
more frequent and severe.
When it comes to fire
specifically, New Mexico is no
stranger to the frequency and
devastation of these
occurrences, whether we're
talking about Hermit's Peak and
Calf Canyon in 22 or the South
Fork and salt fires that
occurred in May and June. Beyond
the rising frequency and
severity at the national level,
the costs associated with these
disasters are growing as well,
and you can see it on this
chart. Cumulative disaster costs
more than tripled in the last 20
years in comparison to the
previous 20.
Those, those costs are spread
across many different entities
from individual households to
the global reinsurance industry,
but a critical piece of that
puzzle and the one that's
relevant for today's discussion
is a cost borne by state
governments.
Government spending on disasters
is difficult to quantify for
reasons that I'll discuss. But
from what we know that spending
is also on the rise.
That's creating pressure on
people such as yourself on how
to allocate those limited
resources towards a growing
need.
Now it's important to understand
that every level of government
in the US plays a role in paying
for disasters.
And governments just don't just
pay to respond to disasters,
government funded disaster
assistance includes a whole
suite of activities that span
the time before, during, and
after a disaster occurs.
In this, in this system, the
state is critical.
And um they help communities and
individuals in smaller disasters
that don't rise to the level of
receiving federal aid.
And even in when they do receive
federal assistance, most of the
major federal disaster programs
come with some sort of cost
share or match requirements.
It's and as it relates to making
communities more resilient to
future disasters, states play an
important role in organizing,
leading and supporting the
localities.
That context of rising costs and
and in a central but understated
studied state role has driven
our research and the big picture
conclusions are, it's difficult
to quantify the impact of rising
disaster costs on state budgets
because that spending is
inconsistently tracked.
Second, states use a variety of
budgeting mechanisms to ensure
that funding can be made
available if a disaster occurs.
There are few standards or best
practices around these
mechanisms. In some cases
they're proving insufficient to
meet those rising needs.
And third, despite a widespread
consensus around the value of
risk reduction measures known as
mitigation. Barriers persist to
both adequately funding and
implementing the types of
projects that reduce the harm
caused by these future
disasters.
Next slide, please.
I want to talk a little bit
about who pays for these
disasters.
The entities that are
responsible primarily depends on
where now I'm going to talk
about wildfire specifically on
where a fire starts. The fire
starts on federal land, the
federal government pays for
those suppression costs. If it
starts on land under the state's
jurisdiction, the state or local
government pays. But as we all
know, fires don't stay within
these political boundaries and
government entities have entered
into this complex system of
hundreds of cooperative
agreements. These agreements
help manage not only wildfire
suppression activities, but also
payment reimbursement between
Governments for services that
they provide. And then the
federal government provides
grants to assist state and local
governments as the state
forester had mentioned, and
these grants come from FEMA and
land management agencies and
cover everything from recovery
to prevention, mitigation, and
preparedness activities.
Next slide, please.
Based on those findings, we
Uh, can think about a set of
actions that states can take to
begin inter integrating the risk
of disasters into their
budgeting decisions. Those are
listed out as measure, manage,
and mitigate. We actually spoke
about these three phases when we
were here last, but we really
want to stress their importance.
I'm gonna start first with
measure, which means to
comprehensively track and report
disaster-related spending.
Our research has found that most
states don't collect or report
this type of information. Part
of that reason is that spending
occurs in so many different
parts of state government and on
many different types of
activities, and given that
disaster efforts are
intergovernmental, the timing of
reimbursements and grants can
muddy that picture. All of that
makes it difficult to capture
those costs. But capturing that
spending is critical. You can't
handle what you don't track.
The next step, which is managed,
means to assess and evaluate
your current budgeting practices
to see if they're meeting the
challenges associated with this
risk.
Our research saw various ways in
which state budgets and uh and
way state's budget and there
really isn't a best practice.
What we saw some states are very
preemptive in that they allow
themselves to put money aside
before a disaster occurs. Some
states are responsive, meaning
that they allow themselves to
find and move funding around
after during a disaster, and
then there's variable budgeting,
which is that some state
agencies have their own internal
disaster accounts.
And finally mitigate, meaning to
invest in those activities that
can reduce those future
disasters. The thing is,
mitigation is a whole world unto
itself and putting it into
context would take some time,
but we want to focus a little
bit more on the measure and
manage side based on some of the
things that our previous
speakers mentioned today. If you
do want to talk about more as
far as mitigation investments
go, we're here and you have our
information. I now pass it on to
my colleague, Peter.
Thank you. Um, so I'm gonna take
a moment to apply those concepts
that Ronna Drey was just talking
about to, to the context here in
in New Mexico specifically, and
I think Director McCarthy
touched on a lot of these, these
really well. So I'm just going
to try to reiterate and
reinforce, um, on this side,
you, you see, we've highlighted
some of your, your current
practices. I'm going to talk
about two of them in the context
of how they impact your ability
to to proactively plan for these
costs as they're growing over
time and in your ability to have
really transparent
to understand how they're
growing, to understand how that
money is being spent to
understand all the things you
all need to understand as
policymakers to make the
decisions you need to make. So
first, this idea that for any
once any fire starts, whether it
be big or small or even for
place readiness placement um in
in high risk times, there isn't
proactive money in forestry's
budget for, for those expenses.
Your entire entirely relying on
that contingency fund on those
executive orders for those
expenses. That means you're
Not, there's no process where
you evaluate how are these costs
growing over time. Let's make
sure we're putting enough as
those costs are growing. Um, and
it also means that most of those
costs are happening sort of off
budget, they're happening,
they're not part of where you
all pay the most attention to
the budget is during that
process where you're considering
and passing your budget each
year. These are expenses that
are being approved outside of
that process, like director
said, you all can still get the,
the information's being tracked,
you still have access to it, but
it's not in the same, it's not
been considered in the same
moment.
So it gets it there's a chance
it gets less attention. So
that's sort of the challenge of
that, that sort of entire
reliance on on that after the
fact contingency fund executive
order approach. The other
approach that is creating some
challenges is this idea is how
reimbursements are managed. You,
you heard it described really
well, I think that um when
there's a fire, everybody shows
up, locals, state, feds, and
then after the fire is is dealt
with, um, everyone settles the
bill, right? And this can take a
long time.
From everything I've heard, you
all do a really good job of
paying out to your locals
quickly, but you get reimbursed
from the federal government very
slowly. That means even if say
the federal government is going
to pay 75% of the cost of a
fire, you're pulling an
executive order for 100% of that
cost. And then when that money
comes back in because there's no
system in place, that just goes
back into your treasury, back
into your general fund. That
means you're, you're pulling out
more than you might otherwise
have to from those that
contingency.
Fun, so it's a bigger hit in any
year when there's a big cost. It
also makes it really hard to
track that total bottom line
spending because it's this
convoluted cycle of money goes
into the contingency fund, it
gets pulled out in a giant
amount, then maybe a year or two
later you get the reimbursement
and then it goes back into the
general fund and then that
instead of just one source that
is this is your wildfire money
and if the money if the federal
reimbursements were to go back
into that, then you would just
be adding the state portion each
year.
And so it'd be much easier to
see what are we paying, what is
the federal government paying?
Um, so those are the, the, the
kind of the big challenges that
we've we've seen created. If you
go to the next slide, um, the,
the question I want to turn to
is sort of given those
challenges, what are some
possibilities you could take
some steps you could take to
kind of uh alleviate some of
those, those challenges. And I
think as you heard mentioned,
Pew, we have worked with
forestry with some staff from
LFC with some staff from DFA to
kind of think through what
different approaches might work
given you're all um context
here, um.
Makes to help get better
transparency and to get help get
better kind of proactive
planning. The approach we that
we've kind of been talking about
wouldn't be new spending. It
would be taking the money, these
are essential services. The
money is being spent now. It's
just the way it is being spent
is creating these extra
stressors. So trying to think
about how you could structure it
so that that money is just
provided in a different way to
let you see where it's going and
to kind of plan for that growing
cost before it happens instead
of after. Um, and I have on
there just a few questions that
you'd want to consider.
If you were going to set up a
wildfires specific fund. Um, the
types of questions you'd want to
answer to, to get the details
right and different states have
approached some of these in
different ways. But one of the
questions is what would a fund
like this pay for? If you were
to just try to set up a fund
that is just taking what you're
currently spending, but putting
it in in a in a more proactive
structure. It could just be
paying for the types of things
that executive orders are
already paying for with maybe a
few tweaks for things like uh
just if equipment gets damaged
in a fire, it could pay for
something like that or giving.
Some flexibility where there
isn't flexibility under the
current emergency system, but
that, that kind of approach
would just
Allow you to have the the same
spending just in a in one
concentrated place. Other states
have included other things into
a fund like this, so some states
allow these funds to pay for uh
like equipment purchases or some
portion of it for mitigation
projects. That would be a larger
investment and maybe a bigger
conversation. So beyond just
solving the problems I've
discussed, um, but one to
mention those are some things
other states include as well.
Um, the second question is how
do you treat these
reimbursements from the federal
government or from other
partners when they come in.
Um, that if you were to have
those reimbursements, go back
into this fund, let that fund
let unspent money in that fund
carry forward into future years
that would allow basically the
last fire, the reimbursements
you get from whatever the last
fire is to provide the down
payment for the next fire. So
you're not having to take an
executive order for that 100% of
the cost if you're not
responsible for 100% of the
ultimate responsibility. Um, it
would also allow for some of
that, uh, better transparency,
much
Easier to track the big picture
of, oh, we know how much state
dollars we put into the fund
this year, so we know how much
the state contribution is, um,
and it lets you sort out between
the state and federal more
easily. The third question, and
this is a big one, is how much
funding are you going to
provide, would you provide in a
fund like this and how, um, and
where would it come from? And
states we've looked at have
provided a few different
approaches to that question. Uh,
one that might make sense here
is to look at the historical
trends. A number of states, what
they do.
As they say, you can't look at
one year for wildfire funding,
right? Because you have a big
fire one year, huge expense,
next, the next year you might
have just small brush fires and
nothing major. So one year is
not going to give you a good
picture, but some states do
things like, we'll look at the
last 10 years, what are the
high, what is the highest 5
years we have spent with the
highest costs, the 5 highest
cost years take an average of
that and use that as sort of a
prediction for for what we need
to invest each year or something
like that. Um, it will never be
perfect. You would
Always have a giant year where
you might have to dip into other
resources, but something like
that will at least grow over
time as your as your risk grows.
Other approaches we've seen
states take is things like uh
taking a portion of a dedicated
funding source. So maybe some
sort of fee goes into a
suppression fund or a couple of
states do something where if you
have, uh, if they have leftover
funds, leftover unspent funds at
the end of a fiscal year. That
goes automatically into a
suppression fund. Those are
useful in that you're getting
kind of a regular identified
source of funding, but they're
based on what's available rather
than an assessment of the need.
So anything where you kind of
identifying your need first.
settling that drive the
investment is going to give you
a better outcome over the long
term.
Um, and then the last question
that you would want to answer is
what sort of reporting do you
want? And this is really a
question that would be turned to
all of you as the policymakers.
What information do you need to
talk to your constituents to
make funding decisions, to
provide oversight, all of those
things. So you'd want to answer
questions, how often do we want
us to receive a report on on
something like this? What
details does it need to include?
Do you want to know how much of
the spending was state versus
federal dollars. What types of
activities are being prepared,
are being paid for, how much
like maybe.
How much is suppression versus
how much is for readiness? Um,
do you care about the breakdown
of how much is going to say,
personnel and crews versus
aircraft versus equipment
repair, how much is being paid
to local governments, things
like that. Do you care about
knowing how much is being spent
by fire or by location so you
can kind of see where the hot
spots are and where the costs
are being driven by. Um, but
these are all kind of things for
you to think about if you were
to try and implement some sort
of suppression fund to address
these challenges that um I'm
going to hand it back to
And try to just finish off with
a couple of quick examples.
Yeah, this is piggybacking off
of some of the things that Peter
said we just wanted to conclude
by showing you how some states
are handling their suppression
funding budgeting, uh, slide 77
has a pretty large flag of
Montana, and I'm they are, for
instance, have a rollover fund
and their funding comes
primarily um from excess general
fund revenue and it's capped
federal reimbursements also go
into this account and they set
aside a specific amount for
preparedness activities.
Each year
Uh, slide 8, Utah also has a
rollover fund, and there are
many sources for this fund that
include general fund revenue,
reimbursements, as well as other
sources. They also take 10% of
their reimbursement and put it
reimbursements and put them into
a wildfire preparedness grant
fund.
And finally, uh, slide 9,
California, who uh many of you
probably heard of Cal Fire,
their forestry, Fire Protection
Agency, and they also have an
emergency or eund that could be
used if more money is needed
than what Cal Fire is budgeted
for. General appropriations fund
Calfire and their e fun comes
from General Fund and federal
reimbursements. The money put in
is calculated by taking an
average of the 5 most expensive
fires over the previous 10
years, something Peter just
mentioned. And although not the
same.
There are some similarities to
California how suppression is
done here as well. Basically
where the money comes from.
To recap, I'm just going to
return to the framework of
measure, manage and mitigate as
we discussed, the state has
taken some important steps on
these elements, and there's
potential, as we mentioned, for
additional work to be done. Pew
has continued interest in
assisting and supporting any of
that work as well. But thank,
with that, we thank you so much
for your time and the
opportunity, and we look forward
to answering any questions
either here or offline.
Represented Vincent.
You're on. Thank you, Mr. I
forgot Senator Schindall was
first, sir, Senator Scindall was
first in the.
All righty.
Um,
To
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, and thank you for the
presentation. Um, it's a uh
important topic and so forth.
So, uh,
I'm strictly I'm gonna go
straight to the, the fun, you
know, the requests or so forth.
Uh, I know that uh a couple of
years, I think in the last
session we created the and this
is a question for Mr. Chairman,
the for our forester uh couple
years, I think last year, we
created the uh legacy funds. Uh,
I think Senator Laville and uh
Uh, worth created legacy funds,
certain percentages going to
emer environment, some of it
goes to forestry. Can you talk
about a little bit about how
that is used and then if we're
creating a fund, would that be
the ideal place or is it
something different outside of
that since part of that is the
conservation Permanent Legacy
Fund, and then I think I believe
there's a land of enchantment,
fund that goes into it and, and
distributed it to the
departments and so forth, so
Mr. Chairman, if we can uh have
the Forer uh speak to that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, the
two are really very, very
different. The land of
enchantment Legacy Fund was
created to provide a somewhat
modest level of funding for a
set of existing programs.
Emergency response is very
situation dependent and for us
in New Mexico, uh, very much
tied to snowpack to drought and
conditions that are somewhat
predictable.
By a month or two but not
conditions that are predictable
on a budget cycle.
So that would be, I mean, I
could go on at length, but just
that's a, a concise, as concise
as I can be that these are very
different animals.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so
I guess in terms of uh
Not so much the programmatic and
how it distributed, but I get
the creation of the fun.
Would it be your recommendation,
you know, if the legislature
sees fit to create a separate
fund for this purpose or it
something that you attach to
this fund that is already in
existence, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the Pew
Charitable Trust.
Did not evaluate the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund as a
structure, uh, that,
Perhaps is something that they
could do as follow up the
structure that they
evaluated.
Does derive from the emergency
contingency fund structure.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, go ahead if
you want to have um.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
I would say that the, yeah, the
structure of that land of
enchantment fund is an
investment fund where you're
taking one-time money to to
generate revenue for a purpose.
This is really more of a a cash
flow management idea. Um, so it
is a, it's, it's kind of they're
both funds in the sense that
their accounts where where money
is held, but they're serving
different purposes from a, not
even from a programmatic
standpoint, for just a budget
structure standpoint, so.
I think it would be having it in
a as a separate concept, um, is,
it's something worth
considering.
We got to turn the mics on and
off their Shindo, so thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you for
the answer. I was just curious
since we have that fun, and I
know that some of it goes
through the forestry division,
amateur and for other, you know,
other departments, outdoor
recreation and so forth, but
since that was already in
existence. I just thought I'd
put it out there and see what
your response is. So I
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, this question is going to go
to our state forester.
What is your budget on thinning?
Currently on an annual basis.
Mr. Chair and representative,
um, for the last several years,
the legislature has been very
generous with capital outlay and
provided us with $100 million
for
Forest thinning projects and
that is the money that we get to
spend. We also get federal
money.
It's, we saw a big bump with the
bipartisan infrastructure law
and that money will be going
away fairly soon. So it's not
money we can count on for the
future.
I hope that answers the dollar
amount. Um, we have scaled up
our internal capacity to manage
money and projects and
It is, it is our goal to
accelerate the pace and scale as
much as we can with, uh, funding
provided and, uh, working
through the procurement and, uh,
uh, management accounting
principles.
Uh, effectively.
Thank you for that answer. And
what I wanted to kind of tee up
on is how far does $10,000 get
you?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, it does not go
very far and our costs per acre
are going up. That's part of
the, the nationwide, uh,
inflation experience and it is
now typical.
Where, where forest thinning
might have cost $1200 an acre,
it can now cost 2000 an acre and
the hazardry removal that we've
been talking about for the last
2 days, uh, does tend to run
about $5000 an acre, so.
Not very far. Thank you for that
answer. So
Here we are.
I'm not getting on to you guys.
This is not your fault.
Here we are talking about making
a fund.
To put out wildfires.
Have you ever heard anybody come
to this committee or any
committee and try to do a fund.
For mitigating wildfires.
And would you have any idea how
much
My community.
is going to pay out on this
particular incident.
And we can never find the money.
To thin
But we always can find the
money.
To fix the problem at the end.
And you know who pays for it?
Our community pays for it.
Their houses are burned down.
If they did escape the fire, now
their houses are floating down
the river.
Or have mud and silt in them.
And we have got to come together
as a committee as a state, and
we have to figure out a lot of
these mountainous communities.
have got to be thinned and we
instead of having this
conversation, which I know we're
fixing that because it's on the
agenda.
I want a, a fund set up, a big
fun setup, and I want to get as
aggressive mitigating as we are
fighting fire, and you know how
aggressive our firefighters are
on fighting fire. There're some
of the best.
Well, we ought to lead the, we
ought to be razor sharp and we
ought to be leading the, the
charge by making sure that our
forests are healthy.
And I would encourage you to
drive through the unburnt part
of Ridoso and Lincoln County and
then take a trip up 244 through
the reservation and look at,
look at all that and just see
how bad that's gonna be and, and
it's not an, it's not an if.
We know that it's a win, but we
always figure out a way to come
up with the money.
At the end, why can't we come up
with the money now and start
being aggressive and working on
that now and, and put a
committee together that will
start logging industries.
And things of that nature and
it's called preventative
maintenance.
Do you do preventative
maintenance on your vehicles? or
do you just drive them until
there's no wall in them and you
just get a new one at the end of
a couple of years instead of,
you know, getting one at the end
of 15 or 20 years.
I know we're smarter than that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And you must know about my oil
changes.
You
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thanks for the presentation. I
guess this question would be for
the.
12 in the corner over there. uh,
what, uh, what should your
selection process on vendors
after the governor issued a
declaration of emergency.
In other words, what I'm trying
to ask is what process do you
use to get vendors to take care
of the problem after the problem
is already there.
And also on the vendors, are you
getting vendors from New Mexico
or from out of state?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
representative.
So on the actual firefighting
side we're not using vendors,
we're using the um our
agreements that are in place and
uh there are some types of heavy
equipment like a skidon uh that
we have a statewide price
agreement on. We also have a
statewide price agreement for
meals, and these are local
providers when the state of New
Mexico is in charge of the fire.
Uh, in addition, under our
master cooperative fire
agreement with the federal
agencies we have kind of, I
guess you would call it a
decision tree or a hierarchy of
that they have to check with uh
local resource and vendor
availability before they go to
the government-wide Viper
contracts. We fought very hard
for that and uh if, if we catch
one of our partners trying to go
around that.
We call them on it.
OK, thank you for that. You
know, is there a best practice
to on any vendors to get the
work started right away on after
the fires on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
do you mean the post-fire
repair?
Or I'm not exactly clear on your
question. I'm sorry. Is there a
best practice to get people on
board.
After the fire had started, I'd
like the version we do so.
What practice do you use to get
people on board right away, Mr.
Chair and Representative, we
work all of that out before the
fire season ever starts. We
begin, um, lining like we, we do
a review of our RMP or our
resource mobilization plan. We
have an annual meeting with any
local government that wants to
be part of that. We go over the
rates like we, we don't do any
of it on the fly. It's, it's all
preplanned.
Uh, as well with our emergency
hire firefighters, we try to
sign up as many of them as
possible and get them trained by
April 1st.
Uh, then we do bring on a number
of students typically in May
after school gets out, and
usually by June, um, we are kind
of done with signing up people.
I think that, uh, Mr. Chair, one
last question or comment, uh,
what Representative Vickers said
a little while ago, uh, you
know, we need to do prevention
and maintenance.
Cause if not, I, I mentioned
this yesterday in committee,
we're gonna be having the same
problem a couple of years down
the road and it's gonna affect
the same people, so preventative
maintenance is a big word, and I
don't know why the state or the
Forest Service doesn't allow
logging and stuff on the land,
but we really need to look at
that because, you know, go out
here and see what I saw
yesterday. It's a big disaster
and it, you know, it's gonna
happen again. It's happened
before and it will keep on
happening until we.
uh, eliminate the problem. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representing small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all very much, um,
the, so it seems clear that,
well, a couple of things. One,
Mr. Chair, uh, and state
forester, we do the, the land of
Enchantment Fund is sending
money to forestry for mitigation
through watershed, well, have
you or can you use some of that
funding for either thining,
prescribed burns, others said
other watershed management.
Mr. Chair and, um,
representative Small, yes, the,
um, I, I'm gonna also answer
something that Representative
Vincent touched on. Um, so, um,
Several years ago, uh,
Representative Paul Bay and
Senator Peter Worth sponsored a
bill called the Forest and
Watershed Restoration Act that,
um, took money from two
recurring funds up to $2 million
a year that gets transferred
from OSE to the forestry
division for forest and
watershed restoration projects.
So that's $2 million a year that
we can count on regardless.
Of the whether we get capital
outlay. Then the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund with the
formula that was, uh, approved
that was in the legislation as
to how to divide the money up
between the agencies and between
programs and agencies puts
another 1.4 million in. So
that's 3.4 million of recurring
funding that we can count on and
that we're spending on the
highest priority projects, but
as has been pointed.
out that money just doesn't go
very far.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and, um, director and that,
yeah. So there's some, but
clearly to the point, there's,
there's a lot more work that
needs to be done and so we need
to continue to look for ways to
consistently fund that, um,
For moving into, it seems like
it's a we have a pretty clear
opportunity to adopt an approach
similar to either California,
Utah, Montana or some variation
with non-recurring funding that
goes in, uh, reimbursements that
come back to that. That's the
sort of, it seems like the
clear, one of the clear
takeaways for the day is that,
that needs to be a priority for
us as we look at, at next year.
Um,
Another question, Mr. Chair, uh,
great to have our crews up and
running, members, the Pecos
River. Is there space to start
thinking about another crew, uh,
potentially based here given
that this is sort of our other
large forest, um,
Uh, and are the members in the
Pecos River cruise, knowing this
is like the first year they've
been up and running, have they
been able to sort of get in that
sort of non when they're not on
a fire doing.
Watershed restoration and other
management type of work.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I will, um,
address those in reverse order.
So, um, the, the crew staffing
really got fully fleshed out in
June, let's say, and um they've
been out on fires continuously,
um, some people are getting
weeded out. So there is a pro we
are still.
In a process of finding our
right people. It's very hard
demanding work.
Uh, so we're not at full, full
staffing yet. We expect to be
picking up more staff to to
become fully staffed through the
fall as the Federal firefighters
who are seasonals, um, can get
picked up by us because ours are
FTE.
Uh, towards your
The other part of the question,
we are doing planning for their
fall work now, fall and winter.
So we expect to have them out
doing thinning work and also
doing support work, uh, and, and
lead work for prescribed burns
that are, um,
Obviously very carefully planned
if we're going to put our people
out there.
Uh
As far as locating a hotshot
crew here. There is already, um,
is it the Smokey Bear hotshots,
um, that are already based here
in Riodos so when we picked our
locations, we were very careful
to find the doughnut holes where
there wasn't coverage, um, and
as well, um, we're ambitious.
We've taken on a lot, 50 FTEs uh
for one division in one fiscal
year.
uh, has been a tremendous
workload. Um, I'm proud of the
work our staff have done. They
are rock stars, um, and, uh, if
they're listening now, I just
want to say like we're not
gonna, we can't bring on more.
We've got to finish what we
started and, and get them where,
you know, to, to full
functionality before we take on
more. And then my answer would
always be yes. The, the threat
is getting worse and worse.
And um, you know, we have to
keep scaling up because the
problem is accelerating faster
than our ability to respond to
it.
Got it. Thank you very much.
Thank you for your work. Thank
you to your staff and thanks to
this record to the team. I think
we've got a very clear uh
roadway ahead of us. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let me ask you some
questions in this budget year,
um, you know, we gave you
roughly.
You serviced
14,000 acres in watersheds.
Uh, treated New Mexico in forest
and watersheds.
Um, we put some money in for a
wildli fires providing
professional technical incident
command system training.
And then in contractual services
and benefits, uh, we have about
$50,000. So what are the
contractoral services and the
other in the Forestry division
do.
I'm, I'm reading from House Bill
2, but I don't.
Uh, Mr. Chair,
Um, I'm, I'm hoping that my, uh,
budget person will could give a
more specific answer. I got a
few more questions if we need to
and we can follow up, but
contractual services, um, uh,
you know, we've, we've needed to
modernize our um.
Like to get from a paper system
of say tracking the invoices for
local government reimbursements
and to streamline how we uh.
How we review, respond back with
requests for questions and we uh
I have been very fortunate to
get under contract now, uh, to,
um, there's the text. OK, 400
category are for soil and water
conservation districts to do
work.
And, and so, but the soil and
water consation districts have
their own money.
And, and so we're contracting
with them to pay them more, even
though we gave them a pretty
good bump over the last few
years and included them in in
the legacy fund.
So
That's one question and you may
not know the answers, but I
mean, for, for that amount of
money you service 14,000. I feel
like Jerry Seinfeld episode when
he's got the thick glasses on.
I put 14, 5 acres you, you've
serviced uh in New Mexico for
that dollar amount.
Uh, Mr. Chair, for the, so the
soils of a small subset of soil
and water conservation districts
do a tremendous amount of work
for us and we like I one example
is the Sierra SWCD and this is
extra work that they're taking
on. It's not paying for their
base salaries, it's it's work,
it's contractual, it's work that
they will
Sub out and get contractors onto
projects, uh, it's, you know, we
have a complex network of
providers that are private
contractors that we pay for out
of 300s and local governments
and including SWCDs that will
take on thinning work, uh,
another example is the SWCD.
Up in Farmington, the San Juan
SWCD that has done a huge amount
of work on the San Juan River in
the Basque.
OK. And I'm just gonna do some
math here real quickly so for
roughly what we can just take
the entire budget roughly for
$100,000.
We can service 140,500 acres of
water, forest and watersheds,
right?
So we put a 1 million in, we'd
have 145,000 acres of.
Watershed restoration and forest
protection. That's in House Bill
2 under where the money was
spent and how it works.
I read the LFC Bible once in a
while.
Mr. Chair.
I hope I understand what you're
getting at. I'm sorry, I'm not
looking at let me let me read it
to you. Well, what, what, um,
when we report acres, we are
reporting all acres, including
acres that we are accomplishing
with federal funds and you know,
in essence.
The two drivers of our ability
to hit the target that is set.
Our, our cost per acre and
whether we have supplemental
funding from other sources such
as federal grant money, and I, I
recognize that's not clean.
It's, it's not a 1 to 1.
Um, but that's because what
we're
What we, this is a historical
practice that um predates the
forest and watershed restoration
Act and the Land of Enchantment
Legacy Fund, so the only funding
we ever got was capital and that
was really up and down. So in in
House Bill 2 in this legacy fund
just really went into full
effect this year without any of
that.
There does, there's, it says
others, so I don't know if that
25,000.
Dollars and other financing uses
it doesn't say other federal
funds in the budget that are
used to complete the 145, so I
guess I'd want a full accounting
how you're gonna, what that is,
right?
And we, we got to build a
system.
So we gotta have numbers that
are that are accurate and.
I know Charles is gonna fight me
in that.
Get the helicopter.
Um
But I, I, I think the state's
kind of at that point, um.
But some of these we need to
really gather up and then then
we need to look, we're gonna set
a subcommittee, so.
You know, I've talked to my vice
chair small and we're gonna set
a subcommittee so those members
that are interested I've already
singled out somebody like
Senator Campos, that's gonna
come from there and, and we're
gonna have to figure this out as
we go forward to build this in.
Uh, the non-reoccurring money
would be very simple for me to
figure out. I just wouldn't do a
reoff bill and send it to to the
forestry division and they have
plenty of money for a while.
Because that money is not
getting spent.
Um,
So I think we need to figure
out.
How we're gonna get the non
reoccurring money where it's
gonna come from, right? How much
can you service?
I, I'm really interesting to see
the soil and conservation
districts if you don't have the
staff to hire contractors to do
that in your subcontracting out
to subcontract out to another
contractor.
We're doubling the fees and who
knows what's happening if it's
Johnny's cousin that is now.
Driving by and throwing a.
Fence post in the ditch and
saying let's throw some dirt
over and we're gonna retain some
water and I've done my work for
the week. Uh, some of that stuff
really needs to get into the
weeds, but if you don't have the
staff to contract, then you're,
we need to build that for you.
Cuz we're relying on somebody
else when the time comes and we
say we need our, our list of
contractors and you don't have
them, you're relying on somebody
else to go get him.
I think you gotta build this.
Whole new system and I'm not an
expert on it, but you gotta
build this whole new system and
say, OK, how do we do that? And
then placement of some of those,
I mean.
We talk about here and we talk
about uh in the north, right?
But you look in the healer and I
think represents all members. I
mean, we got to kind of spread
those around just a little bit,
right?
And, and make sure that they're
spread throughout the state. I
mean, they're within 2 to 3
hours of a response time and if
they all gotta run to a bigger
response and it just takes them
a little more time with
equipment and vehicles, but
we've got to figure that out as
we move forward.
Uh, and then figure out how we,
how we build that whole system,
I mean.
And they were talking yesterday
in my vehicle about.
With what rescue training and
And how to certify them and.
How to get that done throughout
the state, so just not one
person is is hoarding that
licensing system that people can
get certified close to home and
not have to travel and take days
off to do that.
So think about the ultimate
picture that you would like to
see and maybe some other states
that have that.
As you move forward and then
figure out what you're really
gonna need an FTEs to run a
system like that. I think Ali
was in the room, so she probably
listening, so you need to think
about this too in in HSD's
budget minus the 34.95 for the
cake, um.
Uh,
And figure that out and and see
what it's really gonna take to
build this system, right? And
then we can take a look at it.
Uh, there's, I mean, reversion
money, there's, there's money
around to start this, right?
I don't know what a what a
helicopter cost for wildland
firefighting. Do you have any
idea?
Mr. Chair, I did a little
internet research and uh 25
million seems to be the number
that pops up.
25 million is cheaper than than
spending $100 million right? If
we can get containment quicker
than than anything else in in
saving houses and saving, I
mean, in this scenario, saving
the whole community and jobs and
businesses, uh, so sometimes
people are made to.
It may not get used a whole lot,
but that's a good thing. But
when we need it, we need it.
It's, it's one of those things
you have to have in your life
that you, you may not use it
every day, but you gotta have
it. And so.
We know we're headed in this
direction, so.
Start thinking, think big. I
don't mind big thinkers.
But then figure out how we're
gonna put it all together and
make it make sense economically
and in all that.
You and Ellie and so we're gonna
set a subcommittee.
Uh,
well, maybe tomorrow morning
we'll probably set that
subcommittee up and then set
them some dates and some time so
you guys need to, I know you
guys are having, I know you're
swamped.
As we head towards the session,
right?
And, and do this, we're gonna
have to figure it out, so.
OK. Ellie, any questions?
3495.
Thank you guys.
We're gonna talk all about
savings, right?
Uh, I thought that's what the
health care authority was
supposed to be is about savings.
Mr. GSD Secretary, you might get
a pass, but health care
authority needs to talk about
savings and how we're going to
reduce costs and in healthcare
in New Mexico.
Who's gonna start us off?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee with me up here
today we have Secretary Dust.
Director Chavez from RMD and
Deputy Secretary Castillo Smith
with the Healthcare Authority,
and I am Patrick Sandoval, the
executive director of the New
Mexico Public Schools Insurance
Authority, and with me is Miss
Martha Quintana, who is our
deputy director.
Turning to page 2 of our
presentation.
NSA is comprised of 88 public
school districts, 99 charter
schools, 10 higher educational
entities and 18 other
educational entities. The
authority served 77,400
employees and dependents with
46,264 lives insured under
medical insurance. NESC has is
made up of 12 FTEs and is
managed by an 11-member board of
directors consisting of governor
appointees.
New Mexico Association of School
Business Officials, educational
entities at large, AFT NEA, the
Public Education Commission, the
School Board Association, and
the superintendents association.
Moving on to slide 3.
Slide 3 displays the medical,
dental, vision, life and
disability claims costs.
Fiscal year 2025 and 2026 are
projected by Siegel, who serves
as NMSA's benefits consultant.
The projected costs are derived
from NSA member experience, data
contained in NMSA's data
warehouse and predicted industry
trends.
The transfer fiscal year 2024
and 2025 are 7% for medical.
10% for pharmacy and 4% for
dental for a blended trend of
7.8%.
Going to slide 4.
This slide displays the
distribution of planned paid
claims. 15% of members account
for 82.8% of the plan's claims
costs. When we compare the
claims costs from calendar year
2022 to 2023, we can see that
the per member per month cost
for outpatient hospital
increased by 9.7% due to
outpatient surgeries.
Inpatient hospital costs
increased by 8.5% due to
neoplasms, mental health, and
neonatal cases.
Drugs covered under the medical
plan increased by 19.4% due to
oncology treatments and
prescription drug spend
increased by 29.7%.
Due to specialty drug
utilization and increased
utilization of brand name drugs
to treat autoimmune disease such
as rheumatoid arthritis and
multiple sclerosis.
And non-specialty GLP1 diabetic
medications such as Manjaro and
Ozempic that are used to treat
diabetes.
Going to slide 5.
In total, 44.3% of members have
been identified with at least
one of the top 9 conditions.
The prevalence of these
conditions rose by 1.1% from
calendar year 2022 to 2023.
The medical costs for members
with these conditions represent
63.8% of total medical costs.
Members with respiratory
conditions experienced large
claims, primarily due to other
conditions, most notably cancer.
An underlying core morbidity
with cancer and kidney disease
as a primary condition drove the
cost increases.
The two cancer diagnosiss that
stood out were colon cancer and
breast cancer.
Going to slide 6.
The benefits rate increased
effective October 1st of 2024
will be 10%.
The NSA board of directors had
initially passed an increase of
15.53%. However, after a meeting
with a committee consisting of
the legislative Finance
Committee, legislative Education
Study Committee public education
department and the Department of
Finance and Administration, the
board reconsidered the rate
increase and reduced the rate
from 15.53% to 10%.
With the intent of submitting a
special appropriation during the
legislative session. The goal is
to pass future rate increases
below double digits.
Going to slide 7.
Slide 7 displays the cost of
property liability and workers'
compensation claims for fiscal
years 18 to 24, fiscal year 24
is un audited and fiscal year 25
and 26 are derived from our risk
actuaries and we're updated as
of December 31, 2023.
During fiscal year 2024, large
claims were paid out for sexual
abuse and molestation.
And property claims for the hell
losses in 2022 through 2023 are
starting to get paid as repairs
are completed.
Going to slide 8.
This slide displays property
losses for the last 10 fiscal
years during fiscal years 2022
and 2023, members suffered
projected losses of 557.3
million due to hall and wind
damage.
The loss attributed to FY 22 and
FY 23 cause our wind and held
deductible to increase from 2.5
million to 10 million with an
aggregate of $25 million for FY
2024.
That deductible has been reduced
for FY 25 to a self-insured
retention of 10,000.
Moving to slide 9.
Slide 9 includes sexual abuse
and molestation and
inappropriate touching claims.
These claims include faculty on
student, faculty on faculty and
student on student.
Fiscal year 2023 and 2024 are
still considered immature.
To help reduce these types of
claims, Nmseo was instrumental
in passing House Bill 128 school
personnel background and
training.
This bill strengthened reference
checks and reporting standards
of misconduct to PED.
PED ethical misconduct reported
incidents have increased from
148 in FY 21 to 348 in FY 24.
Nmia also procured an anonymous
reporting system through Stopit
Solutions in FY 2024 for school
districts and charter schools.
So far, 33 public school
districts and 11 charter schools
have implemented the system,
making this resource available
to 123,205 students.
Nmseia is currently looking at
enhancing the ARS by p
purchasing an upgrade for
members with less than 10,000
students, which would help
alleviate the administrative
burden for schools and charter
schools.
Going to slide
10
The risk rate increase effective
October 1st of 24 will be
14.99%.
And I'm sorry, that's not
October 1st, that was July 1st
of 24 was 14.99%. The NISA board
of directors had initially
passed an increase of 31.86%.
However, after a meeting with a
committee consisting of the
legislative Finance Committee,
the LESE Public Education
Department and the Department of
Finance and Administration, the
board reconsidered the rate
increase and reduced the rate
from 31.86% to 14.99%.
1%
With the intent of submitting a
special appropriation during the
legislative session.
The goal is to pass future rate
increases that are as minimal as
possible.
And this concludes the NSA
presentation, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Sure, would you like us to
continue or do you want to? OK.
So chair, vice chair, members of
the committees, hello again. Uh,
my name is Alex Castillo Smith.
I'm one of the deputy
secretaries of the Healthcare
Authority. I'm actually really
excited to be here, um.
You know, this is, um, we have
had the state health benefits
portfolio for about 6 weeks.
We're at the very beginning of
this journey.
And I just want to say before I
begin my presentations that part
of why I'm here today is that I
want to extend the opportunity
to all of you to hear your ideas
and recommendations and the
recommendations and ideas from
your constituents about how we
can improve the state health
benefits, um, that are provided
to 55,000 New Mexicans.
Um, again, I want to thank you
for your service to New
Mexicans.
So on page 2.
Um, these are just the topics
I'm going to touch on and I hope
you'll bear with me because this
portfolio is new for the
healthcare authority. Some of
this material is to help level
set, um, our understanding of
the state health benefits. And
so I'll talk a little bit about
the programs and services that
are provided under the state
health benefits, um, enrollment,
uh, revenue expenses, operating
income, cash and fund balances,
Tracks and things you're doing
in the 1st 90 days. You may
recall a very brief presentation
that the Healthcare Authority
secretary gave um in July. This
is the same material, but we
realized we did not have much
time with you. And so I just
wanted to take some opportunity
today and walk through this in
more detail.
Um, on page 3, again, this is
the mission vision and goals of
the new healthcare authority
which launched in July. Um, for
me, when I think about the work
of the state health benefits
team and the services that we
provide, it really is about
leveraging the purchasing power
and the partnerships,
particularly that we have as the
healthcare authority with
Medicaid, uh, which is the
largest pair of healthcare
coverage in New Mexico, and so
really thinking about how we use
the tools and the knowledge
And the expertise that already
exist at this department to, you
know, provide Medicaid coverage
to nearly 900,000 New Mexicans,
um, how can we use those
resources to improve coverage
for the 55,000 New Mexicans who
receive um health insurance
coverage through the state of
New Mexico.
On page 4, just a reminder of
all of the units that are
included in the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority. So
everything that was existing
within the Human Services
Department remains. So our child
support program, behavioral
health, Medicaid SNAP, LIHEA,
all those safety net services.
Um, from the Department of
Health, we, um, the healthcare
authority now has oversight
authority of the Developmental
Disabilities Supports division
and the division of health
improvement.
Um, and from the general ser
from the general services
department, um, we're
administering the same health
benefits, um, portfolio and from
the office of the superintendent
of insurance, the team that has
oversight of the healthcare
affordability fund. So why, like
why is that? Like why, why have
we grown so much in July and I
think to help answer that
question.
In part, if you go to slide 5,
it's because, you know, this
administration and Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham really
thinks that by consolidating
healthcare purchasing policy in
operations, we can improve um
the out of pocket cost that New
Mexicans are paying for health
care coverage. We can design
more member responsive health
plans, and we can hold carriers
more accountable.
Um, particularly because we do
have oversight of the Medicaid
program, which is the largest
payer of healthcare coverage.
One really small example of how
we are leveraging Medicaid in
these other areas of coverage is
that the state health benefits
portfolio, two of the larger
plans, Presbyterian and Blue
Cross. They're also Medicaid
managed care organizations. And
so when I am thinking about what
more do we need from Blue Cross
and Presbyterian in terms of
improving coverage for state
employees, I think our
department has a little more
leverage in those.
Conversations with Blue Cross
and Press because they're also
Medicaid managed care
organizations.
So slide 6.
Um, I am going to focus on the
first bullet point, the health
benefits portfolio, but you can
see that there's a variety of
different services and supports
that the healthcare authority is
now responsible for um with say
health benefits. There's life
insurance fund, uh, wellness
center, and employee assistance
program, voluntary supplemental
benefits like disability and
life insurance, um, the dollar
figures I
You see next to each of those
items is the what we understand
to be the annual cost to run
each of these um items. So for
example, it's about $450 to $500
million a year to run the, to
administer the health benefits
portfolio. So healthcare
coverage, medical, dental,
vision, prescriptions.
On slide 7, you can see the
enrollment um for state health
benefits. The color in purple
are the state employees that had
been that have been enrolled in
the state of New Mexico health
plan over time and the the gray
are the number of the local
public bodies, so the smaller
government jurisdictions.
I believe some higher ed
institutions since 2016,
enrollment has remained overall
relatively stable. What I see
when I look at this graph is a
slight increase in enrollment
across the local public bodies
in a slight decrease among state
employees. And one of the things
that we're going to be looking
into as the healthcare authority
is why? What factors are driving
a decrease in enrollment among
state employees and are there
way
that we can incentivize more
folks to enroll.
A way that would help um save
costs as well. I'll get to that
in a minute. So on slide 8.
Um, also going back to
Fiscal year 2016, you can see
the revenue and expenses across
the state health benefits plans,
the medical cover, the medical
vision, dental prescriptions.
Um,
You can see that there are a
couple years.
Where there are a few years
where the revenues exceeded the
expenses, and that is what we
want to see. That's where we
want to go with the healthcare
authority. But for most of these
fiscal years.
The expenses exceeded the
revenue, and that's why, you
know, it's contributed to this
long-standing um deficit in the
fund balance.
Um, the fiscal year 25
projection that is sort of
shaded includes what we expect
to see in terms of revenue with
the 10% premium increase, but I
really want to highlight that
this 16.5 million projected
deficit in this specific fiscal
year is very preliminary.
And I'll give you an example
why, you know, every quarter we
meet with the legislative
finance committee staff and we
do Medicaid budget projections,
and when we're thinking about
what the Medicaid budget looks
like.
The expenses and the revenues
that we get from the federal
government and from you all of
the state.
Part of our calculation and the
expenses is considering the
health status of the members who
are covered in Medicaid.
How healthy are they? um.
You know, how well are they?
What, you know, if you have a
sicker population covered in a
health plan, you need to project
for increased spending for that
plan. Um, what are the cost
factors, you know, my colleague
Patrick mentioned the the rise
in the cost of the diabetes and
weight management medications.
Um, that's another cost driver
that we have to consider.
Um, this 16.5 million projected
preliminary deficit does not
have any of that sophisticated
analysis yet. And so it's, it's
more crude and I would say we'll
come back to you and in fact
you're meeting with the LFC
staff in October for the first
state health benefits, um,
budget projection where I hope
to have some more of that
sophisticated analysis at that
time.
If you go to slide 9,
I wanted to illustrate.
Just at a very basic level, the
operating income of the of the
fund. So if you subtract.
The expenditures from the
revenue, what are you left with?
And again, you can see in
fiscally you're 16 and 19.
There there was a little bit of
an operating income.
Um, but in most of those years,
um, there has been that deficit
and you can see it's
It's been substantial in the
more recent years, and I want to
call your attention to the $87
million deficit in fiscal year
22, which is pretty significant,
followed by the $51 million
deficit and $300 million deficit
in fiscal year 23 and 24.
When you go to page 10.
That
That gap, that deficit of the
87051 million and the 30
million.
You'll see that reflected on
this graph on page 10.
This is
This, this took it was important
to me to be transparent with all
of you and important to
Secretary Carrie Armijo as well.
We wanted to share with you our
best understanding.
Uh by year, the revenue and
expenses stratified by the local
public bodies in the state
employees.
The, the bars in this graph are
the revenues.
In the shaded area behind the
bars.
I'm sorry, the bars or the
expenses.
In the shaded area behind the
bars, um, are the expenses, the
green, the green on top of those
bars.
Are the appropriations that with
your support, you all were able
to provide to help sustain the
state health benefits.
And so you can see in the fiscal
year 22, a little more
prominently that that bar in
fiscal year 22 doesn't reach the
top of the shaded area and that
gap is by $800 million gap on
that previous slide. Now the
appropriations that are
highlighted in green and 23, and
possibly even 24 helps to meet
some of that 80 million gap in
fiscal year 22, um, but I think
we're still trying to
You know, make up for that, and
that's, that's what we're trying
to think about what to do at the
Healthcare Authority is how to
have this fund be sustainable in
the longer term.
In slide in page 11.
Um, just a very brief overview
of a cash balance and a fund
balance. Um, these two concepts
are really important. Anytime
you're administering a plan.
Um, the cash balance is quite
simply the cash on hand to pay
the claims. It's a best practice
for um.
Medical plans like this, dental
plans to have 1 to 2 months of
cash on hand to pay the claims.
Um, I appreciate the support you
all provided in the
appropriation, so that when the
same health benefits fund came
to the healthcare authority on
the first of July, we did not
have a negative cash balance.
Thank you for that. Um, we do
have a $0 cash balance which we
can manage.
Um, but that.
The best practice we're
anticipating in fiscal year 25,
monthly claims cause of about
41.
$41,000 or so. Um, and so to be
able to have some of that cash
or like I'm I'm sorry, that's 41
million.
Um, so to have that cash on
hand, um, would allow us to pay
the claims as they come in.
And on the graph on the right,
you can see that cash balance
illustrated in blue.
The fund balance.
Is the overall financial health
picture of the fund itself going
back years and years like 2016,
2019.
Um, it's not just the cash on
hand, but what are the debts or
reserves that are in this fund,
um, and you can see here that we
are projecting very preliminary,
about a $10,000 fund um deficit
for the entirety of the fund.
This is still a very preliminary
number because claims are still
we're still collecting the
revenue on claims that came in
the last quarter of the previous
fiscal year.
With our partners at the general
services department and so I
certainly expect though, by the
time of the legislative session
and perhaps even in December
that will have um
A better understanding of the
state of that fund balance.
We see you all soon.
OK.
Um,
On page 12, I wanted
I wanted to raise your
attention. Another aspect of the
state health benefits.
That's directly felt by those
55,000 New Mexicans who are
enrolled in and covered in these
plans.
As we course correct the
administration of the state
health benefits fund.
You know, the state of New
Mexico provides certain tiers of
coverage, you know, they will,
the state of New Mexico as the
employer will pay for either 80%
of the health cost, 70% or 60%.
The higher your income, the less
that import that the less um the
employer contributes to health
care.
Um, I want to thank you all
again for the past several years
for raising the salaries for
state employees, um, that has
had.
Um, for some, um, a small share
of state employees, an
unintentional adverse impact of
shifting them from a coverage
tier where they got a higher
level of state support to a
lower level of state support.
The ranges, you know, so if
you're a state employee, that
makes less than $50,000 the
state will cover 80% of your
health insurance plans,
expenses, um, if you make 60,000
or over, the state will only
cover 60% of those costs.
Um,
These income thresholds are
outlined in statute.
And
You know, I anticipate and we're
currently working with actuaries
on the same health benefits, you
know, I anticipate that if
salary increases for state
employees were to continue to
increase in the future that it
won't be very long when there
will be a very small percentage
of state employees, um.
Having a.
80% of their costs paid for by
the state and so one of the
things that we're thinking about
the healthcare authority is to
what extent do we need to revise
these coverage tiers, um, and
you know, we look forward to
working with you all and the
staff at the Legislative Finance
Committee to think about that.
On page 13, again in the spirit
of transparency, I just wanted
to outline for you all, all of
the contracts that we've
inherited at the healthcare
authority from the General
Services Department to
administer the state health
benefits program.
You can see, um,
The total contract cost in the
12 month contract cost and many
of these are the carrier costs
like Presbyterian, CVS or P
pharmacy. Um, the ones
highlighted in yellow are
administrative functions in
blue, you see the contract for
the Stay well Health Center.
Um, the contracts have various
expiration dates, um, and you
can see the number of unique
members that are served under
each of those contracts.
And then on page 14, I'm just
breaking out specifically those
carrier cost, um, just wanted to
provide to you all the percent
admin.
That is associated with each of
those medical carrier costs.
Um, you can see here they range
from less than 1%.
To a little over 5%.
Um and that's, you know, we're
thinking about in a as we reduce
the cost to administer this
fund, do we have flexibility? Do
we have leverage
in.
You know, managing the ways of
these carriers, um.
You know, spend their
administrative cost.
No, I
On page 15, Secretary Armijo
talked about this when she did
meet with you all in July. Uh, I
won't go into each of these in
detail, but we really just
wanted to present to you what
the healthcare authority is
trying to do in the 1st 90 days
of administering this new
program.
I have the privilege of directly
being the deputy secretary that
has oversight of this program,
so it's very personal to me that
I do my best to support the
secretary in all the New
Mexicans covered under this
plan, um, to, to figure this out
and to do that course
correcting.
You know, this, these actions
reflect our desire to achieve
fiscal responsibility for the
state health benefits and offer
New Mexicans plans that meet
their needs.
Um, as I said, we're at the
beginning of this process, and I
know that the healthcare
authority will not be successful
if we don't understand the
medical and prescription cost
drivers that are leading to
these, you know, increases that
we've been seeing year over year
over year.
Um, there are tools and
resources out there that we can
implement to manage the cost,
um, and I'm doing my own
learning and discovering what
those are. There are your plans
like this are managed throughout
the country and they exist, and
I think this is just a unique
opportunity of the healthcare
authority to do some discernment
with people around the country
and to have them help us speak.
Figure out what we need to do.
Um, to manage cost.
And to manage utilization.
Um, it is not our intent to keep
asking for um a deficit, a
deficiency request for this
fund, your rear.
Um, on page 16, I had mentioned
that we're currently doing an
actuarial analysis of the health
benefits portfolio.
This kind of actuarial analysis
is the first kind of actuarial
analysis, but this
That the that the sea health
benefits has ever had.
Um, so again, um,
We were really excited about
what we're going to learn, the
historical enrollment trends,
historical utilization trends,
expenditure data, um.
And
The graph on the right
represents commercial prices as
a percent of Medicare.
And it's from an independent
study that
branded, um, but you can see
that in New Mexico.
Inpatient and outpatient
commercial prices as a percent
of Medicare in 2022 were about
250% of Medicare. What does this
mean?
Well, I don't, I couldn't really
tell you today in the top 10
procedure codes of medical for
state health benefits, um, in
inpatient, for example, I
couldn't tell you if a
semi-private room at an
emergency department is being
paid at 100% of Medicare, 300%
of Medicare.
I couldn't tell you that right
now, but we're getting actuarial
analysis support to tell us
that.
If we find that some of these
top procedural category codes
are well above.
Where they should be, quite
frankly.
Even if we can shave off a
little bit of those costs, just
a across just a couple of those
procedure codes, that in itself
will drive down the cost of
administering the fund. Um, and
that doesn't require any general
fund support. That doesn't
require any premium increase.
That just requires us doing some
research and analysis to better
understand, you know, what is
driving outpatient costs, for
example, and so we're doing that
line item.
Analysis across these different
clinical settings to help get us
informed and make a better
decision about how to administer
these programs.
On page 17, I think this is my
final slide. Um, I just wanted
to mention the interagency
benefits advisory Council,
otherwise known as the IBAC.
Uh, the healthcare authority is
the fiscal year 25 chair of the
IBAC committee.
And I'm really looking forward
to working with Patrick and and
Neil and um Valerie and others
across the IBAC entities, to
best understand how the
healthcare authority can support
them.
Um, it's my intention and
Secretary Armijo's intention to
form what we just loosely
calling like a governance
council where we can convene
these IBAC partners for more
strategic discussions. I'll give
you an example that Patrick
shared with me that salary tier
that I mentioned that governs
how much support state employees
receive in in their health
plans. It's the same, it's
mirrored for the public school,
um
Authority. So we could consider
as an IBAC team, you know, if
we're going to change in statute
that coverage tier for state
employees.
May it make sense to consider
mirroring that so it's equitable
across the other IBAC partners.
That's just a very small
example, but I'm looking forward
to learning more from my
partners at the IBA um and
reporting back to you about the
progress that we're making.
Um
With that, that's the end of my
remarks and I'll turn over to
Secretary Doucet.
Good afternoon. First I have to
start with an apology. I had
slides for everybody, but they
kept on changing while I was
coming down here and I wasn't
comfortable with those, so and
you don't have any slides for
me, so sorry about that.
Anything I put in front of you,
I want to make sure the flows
right and the numbers are right.
It's strange for me to be up
here and not talking about
healthcare benefits employees.
So this is new. What I'm going
to talk about is risk
management, um, risk management
And our payouts are been in the
news. We've talked about in many
committees. Last year, we
collected about $400 million in
what we thought we were going to
pay out last fiscal year. We
paid over about $66 million.
Currently, we have 2950 open
claims, as we know about
lawsuits, it could start today
and get finished in about 5
years, 3 years, 10 minutes, it
just depends. That's the hard
part about risk management of
knowing how
How much we're going to pay year
to year in our assessments. So I
want to first talk about some of
the things we're doing at risk
management.
Since I've been at risk
management, we've gotten 3 new
attorneys.
Which has been very helpful. Uh,
the governor allowed me to
create another GovX attorney for
risk management. The most
important thing that we did is
we hired a professional person,
Jeanette Chavez, who is behind
me, who's done risk management
for 40 years. She worked for the
city of Albuquerque, Association
of Counties, someone who's lived
and breathed this for 40 years.
So with my experience of
insurance term Department of
Insurance, workers' comp and GST
and the team that we've built
for
Risk management. I feel very
comfortable with what we're
going, what we're doing forward.
Some of the things we're doing
is since last December, we're
reserving a claim. It doesn't
sound like a big deal, but the
last administration stopped
doing that. It is a common
practice in this space to
reserve a claim. Every claim is
not formulaic. Every claim is
looked at.
And is a sign. What do we think
this might pay out. This helps
us manage the fund and when I do
have to raise rates or come in
front of this committee, I can
explain that better. That's a,
it's it doesn't sound like a
game changer, but it truly is,
can changer.
Hiring the the attorneys have
been very helpful. The other
thing we did, we raised the
rates for our outside attorneys
that we use, but we're holding
them to a higher standard.
When I first came in about a
year and a half ago looking at
this, some of the stuff I saw I
didn't like, we had people we
were hiring for attorneys who've
never been in a courtroom
before. So someone put a claim,
we pay the claim. We raised the
rates to see if we could get a
bigger pool of attorneys that we
could hire, which we did. But
we, the attorneys who work for
risk management who oversee
those claims and those attorneys
were hired to a higher standard
and looking at those, are we
paying that? Is it reasonable?
Do we need to take
This to court. And for example,
last month we saved, I, I would
say over $1000 on a claim
because of one of the new
attorneys just going, no, we
think it should be this. For a
long time, risk management, in
my view has been thought of. You
put in a claim, we'll pay the
claim. So if we owe it, we'll
pay it. Things that we need to
defend or take to court, we will
take the court. If things have
our liability, we know, we'll
take care of it. Anything over
50
$2000 cuts in front of me and
it's a page and a half to 2
pages narrative of what
happened, what our risks, what
are liabilities, what are our
defenses and us working with our
partners. The other thing of
risk management, we're gonna do
this year is
Talk to our partners and the
entities who
We're going to raise their
premium by over 10%. Myself, my
risk management director, and my
team are going to meet with
those entities and give them
this is your 3 to 5 year
history, which is the average in
insurance. This is your claims.
This is what we're gonna raise
it to. These are the reasons
why. But not just doing that,
but we're communicating more,
more training, more working one
on one with them. And one of the
things that we want to focus on
next year is hire and with
concentration on bullying. He's
in.
And sexual assault, which as we
all know for New Mexico State,
that's one of our biggest claims
that we've paid in some times.
So, risk management is just not
saying we're raising it.
Explaining why we're, we have a
due diligence of working with
those partners of trying to
reduce those rates. It's like I
said earlier, when a claim comes
in, we just never know when
we're gonna pay it. I wish I
could say last year was anomaly.
That's the first time in anyone
that's currently at risk
management that we would over
our
Assessments, which was 40
million. I'm hoping that was a
one one-year trend, but we're
trying to build it from the
ground up, and I'm very pleased
with the support of all of you
who've helped me in the
governor's office allowing me to
build the staff and hire the
right staff to do this. So
that's my presentation on risk
management and the things that
we're working on.
it
Thank you we'll start with
questions.
Represent Lente, you look.
Senator Woods
On page 12 of
This particular one.
You show
Uh, a chart there with the
healthcare premiums.
The question I have is.
Are we comparing apples to
apples as ever planned the very
same.
Uh chair, vice chair, Senator
Woods, the graph on page 12
illustrates by year the percent
of state employees, um, in their
in the um the percent of
employer contribution into their
plan.
So, for example, in 2019, 60% of
state employees.
Um,
Received 80% of employer support
in their healthcare coverage.
By 2023.
And had decreased to 35.6%. And
so the graph is inclusive of all
of the plans and is intended to
illustrate.
The change over time of the
amount of employer contribution,
state employees are getting for
their health coverage. Does that
help?
I think my question is.
Are we talking about the same
plan offered by, by all four of
these.
Well, it's Mexico average, but
APS.
Um,
New Mexico public er uh
Public
Service and
The general services department
where every plan was ever
planned, offered the same.
Was it a uh whether the premium
was, was changed or not, are we
talking the same plan?
Yes, I think I understand, uh,
chair, vice chair and Senator
Woods, this graph only
illustrates those New Mexicans
covered under the state of New
Mexico health plan. So
Patrick's, the New Mexico public
schoolsurance Authority, and the
retiree healthcare plan. They're
not reflected in this graph on
page 12, just those health plans
that were until the first of
July, administered by the
General Services Department.
OK.
You're going to take these plans
over under the healthcare
authority.
Every one of them is going to
come under your preview,
including
Public schools. Is that right?
And
So every one of them is gonna
come under your preview and
you're gonna use the, the, the
total number of people in all
these plans to negotiate.
for a cheaper
Uh
Provider pay.
Uh,
For prescription.
And my anywhere close to being
right on that.
A chair vice chair Senator
Woods, I'm, I'm very glad you
asked this question. The
healthcare authority only has
oversight of the state of New
Mexico health plans. So my
colleague Patrick at the New
Mexico Public Schools Insurance
Authority, the healthcare
authority does not have
oversight of those plans. The
healthcare authority doesn't
have oversight of the retiree
healthcare. Um, now, that said,
The healthcare authority is a
member of the IBAC, and so that
is where informally.
I am wanting to engage with
Patrick and others at the
Albuquerque Public Schools and
the retiree Healthcare Authority
to do what you were saying to
work with them to figure out how
we can improve vision coverage
and dental and drive down some
of those costs. But in terms of
formal oversight.
Um, the healthcare authority
only has formal oversight of the
state of New Mexico plans that
were previously administered by
the General Services Department.
So we're still going to have at
least 3 different plans out
there.
3, I mean, 3 different employee
plans. We're going to have the,
the state employees plan, we're
gonna have
The uh New Mexico school.
Uh, public school authority plan
and then we're gonna have the uh
Albuquerque Public School plan.
Is that right? 3 different
groups.
Involved in administering.
Three different plans.
Chair vice chair Senator Woods,
yes, that is correct, and
there's also a 4th being
Albuquerque Public Schools.
So I don't see what part
Other than the fact that we're
just putting them under an
agency, what part are we gaining
by putting them under your
agency?
Chair, vice chair, and Senator
Woods, um, there were previous
discussions, um, about the
healthcare authority having more
direct oversight of some of
these other insurance
authorities. Um, but did not
come to fruition during this
legislative session, and I'm not
taking a position today about
whether or not the healthcare
authority should have direct
oversight.
But what was ultimately decided
is that when the authority
launched on the first of July
that we would start with
improving healthcare that's
provided to the 55,000 New
Mexicans who are covered under a
state of New Mexico plan. And so
I think
If I recall the conversations
directly during this most recent
legislative session, there were
some concerns about going too
big, too fast, um, and I think
that's in part one of the
reasons why we are just starting
with the state of New Mexico
health care plans.
I, I do have or want to really
reiterate though, I am looking
forward to the work that I can
do with the other IBAC entities
to collaborate with them, um,
and working together to help all
the IBAC entities, um, being
strategically. I have a lot to
learn from them.
OK, on page, on page 13.
We've got some yellow things
highlighted there.
Can you tell me what's going on
there?
Chair, vice chair, Senator
Woods, yes, I can. The two
contracts are highlighting
yellow are the administrative
supports for the state health
benefits. So the first one, the
EASA Gov. That's ERISA.
Um, that is the, the contractor
that develops and manages and
conducts open enrollment, for
example. Um, they also, you
know, so if you have a question
about perhaps why a claim was
denied, um, or during the open
enrollment season, you know,
you're choosing your plan and
you're reviewing those plans.
It's the, it's ERISA, the
contractor that administers open
enrollment.
The 2nd contract highlighted in
yellow is Aon and
Um, they, they have worked with
the General Services Department
in the past to do some tests and
designs of the state health
benefit plans, um, and they have
worked with them in the past to
ensure compliance with federal
reporting.
OK, so the first one, I notice
it says flexible savings
account, so we're going to offer
a plan for those that do not
want to buy health insurance and
put it through a uh a flexible
savings plan.
Chair, vice chair, Senator
Woods, um, the state health
benefits portfolio currently
offers flexible savings
accounts, I'll, I'll give you an
example of a common one. If I
buy.
Um, there could be a medical
flexible savings account where
if I buy Tylenol or or other
sort of over the counter drugs
at my local pharmacy.
Um, I can pay for that with a
flexible spending account. It's
sort of
It's an account, um, that is
offered on my behalf by the
state, um, to help make certain
medical expenses more
affordable. So those the
flexible spending accounts or
the flexible savings account are
not directly related to
healthcare insurance coverage.
And there could be a flexible
savings account for
transportation. So I take the
rail runner from Albuquerque to
Santa Fe. It's often.
And I can get money deducted
from my paycheck pre-tax.
Where if I spend that on
transportation to and from work,
I get some savings there. So
there are different kinds of
flexible savings accounts.
I want to thank you very much.
As you can tell, I know very
little about insurance.
So I, I appreciate it, um.
I didn't, I didn't ask Mr. Dotta
a question one, because I made a
deal outside, so
I, uh,
I appreciate your attendance.
So thank you very much. I, I
really,
I really see health care just
keep escalating, and I don't
know other than negotiation, but
you can negotiate yourself to
where you have no health care at
all is what I'm concerned about
also with 500 doctors leaving
the state last year, that that
doesn't help, uh.
Us have better health care.
So
Maybe we should investigate the,
the root cause of that.
And try to maybe exit interview
some of those guys to figure out
why our doctors are leaving our
state.
And I know that we have a
medical school here.
And find out why we don't have
more medical students during the
residence in the state of New
Mexico.
So that we can keep them here.
Just thoughts. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Serone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a quick question for
Director Sandoval on NIPSI. Um,
on page 9.
Um,
It looks, looks like
Things are going well as far as
payouts, but the number of
claims.
Still high, a little bit high.
Um, so,
For this bill they asked for
training. Has all the training
been completed at the schools
and the contractors and
everything.
Mr. Chair, representative, yes,
um, that training is offered
through Vector Solutions, and we
also offer it through Palms and
Associates where it's an
in-person training or it could
be done online.
And those are being completed.
I, I think, did you talk on
this? I did, I must have missed
your, your, your presentation on
this part, it, everything looks
pretty good, it's going pretty
well.
Everything's going well for the
most part, um.
We're still not getting total
buy-in from schools or charter
schools on the trainings related
to House Bill 128, um, but we do
have a contract through Vector
Solutions. Those are the micro
trainings they have those
available if they do not want to
do those micro trainings we have
in-person trainings available.
For them, so we're still trying
to get the word out on House
Bill 120 House Bill 128, we've
done a lot of education through
like the school board
association and we're actually
gonna present to the
superintendents association next
month on House Bill 128, so
we're not letting down our
efforts on 128. We hope to
garner full participation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So as far as the ones
that don't have buy-in, do they
have a particular issue or?
I don't really know exactly what
the issues are, but I believe
the issue is it basically just
comes down to not having the
manpower at the school site.
And that's to really coordinate
the efforts and to track the
efforts, and I believe that's
where it's stalling. All right,
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. I just have a couple
of quick questions and trying to
figure out if the Sopranos are
rubbing, running the insurance
industry in New Mexico,
you said you gave me that look.
I'm, I'm looking at some of the.
Public school NES claims and
insurance coverage in our books
and page 8 under I.
And
And so we're paying $68 million
a year for excess coverage.
But we're not really getting the
excess coverage we need.
It seems 68 million for XX
coverage we had 30 43 million in
claims and $18 million refunded
back. I mean, why are we paying
the $68 million for the excess
coverage on top of this when
we're not.
Giving the full amount of the
excess coverage because the
excess coverage should have
covered everything and only got
18 million back.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the way our
memorandum of coverage is set
up, we do have a self-insured
retention that we have to meet
before we receive excess
coverage.
So those are the numbers we pay
in terms of our self-insured
retention before we get back our
exes. And the reason why excess
coverage has really ballooned is
a couple of different instances.
One is on the property side.
We are getting back close to 60
million in excess coverage for
the hell and wind claims that we
suffered down south, and we have
been getting excess coverage
back on sexual abuse and
molestation claims, but every
time we have an event that's
covered by the excess coverage
or excess coverage does go up.
In cost.
So they, they adjust it every
time you have an event or every
time a claim is paid.
It's when we have an occurrence
and when the occurrence is
reserved.
That what the payout's gonna be,
that's when it's adjusted.
And then I, I read in here where
you're actually.
Uh, you're 641,000 short as of
May.
31st, 2024, but you have 96
million invested in it in cash
reserve to pay longer.
Um, can you please explain to
me, Mr. Chair, what you're
looking at Joey may have to jump
up, but it's Joey's report, but
an AMC reported a risk fund
balance on May 31, 2024,
641,000. However, the agency.
Maintains $96 million invested
cash reserves and pays long-term
claims. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair, for clarifying that. Yes,
so.
We're looking at ending the
fiscal year at a deficit fund
balance of close to 7.5 million
in the risk fund. We do have a
high cash balance, but that cash
balance is used to cover our
reserves and also our IDNR and
in some of that cash balance we
also have long-term investments.
But they are, but that balance
is used to cover all of our
liabilities.
I, I don't know. I'm, I'm in
business, so I may be one of the
only dummies that actually reads
it.
An insurance policy and then
gets an umbrella and then gets a
pup on top of that and and the
risk I just.
I'm getting sued over someone
that got stuck in glue in an
elevator when it shouldn't be on
there and and so I I actually
look at some insurance stuff,
but why wouldn't we take that 96
million and use that as our
excess policy and not pay
somebody else for the excess.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that 96 million is
actually used to cover
liabilities and that would be
the claims reserves that haven't
matured yet or incurred but not
reported, that has not matured
yet and that's per governmental
accounting standings Board
statement number 10 that we need
to have that booked in order to
cover our liabilities. If we
used that, it wouldn't go
directly into fund balance. It's
considered cash balance. fund
balance is a little bit
different, as you know, um, but
we
If we were to go into that
model, we would be building fund
balance.
I don't know we're gonna have to
figure this out because if if if
we're paying $68 million in
excess insurance. It'd be
cheaper for the state to carry
that in a cash policy in excess
rather than pay it out and.
Only pay $43 million in claims,
we'd still have uh 40 41 million
left over in excess cash and not
have to pay the policy.
Um,
I think you guys need to look at
that on or do these go out to
bed? I mean, I don't know how
many does each school get their
own pot? Does it work? you your
school get their own policy or
they all under one umbrella
policy.
And to spread the the cost
throughout the school system.
As a cost to the school system
that I see is.
119,000.
That's 1 million, Mr. Chair.
Shit.
Uh,
I don't know, we better, we
better look at that.
I, I, I just that that's a
whopping number out there for
the amount of claims pay $119
million a year and then only pay
43 million in in claims, and I'm
reading from Joey's report.
I mean, that's a big difference
in in what we're spending and
what we're we're getting for
insurance costs, I mean.
Usually I think insurance may
have a 30% margin, maybe some of
them won't work on.
20 to 10 margins, right? That's
a huge margin in that market. I
mean, that's just, it's crazy.
And then, uh, Secretary Duchette
I didn't forget about you.
It looks like on on page 5 of
our our report.
That the, the largest liability
insurance increases are going to
be in the corrections
department, and that's 71%
increase.
I'm on page 5 of of
Joey's report. Corrections is
71% increase.
New Mexico State is a 43%
increase.
CYFD is a 36% increase.
And UNM is 67% increase. It's a
smaller number, but it's a
larger.
Overall number. University of
New Mexico hospitals a 40%
increase, right?
And roughly roughly tolls right
around 1011 million, right? But
then you're telling us that in
the liability fund.
That you paid out $50 million in
claims and you're expecting you
have 2900 and some claims
sitting there to be paid and,
and where do we figure out where
the
You're the one that may need
access to your insurance.
Mr. Chair, in FY 24 we paid out
66,776 281 cents in claims of
last year.
Uh, what my team has given me.
And
Yes, I have a, I'm looking at
the increase for those and those
are entities corrections because
of the work they do in New
Mexico State.
We know what happened last year
and there's a few other claims
out there that are in the paper.
CYFD, but we're working with
those partners, um, Mr. Chair,
of figuring out digging down
what type are the same type? Is
there a training we can do? Are
there other ways? And that's why
we're looking with my team to
assess them correctly on what
they need to pay in for this
fund. We had a new entity about
a month ago who wanted to come
into the fund and we did a deep
dive, which I don't think.
It's been done before of what
liability of their lost friends.
Why were they coming to us? Why
were we their last resort? Who
else did they reach out to and
we asked for a large sum of
number for this size of entity
was over $300,000 which we got.
So we're trying to do those
things as it's done in, in the
insurance world.
I, I, I just, I mean, those are
large increases, right?
I mean, those are red flags to
you.
To an agency saying you have a
71% increase on your claims.
I mean that's a large number. I
mean something.
And
You might have to turn that off,
uh, uh.
Something uh
Something's up in those agencies
to have those larger increases
of a year over year, right? I,
I, we know what CYAFD is because
that's in the paper every day,
but some of these other ones I
New Mexico State we can guess on
that one pretty much what that
one is at the University of
Mexico, we don't know what those
are.
But
I don't know, I don't know how
we, how, how we, if we have to
put more training money in what
we have to do into these
agencies to reduce the cost of
claims, uh, to do that.
And then it's interesting to me
is the the governor's liability
insurance increased by 202,000.
Was there any claims in the
governor's office that you know
of?
Mr. Chair, I do not know off the
top of my head.
I thought it might have been
over the special session.
So
Um, let me go to the healthcare
authority. Well, you never know
what the claims are.
Uh, on page 15 of of your 1st 90
days in action, right?
Are are these, you're gonna do
these bullet points.
But how, what order are you
going to do them as we head to
the session, right? because.
You know, you gotta have this
integrity audit, uh, actual
services, uh, hold monthly
meetings with the LLC, that's
fine, but until we get the data
to see where we're headed,
right?
Separate carrier billings from
state employees and LPBs, right?
How are we gonna get this done
with? How many days we have for
the session.
About 4 months.
4 months
Uh Sen Munoz, we're actually
starting several of these things
now, um, and they don't
necessarily need to.
It's sort of not dependent on
completing one to do another. We
can do these concurrently. We
intend to begin all these
things, um.
This first quarter of this
fiscal year, um, the actuarial
analysis that I mentioned and
during my remarks will be
completed in September and we're
in discussions about a claims
integrity audit, um, already.
Um, our administrative services
division is already thinking of
ways operationally to separate
the carrier building uh between
the same employees and LPBs. If
we can do that, that gives us a
better line of sight into the
spending.
Between those two different
entities. Um, we are certainly
reviewing statutes for the 2025
session. We've already done some
of that preliminarily, that's at
the governor's office for their
review, um.
We have onboarded um expert
consultants already.
To help us in the administration
of open enrollment and to advise
us on favorable contract terms
and options for the next
procurement. So that has already
happened as well.
OK, yeah, it sounds like you got
a pretty good handle on it.
You said you were in a deficit.
Why are you in a deficit already
after.
That's just barely switching you
over a year ago.
We, the 16.5 million I think is
what we are preliminary
preliminarily projecting as a um
A shortfall for fiscal year 25,
uh, Chair Munoz and as I
mentioned, that's
We
We need to better understand.
How real that number is, um, we
have not, we haven't done an
analysis on population health on
utilization, on cost drivers,
and so that number could change.
Um, and it's our intention to
meet with the LFC staff in
October for that first in a
series of quarterly budget
projection meetings.
Yeah.
Well, I, I think you and other
agencies need to get a handle on
that, I think DOH HSD, I mean,
every year in the section of
House Bill 2, there's a, there's
a little line that says that DFA
can cut you guys off from
spending.
In order to keep your budgets in
balance.
And that's in House Bill 2.
And so at some point we're gonna
have to start reconciling, you
know, you're saying you don't
know what you're over DOH
doesn't know what they're over.
CYFD doesn't know what they're
over, you know, they're all
about 15 million, so there's 45
million that adds up in a hurry.
I mean, that, that.
Page in House Bill 2, the DFA
has control to slow some of the
spending and start.
Not getting into these large
numbers, I mean, may have to be
used in.
The pages.
It's an F and House Bill 2 on
uh.
Page 3 that they that DFA has
that requirement, I mean.
I understand things happen.
And, and we may not know, but
it's just getting every agency
is just.
1520 million overspent. We don't
know where we're spending. We
don't, we, we can't even
calculate what balances are. I,
I mean, these are getting to be
large numbers that, that we got
control of them. We're going to
hit a plateau and and I don't
know if you're here for the
revenue numbers, but you know,
we talked about 600 million and
we spent $50 million for for
claims.
$150 million for Medicaid, I
mean.
Just backfilling agencies for
overspending or not knowing
where they're spending will take
away everything that you can
gain, so uh we just gotta get
some control on it. It may not
be a lecture team, but it's a
lecture to that needs to get
out.
And DFA has authority to stop
it.
And so we don't get to this
point in coming in a year and we
need supplementals right away
because we overspent our budget
and nobody was watching, so.
Thank you for your time today.
Anything else, Dad?
Um, I think Senator Munoz and
members of the committee and
vice chair, I just want to thank
you all for your time. As I
mentioned at the beginning, we
are at the very beginning of
learning about this fund, and so
I do want to hear from you all
about how we can make it better.
Um, I hear your concerns,
Senator Munoz, about the
overspending in agencies and
At the healthcare authority, I
do also have the privilege of
oversight of our administrative
services division in behalf of
that, on behalf of that team of
analysts and budget and finance
staff. I do just want to give
them kudos because the Human
Services Department has never
had a deficiency request and you
know, we are the largest agency
in state government, um, and
they are very proud of their
fiscal um stewardship of state
and general funds, and it's
their intent and mine.
And Secretary Armijos as well,
um, that we do a course correct
so that you, the state health
benefits fund in the long term
is sustainable and doesn't have
those deficiencies. So thank
you. Thank you all.
Thank you guys.
Um, refreshments are served.
and dinners at 5, right by the
lobby.
The lobby where you check in?
OK.
Socio, what did you say?
OK.
I'm just checking out that.
So we're adjourned.
