Where it comes.
All right, folks, we're gonna go
ahead and get started with our
next item.
So if you would, please take
your seats, all right. That
happened fast. Hopefully it's.
Happens as well my first day of
school. Um, so we have, um, the
work, so you may remember that
this was Senate Memorial 68, um,
did not pass the 2023 session,
but the developmental
disabilities Council went ahead
with the work, which is awesome,
including this presentation. So
thank you all for the work and
we look forward to the
presentation. So merit, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee, my name is
Mayor Andrews, and I'm your
senior policy analyst.
I'm honored to be here today
with this panel of presenters
from the restraint and seclusion
Working Group.
We are joined in the audience as
well by Deborah Poulin, the
attorney consultant and
facilitator from the working
group from the New Mexico
Developmental Disabilities
Council, and they wanted to make
sure to recognize her for her
work today and also to let you
know she's available for
questions if needed at the end
of this presentation.
Now, if you turn to tab 3 in
your binders, I'm going to begin
by providing a high level
overview of a staff brief I
prepared to provide some context
for the panel presentation
today. Then I will have our
panelists introduce themselves
and will facilitate some
questions and answers with our
panelists to dig into the
findings and recommendations
from the working group.
Restraint, defined as a physical
or mechanical restriction of all
or a portion of a student's body
and seclusion, defined as an
involuntary confinement of a
student alone in a room they
cannot leave are usually
implemented in an attempt to
keep students safe from
themselves or others.
However, the US Department of
Education reports there's no
evidence that using restraint or
seclusion is effective in
reducing the occurrence of
problem behaviors that
frequently precipitate the use
of such techniques and less
restrictive techniques and
de-escalation practices should
always be prioritized.
Attention to the use of
restraint and seclusion has
risen in the past 15 years.
Allegations of abuse in school
settings have increased from
advocates and families, both in
New Mexico and nationally.
Some school staff maintain that
the use of restraint and
seclusion is essential to
keeping all students and staff
safe. They argue that
restrictions on these practices
in New Mexico state law and rule
have fostered a culture of fear
at schools and made staff afraid
to touch students, even to
intervene in fights or prevent a
student from running away.
While we're straint and
seclusion is an issue that
impacts both general education
and special education students.
Data from the Federal Office of
Civil Rights illustrates
students with disabilities
experience restraint and
seclusion more than their
general education peers.
Page 2 outlines the history of
restraint and seclusion policy
in New Mexico. There is no
federal law comprehensively
regulating the use of restraint
and seclusion in schools. So
state law and rule provide
guardrails for their use in New
Mexico public schools.
Our public school code lacked
provisions addressing restraint
and seclusion until the 2017
legislative session when House
Bill 75 specified the conditions
in which restraint and seclusion
may be used in public schools.
Since the 2017, 2018 school
year, state law has required
schools to use restraint and
seclusion techniques only if the
following two conditions exist.
First, if the student's behavior
presents an imminent danger of
serious physical harm to the
student or others and to less
restrictive interventions appear
insufficient to mitigate the
dam, the imminent danger of
serious physical harm.
State law is clear that before
resorting to the use of
restraint and seclusion, a
school must use de-escalation
strategies and positive behavior
intervention supports to take
steps to actively avoid the use
of restraint and seclusion.
Now, moving to page 3, PD rule
related to restraint and
seclusion provides specifics on
the implementation of restraint
and seclusion techniques.
Broadly, rule requires all
schools to establish policies
and procedures for the use of
restraint seclusion, as well as
the documentation and reporting
of restraint and declusion
incidents in their safe school
plans. In addition, rule
requires schools to
appropriately train designated
staff regarding de-escalation
strategies, positive behavior.
intervention supports or other
comparable behavioral management
techniques, including the use of
restraint and seclusion. Code
also requires schools to
implement review procedures. If
an individual student has been
restrained or secluded, two or
more times within 30 days, as
well as an annual review and
analysis of all restraint and
seclusion incidents.
Finally, now moving to the top
of page 4.
Rule requires documentation and
reporting of all restraint and
seclusion incidents. Parents are
required to receive notification
on the same day a restraint or
seclusion incident occurred, or
at least within 24 hours of an
emergency prevents earlier
notification. Schools must
report to PED through Nova, all
instances of restraint and
seclusion including names of
students and school personnel
involved, the type of restraint
used and if law enforcement was
summoned.
It's important to note that
despite these reporting
requirements, New Mexico
currently has no reliable data
on the use of restraint and
seclusion in public schools,
which will be discussed by our
panel later.
Now moving to page 5.
While the keeping all Students
Safe Act, which proposes to ban
seclusion and limit the use of
physical restraint in schools
has been introduced by Congress
for several years. It has never
passed. Although there's no
federal law addressing the use
of restraint and seclusion in
schools. The US Department of
Education maintains guidance on
the provision of restraint
seclusion. The guidance stresses
that restraint and seclusion
should only be used when there
is a threat of imminent danger
or serious physical harm to the
student or other.
And should occur in a manner
that protects the safety of all
children and adults at school.
Additionally, restraint or
seclusion should never be used
as discipline or punishment as a
means of coercion or
retaliation, or as a
convenience.
The bottom of page 5 through the
end of the report on page 7,
discusses the findings and
recommendations from their
experience and seclusion working
group.
As Che Romero mentioned, the
working group was formed as a
result of Senate Memorial '68,
which was introduced in the 2023
legislative session but did not
pass. Although the memorial was
not adopted, the developmental
disabilities Council, which was
a group requested to convene the
working group, convened the work
group regardless and began work
in November 2023.
Now, instead of going through
the 7 findings of the working
group report in the multiple
recommendations to each finding
myself. I'm gonna ask each
panelist to dig in through
questions and answers I will
facilitate. If you turn behind
my brief to appendix one, you
will see the entire report of
the restraint and seclusion
working group.
But first, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I'd like to
ask the panelists to introduce
themselves and also explain why
they decided to join the working
group, and we'll just go and
order starting with Steven. So
good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members, my name is
Steve Starkovich. I am the
current deputy superintendent
for Alma Gordo Public Schools
when I started this work, I was
the assistant superintendent for
special programs and services
for Carlsbad municipal schools,
I guess
My why is that throughout this
work I've shared with this team
examples of staff doing their
jobs according to our
interpretations of the laws only
to face investigations,
disciplinary actions, or
terminations due to
misinterpretation of the rules.
Even when staff are found to
have acted correctly, many
choose to leave the profession.
Understandably, because after
such stresses, who would want to
return, and we all know we have
a need for special ed staff in
general, teachers and students.
Um, I truly believe that most
districts, and I want to be
clear that I am not speaking for
every district, nor am I the
voice for every superintendent,
but I truly believe that all
districts want is clear guidance
on restraint seclusion to
effectively support both staff
and students. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Laurel Nesbitt, um, and
I'm the mother of a young adult
with autism. I am the daughter
of a magnificent teacher, um,
who I miss very much. She's been
gone for a few years now and I'm
an attorney with disability
rights in New Mexico, where my
practice includes representing
students with disabilities and
their families in special
education matters. Um, so one of
the main things that I, that I
do there. I have been very
grateful to be included with
these other smart folks.
discussing this very important
topic, and I really thank you
for hearing us on this topic
today. Um, there are, as far as
my reasons for, for being here,
um, you know, they're, they're
many, but a couple of key
reasons that are related is, you
know, the point that, that I
believe Merritt was making
before about, um, the
disproportionate, um, experience
of students with disabilities
and students of color, um, of
restraint and seclusion because
that is a population I serve and
that's near and dear to my
heart, both for person.
and professional reasons. Um,
and anecdotally and according to
reports like what, uh, Merritt
was talking about the civil
rights data collection. I know
that this is something that
students with disabilities, um.
Experience at a much higher
rate.
Um.
The
The second reason that I am, uh,
and, and actually just an
extension of that if we, I think
a lot, but there's a lot of
discussion in LASC about how we
improve outcomes for students
with disabilities. One of the
ways that we really want to
improve outcomes is having
students at school with their
behavioral needs well supported
and not subjected to practices
like restraint and seclusion. It
has a direct effect on the
outcomes of students with
disabilities.
But the second reason that I
find this work so important is
that even under the current
limitations that are placed on
restraints seclusion in our law
and rules.
Um, both practices continue to
be used too broadly.
Speaking from my own
perspective, I believe that they
should be on reality, what they
are on paper, emergency
interventions of last resort.
Uh, they should not be used as
punishment, as Merritt mentioned
before, as a form of discipline,
and we'll talk more about that,
I think today, about where the,
the rule is housed and how
misleading that is, um, should
not be used as a way of gaining
compliance from students, or as
a routine behavior intervention
or a convenience for, um, for,
for staff and administrators.
Um, an instance of restraint or
seclusion when it occurs should
be seen as a symptom of
something gone wrong.
OK. Something that is avoidable
going forward with more work on
the part of team members who can
put that work in. It should be,
it should clearly signal to the
student's team that there's a
need to design or revisit an IAP
or behavior plan or otherwise
ensure that effective behavior
supports are in place so that a
student is not repeatedly or
habitually restrained or
secluded at school. Thank you
very much.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members. My name is Miguel
Lozano. I serve as the chief
counsel for the Office of
Special Education at New Mexico
Public Education Department.
For my part, um, the reason that
I, I've specifically served on
this stakeholder group is sort
of evidence that the New Mexico
Public Education Department
understands that students with
disabilities are um uh do uh are
treated in this fashion in
greater numbers than their
general education peers
restraint and seclusion, just
anecdotally, um, we know that it
occurs with those types of with
students with disabilities more
often than their general
education peers. There's no, um,
sort of the the public.
Education Department has no
illusions about that. Although
we do understand that there's
going to be restraint and
seclusion um to other students
that may not have disabilities
either through the IDEA or um
504, but uh we also know that in
terms of who this impacts the
most students with disabilities
are, are some of the primary um
per individuals that receive
this as a behavior intervention.
From that perspective, the
Office of Special Education, New
Mexico Public Education
Department.
Understands that we need to push
out more positive behavior
supports and interventions for
students to avoid ever having
the need for um these types of
interventions, understanding
that they, as Ms. Nesbitt said,
can even in inappropriate
circumstances can put a student
in a situation where they no
longer feel safe at school, in
their classroom with a
particular individual and so
positive behavioral supports and
pushing those out to um our
practitioners in the field is an
important part of what the
officers.
Special education um would like
to do and want and his is
working towards today. And so
just, um, you know, although
there were other members from
the public education department
on this, um, stakeholder group.
Um, I have, I have been um
involved throughout and
certainly the the director of
the Office of Special Education
has been focused on this type of
work in order to hopefully
eliminate the need for restraint
and seclusion altogether, but
certainly in only those
instances that are emergent and
are to protect the safety of
students. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee members.
Thank you so much, uh, for being
here. Uh, my name is Michelle
Trigembo, and I'm the special
education umbud for the state of
New Mexico. I work for the
Developmental Disabilities
Council and, uh, we worked with,
uh, Miss Poulin to make sure
that this work occurred. Um, my
office is, um, advocating with
and for families with students
with disabilities to ensure that
they feel safe.
At school
To make sure that they feel
their needs are being met. Uh,
currently my staff has 5 staff
members and 3 consultants, um,
with over 240 years of
experience in both education and
advocacy. Uh, we have been
supporting over 500 we have over
the last 3 years supported 550
families in 74 districts in the
state of New Mexico,
um, and we support them in a
multitude of ways. We could
attend.
Meetings we give them advice.
Several families have called
over the years, and it's just a
part of their story that they
Expect their child to be
restrained, that it is, um, it
has been explained to them that
it is a requirement of the
school to do that to ensure
their own safety or the safety
of the school. It's, it's not
even necessarily the reason they
call.
But it is, you know, part of
what we work on, of course,
because we do want families and
children to feel safe in their
environments, which will improve
their learning opportunities.
We do also offer family nights.
We attend 504's safety plans. We
do all of those pieces again to
help families. Uh,
Restraint and seclusion is of
particular importance to both
the developmental disabilities
Council and specifically my
office of Special Education
Umbud, um, as you can see on the
report on page 3, special
education students are
disproportionately restrained
and secluded. Um, most recent
federal reporting on data
reported that 80% of students
subjected to physical restraint
in public schools are special
education, and that 77
10% of students subjected to
seclusion are students with
disabilities.
Repeated restraints or seclusion
of a single student with a
disability, um,
Or a serious concern in the
community, to our parents, to
our students, and to our
educational community. This is
not the direction we want to go.
We want to ensure that we can
work to eliminate restraint and
seclusion and increase, um,
De-escalation and other
strategies so that we do not get
to emergency intervention, um,
situations.
Good morning. My name is Amanda
Owens. Um, I am a parent of a
child with a disability. And I
also work as a teacher. I teach
4th grade, um, in the public
schools in New Mexico, uh, and I
decided to work with restraint
and seclusion working group
specifically because of my
experiences as a parent, but
also as a teacher, um, I've seen
restraint and seclusion be used
frequently as forms of
discipline or as interventions,
but I feel
that it has lacked any sort of
follow through that's designed
to actually support the
students' success in school and
prevent
Restraint and seclusion from
continuing to occur. I, um,
Also feel that through the
accounts, many parents provided
in the working group. It was so
clear how
Much of an impact, instances of
restraint and seclusion had on
students and their families, and
how it became this cycle where
it just continued and the
expectation was that it would
continue. And my concern also
that I hope that could be
addressed by the working group
and the recommendations.
Was that there is not a lot of
data, or at least accurate data
on instances of restraint and
seclusion in the state, and that
makes it really difficult to
provide guidance and support to
school staff and to find a
different path forward where
restraint and seclusion are not
used frequently as interventions
with students. Thank you.
Thank you all so much.
Laurel.
Before we get into the restraint
and seclusion working group in
the report. Can you begin by
providing some context for the
chair and the committee on how
restraint and inclusion are
currently defined under statute.
Yes, thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the
The, what I would like to do is
go over the key terms restraint
and seclusion as they are
currently defined under our
statute and rule. And also
briefly touch on those same or
those, uh, the counterparts of
those definitions, uh, in both
the keeping all Students Safe
Act, which I believe Merritt
mentioned before, and also, uh,
which is a federal bill that has
not yet passed but has been
through several rounds. Um, and
also on the, uh, US Department
of Education's, uh, office.
For civil rights, uh, guidance
on, on those definitions under a
dear colleague letter from 2016,
a little bit old, but.
It's still there. Um,
Under and I realized Merritt
also went through this already.
I want to break down these
definitions a little bit for
you, but under current New
Mexico law and rule, physical
restraint means the use of
physical force without the use
of any device or material that
restricts the free movement of
all or a portion of a student's
body. But physical restraint
does not include physical
escort. I want to note here that
physical escort is not defined
under our statute, which was a
matter of some significant
discussion within our group.
Uh, we'll touch on that more
later. Um, you can sort of break
down this definition of physical
restraint into a few components.
Number one, physical force.
Number 2, that restricts without
the use of any device or
material, the free movement, 3,
of all or part of a student's
body, and number 4, not physical
or not physical escort. Um,
Turning for a moment to the OCR
definition, the Office for Civil
Rights definition, uh, in that
2016, dear colleague letter.
The definition of physical
restraint is, um, physical
restraint refers to a personal
restriction that immobilizes or
reduces the ability of a student
to move his or her torso, arms,
legs, or head freely. The term
physical restraint does not
include a physical escort, so
that is um.
The same as our as our law. Um,
but it does go on to define or
to try to address physical
escort. Physical escort means a
temporary touching or holding of
the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder,
or back for the purpose of
inducing a student who is acting
out.
Uh, to walk to a safe location
at the end this comes from 2016.
But this is similar from
Similar to the definition in the
keeping All Students Safe Act,
um, physical restraint means a
personal restriction that
immobilizes or reduces the
ability of an individual to move
the individual's arms, legs,
torso, or head freely, except
that such term does not include
a physical escort, but the note
what else uh the keeping all
Students Safe Act, uh, includes,
does not include a physical
escort, mechanical restraint, or
chemical restraint. OK, so that
definition goes on to make other
exclusions.
Um, under the under CASA, the
keeping all Students Safe Act,
physical escort is like the OCR
definition defined as the
temporary touching or holding of
the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder,
or back for the purpose of
inducing a student who is acting
out to walk to a safe location.
OK. So that's physical
restraint. I'll try to quickly
go through, um, seclusion as
well. Um, really kind of noting
too that seclusion has been a
particular point of interest for
both OC.
OCR and the keeping All Students
Safe Act, which actually has
proposed to eliminate the
practice of seclusion in its
entirety. I think it's important
to sort of note that that that's
a, a, a, a major distinction in
the in those approaches. Our,
um, definition of
Uh, oh, you know, actually,
before I go to seclusion, let me
just quickly address mechanical
restraint, which is defined as
the use of any under our
statute, mechanical restraint is
defined as the use of any device
or material attached or adjacent
to the student's body.
That restricts freedom of
movement or normal access to any
portion of the student's body
and that the student cannot
easily remove, but mechanical
restraint does not include
mechanical supports or
protective devices. And you can
see where other definitions
might need to be, uh, in place
there for some of that. Um,
seclusion now, turning to
seclusion, it's currently
defined in our law to mean the
involuntary confinement of a
student alone in a room from
which egress is prevented.
And then the definition goes on
to exclude certain practices
from seclusion. You can break
down seclusion into the
following components. Number
one, involuntary confinement of
2, student alone in the room, 3,
from which egress is prevented
and 4 is not use of a voluntary
behavior management technique,
including timeout, uh, location
as part of students' education
plan, individual safety plan,
behavioral plan, or IEP that
involves students separation
from a larger group.
For the purposes of calming, big
mouthful there, and you can sort
of see where the gray areas are
that are, that are, uh, working
group really had to talk about
and that we, you know, not a
spoiler really here that we're
going to talk more about the
need for greater clarification
there. In the, in OCR, the OCR
definition.
Um, seclusion refers to the
involuntary confinement of a
student alone in a room or area
from which the student is
physically prevented from
leaving. It does not include a
timeout, which is a behavior
management technique that is
part of an approved program
involves the monitored
separation of the student in a
non-locked setting and is and is
implemented for the purpose of
calming, OK, so that is the OCR
definition and then under the
Keeping All Students Safe Act,
the term seclusion means the
involuntary confinement.
of a student alone in a room or
area from which the student is
physically prevented from
leaving.
Except that such term does not
include a time out. OK, so that
is that sort of the counterparts
that you that you can see there
and um and some of the murky
waters that are, uh, that the
rest of our members will talk
about in this presentation.
Thank you, Laurel.
Now let's turn to the restraint
and seclusion working group
report and recommendations which
are in your binder under tab 3
behind the staff brief.
Michelle, can you please provide
a high level overview of the
findings and recommendations
that begin on page 4 of the
report, walking the committee
members quickly through the 1st
5 findings.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. Uh, and
again, uh, please know, uh,
there will be more information
added on. I'm just trying to go
through the report and ensure
that you know where the findings
are, uh, and so I will be
noting, uh, page numbers.
Uh, please also know that I, in
my experience with this working
group, uh, it was a very focused
and passionate group that um as
we worked, we had very difficult
Discussions, uh, with many
differences of opinion, but we
all had the responsibility and
the respect of each other to
honor the different lenses and
perspectives. Uh, there were
positive steps recommended in
this report that the working
group hopes will be considered
and pursued to ensure New
Mexico's laws, rules, and
guidance are clear, effective,
and aligned with the needs of
all students and not just
students with disabilities.
Um, and again, I am giving a
high overview of all the
findings. Uh, finding number one
is on page 4 and rolls to page
5. our first finding the use of
restraint and seclusion
practices in schools is an
important health and safety
issue for New Mexico students,
families, and schools. The
working group uniformly agreed
that improving state law rules,
guidance and training of
restraint and seclusion is an
important issue for New Mexico
schools.
Restraint and seclusion are
practices which can cause
lifelong scars, physical and
mental for students. They are
also practices which can
physically and mentally harm
school personnel. During the
meetings, the group heard
heartbreaking stories from both
parents and, uh, school
administrators about having
children restrained or secluded.
Parents whose children were just
that have disabilities told
tragic stories that
led in some cases should the
child not being able to attend
school at all.
The working group also heard
from school group members about
the uncertainty about state laws
and rules, the need for guidance
and the need for training.
And the negative impact that
these unt unmet needs have on
school personnel as well, along
with families.
This the working group does
recommend, uh, setting goals
based on data to reduce and
eliminate the use of restraint
and seclusion in public schools,
improved behavior support so
that de-escalation is not
needed, but then also improving
training and knowledge of
de-escalation techniques. Um,
examining other state laws and
rules, uh, related to restraint
and seclusion to again uh create
clarity, uh, with these, um,
issues.
with these events. Finding
number 2 is also on page 5, New
Mexico does not have data on
restraint and seclusion in
public in the public schools.
Data is essential to
understanding the frequency of
restraint and seclusion and who
it's happening to.
Without data, it's impossible to
set baselines and form
measurable goals.
Prior to 2020.
There was no reporting
requirement for the public
education department or for
schools.
Now the public education
department, um, provide reliable
data because some districts
report it as school discipline
in SARS, uh, when it should not
be part of discipline.
Nova is a new school reporting
system, but right now it's
unclear if the new system will
um
Positively impact those
inaccuracies and allow for um
clarity of how to report those.
Again, the clarity of the
definitions of the
interpretations, as was
mentioned earlier, continues to
be a concern.
The working group does recommend
that PE be provided with
technical and staff resources to
work with districts to complete
correct reports on how many
restraints are happening and to
whom.
We also recommend that
There be a requirement that
restraint is not reported as
school discipline and that they
published, collected,
non-identifying data on
restraint and seclusion on the
PED website. Uh, Mr. Lozano will
be, um, sharing more on data
later in this presentation.
Also on page 5 is finding number
3. Additional oversight and
monitoring from PE, uh, of the
use of restraint and seclusion
in school is needed, including
from the Office of Special
Education for students with
disabilities. Again, this is,
um, law and rule that applies to
all students, not just students
with disabilities.
Currently there are no over
there is no oversight by PE to
ensure districts and schools are
following state law and rule
requirements up until recently,
the special education division,
uh, disclaimed responsibility
for implementation and
monitoring of restraint and
seclusion laws and rules,
stating that it was a general
education, law and rule, and,
um, another group's
responsibility.
This has left significant gaps
and leaves the state without
needed information to support
districts and schools.
The working group does recommend
regular monitoring by PPE to
identify areas in which schools
need support around restraint
and seclusion and provide
technical assistance, uh, and
training to eliminate the use of
restraint and seclusion.
That the public education
department and the Office of
Special Education, assign at
least one FTE to monitor and
offer assistance as mentioned to
schools and districts.
The public education department
also needs to develop a special,
a state special education rule
that clearly addresses the use
of restraint and seclusion for
students with disabilities. The
rules should address clearly
that the restraint and seclusion
law and rules apply to students
with disabilities contain
policies and procedures about
inclusion of restraint and
seclusion in IAPs and prohibit
the use, um, as a planned
intervention. They do uh
That terminology within behavior
improvement plans and when it
will be used, so that is
currently a practice in schools.
Finding number 4 is on page 6,
school board policies and
procedures for restraint and
seclusion need to be reviewed by
the public education department
and be more readily available to
parents.
Excuse me, a school district
boards and charter school
governing authorities are
required to develop policies and
procedures on restraint and
seclusion.
They then report whether they
have those policies and
procedures in the required
school safety plan, which is
then submitted to the public
education department.
The restraint and seclusion
policies and procedures if
developed, may or may not be
accessible to parents and
community members. Through
discussions, the working group
heard that many parents,
teachers, district and school
staff do not appear to have
solid knowledge on the
requirements and limitations on
restraint and seclusion
currently.
The working group recommends
that improved monitoring by PE
to include PE reviews of each
school's board-approved
restraint and seclusion policy
and procedure.
We also recommend that schools
post their restraint and
seclusion policy.
Uh, and that the public
education department develop a
state rule to provide written
notice to parents explaining the
state restraint and seclusion
requirements. Um, this should be
provided to any parent whose
child has been restrained or
secluded.
Finding number 5 is on page 7
and 8 of the report, practice
and implementation of restraint
and seclusion requirements, uh,
seem to be different around the
state. Some schools are
knowledgeable and should be used
as role models. Many schools and
their staff are not following
current expectations and
requirements for restraint and
seclusion.
There is no state data again
mentioned already on restraint
and seclusion, and the following
information that I'm going to
cover only comes from the
individuals from the working
group.
Um, there are multiple issues at
play when discussing restraint
and seclusion.
Required parental notification
is sometimes not happening at
all. And when it does happen, it
can lack very relevant
information. Many parents
believe, again, as I mentioned
earlier, that their child must
be restrained, that it's a
requirement.
Um, currently state rules
require oral and written notice
to parents on the day of the
restraint or seclusion or no
later than 24 hours as merit
mentioned earlier, uh, and then
written documentation must be
shared within 2 days.
Um, some districts have their
own procedures that do not align
with that. And so making sure
that the public education
department, uh, reads those
policies and procedures that
could be, um, dealt with on the
front end.
um, documentation is supposed to
cover, uh, behavior, people,
locations, and activities that
may have triggered the event.
Other precursors that may have
triggered the event, the type of
restraint or seclusion technique
used and how long.
It is used.
Currently there is no state
template for this documentation.
There is also an issue about
prone restraint and um and that
is when you put someone on their
face or their front front of
their body.
The law does state that any
technique should not impede a
person's ability to breathe or
speak, but it does not
specifically state prone uh
restraint is not is um
It should not be used. The
working group does recommend
that PE create templates for
restraint and seclusion notices,
documentation, and reviews for
schools, even if it is just for
guidance, but that they be
created and can be available for
districts across the state. Uh,
the group also would like to
amend the statute and rules to
clearly define prone restraint
and create clear provision
banning prone restraint and also
improve PED monitor.
of restraint and seclusion to
improve training opportunities
and support for schools.
Thank you.
Thank you, Michelle.
Laurel, can you please finish
walking the members through the
report, beginning with the 6th
finding on page 8. Yes, thank
you, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, and, and Meredith,
it's OK, I'd like to back up to
make one very quick comment
about the third finding, which
was uh PED monitoring just to
add one little bit, which
actually, Mr. Lozano may be a
uh, addressing this as well. But
it is important, I think, for
the committee to, uh, remember
that, um, that an
Annual review of restraint is
already required from all LEAs
under the current law. Um, a
simple way for PED to monitor,
um, the practice of restraint
and seclusion would be to, to
really review those, um, those
annual reports or reviews with
Fidelity, um, these annual
reviews of restraint that are
submitted to PED, and I think it
would be helpful to understand
where that process sits right
now to understand that there is
Information that could be
gleaned from that right now. But
currently, um, districts are
required to, um, conduct an
annual review and analysis of
all incidents in which restraint
or seclusion techniques were
used, including the number of
incidents, the type of incident,
personnel involved, the need for
additional training and student
demographics. OK, just a
reminder on that part of the
law.
As far as um the next, the next
finding, which is, uh, training,
the need for training.
Um, this is a, this section
focuses on this need for
additional training for school
personnel to be able to limit
and prevent the use of restraint
and seclusion. I, I think there
were a lot of difficult uh
discussions that are, that our
committee engaged in. But one
thing that I really really think
we all agreed on is the need for
additional training. Um, the
question then becomes, what is
that training and who is
trained? And those are some of
the points that are addressed
in, in, um, well,
At least, uh, prompted in this
report. I think it is a
continuing question about what
that training would look like
and who would receive it. But I
want to go over, um, the
training just a little bit.
Under our rule,
um, the, it, it describes the
training uh piece in this way.
The restrain or seclusion
techniques that are used in an
instance of restraint or
seclusion should be used only by
school employees who are trained
in de-escalation strategies,
positive behavioral intervention
in sports and the safe and
effective use of restraint and
seclusion techniques, unless an
emergency does not allow
sufficient time to summon those
trained school employees.
Um,
I wanna, for, for the moment
just kind of skip the question
of what what the training is or
should focus on and instead
start with who, who gets
trained.
I think very often, and this was
a big discussion in our group,
very often the folks who get
trained are the folks who need
the training, perhaps the least,
their special education
personnel, and a lot of, there
was a lot of discussion within
our group about expanding that
beyond, uh, special education
personnel, uh, since, uh,
certainly anecdotally, we would
say that a lot of restraint is,
is, uh, undertaken that, that
restraint very often takes place
in the general education
classroom or in, in specials or
other.
Settings in which, um, students
are not supported by special
education staff directly
necessarily. Um,
So the discussion was had that
there should be at least some
fundamental training that was
provided to, uh, regular
education teachers, educational
assistants, administrators, and
other school staff, even like
cafeteria staff and bus drivers
who need to better understand
how to meet the behavioral needs
of students and what those needs
might be, you know, what, what
particular disabilities, you
know, what characteristics,
behavioral characteristics might
flow from, from a student with
that, that sort of disability. I
think being able to read
Those staff for that experience
of the, the behavioral
presentation of students does,
would really, really help, um,
and go quite, quite a long way
toward addressing what Steve was
talking about before about the,
the fear and the concern of
staff and the and also the, um,
you know, what we, what none of
us want, which is people leaving
this profession and not not
being ready to, to face this
challenge. So, um, really
expanding that training, um, is.
is very important. Um, 01 thing
I forgot to mention too is, of
course, school, school resource
officers and school security
guards are sort of on the front
line of folks who should be
receiving training, uh, that
would ready them for the kinds
of behavioral, uh, needs that
students might have.
Um, the question, uh, one
question becomes, you know, what
should the training be, um.
You know, I want to look again
at the rule language which
describes this training as being
de-escalation strategies,
positive behavioral intervention
supports and the safe and
effective use of restraint and
seclusion techniques. Um,
importantly, and I think Mayor
already kind of emphasized this
in, in her excellent high-level,
um, introduction, but the, the
rule leads with um de-escalation
strategies and positive
behavioral intervention
supports, not with, uh,
necessarily the, the element.
of safe and, um, appropriate use
of or sorry, safe and effective
use of restraint and seclusion.
In other words, the, you know,
really, we, we talked a lot in
our group about whether this is
a matter of training people to
training personnel to restrain
and seclude students or whether
it's more a matter of being able
to avoid restraining and
secluding students through, uh,
positive behavior supports and
um and de-escalation strategies.
Um, I will say,
That, um,
there were on as part of this
discussion, there were several
working group members who
expressed that training on how
to address behavior needs
proactively on the front and is
crucial because once
de-escalation is needed, it's
really too late. We've passed
the point where, um, where the,
the really meaningful
interventions can happen up
ahead of the behavior. Um, there
was also though concern that
schools really have to
individually, and this is
reading right out of the report
that schools had to individually
secure the expertise needed.
To make informed decisions about
what training to provide.
Schools are in charge of trying
to uh uh figuring out what is an
appropriate training. And so one
of the questions here is, is
whether we, um, we need to have
more consistency and, and, uh, a
state standard.
And then, um, you know, we, we
talked as a group about barriers
to increased training, of
course, funding is a huge one.
the price tag that's associated
with, with providing this kind
of training or, or these kinds
of training because there might
be different levels of training
that are needed here. But, but
if it's really as widespread as
what our, our group was
discussing before there may
really need to be some, some
funding that, uh, there will
really need to be some funding
that supports that. And also
just the capacity practically
speaking, the capacity
Of school personnel to receive
and absorb more training, uh,
because as we know, teachers get
a lot of training all the time
and there are practical
realities about how to make this
training, um, meaningful for
teachers and staff and how to
make it accessible to them and
and to to have it be clear that
it's a, a support for them to
really be able to meet the
challenges of the behavioral
needs of their students. Um, so
that is, uh, and I know that in
other groups that I participate.
Participated in in the past.
There's been discussion of
practices like modeling and, you
know, uh, modeling is part of
the training, uh, things like
the Project Echo model. I mean
there have been all sorts of
ideas that have been bandied
around in other, other work that
I certainly I've been involved
in, but the, the question of
what in the questions of what
and who are very important. As
far as the actual
recommendations on number 6.
And the recommendations of the
group are determine whether a
state standard for training
should be required, developed,
recommended, and or funded by
PED.
Amend the statute and or rules
to clarify and possibly expand
the scope of personnel, school
personnel who are required to
have training.
Explore options providing for
providing funding for schools to
ensure ability to provide
training to more school
personnel and determined whether
funds for training can be
accessed through Medicaid
without negatively impacting a
student's other services. And if
so, provide training to schools
on how to access Medicaid funds
for this purpose. I know that
I'm supposed to address finding
7 as well, and I, I know that
there's another question later
that asks for me to get into
more detail about the, um, the
amendments proposed amendments.
Um, that we could see as a
group, um, question 7 does
address, uh, the need for
amendment of statute and rules.
Um, but I, I really just want to
flag the, you know, in a summary
kind of way, the pieces of, um,
this discussion on pages 7
through 12 of the report.
Um, the, these discussions in
our group, uh, focused in large
part on, you know, the, the need
to improve, you know, that, that
any proposed amendments would
improve or create key
definitions like physical
escort, which I talked about
earlier, um, improve the review
process when a restraint or
seclusion occurs to try to
prevent repeat performances of
restrain or seclusion, repeat
incidents, um, clarification of
seclusion versus.
This time out and setting
appropriate standards for their
use and relatedly, the need to
ensure that requirements for
seclusion comply with other
state and local safety
requirements, specifically
related to preventing egress of
a student from a room.
And then also removing restraint
and seclusion from enforcing
rules of conduct section of the
rules, and I will talk about
that in more detail on that
follow follow up question. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Laurel.
The restraint and seclusion
working group report is clear
that New Mexico does not have
the reliable data on the use of
restraint and seclusion in the
public schools that it needs.
In September 2020, PED amended
state rule to require reporting
to PED on specific information
related to restrained seclusion.
Miguel, can you talk about what
issues remain today with
collecting reliable data from
schools on the use of restraint
and seclusion?
Mr. Chair, members, um, as, as
you've heard a couple of times,
the, the PED in response to the
statute that addressed restraint
and seclusion decided to begin
collecting data in 2020 via
rule, um, change and um at that
time, obviously we went into a
period of virtual instruction,
so the initial numbers that we
got from, from that initial um
collection where we nil. There
you know there was no reporting
at all. Um, and so
Those, those rules specifically
were to identify the prevalence
of restraint and seclusion in
our schools, um, the the
legislature obviously recognized
that it was happening. It was a,
a a problem area for in um but
we couldn't really identify how
much it was happening, where are
some hot spots, um, if it was,
um, you know, particular
demographics of students.
And so, you know, we we
obviously went through the
period of virtual learning. When
we returned, um, both members
of, of the PED and then other
stakeholders work to um sort of
reiterate those um those
reporting requirements through a
memo to all of our um local
education agency partners and
sort of also highlight that
these students coming back from
virtual learning are going to um
have some challenging behaviors
having not been in the
classroom, um, for a significant
period.
And so part of that was to
inform the LEAs again these are
the things that you should be
reporting through our star
system now Nova, um.
The the uh the actions obviously
were were um aimed at both
determining prevalence and also
identifying where um training
was needed, um, related to the
use of restraint and seclusion
and also in the front end
de-escalation and positive
behavioral supports.
Despite some of those um
activities that we have done
both through um presentations to
LEA's parents, um, the
memorandum that's come out to
sort of address this. Um, it's,
it's very clear to us that the
the reporting just is simply not
in line with the numbers that we
occur anecdotally, um, you know,
you'll be in rooms where, you
know, we look at our data and
there's 10 reported incidents
and, you know, somebody will ask
how many of your children have
been.
Restrained or secluded and
certainly more than 10 hands go
up and so we understand that the
data is not where it should be,
um, and that, um, we need to do
a better job of determining
prevalence in order to address
this issue and determine what is
needed to address this issue.
And you'll hear from, um, many
members of this panel and also
during the stakeholder meeting,
there are a number of reasons
potentially for that, um,
training the districts and
charter schools and their staff,
both on the use of restraint and
seclusion.
And de-escalation in um positive
behavioral support techniques,
um, needs to be increased, um,
and also the system of reporting
at each of the individual um
LEAs is also, um, it differs
across the state and the
training around that reporting,
when does somebody have a
restraint incidents of restraint
happens, when are they required
to report that. Um, now, as a
general matter, the answer is
any time, right? There's a
restraint.
And seclusion, but we, uh, we
know from our um data that
that's not occurring, um, and so
if you look at the numbers, the
one, the one positive piece of
this, and I think the, the
stakeholder group wasn't able to
have the benefit of this is we
have seen increases over time
from the 2020 year to 0, um, to
2 incidents the following year,
um, 13 in the previous year, 22,
23, and then our current,
although sort of incomplete
numbers in our new system show
50 incidents
of, of restraint and seclusion
from 13 districts reporting.
Now, I don't say that as a
positive because obviously we
would prefer the number to go
down, but we also want to
understand prevalence, um, in
totality before we see the
decreases so that we can
understand that we're actually
making an impact, but we do
understand that the districts
are beginning to um understand
and utilize our reporting system
in more frequent ways, um, and
so we're, we're we're trying,
we're going to do our best as
part of
This group and and certainly
moving forward to increase that
reporting and ensure that we're
getting reports back from all of
our districts, um, and charter
schools.
The other, um, you know, the,
the other piece of it is, is
that, you know, if you talk to
um any particular
superintendents, uh, special
education director. They have
different ways of handling the
reporting. Do they, you know, do
they go through their principle?
Do they have a form for
reporting? You'll hear from one
of our members of this panel
that they have a uh at his
previous district they have a
very strong system where they
are able to collect and um pull
together information regarding
restraint and seclusion, um, and
then the question
is whether that internal
collection actually makes it to
the PED, um, it's, it's pretty
clear that most of it doesn't
even in places where they do
have strong reporting, um, and
then, uh, the, the, the other
piece and you'll hear more of
this as well is the connection
to discipline, um, uh, Miss
Nesbitt, uh noted is that, you
know, the, the incidents of
restrain and seclusion can occur
both with related to violations
of the code of conduct, but also
just
Regulated behaviors from both
our students with disability and
others, and they may not require
discipline or even warrant any
type of disciplinary action, um,
you know, a student that with
the dysregulated behavior that's
harming himself and him or
herself in some way, um, may
need to be restrained um to
protect that student. Nobody
that's involved in that is
thinking about discipline or
otherwise and so the
determination of whether they
should report becomes a
question. Um, and so there
You'll hear more, more about
that, but those are some of the
reasons that um our LEAs have
said that the reporting piece is
somewhat unclear, and I think
part of that is, um, sort of the
statute didn't address reporting
and so PED began to collect that
information and sort of uh we'll
have to, to increase its work in
doing that.
He is absolutely committed to
supporting LEA's in the
implementation of these
reporting rules and also at the
front end, um, pursuing more
positive behavioral supports,
training for de-escalation, um,
and so just as a general matter,
the recommendations that you've
heard are going to take some
commitment, um, some significant
commitment to address this
particular issue and the the um
sort of the reduction
Um, through de-escalation and
positive behavioral supports,
the training in that area and
the um the assistance, technical
assistance to LEAs is all gonna
um be a sort of need a
commitment of support from the
legislature, um, and, you know,
I think as a general matter with
respect to data, that piece is
fundamental, and I think you've
heard from everybody that we
can't really know what needs to
be done until we can get the
data in place where we feel
comfortable that we understand
the, the.
Gravity, the prevalence of the
use and um in order to attack
it, um, in a, in a positive way
and hopefully make strides in
ensuring and reducing the use of
restraint and seclusion
altogether except for obviously
in times when it's emergent.
Thank you.
Thank you, Miguel.
Steven, can you please speak to
the challenges for schools on
reporting restraint and
seclusion data.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Mayor. Mr. Chair, committee
members, um, I'll start with
this one through my experiences,
one challenge we face is that
not every restraint and
seclusion incident is related to
a disciplinary issue, as it's
been mentioned.
For some students, their
disability may be that reason
that that particular strategy or
restraint or seclusion strategy
was used, and this puts our
administrators in very
challenging, difficult
positions, for example, though
restraint is state reportable,
that relevant field lives within
discipline incidents in many of
our student information systems
and platforms.
To access that field we need to
link the restraint to a
misbehavior.
In situations where the behavior
is linked to the disability
rather than a disciplinary
issue, we want to be careful not
to categorize a student's
disability-related behavior as a
discipline incident discipline
records are often shared from
district to district, the
students move from school to
school, from city to city.
Often district keep these
incidents separate from
discipline incidents that the
state receives through the
mandatory reporting filled
within the platform. Every time
restraint was used in the
districts I served, I reviewed
that documentation. We followed
the procedure if they um had,
and I forget what the statute
actually says, but so many
restraints within a certain time
period, I ordered an IEP meeting
and we, we followed those
procedures. Everything that the
law requires.
Be written into that statute is
on that reporting form we notify
the parents that that restraint
was used. We collect that
documentation. It's just not put
into a field that reports
directly to PED. Essentially,
only the state only scenes sees
the restraint and seclusion
documentation when it's linked
to a misbehavior rather than all
instances where those strategies
might have been used.
Additionally, the lack of clear
definitions for physical escort
and timeout further complicates
things and complicates accurate
reporting.
This confusion blurs the
distinction between restraint
and physical escort, as well as
between seclusion and timeout
leading to inconsistencies in
reporting.
Um, the burden on school staff
to navigate these complexities
adds to workload. It makes it
challenging to ensure that all
incidents are reported
accurately and timely and
comprehensively, and this
administrative strain can also
lead to underreporting or
misreporting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much, Stephen.
The report also notes that the
practice and implementation of
restraint and seclusion
requirements is different around
the state. Miguel, can you speak
to this finding and also to the
supports PED needs to improve PD
monitoring of restraint and
seclusion.
Mr. Chair, members, um, so I,
one thing I, I will note and I
think you probably hear this in
this committee more than, more
than most is the local control
piece is one that that comes up
often and I think with restraint
and seclusion, particularly this
statute, it's, it's no
different. The, the statute
provides broad authority to our
local education agency, school
boards to create policies around
the use of restraint and
seclusion um at their local
school districts and governing
And the governing boards of the
charter schools, and so, um, as
you might imagine, as is true
with many things, the districts
and charter schools are, they
have varying ways, maybe 189
different ways of handling
restraint and seclusion at their
um particular schools. And so,
um, that's, that's one piece
that I think is difficult and
partially um relates to the data
issues is, um, that there are
just differing ways of doing
things and so, um, to some
extent,
Um, I think that that is, um,
that is uh should be something
that the LESC looks at, um, to,
to determine to what at what
level is that control um
appropriate and you know, one of
the things you'll think of and
you've heard it is, what types
of training are they doing? What
are the de-escalation trainings
that occur, um, is it, um, you
know, there are different
providers, CPI things like that
that are used throughout the
state. Um, but then there are
some uh one-offs where 11
particular district or
Charter school will use um a
particular contractor that
nobody's heard of or really um
reviewed um what are the
reporting requirements for any
particular person that is
involved in restraint, so do
they have to um go immediately
to their principal or, or um
their special education director
or otherwise. And so all of
these types of decisions that
are made at the local level
impact how they um deal with
incidents of restraint and
seclusion and also the training
around the.
escalation and positive
behavioral supports, um, can
differ widely as well. Um, you,
you know, you'll, you hear
stories about, um, you know,
principles that, you know,
they're zero tolerance and so,
you know, they, they, if there's
a violation of the code of
conduct they're going to deal
with that in an appropriate way.
And so, um, when you throw in
the disability piece of it and a
student who, who's um disability
impacts this, this type of
behavior that's disregulated
behavior, that can be problema
And so, um, the, the, the wide
variation in how um restraint
and seclusion is both viewed and
how it's um sort of input and
policy at our um local education
agencies impacts how um how we
are able to sort of tackle it
from the state level. And so
that I don't think the local
control piece can be um uh
discounted here and I think
also, um, it's important to
understand like to determine
what is the appropriate amount
amount of intervention and um
Should the state take a more
prominent role. Um, the
The there's, there's sort of um
differing uh recommendations
throughout this report about
what PED should do. And I think
for the most part, you know,
I've in talking to my
colleagues, you know, we're in
support of addressing this issue
head on, but the, as I said in
the past, commitment of
resources I think is an
important piece to this. Um,
the, uh, sort of hyperfocus on
the use of restraint and
seclusion both on the reporting
and and the intervention.
Of, um, with school districts on
the use, you know, even things
as simple as determining
hotspots, like is there a
particular either person or
district or charter school where
we just see it way more
prominently than any other
place. Um, somebody to be able
to do that requires some really
hyper-focused individuals and so
potentially a single FTE, um,
you know, and talking to, um,
Deputy Secretary Castillo, the,
the primary um uh purpose of
that particular individual would
be to
Work on this data piece like
head on, um, try to get it to a
point where we're comfortable
that we're getting good
information and then um sort of
long term expanding that group
and maybe right off the bat, um,
expanding that group to a group
that is able to, um, sort of
intervene in ways that are more
productive and also um whether
that's go in and do training and
you know, we've seen students
that uh were restrained in
seclusion 3 times this month,
um, restrained restrained or
secluded 3 times this month.
Let's go in and check on that,
that school and see what's what
um what's going on with that
student? Is there other ways
that we can intervene, um, and
that's not just within the
office of special education,
certainly this is going to be a
PED um wide effort where, you
know, obviously students with
disabilities are primarily
impacted, but the data piece um
within the IT department is a
huge one. and then safe and
healthy schools within our
department, um, also has a role
to play here.
In terms of um the general
education students. So I think
the, the main thing that PED is
looking for, we want to, um, we
have the desire to, as we say,
virtually eliminate the use of
these practices and in some
instances maybe by policy
eliminate the practice. Um, we,
we need the resources to really
focus in and um and bring
resources to bear to help our
LEAs and our students primarily
um, try to find ways, other ways
to intervene with
Types of dysregulated behaviors
rather than restraint and
seclusion.
Thank you.
Thank you, Miguel. Amanda.
The report highlights that many
parents do not know the state
has restraint and seclusion laws
and rules, and that they and
their children have rights under
these laws and rules. Can you
speak to your own experience of
what it took for you to gain
knowledge on the requirements
for and limitations on restraint
and seclusion.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh,
I initially sought more
information on the requirements
for in limitations on restraint
and seclusion through my work as
a teacher.
In 2018, a student transferred
from out of state to the
district where I was working.
The student was identified as a
student with a disability, and
his family was very forthcoming
about the nature of his
disability and eager to work
collaborative, collaboratively
with all school staff to support
the students' success in school.
Unfortunately though, the
student was not receiving the
supports or services that he
needed at school and school
administrators and other staff
would frequently do unannounced
check-ins that were detrimental
to the student, causing
frustration and challenging
behavior to quickly escalate in
the classroom setting.
The student was initially
disciplined through suspension
suspensions that were weeks
long, but there was never any
discussion about the lack of
services and supports for the
student in the school setting.
Two days after the student
returned from an eight-day
suspension, his behavior
escalated in response to a
hurtful comment made by one of
his peers.
The other students in the exited
the room as multiple adult staff
and administrators entered the
room.
At this point, it seemed like
there was no imminent danger, as
none of the students, peers
remained in the room, and he was
not attempting to harm any
staff.
When the student began to toss
pencil cups and books on the
floor though. I watched two
adult staff members, grabbed the
student and place him in what I
now know to be a prone
restraint.
I wanna
Just also pause and emphasize
that.
This student
is a really remarkable kid.
He overcame tremendous
challenges in his life. He loved
to read and talk about books. He
would make origami flowers and
hearts and write kind notes when
offering them to others and
appreciation.
He was 9 years old and less than
50 pounds.
But two adults held him face
down on the classroom floor.
I remember asking the adults to
please let go of him. I remember
the adults holding him down,
telling him that if he told them
he wouldn't hurt anyone or
anything, they would let him go.
I remember crying as I tried to
explain that he probably
couldn't speak because his face
was being pushed into the floor.
Eventually they let him go and
he ran to the other side of the
room to hide. He wrapped his
arms around himself as he
quietly cried.
The parents of the student were
asked to pick him up shortly
after. I reached out to the
family to ask how the student
was doing when we finished
school for the day.
It was through the conversation
that I learned his family was
completely unaware their child
had been held face down on the
ground by two adults earlier
that day. They were not even
aware that school staff used any
sort of restraint with their
child that day.
The following day, I expressed
concern with my administrators
about the situation, but I felt
the concerns were quickly
dismissed. So that's
How I started to learn more
about the existing laws and
rules regarding restraint and
seclusion.
Well I didn't know it at the
time, this information was later
valuable to me as a parent.
The following year, my son, who
is also identified as a child
with a disability, turned 4, and
began attending a district pre-K
program.
When my son was in pre-K, I was
I was working in the same school
building.
During a math lesson, a
colleague at my school told me
she would watch my class, but
that I needed to go check on my
son because she saw someone drag
him down the hallway by his arm
and close him in a room.
I heard my son screaming my name
and asking for help.
I
Also want to mention that when I
got there.
I, I was shocked to even like
see that we had a room.
That locked kids inside of it,
um, especially 4 year olds, um,
and I asked if this was like, do
we have a seclusion room? Like,
is that what this is? And I was
told it is a timeout room that
he was in a timeout, and the
offense that led to it was
throwing a puzzle and then
refusing to pick up the puzzle
in transition among stations in
pre-K.
Um,
I insisted that staff let my
child out of the room, and when
they did, my son ran to hide
behind me and started sobbing
into my legs, pleading, Mommy,
we go, Mommy, we go.
While I insisted on a follow-up
meeting with school staff and
administration following this
incident, I never received any
formal documentation, and I know
from reviewing SARS data, the
incidents involving my son and
my student were never formally
reported. And
I need to look at SARS data and
to request that information
because of my work as a teacher,
but I don't know that.
All parents will know to request
SARS data to understand whether
or not instances of restraint
and seclusion involving their
child where ever formally
reported.
In 2020, my family relocated to
a larger district in the state,
but we continue to encounter
similar issues of concern. My
son was physically restrained at
his school last year, but the
notification was made to me by
my son when he called me and
whispered pleas for help through
his tears.
He told me his special education
teacher grabbed him and held him
on a wall, and he asked, can
they do that? Just grab me and
hurt me.
My son told me he ran and hid
under a desk to call me in an
empty office. He said, Will you
please come get me?
It's not safe here.
I called school staff and told
them where my son was, but I
asked they leave him alone
because he was very frightened
and my husband was already on
the way there to pick him up.
As the end of the school day
approached that Friday, we still
hadn't received from school
staff, any written documentation
or verbal notification regarding
the restraint. So I decided to
go to the school and wait until
the principal was able to meet
with me.
After explaining why I was there
and requesting documentation
regarding the restraint. The
principal told me she would have
to look into whether or not she
could share that information
with me.
I explained my understanding of
the rules regarding parental
notification after an instance
of restraint and seclusion.
But I received the same
response.
The following week, I emailed
the principal again to request
the written documentation.
The principal responded that I
would need to submit an IPRA
request in order to possibly
obtain any records pertaining to
the physical restraint of my
son.
In response, I provided a copy
of the New Mexico rule in the
administrative code that details
documentation requirements when
school personnel use restraint
and seclusion.
I did receive the requested
documentation the following day.
But I
I often wonder what I would have
done if I hadn't familiarized
myself with that particular
section of the NMA earlier.
And also how reasonable is it to
expect all parents to be
familiar with that information.
I mean.
Would I still be trying to find
the portal to submit an IPRA
request for information that
probably is more likely to fall
under the umbrella of FERPA, um,
Regardless,
I'm pretty confident that
training on parental
notification requirements was
not provided to staff and
administrators at my son's
school.
And I felt the onus was placed
on me as the parent to
understand and interpret
existing rule and regulations
for school staff.
I find it staggering. The number
of hoops families are often
required to jump through in
order to obtain information,
they should simply receive
without even submitting a
request.
Thank you.
Thank you, Amanda.
Amanda, can you talk about what
recommendation in the report is
most important to you as a
parent and why?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
I think that this question is
difficult to answer, like just
pick one
because of how connected the
recommendations are, with that
in mind though, I believe 3A.
Which states ensure that PED
regularly monitors the use of
restraint and seclusion in the
schools to determine whether and
how it is being used and to
provide guidance technical
assistance and training to
eliminate the use of restraint
and seclusion is particularly
important because it implies
greater oversight by New Mexico
PED on the use of restraint and
seclusion by LEAs. More accurate
data collection on the use of
restraint and seclusion across
the state and more explicitly.
guidance, technical assistance
and training to eliminate the
use of restraint and seclusion.
Um, I have worked as a teacher
for 14 years in two districts in
our state, but I've never
received any training or
information regarding district
policies for restraint and
seclusion.
As a parent, I've been unable to
locate any district policies for
restraint and seclusion.
After making official requests
as a parent for existing
policies. I was informed by the
district that those policies
exist within the school safety
plan, and the plan cannot be
shared with the public, uh, for
safety reasons.
Unfortunately, it seems as
though restraint and seclusion
is often viewed through the lens
of student discipline, but it's
not discipline.
Also in meetings with the
working group, many families
share personal stories that
involved IEP teams including
restraint and seclusion in
behavioral intervention plans,
and this is hard to understand
because restraint and seclusion
are also not interventions, and
it shouldn't be part of a
strategy to improve or manage
student behavior.
Restraint and seclusion do not
belong in any repertoire of
strategies that work to support
the success and well-being of
students. Such extreme measures
should be viewed as red flags
that current practices are
failing to meet the needs of
students. It should ignite a
sense of urgency for reflection,
revision, and growth. And I
think this recommendation 3A
embodies a commitment to the
work that's needed to ensure we
truly see and support the
children in our state.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Amanda.
The report notes that existing
statue on restraint and
seclusion could benefit from
amendment. Laurel, you are an
attorney. Can you speak to the
need to amend statute to ensure
restraint and declusion is not
overused or used in a dangerous
and harmful way, particularly
around the need to add and
clarify definitions.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair,
committee members, um, I, I did
want to go into, I, I previewed
before that we'd be going into a
little more detail about what
some of the definitions are that
we had looked at needing to
create or change, uh, to provide
the kind of clarity that
districts, uh, need, uh, in
order to be able to, um,
appropriately, uh, to, to
understand and appropriately use
restraint and seclusion in in
emergent situations and, uh, and
in terms of the
collection piece too about how
people understand.
Restraint and seclusion in order
to be able to report it
accurately. Um,
So
One of the, one of the
definitions and you'll see this
on, um, the report on page.
Uh, 10, there was quite a lot of
discussion in our group about
the, the undefined, um, term
physical escort. It's in it, it,
it's used as a modifier on what.
Uh, physical restraint is not,
and yet we don't have, um, in
our law, a definition of what
physical escort is. Um, and
there was widespread agreement
within our group that, that we
need that definition, uh, that
that really needs to be a, a, a
key focus. Um,
they're our group talked about
the need for a definition for uh
prone restraint, which I know
that, uh, that Miss Owens was
just addressing, having
witnessed such a thing. Um, and,
and that the, that the statute
Actually, um, officially ban
it's, it's use, the use of prone
restraint. Likewise with
chemical restraint, needing a
definition of chemical
restraint, which is very
infrequently used, we think, in,
in schools. I think there were,
there was quite a bit of
definition, uh, or sorry,
discussion within our group
about that, but nonetheless,
having some definition of
chemical restraint like the
federal bill does, um, to be
able to clarify what that is and
isn't and to also ban its use.
Uh, mechanical restraint is
another piece that we may need
to.
Visit in terms of clarification
of various terms within that
definition when I went over that
before. Um, there is, there are
exclusions there in terms of the
devices that are used in
conformance with medical
treatment provider instructions
or restraints like seatbelts and
other things that are needed for
safety, uh, within the
classroom. So needing some
distinctions there, um, greater
clarification in that
definition. Um, we, one thing
that we really have seen a lot
and talked about a lot in our
group is the practice.
Uh, or is the experience that
students have of elopement and
how to manage elopement from the
classroom or within the
classroom or however you might
define that. And that is really
the key, uh, the key point here
is that we need to define
elopement and acceptable, uh,
responses to elopement with
respect to, you know, as they,
as they interact with restraint
and seclusion. Um, really,
really is a much larger
conversation because we do think
that.
The restraint and seclusion,
particularly restraint is used,
uh, pretty frequently in in
incidents, uh, involving
elopement. And then
de-escalation is a term that
could also be, um.
Could be defined within our, our
law and clarifying that
de-escalation does not supplant
the individualized requirements
of a student's IEP that not,
it's not a one size fits all
thing as far as de-escalation
techniques that really, uh, for
students with disabilities,
oftentimes, um, those, those
students have behavior
intervention plans that have
very, very clear, um,
interventions that are supposed
to be used, both before the fact
on the front end and also in
Crisis situation and
de-escalation techniques that
work or don't work for, for
individualized students, so or
individual students.
And then some group members also
did talk about the need for a
better overall definition of
physical restraint, uh, which
probably is a very good point. I
know there's been a lot of
discussion of, ah, you know,
restraint, restraint seclusion
are not discipline. Um, another
recommendation here is that we,
we do really revisit where uh
the, the detailed description of
restraint and seclusion lives
within our rules, OK. It
currently sits within section 6.
11.2.10 of the New Mexico
administrative code entitled
Enforcing Rules of Conduct.
The, you know, I think that the
the problem there is, is pretty
clear that if this really is an
emergency intervention of last
resort if it really is a safety,
uh, consideration, then there's
a different place for this to
live within our rules that may
lead to greater clarity, less
confusion
about is it or isn't it
disciplined and do we report it
as discipline or don't we, you
know, so there's some confusing
mixed messages there that I
think could be at least helped,
not, not cured, but helped by,
um, starting with that.
It's just having it live where
it might need to live within
the, the rules. And then
another, another point is, um,
In terms of, of necessary
amendments.
There, there was a good bit of
discussion in the group about
shortcomings in the review of
incidents of restraint and
seclusion. I think what we heard
from Ms. Owens is, you know, not
even getting to the review
piece, um, even just the report,
even just the notification
pieces is there are maybe some
real inconsistencies there in
that, but I think it's really
very important. I think Mr.
Starkovic referred to this
before about how many times.
In a 30 day period, a student
can be restrained. And this
without there being a review
under the current wording in the
law, a, a student can be
restrained once every 30 days
without any review of that. Um,
I don't know uh how much you
folks remember about the, the
LESE listening sessions and some
of the some of the information
that was gleaned through that,
but I do know that there was,
there were really quite a few
folks who who spoke about
restraint and seclusion as being
Tremendously prevalent in their
in their children's experience
of school, not just happening
once, um, and then we nipped it
in the bud, but happening over
and over again. And so if we do
the math under the current,
under the current, um, statute
and rule, a student really could
be restrained without any kind
of need to go back to the
drawing table with respect to a
VIP or IEP, that student could
be restrained 9 or 10 times a
year, you know, in an academic
year. And, and that really is a
The concern I think for a lot of
folks in the group about how to
address that, um, and to, to
really.
Make review of any incident of
restrain restraint and
seclusion, um,
Reflect the need for forward
thinking and problem solving and
really trying to see this as an
indication that something is
wrong.
Understanding that their
administrative complications to
that that the district's
experience and how to, how to
really get, um,
Yet
A greater and more frequent, um,
sense of, of the, the need for
review into our, our law. Now,
one suggestion.
And that's reflected here is
that the statute and rule could
reiterate the parents of
students with disabilities have
the right to request an IEP team
meeting at any time, including
after each individual incident
of restrain or seclusion. Um,
you know,
certainly one idea of the group,
I do think there were also
perspectives within the group
about, again, the sort of
question of whether that puts
this back on parents and whether
there needs to be some more
internal focus on, um, review,
uh, resulting as a matter of
course.
from, from restraint, uh, and
seclusion as emergency
interventions. And then finally,
just another group of, of
amendments that we talked about
seclusion specific issues, um,
that we need to ensure that
requirements for seclusion
comply with other state and
local safety requirements,
specifically related to
preventing egress of a student
from a room. I know there was
earlier PED guidance about time
out that, that really kind of
brought this issue up and it
just seems like that's a, a, a
whole different discussion.
About needing to make sure
there's consistency and
compliance there. Um,
clarification and distinguishing
of seclusion from time out and
setting appropriate standards
for their use and ensuring that
PED provides current guidance
related to seclusion and time
out, including but not limited
to whether timeout is an
acceptable intervention, and if
so, how it is distinguished from
seclusion. Um, you know, and,
and I do think that, again,
without going back to, to read
boring language
the, the federal, um, bill and
from the Office for Civil
Rights. I think there are some
good, there is some good
information, some, some good
material there from which we
could, we could, um,
draw, um, wisdom about, about
what is time out, what is, um,
what is seclusion and what are
all the practices in between.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, Laurel.
Statute and rule only permit
restraint and seclusion
techniques to be used by trained
school staff, except in
emergencies. Stephen, can you
finish this up by talking about
how you recommend the
legislature address tackling
these issues from a school
perspective.
Absolutely. Thank you, Mayor.
Um, first, I want to say I'm not
the biggest fan of studies. It
was extremely challenging, as
wonderful as it was to work with
everybody up here is extremely
challenging to make all the
meetings and I think that's why
we lost district representation
as we went through this study as
well, but I also feel that
moving too quickly to enact
legislation that would ban
restraint, the use of restraint
or seclusion could possibly be
the worst thing that we, we
could do.
I feel that to tackle these
issues after continued study and
research that we should work to
establish standards. I think
they're necessary for, um,
training and implementation of
restraint and seclusion.
The standards should be
developed by local school
leaders in consultation with
experts in education, mental
health, and child safety, and I
don't know that we had much
mental health representation or
child safety representatives on
this team. And we know mental
health is on the rise and, and,
and mental health issues often
lead to students can lead. I
don't want to say often can lead
to restraints um being used with
students as well.
I believe we must define
physical escort in timeout, a
task I felt that this team
should have tackled a clear and
specific definition for physical
escort and time out within
statutes and regulations and in
alignment with IDA guidance is
needed.
More study is necessary if we
hope to provide clarity to
districts so that they fully
understand the distinctions
between restraint and escort and
time out and seclusion. And
again, I think an outright ban
of these tools with severely
handcuff school districts, no
mechanical restraint pun
intended, um, but you think
about it in in many school
districts now if a student gets
into a fight, they're
handcuffed, right?
A ban on restraint, a ban on
mechanical restraint, does that
remove that as an option for
school districts, and I just
asked that question.
I believe work needs to be done
to develop and recommend
specific training programs.
Miguel brought up CPI. I think
that's what most districts lean
on is crisis prevention,
intervention and training. And
if you've ever attended a
de-escalation course with them.
There's 10 points.
That they go over with with your
staff, just 10 things that they
say this is going to de-escalate
the student. And I feel like we
train well as districts on those
10 points, but I'm not sure that
it's meeting the needs of
students or doing the job it's
intended to do when it comes to
de-escalation.
Um,
More study again is necessary if
we hope, oh excuse me, I'm
sorry, moving on, uh, who I
thought we should include in the
report what some states are
doing to address these issues as
well, and I brought this up with
the team. Who's doing it well
out there? What are they doing?
I feel like PE can help us here
by looking out there and seeing
what other uh states are trying
to do, but whatever programs or
strategies are decided on, they
should be made accessible to all
school districts, and it
be designed to be scalable so
that um that district can
Address the differing needs of
their students. We should not be
taking a one size fits all
approach. We need to, you know,
the mental health experts, they
can help us, but our schools
know their students the best.
I feel we should secure funding
for training.
And if I can do one thing today,
I want to advocate for increased
funding allocated specifically
for the training of school
school staff on de-escalation,
restraint and seclusion to
include allowable standards for
physical escort and time out.
We need to have some strategies.
I feel the state should explore
additional funding options
including grants and maybe even
petition for reallocation of
funds to help us provide these
trainings to staff all staff
need these trainings.
Not just certain teams of
individuals. I really feel
everyone should be trained in
restraint and seclusion. All it
takes is one fight to happen and
a person that has to intervene
that can't break up that fight
because they haven't been
trained.
With school calendar restraints,
time for professional
development is scarce.
Many unions require daily rate
pay for anything that happens
after hours.
Most instructional assistants
must be paid overtime if we want
to train them.
Uh, now imagine this, a staff of
700 employees getting paid
either their daily rate or
overtime, that puts a huge
strain on school budgets, and I
ask if we can't afford to train
them after hours, then when
would we do that? If we do find
a way to make it happen during
the school day, we still have to
pay for subs, so either way it's
a challenge for us.
Addressing the training
challenges for de-escalation,
restraint, seclusion in schools
requires a concerted effort from
all of you from PED and from
local school districts by
establishing clear standards
defining critical terms
recommending specific training
programs, securing funding,
increasing accessibility and
continuously evaluating the
effectiveness of these
strategies that we implement,
then I feel then the
Legislatures, school districts
can, uh, are, are going to be
better and better well equipped
to handle those critical
situations in a manner that
prioritizes our staff and
student safety and well-being.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we stand for
questions. All right, thank you
and thank you all for the
presentation. So we'll come to
committee members. We're already
at time, so if you can make your
questions as direct as possible
if you're pointing out a
particular member, please be
sure to point them out, um, so
they can answer your question.
So Senator Lopez, please.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
We don't have enough time to go
through all of my questions. Um,
but I want to say thank you
first of all, Mr. Chair, for
merit and the team that worked
on this particular, um, issue
and I know we didn't get the
measure passed the legislature,
but again, I appreciate that the
work continued from uh my
memorial.
The
I mean, I, I took, was taking a
list and of course reviewing and
have reviewed what was sent over
the email, um.
But I just wanted to reiterate,
Mr. Chair.
Our IEPs need oversight.
The IEP individual
individualized education plan
for those who don't know our
acronyms, they're watching, um.
There's a lot of concerns with
oversight, um,
How often their reviewed.
Um, I mean, the list is long
with regards to families and I
know because I deal with
families and in my district.
Um, so I know that that's a
concern.
Um,
And when you have what's listed
in the IEP of services and such
that the student is supposed to
receive. Of course that's where
we hold, you know, the school
districts, which are trusted,
entrusted, right, to work with
this and the student along with,
um, you know, SLPs and all the
other persons who are supposed
to offer services and we know,
Mr. Chair, um, that we don't
have enough professionals to
actually offer. I mean we, we
have some concerns and issues
that that are there. Yes, I
understand, but we still have a
commitment to the student.
Um, you know, the VIPs,
behavioral improvement plans
needs some review. Those need to
be, um, I think reviewed not
just with the family and
whoever's overseeing the IEP but
also working with staff.
Um, so that they understand
because I've been to as an
observer, it's some means and
they don't even review it.
Nobody knows what's in that
piece of paper, which is a
concern.
Um,
And then, um, Mr. Trio, there's
so many different things and
part of the discussions I know
that have been had over years
and just recently.
I um.
How we actually respond.
Um,
And working positively as as
best. Yes, I know teachers are
on the receiving end many a
times because of how students
are maybe acting out from too
much stimuli or whatever it may
be that has caused them to be at
the space that they are,
um, that Mr. Chair, it just goes
back to
What we provide in services for
families.
Sometimes our families don't
have the tools of how to deal
with a student who's acting out
either.
Um,
You know, there's, it's not just
prevalent on, on the schools
because that's where our
students go, but also what tools
are we giving parents to making
sure that our parents or
grandparents or other kin are
receiving these support
services, Mr. Chair.
I'm blessed because I know how
to pick up a phone with one of,
you know, and I've been, you
know, vocal with my son, um, on
his issue on the spectrum. I get
it.
Um,
But those are things I think we
still need to keep in mind as to
what we do. Um, we also have to
remember that when a student
leaves school.
The disability doesn't
disappear.
And many a times, Mr. Chair, we
see them as they grow older in
the juvenile justice system or
in the adult system.
Still acting out, still trying
to deal with the stimuli and all
the other things that have
caused, you know, them to act
out or whatever it may be. I
mean, there's always more
discussion.
But I think it's part of the
conversation we also have to
have, Mr. Chair, as we look at
other possible changes within um
the Children's code and other
things because there's just so
much.
That
The discussion we're having here
that needs to be held in other
arenas.
Um, the notification of parents
should not be within 24 hours.
It should be happening that same
day before the school day ends.
If my child had been restrained,
I don't want to wait till
tomorrow.
I want to be I wanted to know
now and my butt, excuse my
language, is there at school
wanting to know what happened.
And I think when the parents
that I've spoken with and
grandparents, they'd like to
know today.
Not tomorrow.
But today, because they care
about their child and want to
see what they can do for
intervention, because maybe some
issues are still happening at
home.
So that's always been a concern
of mine.
Um, the issue also of
bilingualism, because I have
parents in my own district who
speak Spanish.
And trying to communicate with a
teacher or somebody who's trying
to educate them on what's going
on. There's a lack of
Mm.
ability to explain a lack of
ability, not that the parent or
grandparent is illiterate, but
you have to have some context of
being able to communicate, Mr.
Chair, and I've seen that.
Um, and when you get somebody
who doesn't quite know the lingo
and trying to interpret that
really even makes it worse, just
as it does in the medical field,
right? So that's a concern. Um,
our state through the office of
Special Education still needs to
look as to how we do audits, not
yearly, but much more
consistently, which takes money
and staff, but, um, the state
needs to have oversight basis to
what has been changed and um.
For regards to that. You know,
the restraints use um.
I've spoken with teachers who've
been on the receiving end of
having a student who's hit them.
Um, and maybe has broken a hand
or an arm because of that, yes.
But as was stated before, what
else is happening within that
person's life that that
student's life. You have to go
back and figure out for the
whole picture, not just when
they show up to act out because
maybe something else happened at
home.
Um, it, it's just, it's, it's
not just a 11 snapshot, Mr.
Chair, um, and I've learned this
over time too, as many of us
here, it, it's, it's a full
picture.
Um, and again, Mr. Chair, this
also, I believe, um, when we
talk about an incident that
happened at Rio Grande High
School and it was in the news
where a young man who um didn't
have, I think a an EA couldn't
be there with that person that
day. There was nobody with that
young man, and yet he
Um, I mean, too much to get
into, but ultimately our school
resource officer handcuffed him.
And there was other acting out,
um, that was.
No, I'm not happy with that. The
parents are not, but.
What ensued within the school, I
think there should have been a
different response from the
school district.
And this is not one area I've
heard of reports from Tao School
District and others in the round
of our state where I've gotten
phone calls that were similar
instances of response are taken.
Um, so this is a good start, Mr.
Chair. I know we're going to
have discussion during session
and I, I appreciate it. Um,
It's just this is something that
we have to to work on.
And uh again, it's not just
within our school system, but
how do we progress as these
young students move on out of
our schools into the real world
and what do we do and how do we
respond? Um, so Mr. Chair, it's
also for me within our juvenile
justice system that we also have
to, um, take pause. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you all for being here. I
appreciate it. I won't be a very
lengthy, although it's, there's
a lot to cover here, you know,
and I think your report is huge,
and I appreciate you, Steve, for
driving all the way up, or yeah,
up to this meeting. I'll see you
back home, I'm sure, but, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, I, I just had
a, I guess one question that
I'll, I'll put it all together
on regarding data because we're
talking about the need for data
I think on page 4 of the report
says we need data. And so
I just wonder if this, if your
group looked into that, and I
think this question might be
from Michelle, might be for
anybody who wants to answer it,
but what data specifically are
we looking for?
How do we ensure teachers
are the ones that are reporting
the data accurately because I
know teachers, it's a hard
enough job as it is. There's one
more thing to report, you might
slip up one day and say, oh, I
forgot to report this. Is there
some kind of mechanism to ensure
that the teacher has those,
those resources, and then how do
we ensure that this data is then
being used for policymaking to
ensure that we get it so we know
how do we fix this? Here's the
data we're looking for and then
last, last part of that question
is, uh, the anecdotal data.
You know, like, like, uh,
Amanda's story, that is so
important to have that anecdotal
data from these teachers,
parents, students, and how do we
put that together in a report or
some kind of useful tool to
ensure that we reduce the number
of uh
Of instances of using restraint
or seclusion, so sorry for the
billion dollar question, but go
at it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Block,
I think at the bare minimum, the
data that we are asking for
today is what we need to at
least start the the review
that's location, the, the
student, the individual where
they trained, um, in, in
de-escalation and restraint and
seclusion, um, and then, uh,
sort of beyond that is once we
are able to get actual clear
reporting, we can look at um
prevalence in particular.
areas particular students that
may um see a greater rates of
restraint and seclusion. Um, and
then, and I think some of our
school districts are already
collecting this, that anecdotal
data, the, the teacher is able
to report, actually give a
description of this is what
occurred in this particular
instance, and, you know, if we
find those prevalent areas, we
can look at that anecdotal data
and say, OK, this is what
happened. Is there another way
we could have handled it, um, in
order to have avoided.
The need for restraint and
seclusion, but I think primarily
what we are asking for right now
in order to identify where it's
prevalent and where there might
be need for direct intervention
with a particular district or
charter school, is that sort of
baseline data of where, when,
who, where, when, why, um, and
sort of, and then also uh in
addition to that, probably
understanding the level of
training that we have at our
districts, um, who's trained, or
what districts are requiring all
Teachers to be trained. What is
it just special education
teachers. So beyond the actual
use of restraint and seclusion,
but also the training rates and
sort of and and also maybe
direction from the legislature
on what, who should be trained,
um, because basically what it
says, what the statute says now
is only those people who are
trained can um engage in
restraint and seclusion except
for exceptional circumstance,
emergent circumstances, but
having a real clear picture of
who is required to be trained
would be helpful, but the data
on that also is a big piece, but
I think at the outset
And as I said, sort of
hyperfocused on that, that sort
of uh immediate set of data to
understand what's the
prevalence, where is it heavy
and where, you know, where are
there places maybe districts
that don't use it often or are
not reporting, and we can sort
of understand what they're doing
potentially that is avoiding um
restraint and seclusion, and
I'll turn it over to um uh Mr.
Gambo because she certainly has
a practitioner's perspective on
that.
I was gonna say I don't know
that I can answer this so much
as being the umbu, but as an
administrator, I think there are
multiple places where
information is being housed
whether that's in a behavior
improvement plan, um, an FBA of
functional behavior assessment,
um, and then there are districts
that have, um, documentation,
uh, expectations, uh, the other
piece that we can't possibly
kind of hit on, but in safety.
School safety plans, there is
usually information about a
crisis team. Um, and where I
used to work, we called it a a
support team because we didn't
want to make it a worse
situation. So we called, um, our
crisis team support team. We
went to uh a student that was
having issues, sometimes other
students were still there,
sometimes they had been, um,
removed, um, but it's a bunch of
adults coming to an area to do
de-escalation. But what we
Also don't have data on is how
many times our crisis teams, um,
going to support and not having
to restrain because then there's
a whole other set of data that
can be looked at to talk about
why was, why was this successful
and this one was unsuccessful in
that it ended in a restraint.
Sometimes there's no way to
avoid it. Many times there are a
million ways to avoid it, um,
and also a million ways to avoid
even getting to a crisis team
plan because
In the safety plan created by
the school and approved by the
board, um, don't focus on the
fact that every teacher should
understand how to de-escalate.
Every teacher should understand
how to create behavior supports
within their classroom. And that
training isn't happening. So
right now, we've got, we've got
data in multiple places that
aren't talking to each other.
And I think ultimately, it boils
back to people and time and
effort in getting
One from every district on a
call and wait, maybe we learned
something from COVID that can
help us get that done and have
those people who are overlooking
the various things and maybe
that means multiple people from
every district on a call that
says, oh, wait, that information
is over there. That information
is over there, and then Ped
saying, how do we get it all
into the place that we can make
it make sense. So I think there
is data out there, we know it
is, um,
have to figure out as a
statewide entity? How do we get
it to where we need it to be so
that it can be analyzed, um,
reviewed, and improved upon.
I think Mr. Chair,
Representative Block, sorry to
interrupt. I just wanted to add
that often and, and I thought it
was important for you to know
that often teachers are the ones
that will complete the restraint
documentation or the seclusion
documentation, but it's also the
principles that are the ones
that are entering that
information or that discipline
incident into the student
information system. And again,
I'm speaking from my experiences
within the districts that I I've
served, so teachers are
completing
documentation while principles
are implement are inputting the
discipline incident into the
system, so there are two
different avenues to get that
data, I guess.
And, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Block, I, I just
wanted to add one little piece
about a data point that is
important, um, with respect to
information that is provided to
parents, and that is information
about the behavior and its
precursors when we're thinking
about how functionally that data
can work for that individual
child in, um, in creating a path
forward, it's important to, to
note that our rule does, um,
does provide the.
That no longer than school, two
school days after an incident,
um, the school employee shall
provide the student's parent
with written documentation that
includes information about any
persons, locations or activities
that may have triggered the
behavior if known and specific
information about the behavior
and its precursors, the type of
restraint or seclusion technique
used in the duration of its use,
so that, but the precursor
piece, the antecedent part is a
really important part of how
this data functions, um, maybe
not in the
Larger sense that other folks
have been talking about, but in
that particular students, um,
Ongoing path.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for such a very thorough, um,
Explanation of everything, uh,
just 3 quick things and some of
it can be done offline. Why has
Congress never dealt since 2009
with the nationwide restraining
the seclusion bill. Is it
because of the local control
issue? I, I just need a nutshell
answer.
Do we know what the problem is?
And if we don't, we don't.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Garrett, I, I don't know if
there's anyone else here who can
address that. I, I know that I
cannot, we don't know. And and
the the keeping All Students
Safe Act has been proposed
several times, um, by Senator
Murphy and others, and I, I, I
don't know, um.
I, I, I haven't always kept my
eye on that ball like I should
have, um, admittedly, but I
don't see that it's ever really
gotten out of committee. So
thank you. Uh, and Mr. Chair,
Amanda, thank you for really
giving us the picture of your
own son and a student really
helped understand, uh, the
relationship of restraint and
seclusion in real life. Am I
correct in understanding that we
need
Separate reporting area for
seclusion and restraint that has
nothing to do with discipline,
discipline would be like the
handcuffs on a child that is
truly has nothing to do with
special ed. It's a criminal act
or something versus
A procedure that is part of an
I.
OK.
IEP sorry.
Am I understanding that right
that we need a separate system?
For data reporting so yes, and
some districts already have it,
but that separate area continues
to not talk to the public
education department. Um, but
yes, it needs to be separated
and there does need to be
specific training for
administrators because there is
a part that the child is
refusing a directive. And so it
can start as discipline, but
when that
Behavior is connected to their
disability,
then, then it should not be
located there in the discipline,
um, part of the matrix. The
other piece is unfortunately in
our state, there are many
children who are
Um,
That the police are called and
police play a large role in
their um event at school that is
directly related to their their
disability. So that is happening
in New Mexico.
Thank you. Final thing, uh, Mr.
Chair, sorry, I said one
question, elopement is, is that
when my former student ran away
from my classroom into the
Volsky and showed up at a bridge
an hour later. OK, thank you.
Uh, Represent Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you panel for all your work. Uh,
this is excruciating work and
it's deeply appreciated.
Um,
Having said that, whenever I see
a recommendation with 31
recommendations, I get a little
scared. I get a little scared
because it's hard to do one of
these things.
You know, I, I, has anybody, I,
I'm just curious, Mary, maybe
you can answer this question.
Um, has anybody put a, uh, uh.
Um, a budget to the cost of
this.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Herrera, that's a great
question. Honestly, given the
scope of the report, I think
that our first step right now is
bringing this to the committee
and seeing what you're
interested in. If there are some
recommendations where you're
interested in seeing what the
price tag would be, we would be
happy to put that together for
you and get back to you offline.
Well, you know, I just know how
many times it says PED should do
this and PED shit that. And, and
you know, and you know, our
police officers aren't trained
to respond to these situations
either so it's, it's training
throughout the state on very
many levels, um.
And, and, you know, I've
certainly seen these things
happen in my school district and
it's, uh, and I also want to say
that I don't think the reporting
should take longer than the
incident itself.
And sometimes that happens too,
and, and for teachers who are
overwhelmed with everything they
have to do.
And principles and then to uh
fill out a report. I, I, I just
worry about all of these
recommendations, and it's not
because they're not good.
I just don't know how we're
going to do it. And I, I guess I
would ask all of you, could you,
um, could you, you give me your
top three picks? I mean, if, if
you had to pick 3 items out of
this legislation that you think
should happen immediately, what
would those be?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I'll go first. I
would say that my three
recommendations would be data,
improving data to ensure we have
reliable data, training, and
then ensuring that parental
notification is happening.
Again, I, I, I would advocate
for additional funding, um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Adding, uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, um, adding to that
list, I would, I would also, um,
emphasize the need for a greater
review procedures and the piece
that I was actually just talking
about a moment ago about the
importance of understanding, um,
antecedents and uh the and the
upfront need for behavior
interventions and supports that
are positive and that are, uh,
going to support students, um,
Basic behavioral needs at
school. So it is the training
piece, but it is also improving
the review processes within the
law itself. And it's also some
of the pieces around, um, that
seemed like they would be not
very costly around, uh, making
this distinctions that are very
necessary around um around
discipline and the and really
clearly defining restraint and
seclusion as being separate from
that.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrera, I think, as I've said
before, I think from PED's
perspective, uh, the additional
FTEs and financial resources are
an important piece of that. I
think if you look at the
recommendations, not all of them
are going to require statutory
change. And so to the extent
that we have the resources to
implement some of these things
we'd be able to do that um in a
more focused way, um, if, if we
had additional FTEs and in the
long term possibly expanding a
team, uh, to support this
specific work.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Hereta Here,
um, training, training,
training, training, um.
To avoid the need, and again, I,
I agree, uh, the public
education department and the
special education office have
already started a lot of this
work. They, they, they're not
waiting, uh, for someone to tell
them that they have to do it. A
lot of the work has already
started. So funding those FTEs
to to really be able to dig and
do the work well, um, is
essential, along with that
documentation and notification
to parents.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Herrera, I did suggest a
recommendation earlier in
response to one of the
questions. It was 3A, which I
feel.
embodies a lot of important
recommendations like oversight,
accurate data, um, and, and
training and technical
assistance for districts and
then just on the the
Discussion around uh reporting.
I will say that.
There is a recommendation that
also mentions a possibility of
considering a standardized form
or like a universal form if you
will, that could be used by
districts, and I think that.
Keeping in mind.
What staff face in regards to
time constraints and completing
the forms that could be taken
into consideration if such a
reporting form were developed,
but I also think it's just, it's
so important too that this is
actually being recorded and
reported in that data is
represented in all districts
across the state because
Restraint and seclusion just has
such an impact on students and
their success in schools. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you all and Mr. Chair
and Amanda, I would, I would
agree with you. I have a, um,
A great nephew who has
experienced many of the things
that your son experienced and
continues to do so and I think
families were special ed kids
are just really looking for
solutions too, and I think if,
if I would add one thing on, it
would be what Senator Lopez said
would be somehow include
training for parents that that
is, that works with schools so
that everybody would kind of be
on at least the same track. It
would help.
Um, and, and all of that, all of
that costs money and it's money
we should look at because it's
money that's needed and uh and
I, I want to remind, um, of this
body you guys don't need to know
this that training doesn't
happen in one day either. You
know, it's got to be continually
we've got to review what
happened, you've got to do, you
know, so it's, it's, I think
really got to be a team approach
somehow at a school.
Uh, an individual school and in
a school system so that you just
don't, you know, oh, we did
training on, uh, physical
restraint today. So everything's
fine. We checked the box. So it
really has to be training that
works and is reviewed and comes
back again. So I do thank you
for this report, uh, for your
work and for your continued work
and I hope we can, I hope we can
work together to come up with
meaningful change. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, you
know, I, uh, substitute, I'm a
substitute teacher at
Albuquerque Public Schools and
we're not allowed to intervene
in those situations or staying
restrained folks that there's
fights. I've been in situations
where I've been a substitute and
there's been a substitute EA and
so the question I have is, what
have you thought about kind of
the role of substitutes, um,
because I mean, I know they're
not going to be getting the
training, but they're going to
be in situations where we want
to make sure they're not harming
any of our students, but
In some cases by just standing
there watching what's happening,
um, in a, in a fight situation
or any situation and not having
the training, you know, they're
allowing harm to happen as well.
So if I could maybe have PD
respond, deputy superintendent,
and, um, the attorney from
Disability rights real quick, we
are behind schedule if that's
OK.
Mr. Chair, Senate Majority, uh,
uh.
Leader Pope, um, I think that to
answer your question, I'm not
sure that there's a barrier
currently, um, to training
substitute teachers. I think
primarily it's likely financial
because if, if school districts
and charter schools are unable
to, uh, to train their primary,
their, their general staff, um,
substitute teachers like they
are going to to be um on the the
tail end of that training, but,
um, you know, to the extent that
they're able to get the support
to do that, I think it makes
sense and particularly for
substitutes.
That work primarily for a single
district, not ones that, you
know, that are employed as
substitutes by the district
makes total sense to um to get
them training, but I imagine and
uh Mr. Starkovich could likely
speak more to that, but I
imagine the, the resource issue
is likely a primary one.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, Pope, I,
I do feel that all staff need to
be trained and I said that
earlier, um, substitutes,
nurses, food, uh, custodial
staff, food service workers, I
feel like everybody should go
through that training. Some
district policies require that
Staff react not just respond,
but react when a student is a
danger to themselves or others.
So for a district to say Mr.
substitute, you can sit back and
watch that fight take place and
watch that student get hurt. To
me it's the wrong thing we
should be saying. We have a duty
to intervene to protect students
from those situations. So in my
opinion, we need to get funding
to to train everybody that sets
foot in a building and I'm not
talking about a vector training
or safe school training, I mean,
they need, they need the real
in-person type.
Ray. Thank you.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Pope, I think it's a great
question and I think, um, just
to add to that and in ways that
are probably not super helpful
given the greater expertise to
my left and right. Um, I, when,
when you ask your question, what
I really think about is how a
substitute teacher is prepared
to meet the day that he is
walking into, OK, and, and part
of this goes back to what
Senator Lopez was talking about
about implementation really,
really uh knowledge of what
In the IEP and what's in a BIP,
and I think particularly with
respect to students with
disabilities. Some of, of the,
the challenge that I'm sure you
could tell me, you could write a
novel on is, um, you know, what.
Being prepared to go in and
meet, uh, the needs of the
particular students in that
classroom for that day who have
those needs. And so I think part
of it is not so much a matter of
formal training, but about
preparation on individual
students' IEPs and VIPs in order
to know again, most, it really
is, I think a lot of the, the
belief of a lot of folks on our
team that most restraints.
Most incidents of seclusion can
be avoided if in fact there is
an understanding of what to
expect from that student and how
to respond to it in effective
ways. And whether that means
calling in behavior, um,
behavior specialists, you know,
calling in, uh, folks from the
team knowing who to call, uh,
from that child's team in order
to involve them in any sort of,
um, incident that's brewing up.
I think that's part of it too.
So I hope that's not too off
track, but I think when, when I
think about training
Think about preparation that is
the student specific and plan
specific or program specific.
Thank you. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I think maybe
it's just an APS Albuquerque
Public Schools districting at
this point they contract the
substitutes through Kelly
Services and I went through the
training and that's what we're
told is we have to let someone
else do that because we're not
training and liability, but I
just have the concerns that
we're talking about. You brought
up IEPs, we, they ask us to
substitute special education.
You're just going in without
having that preparation, without
having a lot of that information
IEPs.
And so I just think we really
need to consider that, but it
also sounds like I need to have
some discussions with the
Albuquerque Public schools as
well. So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent Figaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel, and it's an honor to see
a former colleague on the panel.
Um, I, my questions are for the
panel as a whole, but anyone can
answer is this group going to
continue working specifically to
propose language, um,
Amended changes for the
definitions that are unclear in
law, that are listed in the
report on page 11.
Um, item 78K and beyond, or are
you handing us this report and
suggesting that the legislature
make up these definitions which
would not be my recommendation,
Mr. Chair.
I mean, I, I, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Figueroa, I, I
can't speak for the whole uh
team, but certainly PED is going
to be involved in, in these
discussions to the extent that
the legislature would like us to
be and I certainly, um, to the
extent, you know, we will be
involved in these discussions,
having worked with these
stakeholders, it does give me a
different perspective than I
certainly had, um, and so I, but
I, I certainly can't speak for
the continuance of this group.
I'm not sure if I can either,
but I know that I have discussed
this with executive director
Alice Lou McCoy and DDC is, um,
We understand the imperative
nature of this, and we will
continue to fund, um, this work
or the work of others, uh, to,
to, um, pin those definitions
down. So we are, we continue to
be committed to this work, um,
you know, there was just caution
that, you know, are we the group
to do that? And, and maybe we
are, or maybe we need to pull in
other members, but again,
developmental disabilities
Council is committed to this
work.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you. That is good to hear. I
would like to see.
Proposals come before this
committee, preferably before the
next legislative session, if
possible, and I would like to
see the council continue to work
with PED on creating those
templates. There's no reason why
we can't have those done. Um,
and the recommendation 6A
propose who should get training.
Um, I'd like to see the
council's take on those
languages, not just a
recommendation that it needs to
be done. Um, my other
Question is focused, Mr. Chair,
primarily toward PED is PED
going to include focused FTE and
their budget proposal for this
next session.
I will turn it over to Assistant
secretary
to answer that question.
Let me step out, did you want to
respond.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, right now
it's unclear whether or not we
will ask for these specific uh
FTE in our budget. We are still
putting our budget together for
the next year. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you for
giving us that information.
There are other questions about
PED and the Ombuds comment that
this work is starting. This work
is beginning. Um,
is is
The planning to make templates
for parent notifications. The
notifications to parents of
their rights. The expectation
that that notification will be
given to parents without it
necessarily being requested or
even prompted by an incident, as
well as the incident templates
are those PD looking at.
Authoring those, planning those,
requiring that they
Be given to parents or is that
something the PED is waiting on
us to make a statutory change
for it to happen. Because
notification was mentioned by
several folks as a priority.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Figueroa, I think certainly the
the PED has taken all the
recommendations seriously. I
don't know it because it's just
very recent within the last
week. Um, I don't know that
there have been some concrete
discussions about whether to
undertake um templates of this
kind. I mean, we're certainly
doing in the office of Special
Education a number of templates
including a template IEP is um
um as Senator Lopez mentioned,
um, but I don't, I think the
recommendations being basically
less than a week old, we haven't
necessarily really concrete um
conversations about whether we
would move forward, but we
certainly are taking all the all
the recommendations seriously.
Fair enough, Mr. Chair. We'll
hope to hear more from PED on
progress on these things with
more than a week has passed, I
would add to that, um, that we
look at the funding carefully
that it be included in the
budget because it is necessary
to accomplish this work. Um, and
thank you to the council.
And to all of you who gave your
time to give us this report. I
hope we can make some of these
things happen.
Thank you. Um.
I did have one question that's
that's a little bit broad that I
don't know if it is addressed,
but, um, heard a lot of
training. Um, obviously, um,
which is awesome because I'm
about to start training next
week, but um,
I guess about reintegration, um,
because one thing where I've
never had training, I've never
had any guidance toward, but it
certainly happens is after
incidents and doesn't have to be
as extreme as what we're talking
about obviously in, in, in.
In this case, but obviously
including these cases of
seclusion and restraint, um, but
like how I, I, I can't remember
who, and I apologize, but
mentioned about um the student
doesn't want to go back to
school, to class anymore, right?
It becomes a barrier. Um, and
it's also on the teacher's side
like it becomes difficult, um,
uh, so I guess my question is,
was there any discussion about
like reintegration into the
school setting. Like how do you
get to a point
Where
Wrongs are recognized in
Come to some sort of agreement
solution moving forward in
progress, because school's going
to have to continue to happen
for a student and the educator.
Hm
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
I have taken the CPI training
multiple times, and that entity
does, um, discuss and and create
systems of reintegration. There,
there are two questions
happening right now. So when
there is discipline and there
are events that occur that, um,
hurt adults feelings, hurt
children's feelings, hurt
families's feelings. Um, there
can be refusal.
There can be schools that that
are calling.
Uh, your, your child is having a
difficult day, you need to come
pick them up, and that is also
not recorded. So that's a whole
different event occurring, but
with training with these
entities that training exists,
reintegration is an important
and necessary part and is part
of the documentation, um, that
is required, I know by
Albuquerque Public schools. So
templates do exist, you know,
but, but now we fall into the
local control, the who decides
what.
But reintegration is a part of
training for de-escalation, and
again, the training is 2 days,
it's a day and a half of let's
avoid the problem and then they
do an itty bitty snippet on how
to correctly so that no one gets
hurt, restrain a child. So the
training is set up to one,
de-escalate and get the kid, um,
and the, and everyone involved
back, um, into an educational,
um,
Rolling system, um, and then if
an incident has to reintegration
is part of that training as
well. So it is part of it, but
again, how do we train everyone?
Because that's my answer. It's
been my answer for 3 for 3
years, train everyone, all the
things, all the time,
pre-service teachers, um,
teachers who were just entering,
teachers who are veterans, train
everyone, um, and, and again,
cyclically and um,
I, not every teacher needs the
same training, um, in, in
creating classroom supports
within their behavior supports
within their classrooms.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I just wanted to add
that when that child is
restrained more than once within
the 30 calendar day period per
statute that IEP meeting is
meant to try to support that
reintegration, look at what
happened, what could we do
better next time? What other
things do we need in place, um,
and we have, um, in the
districts I've supported have
had heart to hearts, I guess is
the way to put it between the
family and the teacher.
and tried to reconnect them with
the student, um, so that they
can repair that relationship so
we have tried some of those
things and it's my understanding
that that's the reason behind
that that follow up IEP meeting
if we meet those, uh, restraint
guidelines.
Because if I, if I may excuse
me, I'm sorry, it's just, I
guess my issue with that is that
that's after multiple
restraints, whereas one of these
incidents could.
Starts, it starts spilling it
over into absenteeism. And then
once we start talking about
absenteeism, then it becomes a
problem, um, so I'm sorry.
Uh.
No, uh, Mr. Chair, I appreciate
your comment because it really
set up my comments so well, and
that is it. I, I think that um
that is really the reason why
what I was speaking to earlier
about needing to think about the
review frequency and the fact
that every instance of restraint
or seclusion should spark that
conversation because it really
is. It's part of it is repairing
relationships. Part of it is
really revisiting that behavior
intervention plan for children
who have VIPs to make sure that
things are
If a restraint is happening, it,
it really, without blaming
teachers, without blaming staff.
It really is a moment for the
school to say, oops, something
is not working. This is not
working. And so, and so
reintegration, I think, is
really a matter of, um, on that,
on that individualized level,
looking at that VIP changing
things so that things are
working and and working not just
for the student but working for
for staff, working for teachers,
working for everyone in that
environment. That, that meeting.
Really needs to happen after a
single instance, I think of, uh,
and I know people on, on the
team, I don't speak for the
entire team on that, but I do
think that personally that has
been a big issue that I've
thought of for many years with
this, um, with this matter is
that the review procedures
really need to be revisited for
that very reason. And I know
that, that you're, I'm probably
telling you what you already
know and this is where your,
your question comes from, but
you know that our, our rule does
already require that the
policies that districts.
put together, uh, regarding
restrain or seclusion need to
consider school district support
and strategies for school
employees to successfully
reintegrate a student who has
been restrained or secluded back
into the school or classroom
environment, so that's already
supposed to be a piece of any
policy or safety plan that we
have in place for the, for the
district in terms of the broad,
the broad view, but in terms of
the individual view, um, the
review, the immediate review by
a knowledgeable team who can
change the course of things is
so critical.
Thank you.
Right. Well, thank you all so
much for being here. We really
appreciate the work that you
have done here before us, but
the week that the work that
you've done over the past year
and your work. So thank you so
much and we look forward to some
of those recommendations that
Represent Figueroa, um, had
asked for, so thank you. Um.
All right, so we're about
12:30ish. Um, we'll come back at
1:15, so we'll have lunch here.
We'll come back at 1:15, folks.
