I take it you can hear me?
They must have fixed the wiring
in the building. It must have.
Well, Mr. Chairman, it's nice to
see everybody this morning. My
name is Wayne Props. I'm the
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Thank you for having us this
morning.
I noticed that you're already
running late, so I'll try to
catch up on time and be brief in
our presentation.
Uh, I'm joined, as you can tell
by a number of DFA staff. I was
going to introduce them all, but
in the interest of time, I'm
only going to introduce a
couple.
A couple of the new ones. I want
to, first of all,
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, uh, introduce you
to our new local government
division director Cecilia
Mavromatis, she could stand.
As you all know, the local
government division is one of
the most important divisions at
DFA and the one that probably
impacts your communities the
most. So I, I hope you will get
to know uh Cecilia. She's been
in the job now about 3 weeks.
She's not new to DFA. She was in
the state budget division, uh,
prior to taking on the role as
division director at local
government, um, but very pleased
to have her, uh, in this uh new
role.
Uh, also want to introduce our
general counsel. We have a new
general counsel at at at DFA uh
George Hippolyte, George, if you
would stand.
Very fortunate to have George.
He's uh not only from what uh
I've been able to tell in his
month or so at DFA a very good
lawyer, but he's particularly
knowledgeable about financial
matters and as you can tell,
that's not, as you probably
know, that's not an easy skill
set to find, uh, in an attorney,
uh, and, but it is a skill set
that we need at DFA, so very
happy to have.
George, uh, joined us uh as our
new general counsel and hope
that you'll get to know him, uh,
as well.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I was looking at your
agenda, and it appears that you
will have over the course of the
next 5 days, 38 PowerPoint
presentations.
And if those average 20 slides,
that's uh 760 slides.
Uh, so I'm gonna do you a favor
this morning. I'm not going to
go through my PowerPoint
presentation. You have it in
front of you.
happy to answer any questions
about it.
But I'm gonna tell you what I
think we need uh at DFA. I'm
joined by Mark Melhoff, our
administrative services
director.
Uh, and May Romero, our budget
director as well, and they can
certainly answer any questions
that you have about our budget
request.
But again, I'm just gonna tell
you what I think we need at DFA.
First of all, recurring, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, I think we need
between 1.5 and $2 million in
new recurring funding for FY 26.
That 1.5 to $2 million would
fund an additional attorney at
DFA. We currently now that
George has joined us, have 2
attorneys at DFA.
Uh, we've requested an
additional 2, but if you could
see your way to giving us an
additional one, I'd be pretty
satisfied with that.
The general counsel's office at
DFA is different than any other
gen general counsel's office and
state government because George
is not just a general counsel to
me. Uh, he serves as an advisor
to the governor's office as
well.
Uh, he serves as an advisor to
all other state agencies.
Uh, as well. Uh, so it's a much
broader scope of work, uh, in
the general counsel's office at
DFA than it is in other uh state
agencies, and we are responsive
and responsible to all of those
state agencies as well.
So it's a lot of work for just 2
people. So Madam Chair, again,
uh, if you could see your way
to uh funding an additional FTE
uh in our Office of General
Counsel, we'd be most grateful.
Second priority, uh, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee, it
would be an additional $500,000
approximately in financial
control division, um, Mr.
Melhoff, in addition to being
our uh administrative services
acting administrative Services
director is also our division
director for the Financial
control division.
The financial control division
at DFA is a heart and soul of
what we do. uh, Mr. Melhoff is
essentially the, the chief
Uh, financial officer for the
state of New Mexico. He's
responsible for ensuring that
all of the money that you
appropriate to DFA to other
state agencies is spent
appropriately.
There are strong financial
controls in place to ensure that
uh we don't get off track in
spending the money that we have
appropriated, uh, each year by
you, the legislature.
Uh, so we do anticipate, Madam
Chair, that looking like we will
have about a $500,000 shortfall
in financial control and again
Mackie and Mark can talk a
little bit more about the
details of it, but that would be
our second priority.
Third priority, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee is
about another $750,000.
For our newly created
infrastructure and planning
division at DFA.
Uh, you all know the director of
the new division, uh Wesley, I
think Wesley is, is here today.
Uh, the division kicked off on
July 1st of this year.
Last year, uh, you got us headed
down a good path was standing up
that division by appropriating
$750,000 in non-recurring money
for the current fiscal year or
that new division.
We, of course, are asking for
that $750,000 from the current
year to become recurring, uh,
but we're also, we also believe
that another $750,000 would set
that new division up for the
kind of success that I know you
wanted when you established it
through legislation, uh, this
last session. Wesley has done a
remarkable job so far of
staffing up the division. I
think he's only got a couple of
positions that are not.
but I think those are all in
active recruitment, so he's done
a good job of spending that in
additional $750,000
appropriation, but I've seen
this happen too many times in my
career, um, as chairman and
member of the committee, we
oftentimes don't finish the job
when we set something up, and
don't give it the resources it
actually needs to succeed. Uh,
so we think, Mr. Chairman, that
an additional $750,000 would
allow, uh, Wesley to fully staff
up that division, add a few more
FD.
between 6 to 8 FTE, uh, and if
we could do that this year, we
won't have to come back next
year. You'll have the
infrastructure and planning
division that again, I think you
all envisioned when you set the
division up with legislation
this past session.
And then finally, Mr. Chairman,
on the recurring side, probably
about another 250,000 or so uh
to fully fund existing
positions. It's a priority to
fully fund existing positions
this year. Uh, we are taking a
vacancy rate and or did have a
vacancy rate uh built into our
uh request of between 5 and 10%
depending on the division, so
we're not asking for all of the
money, uh, but we are asking to
fully fund the positions that we
currently have uh with those
vacancy rates.
built in, uh, and also some
other miscellaneous costs such
as uh increases to rates, uh,
insurance premiums, etc. that
all state employees or state
agencies are experiencing. So
again, Mr. Chairman, between 1.5
to $2 million in recurring um
numbers would, um,
You are asked to you uh today
and as we move into the, to the
session.
And those recurring as our on
slides 5 through 9 if you want
to look at the details of, of
what our requests are.
non-recurring, uh, which is on
slide 11, Mr. Chairman, we are
asking for a million dollars to
conduct a sock audit, SOC.
And I'll never remember what
that uh stands for, but good
news is Mark does, uh, about 2
years shortly after I became
secretary of the DFA, the state
auditor.
Issued a, um, I don't know
exactly what it's called, but uh
a mandate that the state.
Audit, it's human resource and
payroll system, you, you know it
better as, as the share system.
The share system had been in
existence over 20 years and had
never been audited. Uh, we
fully, um, supported the state
auditors requirement that we
conduct an audit of share, uh,
we just recently completed the
first one. I don't know if that
audit is.
Public yet.
Uh, but as soon as it is public,
we'll, of course, let your staff
know so that they have access to
it.
Um, but so audits aren't cheap.
Uh, it's gonna, we estimate that
it'll be about a million dollars
to conduct this audit on an
annual ongoing basis.
We're again asking for one time
non-recurring money for this
year, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee, but I do
anticipate in future years, we
will try to ask for that to be
built into our budget as on a
recurring basis.
We're asking for an additional
$8,160,000 for civil legal
services in a non-recurring
requests.
Um, we're also asking for some
additional funds, uh, probably
in the neighborhood of 250,000
or so for some unanticipated
legal costs that we have are
occurring in the current fiscal
year, uh, including a lawsuit
that was brought against the
Department of Finance and
Administration by the
administrative office of the
courts.
Uh, so Mr. Chairman, um, again,
there's some other smaller
requests in our budget. I
didn't, not going to go through
each and every one of them.
Um, do you think, uh, it's a
reasonable budget request. We
also have, you'll see on, I
think it's on slide.
We'll point you to slide, um.
We're all there.
On s it's, I think it's a one
slide that's not, doesn't have a
number on it, it's, but it's
obviously between slide 9 and
slide 11, slide 10, you'll see
our membership and dues requests
that we also oversee at the
Department of Finance and
administration.
It's not a part of our um DFA
budget request, Mr. Chairman,
but we do anticipate making an
additional request for matching
funds for federal grants. This
is something that you funded
last year.
And uh, I think it was a $75
million of the executive will be
asking for additional uh
Infrastructure matching or
matching funds for that. We
haven't settled on a number yet,
but we think that program has
been quite successful, uh, we're
asking for $250,000 for the
Work that we to continue the
work we've been doing on direct
pay for the state of New Mexico
I'm happy to talk a little bit
more about that as well.
And then Mr. Chairman, on slide
12, you'll see our versions and
vacancy rates that we wanted to
report to you.
Our vacancy rate is a little
higher than I like it, um, but I
think, um, that sort of tends to
ebb and flow and I do think
we'll, uh, we are actively
filling all of the positions
that you have, uh, appropriated
for the Department of Finance
Administration.
So I think that uh vacancy rate
will come down a little bit.
In terms of reversions, Mr.
Chairman, I think we have made
some progress there, I believe
last year we reverted $2.1
million in operating budgets,
uh, this last fiscal year, uh,
we reverted as you'll see on
that slide, uh, about 200,000,
so we do take
Reversions very seriously at
DFA. Uh, we don't want to send
money back to you if we don't
have to, uh, cause you probably
won't give it right back to us,
and we know that, so we're going
to try to spend it, uh, and uh
we've worked very hard on that,
actually, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to wrap
up there and ask you, answer any
questions that you have about
our budget request or other
things that are happening at at
DFA, um, but before that, before
I do that, Mr. Chairman, and
before I forget, I certainly
want to wish you and, and all of
the committee members and your
families are happy and safe uh
Thanksgiving. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Questions from community center
woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And a good happy Thanksgiving to
you too, sir.
I, uh
You
Your job, one of your jobs, uh,
uh, one of your staffers.
Actually looks at uh
How much money is in each
account?
And how that money is being
spent.
Uh
And I noticed we're overspending
quite a few.
Those accounts.
How do you justify that when you
spent, when, when you spend more
than the budget.
Uh, as Chairman and members of
the committee and and Senator,
I, I'm not sure all of the
accounts that you feel that
perhaps are overspent. I do know
one that we've
A lot of time discussing with
you and members of the
committee, uh, that's the uh
employee health benefits fund
for the state of New Mexico.
Uh, that, um, using your term,
um, Mr. Chairman and senator was
over has been overspent for the
last several fiscal years.
Uh, it's paid out more.
Uh, in benefits, and it's taken
in as revenue, and you don't
have to be DFA secretary to know
that's not a sustainable model.
Uh, we have tried, Mr. Chairman,
and I, I do want to leave most
of the discussion about that
particular fund to the new
healthcare authority secretary
because she's now responsible
for it.
I think you're gonna see some
things coming out of the
authority to try to address uh
the fact that the expenditures
have not kept up with revenues,
but I do know over the last 3
years, we've raised premiums on
average by 10%.
For all state employees that
participate in that, um, but
more needs to be done and I
don't, I'd be surprised if we
were completely out of the woods
on that one, no pun intended,
uh, completely out of the woods
on that particular challenge
that we've been trying to
address together, and I think we
have worked together to try to
address that.
You're happy to let Mark talk
about, you know, how the system
works because I think sometimes
when something is showing up as
uh
Uh, being over expended, it's
just because the revenues
haven't hit yet, so if I could,
Mr. Chairman, very briefly give
Mark an opportunity to talk
about um how share system works,
how he, um, how he tracks these
things and kind of debunk the
myth that there's some magic
button that he controls that
allows state agencies to
overspend, uh, because Mr.
Chairman, I can assure you that
button doesn't exist, so Mark.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods, um,
there isn't a magic button. And
and you and I areenators, we we
discussed this last year I
think. It's really not a magic
button I think the, the ERP
system share the accounting
system, it's set up at the
beginning of every fiscal year
with those budgetary controls in
place and and whatever budget
you all appropriate through
through the various bills is set
up with, we call it budget
checking, but it's, it's a way
to prevent agencies from
overspending their budgets. Um,
I'm not a a other than the
healthcare funds. I'm not.
Where specific funds you're
you're referring to with the
system generally will not allow
an entity to overspend their
budget. Now there's a budget
adjustment request process that
they can go through state budget
and and LFC, but generally
speaking, the system will
prevent that. There are timing
issues with revenues coming in
when we're talking federal um
capital that we have to really
closely monitor to make sure the
agencies are receiving the
revenues in a timely manner, so
they don't overspend and then
adjust budgets accordingly
throughout the year and the
financial control division.
along with the state budget
division. That's something we're
doing on, on a pretty much a
daily basis.
It, it, it sometimes amazes me
when I talk to the
State treasurer.
He says, Well, I've got to pay
these warrants because DFA says
They do.
And I ask him the same question.
Well, it shows it's a negative
balance.
And I understand the, the, the
lag of
Uh receiving federal funds.
But it
We're having a hard time seeing
that picture when it's a
continually.
Negative balance, and then that
negative balance keeps
increasing.
And in this particular fund that
we're talking about right here
is, is one of those funds.
And, and we ask, you know, we
ask the agencies, why don't you
Up the game. Why don't you show
in your different agencies.
Um
I guess the question is, why
shouldn't we show this negative
balance in, in the agency.
Itself instead of the, the fun.
Or and what's all on accounting
deal. It's all a double entry
accounting deal that we're we're
trying to show some kind of, of
rhyme or reason to.
But we keep putting general fund
money into those.
Trying to make
In our head, the fun balances.
And it kind of telling me what
you're telling me right now.
Is that the fund balances, it's
just uh, a time.
Increment. Is, is that what I'm
hearing?
Chairman Senator Woods, at
times, yes, because federal
revenues are on a reimbursement
basis, so the agencies are
getting those on a tell amount
of capital outlays on a
reimbursement basis. So there is
a timing delay in some of those
now in some funds, like the
healthcare fund, that, that's a
different issue that we have to
address as a state which we're
working towards, but generally
speaking, yes, it, it's a timing
delay, and they are evident on.
The agency's financial
statements, as well as in share
the balances are there, and
that's something we financial
control monitor on a daily basis
and we and our our cash control
manager Heather Kent is here in
the audience. Ernner staff are
monitoring this daily.
We are watching it on a daily
basis, and we do reach out to
the agencies when we do see an
issue with the timing delay, and
we, we asked them to speed that
process up, or, you know, we
tell them, hey, we may have to
shut this off until this is
resolved, which we do have the
ability to do as needed, which
is somewhat detrimental to the
state if we do that, but we
would if we had to.
So, essentially,
Well, I'm hearing what's going
on.
If this was a private industry,
which state is not private
industry.
But if we were running an
insurance company, the state,
uh, the office of of of the
Office of E.
Superintendent of
Insurance.
would require
A reserve.
So that this wouldn't happen.
Because they want to make sure
that whatever company it is.
Protects the consumer.
What we're doing.
is saying the budget of the
state of New Mexico, the
revenues of the state of New
Mexico.
Is what's protecting.
The health care system.
They were talking about.
And yet
Every opinion is accounted for.
You may investments of any
reserves.
The treasure makes investments.
I'm not saying that you in
particular, but
The stated in New Mexico makes
these investments every penny is
accounted for.
In a budget process, every penny
is accounted for.
So all of a sudden we have a
negative.
How's that accounted for?
What is the office setting?
Account for that.
If it's not
In a budget
It's coming out of some kind of
reserves.
It makes it look it's one-sided
to me.
And I know I'm not smart guy.
I know I'm not an accountant.
But it looks
It looks as though we're
creating.
Money
Here
And it looks as though an
agency.
I overspending their authority.
And
The
The treasure's got to make it
up.
And the state treasurer's got to
make it up.
Because
If not, let me know if I'm
wrong, but
When we pass the budget,
We designate that money to go to
the treasure.
In the treasure pays that out
monthly to agencies.
Whatever that budget is is how
much money the treasury gets.
The treasure starts paying
bills.
And somehow, some way.
They're paying bigger bills than
what's in the budget. I don't
want to beat this horse.
I know, you've heard my story
before.
I apologize to both of you.
But it's amazing that we're
supposed to keep
This
Fier down to every penny.
And all of a sudden we're 150
million.
Upside down.
And just one fund.
And I'm sorry I didn't list all
those funds today that are
negative.
We've got them back here in the
book.
I don't, I don't wanna, I don't
want to beat the horse anymore.
Uh, you.
We've had this discussion
before, but
We are not appropriating enough
money for this.
Somehow
And we either need to
appropriate more money, or we
need to gather money some other
way. Those other state funds or
however we do it.
Uh, you know, uh, it probably
should be bigger premiums
collected from the employees,
uh, to do this.
Uh, is, is, would be the
standard rule. If we're not
gonna do the standard rule.
We shouldn't just manufacture
money.
What I'm getting at, and, and
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, um.
Um, I'm beating this horse.
Thank you very much.
It's called tuning.
When you tune on your horse nut.
Be him.
Any other questions from
committee members?
When, let, let me go back to
Senator Woods's point I mean.
We're, we're sitting here
watching agencies overspend
their budgets day after day
after day.
And not to the small dollar
amounts.
The larger dos.
Then we're seeing
Capital outlay.
Balances
In Rio
Or are allowing the controllers
allowing them to use that money
for other purposes instead of
the intended purpose.
Um, where do we put the checks
and balances in that system.
I mean we could go back to 2
2016 or when Treasurer
Eichenberg was there and there
was no money in the bank
account, we were, we were
writing hot checks literally
writing hot checks to make
payroll during that time frame.
And I mean, he had a choice,
either pay people and
Or not and no payroll, nothing
goes home, or he goes to jail,
he kind of chose a choice to go
to jail. We're not in that
situation nowadays.
We're over budgeting or we're
under budgeting.
And then the checks and balances
I see it there.
is not in the system to make
sure that
statutes are applied correctly
in won't give you the example,
but I think you know the example
of taking balances from
appropriations and using them
for other purposes in there on
intended purpose, which is a
clear violation of the statute.
Where, where do we clear this up
at?
Well, Mr. Chairman, you, you
covered a couple of things and
again, I, I don't wanna.
I don't want to be disagreeable,
but I disagree that there are
not checks.
Mark just went through them.
If you want to know all of the
checks that are available.
Send your staff over. We'll go
through them with them. I know
Adrian came over. We, we've been
giving him access to shares so
he can better understand share.
It's Cher is an open book.
Agencies do not routinely
overspend their budget.
You get a deficiency report
every year. We provide you a
deficiency report every year.
It's less than a dozen last
year.
The big one is the big one. It's
the health benefits, and you're
right, Senator Woods, you're
going to have to continue to
fill that bucket.
We're going to have to continue
to raise premiums. We're gonna
have to do some cost
containment, which hasn't been
done, but I think the healthcare
authority is better positioned
to do that than GSD was.
But until we do some of those
cost containment things that
other state programs like the
retiree Healthcare Authority
have been doing for 20 years,
that's why they're still
solvent. When I took over
retired healthcare authority 20
years ago. It was projected to
be insolvent within 7 years.
It's not insolvent anymore. What
did they do? They raised
premiums every year.
They cut benefits.
Uh
And they contain costs, so I
just don't see agencies
routinely overspending their
budgets. That's what we call the
uh deficiency appropriation, you
get a deficiency report, we
provide you with the deficiency
report.
Um, things happen when you're
dealing with this many agencies.
This large of a budget,
occasionally things are gonna
happen. I'm not sitting here
saying that Mark and his staff
are perfect.
Uh, some things may get by them
too, but I just disagree that
there's rampant overspending by
state agencies outside of the
budget parameters that you
established in House Bill 2. I
just haven't seen that. If I saw
it, I'd be the first one saying
something about it, but I don't
see it.
Uh, with regard to capital
outlay, I know that's a a topic
of discussion, um.
Wanting to spend more money, not
spend more money necessarily,
but spend more money, spend the
money that you appropriate. I
met with the governor on this
two weeks ago.
Nobody wants that wants that to
happen more than she does.
But as I pointed out to the
governor,
Of the capital outlay that you
appropriated in the first term,
first year in office.
93% has been spent.
Her 2nd year in office,
86% has been spent.
Her 3rd year in office, 63% has
been spent.
Her 4th year in office, 34%.
Her 5th year, 22%.
And of course, the current
fiscal year we've only spent
about 1% of the capital outlay
that was appropriated. We've had
it for 5 months.
So, I think there's a narrative
out there, can we do better?
Yes, that's why you created the
infrastructure uh division.
That's why, why we have that,
and I think that's gonna help
enormously.
Um, but I believe that we are
trying to respond, because it's
one thing to spend money
quickly, Mr. Chairman.
Um, it's another thing to spend
it wisely.
And that's also our job at DFA,
not just to spend the money.
But to ensure that it's spent
wisely with appropriate
financial controls.
So that we don't have
Scandals
Like we've had in the past.
When the state treasurer was
kiting checks.
We're not kiting checks with
DFA.
So, you know, can we do better?
Absolutely.
Um, that's why I always say my
number one priority in our
budget is financial control
division because if Mark doesn't
have the staff he needs, and
then things can slip through the
cracks.
Uh, but I'm here to tell you, I
know we can do better. One of
the things that we implemented
just this last week.
All executive agencies, cabinet
level agencies must now
regularly meet with their state
budget division.
Analysts
The number of documents. I don't
have it in front of me, that
they will be required to
Provide on a quarterly basis.
This is primarily intended to
ensure that the money that is
appropriate is being spent on
the, for the purpose that was
appropriated.
Uh, that if there are red flags
in terms of reversions.
Possible overspending that we
catch those upfront instead of
waiting it to the end of the
fiscal year when we close our
books, which is historically
what we've done.
Uh, so we do listen, uh, and
we're trying to do some things
differently at DFA uh to ensure
that some of these concerns that
you've had.
Uh, including with the health
benefits.
We're in a better position.
Quicker
Uh, to address those with the
agencies become before they
become a bigger problem for you,
and frankly.
So, Mr. Secretary, I mean.
We're 4 months into this year, 3
or 4 months of this year, and,
and we're already looking at 44
supplementals.
In 6th deficiencies.
And that's
In a 4 month
July August September October 4
months.
I mean, we're looking at 44
deficiencies in or 6
deficiencies and 44
supplemental, so I mean.
Somewhere we're not tracking the
right numbers at some, I mean,
Mr. Chair, my deficiencies there
for prior years are not for the
current fiscal year. So that was
for, it's not just for 4 months,
that's for 16 months now at this
point.
Those 44 supplement 6
deficiencies.
Mhm. That's for last year,
supplementals for this year are
already tracking and so I mean,
in a 4 month period, I mean,
that's spending money really
quickly if you already know
you've overspent and asking for
a supplemental.
I mean they may be large
supplementals and may be a
healthcare authority, right?
That one's gonna be an outlier
the whole time cause until we
can get a handle on DOH and HCA
and and all that. Those are
gonna be outliers and they're
gonna be large numbers and we
just.
I think we do the right thing
and we always end up short. But
they got to do a little better
job of getting the head um.
And I agree with that, Mr.
Chairman, we need to do a better
job of getting ahead of some of
these things. I don't disagree
with that. And and the problem
is we as a legislature, we meet
once a month and you guys are in
the office 300 days a year.
And, and, and we're only here.
30 days a year trying to build a
budget and, and so you guys, the
agencies have the time to do
this. They gotta figure some of
this out.
And not come in with, you know,
for that is.
It's not pretty, very strategic
at all, reversions in total were
roughly 300 million, we think
this year, right?
That's how much we overfunded
agencies, I mean.
In order to fix the problem that
DOH and HCA.
There's money to fix.
Prom and and lay a little extra
money there just in case, but
when the agencies are asking us
for more than they can use, or
than they can accomplish,
becomes a problem.
where we want to put our money.
And then
On that point, Chairman,
operating budget reversions are
actually down slightly this
year. The overall number is up.
I understand that, but the, the
where we're seeing the larger
reversions are not in section 4,
they're in section 56, and 7.
Uh, and some prior year versions
that didn't get booked
appropriately, uh, or not
appropriately, but they weren't
booked when they should have
been booked. Those are the kind
of issues that I'm, as I just
mentioned, DFA understands that
we need to try to help agencies
get out front on quicker, but
overall,
Operating budget reversions is.
Which is what I focus on, uh,
cause that's the budget that you
give me to run DFA if I'm, as I
said earlier, we were, we
reverted 2.1 million last year.
That's unacceptable. I got the
message, Mr. Chairman. This year
it was 200,000. Hopefully next
year will be 0.
but our message has been
received, but
And on the other, you know, 656
and 7 sections of House Bill 2,
we need to, we need to figure
out what's going on there, and I
think we can, I think we can do
that. And I also think that as
federal funds continue to dry
up, and they may dry up even
quicker now.
Uh, you may see some of those
versions uh not happening at the
same level going forward because
they agencies won't be able to
rely on that.
But in the same step you're in,
agencies are not applying for
their federal funds either.
And you can go to CYFD who's not
applying for their federal funds
that programming, um.
Homeland Security is now coming
in saying we want a supplemental
or we want.
Change that so that we don't
have to apply in the agencies
are gonna have to apply for
federal funds, whether they get
them or not, that's a different
story.
And then the other cautionary
tale is, I mean, some agencies
in in your agency when when we
have good cabinet secretaries
like you that we trust. We don't
mind over we don't want to leave
you short. I mean, the pace
study has taught me that in no
greater detail, we spent
countless days working that
thing.
The bone and so we don't want to
leave you short, and, but we
don't wanna
To go overboard in some of these
agencies are gonna have to get
in line and say.
You're gonna have to build the
trust with the legislature,
cause we're gonna look really
hard at this this year.
Uh, we know
That if we come in with a 4%
increase.
3% of that is just going to
healthcare.
And 1% is going into your
checking account.
I mean, that is a large portion
and and that was.
Pretty much caused by the
executive by not increasing.
Uh, costs on the health funds.
3 or 4 years ago, and now it's
just, it's still snowballing and
haunting us like a ghost.
It won't go away and we gotta
get control of that, so employee
what my insurance is gonna cost
me, it's the highest cost that
we everybody's paying for me.
So we're gonna have to figure
that out.
Um, appreciate the time, maybe
one shot Wayne can.
Get that.
can get that, uh, figured out if
we can get you a, maybe we can
get you a practice ranger
shooting heels so we can get
these on target, the fine, Mr.
Chairman. Happy to do that.
Thank you, sir. Thank you,
ma'am. All right, thank you.
Um, we're gonna jump to just so
we need to do what where we're
going to go, Charles Tabb in for
Nancy, N for Nancy Rodriguez.
Mr. Chairman, this is the uh
list of contracts that were
requesting approval for. There's
2.
One is for uh Laird Grazier
who's uh worked with us for many
years to help uh.
Provide a force multiplication
for our economists, and the
second
is for the next phase of the
personnel study.
Um, this would get started on
the job architecture. This is
where we've got the new pay
scales that um we expect to be
implemented.
Starting July 1.
And this is helping map people
uh from the existing uh pay plan
to the new one to make sure that
they're in the right spot. And
this is for a contract for
200,000, uh, to get started. We
um would have a request, uh, for
the legislature as part of the
feed bill to fund the full study
at 750,000, uh, which has been
uh negotiated with Deloitte. We
had issued an RFP for this uh
during the summer, and that's
how much
Uh, we've negotiated with him to
get the job done for the next
phase, the 200,000 would get us
started. Uh, they've broken out,
uh,
The project
Um, and we'd have some
information by the end of
January, uh, but the next phase
would need, we need additional
funding. So the request is to
authorize us to enter into that
$200,000 contract, and then in
your package, you've got
The, um, phase two.
That if
Uh, the legislature funds the
full uh contract amount.
Uh, that amount
Um, would be amended with the
contract.
And we wouldn't need to come
back because you'd be in the
session.
Um, so, basically, the full
amount would be for up to
750,000.
Um, broken up, but the first
thing is 200,000. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
Questions on the contractor.
You can have a motion by Senator
Rodriguez, second by Senator
Woods, the objection to the
motion, you know, OK.
John, you're gonna start off.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, uh.
Good morning everybody, John
Courtney, deputy director here
at LFC.
Uh, with me is Doctor Andrew,
uh, Minner State Bud Bud
division director over at DFA.
Um
Last legislative session.
You all passed and the governor
signed House Bill 196.
Uh, creating the government
results and Opportunity fund.
That bill asked for DFA and LFC
to work together to look at the
accountability and Government
Act, and come with, come to you
with potential uh
recommendations for changes. We
have those for you today, um.
I'll start by just giving a
brief history of the AGA, um,
some of the changes that that
you all have made uh to the AGO
over the years.
Um, and then, uh, Andrew will
talk.
A little bit about some of the
some of the good work that DFA
and LFC have been doing together
to uh improve transparency,
improved requests, and then
specifically get into the uh
recommended changes to the HEA.
So you should all have a, a
slide deck in front of you.
We've got it displayed up here
on the screen too, if you'd like
to follow along. We'll go over
to slide 2.
So
In 1999, the, uh, New Mexico
enacted the accountability in
Government Act. And what that
act essentially did is it moved
us from a line item budgeting
process based primarily on costs
to a process that's more focused
on performance. Um, you'll see a
larger categories, um, uh,
funding, and I'll have an
example here in just a slide.
Um, and that performance focus
includes uh measures, goals, and
quarterly reporting. You all
know those, um, not only uh from
seeing them in the budget, but
also from the quarterly report
cards.
Uh, that are, are published on
uh LFC's website.
So as a result from this DFA and
LFC make recommendations that
reflect those larger categories.
They include performance
measures. You can see, um, and
actually uh follow those QR
codes if you're interested to
last year's budget
recommendations, um, which is
what we'll be talking about all
week for our November agencies
as we prepare to um release
those budget recommendations uh
that you're working on in
January.
So this is just kind of an
interesting slide as, as we were
preparing this, I, I thought it
was kind of a neat look to go
back to the 2nd judicial
district attorney in 1997 to see
how they looked in the budget
versus how they look, uh, today.
So this is pre-AGA versus post
AEA. And you can see that we
used to focus um fund agencies,
um, on, on more granular line
items, including categories like
travel, maintenance and repairs,
supplies and materials.
Um, capital outlay, out of state
travel was a separate category
with no performance metrics in
there. You, you'll also notice
the uh the difference in funding
going back to 1997, um, the
personnel funding for the 2nd DA
at the time was $7 million. Now
we're at, uh, for FY 25, uh
30.5, 30.6 million.
So, if you look below there,
this is post AGA.
Um, and the, the differences we
have fewer categories, but we
now have uh performance measures
included in there.
So the statute calls for DFA and
LFC to to collaborate with
agencies on performance measure
development, which we, we do
every year, um, those
performance measures and those
goals are a part of the budget
recommendations that are
released by uh each branch in
January.
And, uh, agencies work, um,
To report on these metrics on a
quarterly basis, uh, key
agencies, I should say, not
every agency, but key agencies.
Um, and that's reported on, on
our website and released to the
to the public every quarter. Um,
I believe right now our our most
recent, and this is an example
on the right slide there, slide
4, DOH's public health report
card. Um,
Those uh performances
categorized based on the uh red,
yellow, green scale, um, green
essentially, uh, are, is when an
agency is performing well,
meeting, meeting targets or
goals, yellow when they're
close, but, you know, may need
some improvement and red, uh,
when they're, they're not
meeting those.
those requirements.
Um, fast forward to 2019.
And um Senator Ru sponsored a
bill, Senate Bill 58.
Um, that made another change to
the accountability in Government
Act.
Uh, this gave the Department of
Finance Administration and the
legislative Finance Committee,
um, uh, the authority to uh
select agencies.
Um, to look at, uh, program
inventories, uh, not only to
look at what programs, uh,
agencies were, were, uh,
providing, but also categorizing
them in terms of how much
evidence they had behind them.
And you can see their, um, you
added definitions to statue to
define evidence-based
research-based, and promising.
This is something the federal
government has, has done
recently. It's something that,
uh, some other states have have
also done. Um,
And so, um, we've been doing
this inventory process for going
on 5 years now on our side, uh,
Doctor Sarah Dentis.
Uh, leads that process on the
DFA side. Simon Miller did for a
number of years and now I
believe John Campbell does that,
and you'll actually see a brief
coming uh to you later this
year, probably December. To
summarize the findings of, of uh
those program inventories. Uh,
they're really interesting
though, and, and um when we do
the same agency or the same
program multiple years in a row,
uh, which we've been doing for,
uh, behavioral health for the
Department of Corrections for
CYFD you can actually see the
progress that's being made in
terms of
Um, the, the amount and the
proportion or percentage of
investment that's going towards,
um, uh, promising research-based
or evidence-based programs.
So that brings us up to to last
year where you all uh passed and
the governor signed House Bill
196, the government results and
opportunity fund. Um,
So this is a uh
A new tool in your toolbox, uh,
that does a couple of things.
You know, one, it provides
funding for the midterm. You all
funded projects, pilot projects
last year for 3 years, the, the
statute gives you the
flexibility this year if you
were to want to um do that for 4
years or more for pilot
projects, um, to do that.
Um, but the other thing that it
does is, is it basically gives
agencies um uh a trial run on a
pilot basis to see if, if a new
idea or a new program, um, can
make an impact, can make a
difference, can can achieve a
goal that that's of interest to
uh to that agency and improving
lives of the um
People of New Mexico. Um, you
all put uh 512 million in the
government expendable, uh,
government results and
opportunity or grow expendable
trust last year. The way this
works is every year, um, it will
spin off 25% or 100 million,
whichever is greater to the
program fund, that program fund
and funds these uh pilot
projects on a, a multi-year
basis. Um, I believe the, the
projection in the FIR for this
year is a spinoff, uh, from
Expendable trust into the
program fund of about uh $133
million.
Uh, that I'll, I'll pass you
over to Andrew, who will take
us, uh.
slide 7 and and beyond.
Thank you, John. Uh, good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Pleasure to be
here with you again and I will
look forward to working with you
all during the upcoming session.
So I'd just like to start my
part of the presentation by uh
covering some of the ways that
DFA and LFC have worked to
improve, uh, budget requests and
transparency regarding them over
the past year, so you can see on
the current slide, uh, one of
the main ways that we did that
was to reform the uh expansion
request process and come up with
a, a new form collab
really collaboratively that uh
requires agencies to uh submit
uh some more specific
information and then extensive
information regarding them. So
those, uh, request forms that
the seven elements that you see
described here, uh, those are
being used to inform both uh
recurring budget recommendations
for uh expansion requests, but
also, uh, some of those grow
pilot projects that that John
mentioned and that I'll be
talking about, uh, here in a
bit. So, uh, I think this is
a great step in the right
direction and, uh, you know,
this is the first time that
agencies have seen this, uh, for
this past FY 26 budget requests.
So I'm hoping next year over the
interim, we can, you know, get
some feedback, uh, for how they,
you know, dealt with it and kind
of incorporate that and work
with the agencies, work with LC
to to further refine and improve
uh this form for future years.
Uh, next, I wanted to highlight
some of the ways that DFA has
some of the steps that DFA has
taken, uh, to reform and improve
the budget process as uh the
state budget division is
responsible for providing all
these guidelines and rules for
uh budget requests, so you'll
see several different things,
uh, on highlighted on this
slide, we required additional
reports, including
justifications for specific line
items and lists of agencies
current anticipated contracts,
required agencies to submit
details.
a list of their federal grants,
and they expected funding
levels.
Uh, we moved the deadline for
special appropriation requests
up, uh, you might remember it
used to be due October,
November-ish, uh, but we moved
it to a line with recurring
budget requests. So basically
September 1st, and that allows,
you know, because, as you all
know, we've seen a lot more
non-recurring special
appropriation requests and over
the past few years with the
greater avail availability of
revenue, uh, so that allows more
time for those big requests to
be analyzed and considered for
the executive and legislation
recommendations, uh, kind of on
the other side of that, we moved
the deadline for uh supplemental
deficiencies and
reauthorizations and bar
language back to November 15th,
of course just last Friday, so
you see they, those all just
came in. Um, that's to allow
agencies a bit more time to
determine their needs, and
because we know there's a lot of
focus on all this, we did
increase the requirements of
what we want to see, along with
these requests. So we want to
see good budget projections for
supplementals. We want to see
documentation for deficiencies
and spending plans for any sort
of non-recurring appropriations
that they are asking, uh, to
reauthorize.
Goal for all this is to increase
both the quantity and the
quality of the budget
information available to
executive and legislative
analysts and leadership when
crafting their budget
recommendation. Uh, this is all
a work in progress. We believe
there's more to be done in this
regard, and it is my goal to
continue to approve this process
uh as we go into the future.
Uh, the next slide, this shows a
couple of the ways that we and
the LFC have worked to, uh,
increase transparency in the
budget request. So, uh,
On, on DFA side, I'm very proud
that for the first time we
published all agency budget
requests on the DFA website. Uh
it took us a little bit of time
to do this because we wanted to
make sure we have the technical
review, uh, part of the request
done to make sure that we were
providing accurate information
to the public, but you can see
all those now on DFA's website,
um.
And then we also have dashboards
on DFA's websites regarding past
junior bills, um, capital
outlay, all that stuff. So, uh,
more information on our website
and then on the LFC side, uh,
they released a Citizen's Guide
to the budget, and they've also
implemented multiple dashboards
for revenue estimations, risk
settlements, stuff like that.
So,
I want to highlight all these,
uh, steps here because, you
know, these things are not
technically changing the AGA,
but I believe they go hand in
hand with reforms to the AGA to,
you know, efforts to improve the
budget process. So, OK.
So now let's talk about uh some
of the proposed changes as John
mentioned, to the, to the AGA,
uh, before I started, I want to
thank, uh, Simon Miller, as John
said, who's who's been working
on our side uh on this, on this
stuff.
So
What you'll see here are
basically trying to get out what
are the required elements, uh,
of evaluations for these grow
projects. Basically, how should
these pilot projects, uh, be
evaluated and considered for
eventual eventual inclusion into
the agency's budget. And so I,
you know, I'm gonna go through
all these little details here,
you can kind of see the list,
but I will tell you that they
are basically built for the most
part, uh, they are built off
when you go back to the
expansion request form.
Uh, agencies kind of had to
address most of these. So trying
to find some commonality and
continuation, um, in the
process. So,
And then real quick, um, you'll
see, so there's a slight
difference, you'll see LFC
proposed section on the left.
EFA proposed section on the
right, um, so as you can see
there's mostly, they're mostly
the same, excuse me.
There was a small difference
here where uh our lang our
suggestion was the division and
consultation with the committee.
uh, this is language that is
consistent with other sections
of the accountability and
Government Act, such as uh
proving changes to uh
performance measures or program
structure, that's just how the,
the law is written.
And the, um, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, so we
were able to reach consensus, I,
I think on, on all those
recommendations except that that
first sentence and Andrew said,
there's a section of law that
that reads in consultation with
that um uh
My memory specific to
performance measures. There's
also a section of existing law
in the AGA, um, that reflects,
um, the LFC proposed language
that goes back to that 2019
Senate Bill 58, uh, language.
Um, so the, and the, the concern
there is, is not for necessarily
for this administration, we work
really well with the DFA, um,
but, you know, potential future
leg um.
Uh
Administrations, uh, we felt
that, that, uh, our language
just gave us a little more uh
equal. Thank you, John. Uh,
going on to the next, uh, slide.
This is the 2nd part of the
change, and this is basically
just a uh regarding the timing
of plans, basically when these
plans, uh, the evaluation plans
will be, um, submitted, um, and
when they'll be when the
evaluation plan will be, so
sorry, let me just speak to it.
So basically, uh, an agency that
receives a grow appropriation,
uh, prior to the
First year of it, they have to
submit their plan by June 15th,
and then a final accountability
and evaluation plan will be
approved by the division and
committee or again, division
consultation with that same
thing we just discussed on or
before September 1st of the
first year. So those, that's
what you're seeing on this one.
you know, I had a small
clarification suggestion
regarding timing, which uh you
see adopted, so I do appreciate
that.
And then, uh, the last change.
Here, uh, this is something that
DFA came up with and uh I want
to thank John and folks for for
including this. This was just an
idea to uh give the, a bit of
formality to the process by
which a uh grow pilot project
would become part of an agency's
uh recurring budget, and it also
tries to address a bit of a, a
timing issue in that if you say,
um, you know, a pilot project is
approved for, let's say 3 years,
uh, as you
know, we work on the budget
request process a year in
advance. So, for example, if uh
HCA has a, has a grow pilot
project for FY 252627, if they
would like to put it in their
budget in 28, they need to make
that request during this, during
FY 27, right? During the final
year of that pilot project, so
that's a little, you know,
that's just a timing issue that
otherwise, you know, if they
wait a year to the final
evaluation is done, and this is
not to take away the final
event.
Evaluation or anything, but if
they wait the year, then there
might be a gap between where
they don't get the funding, and
if this is a good program that's
working, you wouldn't want that
to happen, could have negative
impacts on, you know, the
program or it's or it's
beneficiaries. So, uh, just
offered some language that tries
to get at that here basically
just says, um, by July 15th of
the final fiscal year of
appropriation, uh, division, uh,
we'll consider the inartation,
of course, with the agency and
LFC shall consider the
evaluation performed.
to that point and make
recommendations to both the
governor and the committee
regarding inclusion of the
program, the agency operating
budget the following fiscal
year. So then the agency could
take that information, those
recommendations.
Work it into their budget
request for the following year
and the LFC and the executive
could uh react accordingly, so,
uh, those are the changes, uh,
we at DFA we believe what's
being presented is a significant
step forward. Uh, I appreciate
being able to sit down with the
LFC to discuss, uh, I just want
to say though that we haven't uh
briefed the governor's office on
these changes, uh, but we expect
to do so soon, and we'll bring
anything further, any further
suggested improvements back to,
back to the LFC.
So
Um
Last thing is, uh, I wanted to
briefly introduce a couple of
new staff members. So thank you,
John, for giving me the
opportunity to do that, uh, in
last session, the legislature
provided funding uh for uh state
budget division to hire our
first ever uh executive program
of performance analysts, so, uh,
thank you for that, really
appreciate that. So, uh, briefly
want to introduce them. They're
back here. So one of them, I
think you'll be familiar with
John Campbell, former SFC staff
and LFC staff, and then we have
Jackie Stele here.
Uh, comes to us from the private
sector, uh, whoever heard of
someone leaving the private
sector to come for work for
government, but we got one, but
she, we really appreciate uh all
her knowledge and perspective
that she brings, so, um, this is
a program that we're still
building out and expanding, and
we're we're we're excited about
it. They, they've been, uh, you
know, uh, they led agency
performance measures training,
something we reinstituted last
year, but they took it over uh
this this year, uh, of course,
like John Manchin Senate Bill
58.
been helping agencies with a
performance measures, but we
want them to do a whole lot more
and so um I just wanna close
with saying, you know, we all
share, uh, the same goal of
helping to address the needs of
the state, and we'd like to work
with you any way we can, so you
have any questions, suggestions,
concerns regarding the state
budget process or agency
operations, please don't
hesitate to reach out to myself,
John or Jackie, you've got your
email, their emails there. And
yeah, we, we, we look forward to
continuing to work.
with you all both offline and in
future hearings, so thanks, and
with that I'll turn over for
questions.
Thank you, I guess I'll have a
motion to adopt pro pro section
A.
Let me, uh, uh, any questions
from committee members.
Yeah.
There would
OK, you showed up an example of
the chair, you showed an example
of
Some programs
That uh were, you know, we're in
the red here on page.
For
And as administrations change,
and as new ideas come in.
How the hell we're going to stop
the program.
I mean, this should be an ideal
way to actually
Say this program is doing no
good, so let's stop it and quit
funding it.
Is, is that in the plan, or are
we just
Keep expanding.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator Woods,
it's a good question, uh, for,
for this, for the grow
appropriations, that's, that's
exactly the plan, you know, to,
to pilot these things on a, on a
mid-term basis, but with uh
non-recurring funding.
And use it as a testing ground,
um, with this evaluation
component attached to it, so
that we can see as it's rolling
out, if it's working as
intended, if it's moving the
needle. And if it is, as Andrew
mentioned, um, you know,
building that into recurring
budgets. But if it's not, um,
uh, not to recommend that for
recurring funding. Um, that's
been one of the challenges that
I, I know we've talked about
through the years that usually
with expansion requests, um,
that evaluation component.
Uh, isn't included. And so when
Uh, traditionally, when those
expansion requests happen and
you all have built that money
into the the base budget. There
is no mechanism to to pull that
back. Uh, whereas this, this
creates that exact kind of
mechanism that that uh sounds
like you'd like Senator, and,
and this is Mr. Chair, this is
exactly
What I am so concerned about.
I think we have 3000 contractors
for the state of New Mexico so
some odd.
Large number
And I know some of those
contractors are, are doing
programming.
And, and, uh,
I often wonder, you know,
How close are those programs
being looked at that those
contractors are doing.
Um, and because it seems we're
ever expanding, so that's what
I'm getting at.
Can we actually come up with a
numerical value mature.
To say
This is bad. Let's quit it.
Let's rerout our money. Let's do
something different.
So, hopefully, this is what your
program will do for us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This year.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. So
it's, it's
The Growth Fund, I think last
year we didn't get to.
The word out.
To all of the members that this
was a special project,
everybody, not everybody, a lot
of people still took it as a two
junior project.
And I think
Uh, the evaluations part of that
is.
Critical that we make sure that
that's in whatever we do this
year.
Um
But
Do we really need 112.
Or 224.
New programs to look at,
evaluate.
really that many things out
there that we need to do.
Just
throw that out there. It's a
rhetorical question because
It seems to me like we could
really grow a lot of programs.
It might be OK, but do we really
need? So that's out there. But
the other part that we talked
about here was
Was how we do the budget and how
we evaluate and all those kind
of things.
But based on several things that
we've heard today.
Somebody doesn't know what the
appropriation system means.
I don't know if it's the
departments or DFA or if it's
the treasurer or the governor or
LFC or us.
Somebody has, has, has a problem
with.
With how the appropriation
systems work.
Because we're the appropriators,
we say department has 10 number
of dollars.
DFA is supposed to control those
dollars.
And the governor does whatever
she wants with those dollars.
The evaluations that we have.
Meaningless once they decide
they're going to spend those
dollars.
There's no reward or punishment
for failure or success.
Somehow we need to define how
the appropriations work, and I
think we have the definition, we
just ignore it and so does the
governor and so does DFA and so
does every agency.
In the evaluations.
are great.
But they mean nothing because we
don't care how they spend the
money.
Well we care. We just don't do
anything about it.
So
Just my friendly comments.
Representative Hernon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. I'd like to
direct your attention to the
Department of Health uh report
card that I'd like to for you to
answer some questions and this
would also help us to understand
this evaluation process. So the
first one where there is an R
rating. It refers to uh
contraceptives for women who are
ages 15 through 19, but it's
showing as a failure. My
question would be how closely
are you looking at how that
program was actually carried out
and did the Department of Heal
put in the resources it was
needed to make sure that this
program was successful rather
than trying to eliminate the
program, that would be a major
and critical concern, and I also
point to you with respect to the
same pro to a similar program
with regard to cigarette smokers
in the cessation of services and
coming to the Department of
Health. Uh, I'm just wondering
how much effort was put into
these programs. Both of them are
incredibly important and we
should not cut them out. So
could you please answer those,
Mr. Chair.
and members of the presenters.
So Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, that, that's a good
question and, and, you know,
this is, this is an example of,
of a quarterly report card of um
in the, the existing AGA
process, um, you know, the, the
Department of Health, it looks
like they, they missed that
target, um, by, by 4%, so you
know, didn't quite get there,
but those are, this is a good
tool and and and those are a
good tool to leverage for
questions like that. When we
have uh the Department of Health
in, in front of us for their
budget hearing. I believe that's
in December.
Um, so they, they'll be up and,
and, you know, for, for a number
of the agencies, including some
of the agencies, will we see
this week. Um, you can go online
and see what their, their
current performances in those
report cards and, and dig into
that exact, exact level of
detail. Um, as far as the the
specific questions you'd have,
I'd, I'd have to go back
probably to the department to to
get more details from them or
our analyst who's over that.
And thank you very much and Mr.
Chair, Mr. and presenter to, uh,
just to, to focus specifically
on the overdose reversals in the
harm reduction program, and that
has a yellow. There's no reason
for that to be in a yellow, and
so we could look at that, those
programs and the other bigger
question is that, uh, I want to
know how can we be assured these
programs are not going to be cut
or eliminated because they're in
the red or in the yellow when
they should be continuing, and
is there something that we need
to be doing?
Or what do we need to do to make
sure that they continue.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon. So, um, you know that.
The um
The yellow rating on that metric
uh has to do with um the agency
not not meeting that target. So
the yellow, they, they almost
got to 3200, but they, they
didn't quite get there. Um, as
far as, as, uh, future funding
for these programs, that's,
that's up to you all. And
that's, that's exactly what,
what we'll be talking about when
DOH comes in in December, just
like the agencies, this, uh,
this week, uh, they'll have a
budget proposal, um, we'll have
information.
uh for you to, to dig deeper
into that. And then that's a,
that's a decision that that um
you all make as members of the
legislature, we're to, where to,
whether to fund that, whether to
fund it more, less, what those
needs are, um, with this being a
a a tool in your toolbox to to
help dig into that level.
You. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, so
those are just a point in time.
It says, did you, did you get an
A, B, or C, right?
Not whether we're going to cut
the program, it's like, are you
really providing contraceptives
in schools and are they readily
available and they're not doing
it, so they're they under met
their mark, telling the agency.
We want to see a better
performance out of that.
Right? You need to go from red
to green is where you really
need to go.
It's not cutting the grow
program is, is determining.
What shall go in and what
shouldn't go in and we're saying
how do we score that and so on
that mark, if, if it's that was
in grow and they were in the
red, we'd all say, oh yeah,
well, they're not, they're not
meeting the requirements, so
what do we want to do, do you
wanna put it back and grow and
see if they can meet their
requirements, or if it wasn't a
girl program, but that's a base
budget number in an agency, so.
different scoring methods and
one just.
And monitor what's happening
inside agencies.
Um
John
Why, I mean, the governor vetoed
all the performance measures in
the grow.
Right? And there's no
performance measures on
non-reoccurring.
Which would be grown, correct?
Mr. Chairman, a portion of
non-recurring is grow.
Yeah, and, and so there's no
performance measures on them.
So I mean, we gotta be thinking
it.
Ahead, I mean it'd be 5 steps
ahead of the.
The exact in the next exec.
Mean
We really want to see if these
things are working. I mean,
performance measures have to
happen across the board.
And, and I think it's up to the
legislature to determine whether
they want to continue the
programs or not.
Not the executive Andrew, do you
know, can you name three places
where the exact spent.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, I believe
there, there will be an
executive recommendation for
Gro, uh.
In the FY 26 budget
recommendation that's coming
out, no, I, I we were in past,
in the last year did she
appropriate her grow money. Uh,
well, we, uh, Mr. Chair, we
didn't know that there was a
grow when the executive
recommendation came out last
year, so there was no grow
recommendation last year, but
there will be an FY 26.
And and so her portion of growth
that the executive program.
But that was because it was part
of the ele Mr. Cher was part of
the LFC budget recommendation
last year, so there was no like
the whole concept of grow was
part of the LFC budget
recommendation last year, so,
uh, as for now, they are the
executive agencies are just
implementing the where the uh
legislature
Charles.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think this
is a good
The clarification point.
So
The Grow is a a big pot of money
that you've been appropriating
money with the intent to have a
heightened level and there's two
types of projects that received
Appropriations from that fund.
The first were the things that
John was addressing were
agencies were asking to expand
and rather than put it into the
agency-based budget, you set it
aside as a pilot project.
All of those were for 3 years.
There were some deletions of
accountability and performance
measures, but there was a lot
that was still.
Left in, so we're working with
those agencies on that.
The second pot of money for Gro.
was a member and governor-driven
uh projects for 2 years.
Um, with the intent that there
would be a heightened level of
accountability.
Over those. There was a a couple
of projects that I think the.
The governor's office did
recommend, I can't remember off
the top of my head exactly what
those are, um, but two different
types of
Uh, grow appropriations that I,
I think there's been a lot of
confusion about out there, um.
But both with the intent of a
heightened level of
accountability of are these
things working or not, whether
they were appropriated by an
individual legislator or whether
Uh, it was an agency, um,
project.
Thank you, Charles. That's,
that's correct. Sorry about
that. Thank you for the
clarification. So yeah, as he,
as Charles said, there are those
kind of two sections and section
if you like section 9D. That was
the that was the kind of second
part of Gro, uh, like Charles, I
don't remember the governor's
portion of that off the top of
my head, I can get that for you
easily, but uh, uh, but you
know, those came together late
in session, and I think it's a,
you know, basically constituted
the former junior bill, um, I
think that's a question before
the legislature as to how to
address that part of it, uh,
next session.
OK, and
Why are John, why, why are we,
well, I know we told him to do
that, but why, why are Andrew,
let me ask you, why are you?
pushing back on the legislature
approving the.
Uh, with regards to the, the
pilot projects, Mr. Sherman, uh,
I wouldn't say it's pushing
back, it's just that the the
The the executive feels that
they should as part is the
responsible part of uh the
executive budget recommendation
to put forward in FY 26, uh,
list of projects that the
executive fields would be
suitable for uh pilot projects
just as part of the, as the part
of the recommendation overall.
Yeah, and, and that's kind of
worrisome to me that that we're
not making the determination of
what programs are scored and and
done correctly in the
legislature to move forward.
And that programs aren't.
Put it the
Last couple of years of
administration and and then we
grow government.
Bureaucratically
Before and try to get
performance measures back in
there that are more stringent
than across the board with
reoccurring and non-reoccurring.
Anything else, John?
Uh, no, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Sure.
As the next panels coming up,
Mr. Chairman, um,
I don't think uh Miss Dobson has
been introduced to the
committee, I think.
We're traveling, but I'd like to
introduce one of our new.
Program evaluators.
So
Elizabeth, do you want to stand
up? Elizabeth Dodson, uh, she
joined LFC this summer. She's
been, she's a recent graduate
from UNM's political science
master's program. Um, she'll be
presenting a project to you that
she's been working on on school
transportation in December.
She's been doing a great job, a
good addition to our, um,
program evaluation unit just
wanted the opportunity to
Everybody to
Put a name to the face.
Congratulations. Thank you.
Are we gonna work off uh
Doctor Dines, are we gonna work
off a handout or?
Tap.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, you'll be in
tab B of your binders, uh B as
in boy, looks like this.
But whenever you're ready. Uh,
good morning, chair, and members
of the committee. I'm Doctor
Sarah Ds, uh, LFC program
evaluator. I'm joined today by
my colleague, uh, Drew Weaver,
who is also a program evaluator.
We're here to present the DDMEV
of waivers progress report and
as I just mentioned, it is in
tab of your body.
Uh, before we get started, we
want to thank Director Jen
Rodriguez and her team at the
Developmental Disability
Supports division or DDSD for
working collaborative with
collaboratively with us
throughout this whole process.
We also want to remind you all
that this is a progress report.
Go.
Uh, I also want to remind you
all that this is a progress
report from an evaluation we did
6 years ago in 2018 on the DD
Aevia waivers. These waivers
support individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities and they use an
option for states to allow for
the federal government to help,
uh, provide services for people
using Medicaid services.
Uh, LFC conducted this progress
report to see the status of
recommendations we made back
then focused on costs,
oversight, and to learn more
about how the system has
responded to the state,
embracing an opportunity to
effectively eliminate a waitlist
for services.
Now if you'll please turn with
me to page one.
We'll start with the
The DD and mea waivers are
administered by DBSD, serving
just under 8000 New Mexicans
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities.
These waivers provide both state
and federal Medicaid dollars.
And they're used to deliver uh
living supports, community
services, therapy, and uh other
services to allow waiver
participants to live within
their community.
Since the previous evaluation in
2018, DDSD has resolved the over
35 year Jackson lawsuit and has
effectively ended the
thirteen-year wait list for
services, but problems with
provider capacity have arisen
and persistent, uh, issues with
quality monitoring and cost
containment have remained.
In 2024, the state serves 69%
more DD and Mia clients than in
FY17.
But the majority of this growth
occurring since 2021.
The rapid growth of the waivers
has likely strained providers,
with at least 50% of providers
not accepting new clients.
GTSD is working to improve its
processes around abuse and
neglect, but is not assessed
capacity of case managers and
consultants to monitor
participants, resulting in
uncertainty regarding visit
quality.
Waiver costs have also continued
to increase, and this can limit
the number of new individuals
that the state can provide
services to.
Since the previous evaluation,
cost per client has grown 26% to
98,000 across the DDMED waivers,
and this is largely due to a
higher level of care and rate
increases.
The report has 3 main findings
that I want you all to take away
with you. The first is that
provider capacity has decreased,
likely due to increased DD
enrollment.
That, uh, abuse, neglect, and
exploitation processes in the
development of disabilities
waiver system are improving but
need to be monitored, and that
costs are continuing to
increase.
Now let's turn to page 3 and
we'll get started with.
The Didi media and supports
waivers serve 7,849 individuals
at approximately 800 million in
FY 24.
These waivers, which are
administered by the
Developmental Disability
Supports division or DDSD offer
home and community-based
services so that participants
can live and be active within
their community.
If you look at chart one, you
can see the steady increase of
DDSD budget related to these two
waivers since FY 17.
And the budget has increased
about roughly over 100% from
FY17.
DDSD operates 3 waivers as shown
in table 1, that are related,
that we're going to be
discussing today. The first is
the DD waiver. This waiver, uh,
is the, the traditional waiver
it provides comprehensive
services, uh, and these are
coordinated for the use of a
case manager.
Then there's the me via waiver,
which is a self-directed waiver,
it allows participants to choose
and manage their own services.
Lastly, there's a supports
waiver which provides up to
$10,000 for individuals who are
on the waitlist. Um.
And then I would like you to all
turn with me to page 4 to look
at table 2 and chart 2. These
show how enrollment and costs
associated with these different
waivers, um, have changed. With
chart 2 showing the increases in
enrollment and per client costs
since the 2018 evaluation. Well,
enrollment has increased 69%
since FY17.er client costs have
increased 26% and total spending
has increased 118%.
Further down on page 4, you can
see that since FY 22, DDSD has
provided allocations to 5700
potential clients.
In November of 2021.
Uh, as shown on page 5 on chart
4.
The state began using the
American Rescue Plan Act funding
to remove people from the
waitlist and continued to do so
through FY 24.
New Mexico is used 2 11 million
of the ARPA funds to allocate
services and expects to continue
to add people from the waitlist
annually using both general fund
dollars and Medicaid dollars.
However, adding additional
individuals comes with a price
tag for the state.
Especially as federal ARPA
dollars are gone.
HCA projects to need between 73
and 89 million in FY 25 to
remove people from the waitlist.
And while removing people from
the waitlist allows for more
immediate access to services for
many individuals. It can
strained provider capacity and
potentially negative negatively
impact performance metrics.
Additionally, waiver costs
continue to increase. You'll
look with me to uh at chart 5 at
the bottom of page 5, you can
see that New Mexico is some of
the highest waiver costs in the
country based upon most recent
available data to compare state
by state.
Furthermore, the Medicaid
Assistance Division or MAD
projects continued cost
increases, expecting a 14%
increase in the developmental
disability waiver costs between
FY 24 and 25, and most of these
increases in costs are coming
from both enrollment, uh,
increases and rate increases.
Looking at page 6, table 3. And
see that provider rates have
increased between 16 and 64%
between FY 18 and 25 depending
upon the service category.
Um, if you'll look at that
table, the customized in-home
supports, sorry, excuse me, the
one above, supported living
increased between 16 and 24%
depending upon the level of
acuity that individuals had with
our lowest acuity care, uh,
increasing by 16%, and then on
the high end, you'll see that
our therapies have increased by
the rates have increased by 64%.
This includes occupational
speech language pathology, and
physical therapy. Moving to the
bottom of page 6. A subset of
services make up the majority of
our state's expenditures.
The waiver offers an array of
home and community based
services with case managers or
consultants helping participants
coordinate and find the services
they need.
You'll turn to page 7 and look
at charts 6 and 7.
You can see that living supports
make up the majority of our
spending, followed by community
supports, and the definitions
for the main categories of
services are included within
table 4.
And if you'll turn with me to
page 9.
Uh, despite some progress, some
of the, most of the key findings
from the 2018 evaluation are
still unresolved, including
rising costs and the need for
additional oversight. Table 5 on
page 9 provides a summary of
which findings have been
addressed and which findings
have yet to be addressed from
the previous report.
Uh, importantly, I want to point
out that the state has resolved
the Jackson lawsuit and has
basically eliminated the
waitlist, but we still need to
focus on costs and oversight.
Both of which will be discussed
in detail later in this report.
First, however, we want to move
to discussing provider capacity,
is the ability for providers to
to provide services to
individuals. So if you'll turn
with me to page 10.
New Mexico has limited provider
capacity for its high demand
service provider capacity
challenges are common
nationwide, uh, and not just for
the development of disability
waivers, but for other services
as well. And this is largely due
to too few workers to provide
direct support to individuals,
uh, and for, and too few
therapists in at least in New
Mexico. If you look at Chart 8
with me.
You can see how the proportion
of providers accepting new
clients has dropped for the most
expensive services since 2018,
and uh one of the ones that I
wanted to just kind of use as an
example is for intensive medical
supported living. Uh, that's the
top service in the chart.
Uh, you'll see that the number
of individuals providing that
service significantly dropped,
and there's, sorry, the number
of counties with providers
accepting new clients
significantly dropped, and this
includes counties such as
Bernalillo, Sandoval, and Donana
counties. If our most populous
counties cannot provide the
service to new individuals,
that's a cause for concern
because this is where the
majority of individuals live.
And so it's in the most populous
counties can't get the service
or less populated counties also
likely cannot. Additionally, if
you look at page 11 at table 6.
You can see the number of total
providers that are on moratorium
or not accepting new clients.
For instance, in August of 2024,
we had 282 total providers
across the DD media and another
waiver called the medically
fragile waiver.
However, 159 of those providers
were on moratorium, meaning that
56% of providers at least were
not accepting new clients.
Given these issues, the
developmental disability
supports division or DDSD
permission to provider capacity
report in 2023. This report was
conducted by the Public
Consulting Group, and they found
that roughly 50% of clients
cannot access all the services
that are on their plan.
On page 12, you can see that
DDSD is working to address
provider capacity, but could
also proactively implement some
federal policy and best
practice.
Table 8 shows the list of
recommendations from the PCG
report.
Uh, DTSD is addressing at least
9 of them, but could do more in
regards to wage pass-throughs.
At the top of page 13.
The federal rule will require
the development of disabilities
providers to pass through 80% of
reimbursement rates to those
directly providing services by
2030. And we as a state could
require this sooner, and likely
to improve retention and
recruitment of individuals.
DDSD general uh excuse me,
support professionals or DSPs
are generally low paid and have
high turnover, uh, salaries for
most DSPs were between $12 to
$17 an hour in 2023.
And providers had a turnover
rate of roughly 32%. This is
higher than what it was in 2018.
North Carolina included
pass-through recommendations in
its 2023 budget bill in New
Mexico could also enact similar
legislation to require
pass-throughs prior to the
enactment of the federal rule.
Uh, with GDSD developing a
monitoring plan prior to
implementation.
Looking at the bottom of page
13, there are other other ways
to increase DSP pay beyond
pass-throughs. One way is
through incentive payments, and
this is a practice that is done
in many other states. For
instance, in Oklahoma, they
started incentive payments this
year, providing an additional
$1000 as a recruitment or
retention incentive, and an
additional $1000 every 6 months
through January.
New Mexico could use its
government results and
opportunity fund or grow money
to see if this is an effective
strategy for our state.
Two additional strategies to
free up uh provider time,
include uh uptake of telehealth
services as well as examining,
uh, uh, how we use therapy
within our state, um, and with
that, I will turn the
presentation over to Drew to
discuss our next two chapters.
Thank you, Doctor Dents, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
If you'll turn with me to page
16.
Our next finding is that while
the healthcare authority is
addressing some safety concerns.
Others regarding client
monitoring and requests for
assistance remain ongoing.
These findings touch upon DDSD
as well as the division of
health improvement, or DHI,
which is the abuse and safety
regulatory and oversight body of
the HCA.
As many of you may be aware, a
wave of participant died from
abuse in 2023.
Prompting both a quick response
from the agency in the form of
wellness visits for all 6800
participants, but also with the
help of a third party consulting
group, Accenture, longer term
reevaluation of the division's
organizational structure of
their processes for abuse,
neglect, and exploitation, or
A&E.
On page 18, table 11 addresses
some of Accenture's main
findings, and 7 of the
recommendations they flagged as
needing most immediate
remediation.
As a side note, a full list of
wrecks can be found in Appendix
D if needed.
Within table 11, DDSD has
already made progress on a
number of these recommendations.
For example, they have further
articulated their own key
concepts and mission statement
and identified ways to build
these principles into daily
practice.
Another recommendation from
table 11 identified in red and
for which more progress could be
made involves assessing case
management and consultant
capacity. An important step in
coordinating both safety and
service quality.
Part 11, on the bottom of page
18, shows both the total number
of case management and
consultant providers, as well as
the number with deficiencies
related to monitoring
participants.
23% of case management providers
and 83% of consultant agencies
were cited for either not having
evidence of visiting
participants, not having monthly
contact or of not recording this
information properly within
their information management
system.
In addition to potential
compliance and safety
ramifications, this builds off
another Accenture finding that
even when visits are happening
for participants, they can be
checked the box or
compliance-driven.
On page 19, the blue callout box
highlights another finding
regarding abuse, neglect, and
exploitation that DDSD and DHI
are in the process of addressing
regarding process and clarity.
This includes the need to
identify accountability points
for risk and safety, update job
descriptions with enhanced role
details and responsibilities and
develop new communication and
training across agencies to help
implement these changes.
On page 20, table 12 touches
upon a few of these
communication and accountability
points.
A regional office requested
assistance, Aurora can be filed
by providers or participants for
help receiving services in a
timely and correct manner.
And FY 24 Roass took 9 days to
assign and 58 days from
assignment to closure.
This marks both an improvement
from FY 23, in which cases took
over 93 days from assignment to
closure, but still falls above
the 5 and 45 day guidelines to
assign and close respectively,
that the agency has set forth.
One additional safety and
wellness finding highlighted in
bold at the bottom of page 20 is
that DDSD and DHI monitor
compliance, but have not
traditionally assessed
participant quality of life or
other participant outcomes.
Page 23, sorry to make you turn
a few pages. Highlights current
performance measures for DDSD
and DHI related.
Excuse me, related to the DD
waivers, including many new
performance measures from the
Federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid with a large number of
these measures positively
addressing abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
However, on page 24, table 15
lists potential performance
measures DDSD could adopt
related to participant outcomes
such as community inclusion,
individuals residing in the
least restrictive environments
for their needs and individuals
progressing towards more
personalized goals.
Finally, if you turn to page 26.
Our final chapter.
is that DDSD has limited
oversight of participant budget,
expenditures, and service
delivery.
Waiver costs have consistently
exceeded LFC and Medicaid
Assistance Division projections.
A 16 shows average participant
expenditures versus projected
average expenditures.
Looking at the traditional DD
waiver in FY 24, for example,
the state's per participant cost
of over $115,000 or 34% higher
than the projected cost of
77,000, which we use for
budgeting and planning, which
can have severe implications for
projections moving forward.
This trend is exacerbated by the
fact that new waiver enrollees
already exceed these projected
averages in their first full
fiscal year on the waiver.
LFC's 2018 evaluation found that
new waiver members cost could
rise as much as 78% between year
one and two and another 23%
between years 2 and 3.
One potential explanation is
that in general, participants
are using higher level and more
services.
Table 17 on this page
illustrates how reimbursement
rates for supported living vary
by category, ranging annually
from $75,000 for category one,
on up to $156,000 for category
4, according to FY 25 rates.
On page 27, chart 14, shows that
nearly 80% of individuals are
enrolled under the highest
acuity levels of supported
living, and that this is up over
10% points from 2017, when LFC
identified it as an unmonitored
trend then.
Table 18 breaks this trend down
further, showing Category 4 as
the primary enrollment driver
now encompassing 50.6% of
supported living individuals and
growing yearly.
In other categories such as
therapies, a much higher
proportion of waiver
participants are enrolled or
using services than in nearly
any other state.
Table 19 shows peer,
non-institutional states on
either side of New Mexico in
terms of average expenditures,
and what proportion of the
waiver anticipated using
physical therapy, occupational
therapy, or speech language
pathology.
In addition to having a larger
participation rate than those
others.
Those in New Mexico are also
using more of it than any pure
state.
The callout box highlights how
24% of users exceed these
service caps.
This occurs even though an
articulated goal within our DD
waiver standard is to fade out
or transition participants off
services when they are no longer
needed.
The state, however, has reported
not receiving a fade-out plan
within the past 3 years.
Two potential reasons for these
allocation trends, which we
highlight on page 28 or the lack
of a two-step review process and
the lack of a validated
assessment tool.
Which can decrease oversight and
may increase the risk of
misallocating services.
Figure 3 on this page
illustrates the service and
budget development process in
which an interdisciplinary team,
including family members, case
managers, and the providers who
will be contracted for services,
help the participant build and
submit a budget plan.
We highlight two parts of the
process.
The gray box indicates where a
validated assessment or
consistent tool to measure
participant needs and abilities
could help determine appropriate
service levels.
The state used a validated
assessment in 2013, but then
removed it following a lawsuit.
Waldrop versus HSD.
The lawsuit, however, did not
forbid the tool, nor did it ban
service limitations instead
addressing fair hearings and
exception processes for
additional services.
Excerpts from the Wardrobe
settlement are contained in
Appendix F.
Secondly, the red circle denotes
another former step, which was
an outside reviewer to conduct
clinical review of service
plans.
This was phased out beginning in
FR 24 and eliminated in FR 25.
Final sub-binding is on page 30.
And this is that LFC found that
Didi and media participants are
significantly over their budget
allotment or service caps.
The media waiver or more
self-directed option as an
individual budgetary allotment
or maximum amount of funding,
which was set at just over
$72,000 in FY 24.
Part 16, the histogram
illustrates the number of
participants based upon
expenditure range. The sky blue
bar representing the 360
participants between 70,000 and
80,000 were the maximum
allotment should be.
Over 1500 or half the
participants expended between
80,000 and 100,000, and another
300 expended more than 100,000.
If the allotment had been
adhered to, the state would have
had an additional 42 million or
enough to fund another 575
individuals.
Similar findings exist for
several DD service provisions.
On page 31, however, we
highlight how for some services
such as community-based
employment supports, New Mexico
does not have service limits,
even though it is common
practice in most states.
All 4 of the pure states alluded
to earlier, for example, have
limits in different ways,
whether it's monetary or hourly.
DC, the most generous of these
examples, as a weekly hour limit
for community employment
services combined which
participants can choose how to
fill in which if New Mexico had
in place, would have saved 17
million.
With that, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'll turn it back
over to Doctor Dinis for key
recommendations.
Thanks, you turn with me to page
2, we'll discuss some of the key
key recommendations.
I don't know why it's not coming
up on the slide.
I apologize for that. Uh, I'll
talk through them.
Uh, anyway, so, uh, the
legislature should consider
enacting uh
The legislature should consider
enacting legislation to require
providers to pass through 80% of
Medicaid reimbursement rates to
the salary of direct support
professionals per the CMS final
rule, starting in FY 27.
This legislation should require
DDSD develop a compliance
monitoring plan by September 1st
of 2025.
CTSD of the Healthcare Authority
should work with the LFC and DFA
to create performance measures
for client outcomes, quality of
life, and provider quality.
Uh, DDSD should also ensure case
manager and consultant ability
to meet current standards,
including monitoring of
caseloads. If case managers and
consultants are not meeting
state standards, they should
increase training and oversight
of the case management and uh
DDSD should also follow through
on plans to require the Finland
adaptive Behavior scale and
require the results of the scale
be used to develop
individualized service plans
within the traditional
developmental disabilities
waiver and for the traditional
developmental disabilities
waiver, develop appropriate
budget.
caps for services for new
enrollees, and for the media via
waiver adhere to the individual
budgetary allotment, unless
there are justifiable
extenuating circumstances. Thank
you so much for your attention,
uh, do you have a presentation?
Uh, I'll turn it over to uh HCA
to for a brief presentation.
Yeah
We're OK. Thanks.
And they share this uh members
of the committee, thank you. I'm
Kira Ochoa, deputy secretary for
the Healthcare Authority. I have
the um newly um given honor of
um having DDSD in my portfolio.
I'm very happy to be here with
um deputies from Jennifer
Rodriguez's team, unfortunately,
our division directors traveling
for work and um so her team is
here with me today to answer any
specific questions. I have Scott
Doan, Joseph Ty and Chris Fiy
were all.
deputies in the division. Um,
first, I want to start by
thanking um
Sarah and her team for the
report, um, we, I personally
actually learned a lot about the
division by reading the report.
um, and so I think it's a
wonderful comprehensive view
with um some really interesting
recommendations. Um, I'll just
speak high level to some of the
main uh things that the division
would like to just have you
think about as you think about
responding. Um, the first thing
is that the main idea of um
implementing the wage pass
through before 2030, um, the
division does have some concerns
around that getting out in front
of the CMS rule change can be um
inefficient, uh, if we were to
implement something that CMS
doesn't ultimately agree on. So
that could create its own set of
costs, um,
Uh, this is really just the high
level on the 3 recommendations,
um, so I don't have a page by
page, but we're happy to answer
questions on page by page
issues. Thank you. Um, so that
is one point um that we have a
concern around, um, we
certainly, um,
You know, encourage and are uh
very interested in the idea of
incentives for these hardworking
providers and the people that
they employ and it's really
difficult field, and we're very
open to exploring all other
sources for implementing
incentives and retention bonuses
that we could um work with
providers to do, um, and the
other high-level responses on
the issue of A&E abuse and
neglect, which is, of course,
primary.
in everyone's mind as we as we
think about this provider
network in this population. Um,
we have, um,
since the incident.
Um, created a new bureau within
the DDSD to respond specifically
to A&E and so that is a real
dedication, but no matter which
bureau you're in, no matter
which division you're in, um, we
are, you know, really
implementing a um
Ultimate responsibility at every
level for responding. It never
stops at your desk until you
know that the complaint has been
taken care of and so we're
looking at all the processes
that'll make that primary in
every staff person's mind as, as
I know it already is and, and
most people's minds. Um, the
other piece of that is um to
really uh revise the quality
management tools to look at the
um capacity, the case manager
capacity and the
consultant capacity, and that
has recently occurred, so we're
very happy to report and, and
Mr. Done can tell you more about
that if you're interested in
that, how that will help, um,
really assess that capacity of
those folks to respond to any,
and then, of course, um, we're
happy to have our division of
health improvement here, uh, as
well, uh, and we are in HCA very
excited to have submitted a
budget request that really
bolsters their capacity, um, to
respond, um, meaningful.
and and robustly to any. And
then finally, um, the.
The um issue of costs, which I
know, of course, is all primary
on this committee's mind, um,
you know, it is challenging um
given previous litigation to uh
institute caps, which we've done
in the past, um, but you know,
the division's been directed,
um, from that litigation, not to
do so. That said, um, we are
very committed to implementing
the validated assessment tool,
the Vineland tool, and you
appreciate that comment from
from the.
Um.
From the group and um you know,
really that person centered
planning, uh, is where the
individuals can control costs
best, but, you know, we welcome
your input on how to do so. And
with that, um, we really will
just wanna think again, um, the
LC for their hard work, um, and,
uh, looking at all of this and
stamp for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you all for the
presentation, a lot of
information and um kind of hard
to follow it all, but one of the
things that I noticed, Mr.
Chairman was on page 10, and on
page 6.
Those I kind of uh correlated
those uh percentage change in
reimbursement.
And, and the cost, uh, that,
that it's gone up.
And the one thing that I didn't
see a cost uh percentage is the
one that is the, the lowest,
which is the intensive medical
supported living. So is that
considered home health care, or
what is that under and anyone
can answer maybe.
Doctor Dentist, uh, chair
members of the committee, um, I
could easily get you the number
for intensive medical living.
The reason we did not put it in
that small table, I think it's
just because it's a smaller
number, and we're trying to keep
the table concise. I don't know
if anyone, uh knows it, but I
could find that for you pretty
easily. Well, thank you for
that. I, I was just curious
because Mr. Chairman, it looks
like, um, you know, for physical
therapy, occupational therapy
and speech language pathology,
64% increase, um, in, in
And then the, the rest were a
little bit lower, but I wondered
if that's maybe part of the
problem. Maybe there needs to be
an increase in that as well. And
so with my, my question is,
The cost has risen, the
percentage for reimbursement has
risen, but it's gone ultimately,
we're not doing, we're not uh
servicing as many people as we
were. So,
Do you think the percentage of
reimbursement has anything to do
with the num reason it's gone
down
like, yes, likely the the number
of individuals who
I'll get closer, uh, the number
of individuals who uh don't you
entered the waiver was
significant. We added thousands
of individuals and by adding
those thousands of individuals,
there just might not be enough
providers or the providers may
not have enough time to
adequately see all individuals,
and then another point of
clarification I wanted to make
was that the chart 8 on page 10
that you're referring to is the
number of counties that are able
to accept new clients. So they
may be serving more people but
not able to take.
On new clients.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and Mr. Chair, um, if
we may also add.
Yes, thank you, uh, Deputy
Secretary Ocho. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong,
intensive medical living
services is offered through the
developmental disabilities
waiver. The DD waiver, it's a 24
hour residential service. It's
probably less than 50
individuals statewide who
receive that service, and part
of it is because uh that service
is intended for those
individuals with the most
medically complex needs,
individuals who are on um some
type of durable medical
equipment like, um, ventilator
uh dependent, um, they, um,
are, are very uh fragile in
their medically, uh, medical
diagnosis. So that's really for
those individuals with the most
complex medical needs that we
don't have that many individuals
on the waiver who um require
that level of intensive medical
care within our 24 hour
residential services.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that
clarification. I was just, you
know, the chart makes it look
like
We're not offering enough
services, but
In reality, we may not have that
many clients that need that
service. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair, um, Representative
Armstrong, that is um correct
for that specific service, you
don't see the number of
individuals who need or, or
qualify for that level of
service as you would, for
example, in the support category
4,
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
chair.
Um
Under the key recommendations.
So
Do you already have someone
working on the legislature
Senator Gonzalez, no, we do not
currently have anyone working on
that legislation, and I think it
could come about in a variety of
different ways. We can talk off.
I guess the only concern is you
know, the sooner.
It's just the part that I was
looking at, and again, it is a
lot of
um, that could also be done
through uh the House Bill 2
process, which is what was done
in North Carolina, they did it
very well, thank you.
Thank you, Senator. All righty.
I, I just have a quick question
and I'm gonna move there. I
don't have anyone else on the
list, so, um, let me just ask
you this question. Thank you,
Kira and everyone for our staff
for your work. Um, you know,
we've got 7900 New Mexicans,
people on the DD waiver,
including the mea waiver. Um,
and so, and we've had a 69%
increase.
Since 2017 in those numbers that
we serve.
The question that I have helped
me understand this is that we
had approximately 6000 people on
the waiting list before.
It was again supposedly cleared.
Um, I'm, I'm having a hard time
understanding how we could have
cleared a list of 6000 people on
the waiting list that had to
wait up to 13 years to get
service, and we cleared that
list in a year.
Yeah, I don't understand how
that happened, but yet we still
have a 69% increase.
In the DD waiver clients that
were serving, so help me
understand how that works. I
want to make sure that we're not
leaving, um, you know, letting
people fall through the cracks
here that should be getting
these services, as we know,
these are the most vulnerable uh
developmentally disabled
individuals that we're here to
serve. So thank you, Sarah. Can
you help me with that? Thank
you. Thank you, chair. Uh, what
I would point you all to is
chart 4 on page 5,
Uh, what that shows is the
number of individuals who with
whom we're allocating services
and the number of individuals on
the waitlist. Oftentimes people
may uh decline accepting
acceptance of services at that
time. This frequently happens
with younger individuals who may
already be getting their
services through other things so
they can put their allocation on
hold, and then, uh, join the
waiver uh when they need to
actually start receiving those
services.
OK. Yes, yes, yeah, it does make
sense. Um, did we, Sarah, did
anybody follow up to see.
Where are these individuals
were, there were approximately
6000 for 13 years on the list
and they disappeared. I wanna
make sure that, yes, I agree
with you some maybe went on to
get other services, and you know
what, unfortunately some may
have passed away waiting 13
years with developmentally
disabled, uh, needs. I, I just
can't imagine that, but I guess
the question that I have is, did
anyone follow up to see
Whatever happened to those 6000,
did some of them get other
services, did some of them, um,
elect not to have services
through other providers or how
does it work? Just briefly,
thank you. Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, yes, DDSD made a
concerted effort to um find, if
you will, everyone on the
waitlist of 6000 individuals,
and so first thing we did is we
went through the list to make
sure we had accurate contact
information, the person on the
wait lists, their, their family
It was her guardians, friends,
relatives, and we sent out, uh,
letters and letters in itself is
not good enough, but we do not
get responses to letters. We
made phone calls, but we do not
get responses to phone calls. We
make additional follow-up phone
calls in some cases, we even
went and knocked on doors at the
last known address to find
everyone we also consulted with
our partners at uh Medicaid, the
managed care organizations and
the care coordinators to see if
they had additional um
information and so as
uh, um, dentist said, um, those
individuals who did not accept
the allocation, they may have
done so because they are
currently satisfied with the
supports that they needed, or
they were satisfied with their
natural support, so they
requested that they place their
allocation on hold, which they
maintain their date in the next
time the funding becomes
available, they're offered the
allocation letter again so they
don't drop off, they stay there,
and there's no limit to that,
the number of times that you can
um put your allocation on hold.
we continue to offer as services
um become available. So I hope
that helps uh answer your
question. Thank you. That did
help quite a bit, I guess one of
the things that crosses my mind
is that these individuals, many
of them, well, all of them
actually, that's why they're on
the DD waiver and, and, and this
other maybe a program they have
developmental impairments and
intellectual challenges, and
some of them can't see, some of
them can't speak, some of them
can't hear, and some of them
altogether, they can't hear.
speaker or understand um or the
cognition maybe deficient or
something, some kind of
impairment. The question that I
have is, are we going to them to
ask him these questions when
they can't understand the
question of the, the level of
intricacy that we face here, or
do we go to their providers,
their providers have to be the
ones making these decisions for
them. Explain briefly, please.
Thank you,
Mr. Rodriguez, um, so for those
individuals that you're talking
about who may not be able to
see, may not be able to hear.
may not be able to communicate
uh with us. We go to any known
contact, whether that's a family
member, whether that's a parent,
whether that's a corporate
guardian, whether that's a
service provider, whoever has
had contact with that individual
is authorized to speak on their
behalf. That's who we have
correspondence with making the
decision as to whether that
individual wants services or
not.
Thank you very much for that
information, and I, because of
the sake of time, I'm not gonna
go on for any other questions.
I don't have anyone else on the
list. I want to thank everyone,
our staff, and you all for your
work that you do appreciate that
you have a good Thanksgiving.
Sure, and now I think we're, we
are done before lunch. I don't
see anyone else, so we're gonna
go and then come back at one
o'clock. How's that?
Let's see what time it is. Yeah,
we have a little time, we
finished a little early, so
we're gonna have lunch and then
come back at one. I know it's
rare. Oh my goodness, yeah, we
