And uh ariscoejo.
Yeah, this establish for me.
From alo
uh the 8th or 9th power.
And
Uh, Pedro Durani Chavez.
And uh
Mila.
He lost.
The resents
blue collar Chicano
precincts, uh, West Central,
uh, laidadia la mosa sinson
Tower neighborhood in the laidad
de Skyview West.
Sky View West neighborhood has
done thetacido la familia
answer.
the Carlos the Carrera.
Luniko and
and those mires
yes
la mercedes.
Mr. Chair.
It's a good morning, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I can't beat that, so
just very simply that you know I
am a representative Elio Lealco.
I represents parts of uh Sibula
and McKinley County.
I'm originally uh.
But it was not born out, raised
in the Moai area, which is the
Mola land grant area that, uh,
eventually I ended up in the
Grand area where the uranium
mines.
So thank you everybody for being
here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good Morning, Chairman. Thank
you, Antonio Maestas, Senate
District 26, um,
A multi-generational, uh,
norteno almost my folks are from
Vegas, which I'm very proud of.
I was born in Albuquerque. I
represent the West Mesa.
Trisco area and share the
neighborhoods uh mentioned by
Representative Garcia, the older
Trisco neighborhoods which have
been around.
Since the early 1700s. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair ones
todos,
uh, Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, which is the
southwest quadrant of Bernalillo
County that covers the southwest
Mesa and South Valley. They're
in Bernalo County and uh I
apologize, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
working two different
committees, so I may bounce from
here back across the hall, and
I'll be back and forth today, so
oh
so bear with me, but um thank
you and good morning to
everybody again.
Good morning, everyone. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman. I'm State
Senator Jerry or Tipino, uh, I
represent.
State Senate District 12, which
Actually, at the end of the
year, we'll no longer exist.
The number has been moved to to
Rio Rancho and um I think Taylor
Ranch or maybe it's about uh
Ventura, Ventana Ranch, uh, but
the district as it currently
exists is downtown Albuquerque,
part of the UNM neighborhood,
and then on the west side across
the river, uh, many, many, uh,
uh, precincts that actually
overlap with the Representative
Garcia. Uh, I've been on this
committee.
Uh, for the last, I think 9 or
10 years and have enjoyed every
single opportunity to visit the
Mercedes of the state, as many
as we could get to.
And, um, it's been a great
experience. I'm retiring at the
end of the year, so this will be
my last meeting with the land
grant committee, but I want to
thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Mark the staff for all the work
you do.
This, I, I will certainly be
following this committee in my
retirement and making sure that
uh what goes on continues the
work that Representative Garcia
and others who went before us
began. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, so
nice to see everybody in the
audience, um, I know I haven't
been to very many of these
committee meetings this year due
to sickness and work conferences
cause you know, I still have to
work, um, or last unpaid
legislature in the country. Uh,
aside from those political
remarks, I just want to take a
moment to uh think uh Senator TC
Pino, for everything that you
have done, uh, the leadership
you've shown, um, I called you.
Uh, once in a, in a state of
distress and you, um, you calmed
me down and I I remember that. I
mean, I don't often, yeah, I
know it's not true. I'm often in
a state of stress, um, but he
was really, uh, thank you,
Senator for um your insight, uh,
your, your comb, your leadership
will, will be missed, and I, and
I want you to know that.
Thank you. Um, Christina Ortiz,
I represent House District 42 in
Taos, um, I'm so honored to be
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. I'm state Senator
Leo Jaramillo, and I represent
Senate District 5, which
includes Rio Riba, Los Alamos,
Santa Fe, and Sandoval counties,
and my district holds the most
land grants out of any Senate
district. And so, I've said it
before and I'm gonna say it
again that I'm excited to serve
on this interim committee with
two of my primos, 2 of my
cousins, which are Senator Lopez
and Senator Ortiz Pino, and so
every year during the session,
we take a primo selfie in front
of the um seal and it's gonna be
sad not to have Senator or TZ
Pino with me in January, but
Senator, I've told you this
before, and I am so thankful for
your leadership and for years
looked from the outside in at
the work that you did for New
Mexicans. And so I've always
been a fan of yours. And so I
promise that with you gone, I
will carry on your legacy of
ensuring that I fight for New
Mexicans and that they fight for
those who need the most of our
support, and I, I know that
you're gonna be one of my
constituents in Dixon. So I know
where to find you when I need
some advice, so thank you so
much.
And I'll I'll let Mark and the
staff introduce themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is
Mark Edwards. I'm with the
Legislative council Service.
I've been staffing.
This committee for 1112 years
now, and
Over on my right is uh Nicole
Wagaspo, also with council
service, over from my left is
Nancy Martinez.
Also with the council service.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much. With that,
we're going to take a break. I'm
just kidding.
We're gonna move on to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
tribal infrastructure Fund.
potential model for a land grant
infrastructure fund, and with
that I'm gonna call it Mr.
Thompson and representative
Garcia.
Mr. Chair, before they sit down,
uh, Representative Garcia had
asked me for a draft bill for a
for a land grant infrastructure
fund based off of the tribal
infrastructure fund.
I got it back from proofing this
morning, there was quite a
number of uh edits because what
you do for tribes and what you
can do for land grants are
different things, so I will try
to get the bill ready for the
endorsements later this
afternoon, but unfortunately,
Represent Garcia will not have
that, uh, for his presentation.
My apologize.
Apologies to the council and to
the uh to the representative.
Thank you for that. Good
morning, Mr. Thompson, and hello
again, Representative Garcia.
Committee chairman members of
the, um, uh, thank you very much
for, um, allowing me the
opportunity to share some
information on the tribal
infrastructure Fund and I also
wanna take just a moment to
acknowledge, um, my good friend
representative Lea Kong from the
Grants area.
I've known um representative
Alone for
Quite a while and I appreciate.
And have appreciate all the work
he does and have the utmost
respect for
Is um service to the community,
so it's good to see you, Lee.
Thank you.
Uh, uh, I'm Mark Thompson. I sit
on the tip board and I will uh
give a presentation on TIFF is
my understanding. I was
requested by um Secretary of
Indian Affairs department to
come and make this presentation.
I was asked by um Mr. Edwards,
um, Mark.
About handouts, what I do have
with me are
is information that's available
on the Indian Affairs website.
It's readily available. It's
just the TIFF guidelines, tribal
infrastructure Fund guidelines
and a sample of the um TIFF
grant application, I can go
through that process, um,
Somewhat succinctly and will
stand for questions.
Um, Tiff was created by uh in
2005 by the TIFF Act, um, and,
and it really starts with any
Any formulation or any process
starts with governance.
And that governance begins with
the tribal infrastructure Fund
board.
Of which I sit on as the pueblo
rep I've sat on the tiff board
now for quite a while. I've been
involved with TIFF.
Um, since its inception back
when
Uh, Senator Benny Shendo was um.
At Indian affairs. So that goes
back a while, so I've been
involved with TIFF since um its
inception.
It starts with governance, so
the tribal infrastructure fund
board was established um to
Govern and oversee the tribal
infrastructure Fund.
So really understanding how
you're gonna do that and, um,
that's your prerogative, but I'm
just giving you an example of
how TIFF is set up. So we have
the tip board, which provides
governance in the guidelines.
In the TIF guidelines, we, uh,
you have established the TIFF
review committee.
That committee is made up of at
least 3 to 5. There's no set
number, but that committee is uh
subcommittee is made up of
participants to review the tip
applications.
And the applications um come in
from all of the tribes in the
state of New Mexico, uh, once
the, um, TIFF tribal
infrastructure fund is funded.
And we, um, have an application
process that's online, and we
have criteria that's established
by which we grade the
applications and scored
applications, I
Been sitting on the TRC, the TIF
Review Committee.
Um, almost since day one, I've
chaired that committee, um,
several times and more recently
I've been the chair for, for the
past several years. Um, it's,
it's an arduous process. It's,
it's, it's a difficult process
to review 40 to 50 applications
and score each one of these
because the need is quite
extensive, but that process is
uh um.
Important.
So basically, chairman, members
of the committee. We have the
tip board.
The tip board assigns the review
committee. The review committee
reviews the applications and
those applications are scored on
um several criteria, critical
need.
is one criteria.
Project readiness is another
criteria.
Um, capacity is is another
criteria and leveraging.
So we have basic criteria that
we allocate points for, and we
evaluate the applications based
on that criteria. And so that
process has been well
established for the last 10
years, certainly. Um,
I
Had hands-on in helping
establish that process, um, and
tweaking it too, because it
always is important to be able
to adapt and adjust and
improvise and, and change that,
but the um criteria has been
established for a while, again
includes critical needs.
Project readiness.
Capacity and leveraging. Those
are the primary criteria by
which we score applications.
So, the applicant's ability to
communicate what that project
is, what the need is, how ready
are they? What is their capacity
to make sure they get the
project done, and are they
leveraging? Are they pulling in
other people's money.
So those are fundamental
concepts of the TIFF. I also
currently, and I thought this
was important to, um, I sit as
the Indian Affairs department
representative on the Water
Trust board.
What are trust board is quite
significant. It gives out
significantly more dollars than
the TIF does. But those criteria
are very similar to what is done
on the water trust board too as
well. You want to make sure that
the um need is there.
You want to ensure that the um
project is ready, that it can be
spent because we all hear about
unspent dollars out there and
those types of things. You want
to make sure that the um
applicant has the capacity to
get the project done. And you
also want to ensure that they're
going after other people's money
and using whatever they get as
leverage.
That is the top level summary,
chairman, members of the board,
I certainly can stand for
questions again, any information
I've talked in referenced.
There's a lot of detail there,
but I'll keep it top level for
the sake of time. I, I don't
want to get too redundant. I
wanna be as succinct as possible
in respect to all of your time,
but the information I have
presented here is on the Indian
Affairs website.
Under tribal infrastructure
fund, you'll see the guidelines,
and you'll see a sample
application and it can uh pretty
much spells out.
What
Um, the process is.
Um
That completes my initial
presentation and I will stand
for questions, chairmen and
members of the committee.
Representative Garcia, did you
have anything to add before we
go to questions?
Um
No, we should go into the
question. Any questions from
those of us who are here?
Representable.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. I was
just wondering, I was part of
the uh
Go when we did the uh
Table infrastructure fund way
back under Speaker Luhan.
I was just wondering if we had
ever thought of doing something
like this for land grant.
Be so many communities out there
that
I mean
Uh, if I look at the Espanola,
we've driven those roads, OK?
As a committee we've been around
all over the the land grant
community and we don't what
there's, what they're looking at
and what they're, what they
need, but it seems like somehow
we need to have something other
than uh
That's lovely
rich people because uh one
senator, one representative, uh,
That's pretty much what they're
down to and uh most of the land
grants.
Can not cover the needs of the
land grant community.
I think it's something that
should be thrown out there and
thought about, I don't think
it'll happen this year.
But I think it's uh
It's something that I, uh, uh,
represented to Ovela, and I
talked about it a long time ago,
and that's where we ended just
talking about it.
that is my, uh, Mr. Speaker. I
hope that uh we could have
something like that, at least in
the works.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator or Tino.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and thank you for the
information on the tribal
infrastructure fund. There was a
problem a few years back with
money being
Unspent, accumulating there
because the process had somehow
not work smoothly, but I guess a
lot of those problems have been
ironed out. Is that the case?
Oh, excellent question, Senator.
Uh, yes, there were challenges.
I, I, I don't think, and, and
I've been around it for a while
and I was there during that
time, where we um tweaked the
guidelines a little bit. I don't
think it was necessarily the
process itself.
I think it related toward, and
this is my professional opinion
related toward the capacity at
the local level.
Being able to have the and, and
so what we did at the TIF board,
um, is we, um, adjusted the, um,
Scoring
Um
To enable the local applicant to
communicate if they really had
the capacity and if their
project was truly ready.
So you got to adjust the window
for the applicant. You gotta set
up the window by which the
applicant comes in to
communicate to the reviewer, if
they really are ready to spend
the dollars. So that's where you
catch it at, not after you gave
it to him. So the window coming
in is critical, um, if, if I
would advise the land grant
committee here, if you're
setting up a process, make sure
that that window by which the
applicant comes through to seek
funds.
is truly avaluating the project
need, the um readiness of the
project, um, and the capacity,
those things are critical. Once
we tweaked a little bit, of
course, you still got to go out
there and get the other projects
done, but projects coming in
after that, um, at least here in
the short term has seemed to
have been moving quicker because
we've scored higher if they
demonstrated that they were
ready and they had capacity.
And I may have missed this,
Mister Chairman, but, uh, uh.
Who actually makes up?
The the
committee that does the scoring.
So, the, the committee that uh
um thank you, um, members of the
uh chairman and members of the
committee.
So the
Chairman of the tribal
infrastructure Fund board board,
the tip board, which is
secretary of Indian Affairs,
appoints the committee.
The TRC.
The technical review committee.
So the chairman of the TF can
appoint the review committee.
And typically there'll be a
cross section of different
technical capacities, um,
lately, uh, DFA has been on
their environment department. We
have representatives from IHS
that participate in this myself
as the Pueblo rip I've been
around tiff. I'm, I'm a dip, I'm
a project guy. Uh, um, so just a
cross section of folks that have
the technical background to
review applicants coming in.
And are those decisions final
then the the the because these
are monies that are set aside
just for that fund. So you all
get to decide how that money
gets spent. Um, Senator, uh,
thank you, uh, chairman and
members of the committee, so the
TRC, the technical Review
Committee makes recommendations
to the TIFF board. The TIF board
has the authority to make that
final decision.
So, so the committee makes a
recommendation and we
communicate what we've done and
justify where we're at, then the
TIF board has questions if they
have the authority to say yes,
no, or make adjustments from
there, then the tip board is
what makes the final decision.
And then the final question for
you then would be who is on the
tip board or those appointed by
somebody? Yes, my governor by
the governor of the state of New
Mexico. Well, the governor, so
what is that like a 77 member
board or something like that,
yes, I, I excuse the
interruption there, um, chairman
and members of the committee. So
I believe to the best of my
knowledge here, the tiff Act
stipulates who's on the board.
And there are representatives
from several state departments,
NMED, uh, DOT, uh, DFA, um, so
there are state agencies that
are part of the TIF board along
with a pueblo rep who, who I am
in Navajo rep and Apache rep,
and, and, um, a non-voting ex
officios from Indian house
services BIA, those, those,
those groups.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and then my question for Mr. for
Representative Garcia is, so are
you, and you may have said this,
uh, when, or Mark may have
referred to this when, when he
was explaining and I kind of
didn't quite understand. Are you
proposing this in legislation
this coming session will be
proposing that?
Uh
Um, uh, the small chairman and
representative or TCP I mean
Senator Tipino.
Uh, yes.
In fact, my presentation after
Mr. Thompson's is based on the
need.
Uh, for establishing the then
Grant Mercer infrastructure
Fund.
And we do have a bill in the
making, and I hope that it'll be
ready.
My endorsement time this
afternoon, that'll kind of.
Spell out the specifics, but uh
as the chair and uh Senator
Tippio, our bill on the land
grant infrastructure fund is
structured, to my understanding.
Almost
Exactly, yes, the.
Thank you. I, I didn't
understand you were gonna make
another presentation, so I'll,
I'll, I'll end there, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
I'll take a couple of questions
if you don't mind, and so thank
you for that presentation, Mr.
Thompson. What type of projects
are you seeing that are being
funded?
Um, Chairman, members of the
committee, so it's
infrastructure across the board,
water.
Um, wastewater systems, roads,
um, community facilities, public
safety facilities, um, health
facilities, those types of
things, but the primary um basis
of this is infrastructure.
Um, so how you define
infrastructure can be spelled
out in your language, and how
it's justified in that
application process.
Um, but the primary, the
predominance of the applications
are water, wastewater roads,
infrastructure-related. Thank
you. Do you by any chance, Mr.
Thompson, remember if Santa
Clara Pueblo has applied for
one.
Uh, yes, I, um, chairman and
members of the committee, I
actually used to work at Santa
Clara for 7 years with Governor
Chavarria. Um, so maybe I might
look a little familiar there,
um, I, I, I've, yes, the short
answer is yes, uh, Santa Clara
Pueblo is one of the pueblos
that's a high performer. They do
a very good job in their
applications and they spend
their money. Thank you and for
those of you in the audience,
the reason why I asked that
question is that's one of a
couple of pueblos in my.
districts who are working on a
water infrastructure projects,
so I wanted to make sure that
they were aware of the
application and the funding
that's available. And then just
one last question, is there a
maximum amount that is given
out?
Uh, yes, um, chairman and
members of the committee, the
guidelines stipulate 15% of the
legislative award.
And the tip board can adjust
that, depending on how large the
allocation is, and there's been
a time a couple of years ago, we
didn't do it this year, but a
couple years ago we actually
lowered it to 10%.
Because we wanted to fund more
projects. So I think it's just
the prerogative of the
oversight.
Um, board
But right now it's 10% or 15%.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Thompson, and Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, uh
Small chairman and Mr. Thompson,
uh, for that presentation, uh,
on the, um,
On the applications.
Um
R is the funding.
for its entirety.
Or is it like a aased process.
Uh, for example, say there's a
project of um.
Um, 900,000.
And Mr. Chair, uh,
Is the is the application.
In, uh, brought forth by the
entity.
Um
Cover that much or can it be
phased in?
Chairman, members of the
committee.
It depends.
I, I, I don't mean to be too
facetious there, but it really
does depend. It depends on the
local communities and the
applicants' ability to
communicate the project.
Um
Typically, the short answer to
that question is, you want to
pay for a fully functional phase
of a project.
But it doesn't always happen
that way.
Then the other thing is, um,
and, and it, it can, it can get
complicated very quickly is if
you're scoring for leveraging
capability. If you're scoring
the applicant on their ability
to go and get other people's
money. Sometimes that other
people's money is federal money
and comes a little bit slower,
and so the ability to overlap
the funds so you can complete a
fully functional phase can be a
challenge. So
I don't mean to be too sarcastic
when I say it depends, but it
really does depend on how you
train the applicants to apply
for the funds, you can apply for
planning funds. You can apply
for design funds and you can
apply for construction funds, or
if your project is well enough
scoped out, if you have a good
scope of work, you can do a
design build and you can uh
apply for design and
construction funds, depending on
how effective you are.
and communicating your ability
to get the work done and the
amount you're asking for, does
it really truly complete a fully
functional phase, together with
the leveraging funds. So it's
not a very easy answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
that. That was a real thorough
answer, uh, and kind of really
explained to me the process, um,
one last question, uh,
the chairman and Mr. Thompson,
uh, on the issue of reversion.
Um
Um
If a project doesn't pan out.
Um
Is there a reauthorization to
move that money elsewhere, or
does it go back into the
into the the major fund.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, so the whole idea
and um matter. I won't even call
it an issue, the, the whole
matter or action of reversion
can get very political.
If I, uh, don't mind being very
direct and honest there. So,
The way TIF is set up right now,
the big issue or the, the, the
big constraint.
Or the big requirement, be more
specific here.
Are the requirements of the bond
sale.
There are time limits on the
bond sale. If you're going out
and selling bonds, there are
limits on your ability to have
those funds available from that
bond sale. That's the ultimate
driving criteria as far as time
frame is concerned. So,
For Tiff, we give construction,
um, 3 years, a construction
project will get 3 years, but we
know if it's a severance tax
bond, you actually get 4 years.
So there's the ability there if
needed to extend it one more
year.
But once that bond expires, then
that you're done.
Um, so those are the ceilings,
the, those are the limits that
are related to actually driven
by the bond sale itself.
So for planning and design
dollars, we usually give 2 years
for construction projects, we
give 3 years. We all know though
that the bond sale is the one
that gives you a time limit,
that's really the um the driver
and the critical date for
reversion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Thompson.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Garcia, Mr.
Thompson, thank you very much.
This is exciting, uh, fantastic.
Project I look forward to seeing
the bill.
This afternoon, and I'm just
looking at the, the website that
you referred to.
Chairman of the tribal
infrastructure Fund.
It's administered under the
Department of Indian Affairs.
And, uh, and then it has a
board.
There's a novel representative
of Pueblo representative Hickory
Apaches representative.
As well as department heads from
the Department of Environment.
Finance Authority, DFA Indian
Affairs.
And then, and then the money
derives from a percentage of the
bonding capacity.
What's been happening lately,
Mr. Chairman, is because we have
so much money because we have so
much cash, you know, in our
general fund.
Our cap outlay has not been um.
We have not gone to New York to
sell bonds. We've just been
using money out of the general
fund. So when we do that, we
gotta make sure that the
projects that were supposed to
be funded based on a percentage
of the severance taxes are are
funded through the appropriation
of the general funds, the
classic example, Mr. Chairman,
the um,
Honorable Senator Rodriguez.
You know, passed a bill that a
certain percentage of that
severance tax bonds go into
housing, and because we didn't
bond the last couple of years,
we uh made the point to pass the
bill to spend.
Mao the same amount of money for
that purpose. So anyway, I, uh,
I think when and if we do this,
I don't think it has to be as
bureaucratic as the
And the travel infrastructure
fund, uh, and hopefully we can
get some money from the general
fund to, to jumpstart it, but we
have to find a home for
For it within state government,
I would suggest we consider the
economic development department.
I think the economic development
department could, uh, it's very
well managed and.
And could devote, you know, 1 or
2 or 3 FTEs to
To securing economic development
for the land grants, uh.
Depending on which way the
particular land grant wants to
go. We just have to decide.
Um, cause this, this list, Mr.
Chairman, um,
Now that we're, now that the
land grants are more empowered
and more organized and
And are more hip to the Capelale
process, we're going to be
getting more and more wonderful
lists like this will
appropriate, it puts a heavy
burden on those.
On those, uh
Lawmakers from those areas.
Um
And hopefully we can get support
from, from the urban areas as
well, but it would be nice to.
You know, put $5 million into a
fund and then have a
Have a, a board managed by the
economic development, then
allocate the money for these
projects. Um,
These part the the tribal,
lastly, Mr. Chairman, that the
tribal infrastructure projects
are like 5 to $10 million huge
water projects. These are more
in the neighborhood of like, you
know, 200,000 $300,000.
So I think that'd be much easier
managed.
Um
But I think it's time for uh,
for us to, you know, build up
the infrastructure in these, in
these communal lands, um, to
provide a future for the errors
and the
And the leadership of the
various languages. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. And then I'm just
going to take two more, Mr.
Thompson, are you seeing that
the buffaloes and tribes are
spending the money, are they?
And the only reason why I asked
that is because in Ri Riba
County, in rural counties where
we're seeing a hard time when it
comes to capital outlay that
they're not spending it, and
it's just because we don't have
the manpower to ensure that
these projects are done. So then
we have to reauthorize the money
going forward because in rural
New Mexico, we're having a hard
time finding people to come and
work on our project.
s or having the staff within our
counties to do that, are, are
the tribes and Pueblos finding
that as well?
Uh, Chairman, members of the
committee, I appreciate Senator
Maestas um point there because
it's important to understand
that even on the oversight, the
state's side, wherever that
oversight responsibility lies
has to have the capacity, and in
this case, Indian affairs
department. They have about 3
FTEs.
Um, and they manage all the
capital outlay and tiff.
And it's a big deal. So with TI
itself, um, chairman, the money
is getting spent, but it's not
perfect. There's a couple of
projects that are running the
risk of being uh um fought back.
You know, and, and, and we hate
seeing that, but sometimes that
happens. Um, I right now
personally do not, am not aware
of any specific project that
actually got pulled back.
I don't have that personal
experience, but when I review as
a tip board member. When I
review the reports and we get
reports from an affairs
department, so it goes back to
what uh um Senator Maestda said
earlier is having the capacity
at the oversight uh um
department to, to report and,
and to be able to make those
informed decisions when we get
reports from Indian Affairs
Department over the last 3 to 5
years of what's left.
out there to spend, we've been
able to pull that backlog back
um down and get the money spent,
but that takes effort. It takes
effort at the local level and it
takes effort from the oversight
of the state.
The true partnership. And then
this question mark, maybe you
might be able to answer this. So
I've heard stories from Senator
Stephanics and Senator Ortiz
Pino that they thought times
when there wasn't a lot of
capital and a lot of revenue
that came in and represented
Ortez and I are lucky that we
came in while oil and gas on an
influx of money into the state
of New Mexico with the past 3
years of an increase of funding
that came in from oil and gas,
does that change the tip that
they get more money, or how does
that work? Yeah.
Yes.
The, the, uh, if I may,
chairman, the funding for TIFF
has increased the past couple of
years. Do you by any chance, Mr.
Thompson said no by how much?
Uh
yes, uh, well, roughly, you
know, I'm just giving a rough
numbers out there, so please
don't hold it to me. About 4 or
5 years ago, we were getting 15
to 20 million a year. Um, the
last two years we've gotten 50
and 60.
Very good. OK, thank you for
that. Got to encourage.
OK, we can get Pablo and the
nation to look into the
application process. Yes, well,
Governor Phillips did get a
pretty good award this past year
from TIFF. Good. Thank you so
much. See for Mark.
Mr.
Chairman to your point.
As long as gas prices and oil
prices are high.
And, and there's a lot of
production in New Mexico, then
that fund, the severance tax
bond fund is gonna have a lot of
money in it and the tip, the
water trust board, uh, the
legislature approves a land
grant trust where they're all a
percentage.
Collonius, there are,
yeah, so.
As the uh
As the energy mineral wealth,
uh,
Revenues come in.
That those funds increase, but
if it shrinks, I, I remember,
uh, not too long ago, about
2015, well went from $1 to
barrel to $33 a barrel almost
overnight.
And all of those funds shrunk.
They still got money. They were
just getting much smaller
amounts.
Thank you for that. Say no
further questions, we'll move on
to the next item, which is a
presentation from Representative
Garcia.
Gracias, uh.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Uh
I, I, uh, I'm gonna kind of
focus on the need.
Uh, for a, um,
A land grant and there's
infrastructure fund, but it is
structured similar to
The uh primal infrastructure,
the water trust board and the
Colonial Infrastructure in that
we're basically
Uh, earmarking.
Um
From the severance tax permanent
fund.
A certain percentage.
And uh
So it, it's similar in terms of
structure to those, those 3
funds.
Uh, you know, I've been with
this committee since its
inception in 2003, Mr. Chair and
Um, and actually some of the
first issues that
That came to for.
With the committee was um
The need to do away with the
verse position.
Lawsuits against the land
grants.
Because, uh, land grants were
basically
Expanding, you know, uh, um,
almost other minuscule budgets
on fighting back.
Lawsuits from um
And
love via tapes.
Wanting to reclaim parts of the
common land.
And the other was um Mr. Chair,
the need for revenues, um, to
kind of run, operate the land
grant and also to uh revenues to
kind of um promote the
infrastructure.
Improvements online grants.
So this issue kind of goes way
back. And that's when we
resolved.
The kind of those first issues
that came forth, um.
In terms of the adverse
possession and uh
The operating stuff because we
did do.
A couple of years ago, the uh
land grants assistance fund,
which is very instrumental and
really created a lot of growth
and momentum within our land
grants.
of dealing with some of the
operational costs.
No, Mr. Chair, um, at the very
onset, uh, when that language
became
Designated political
subdivisions in 2004.
Uh, the majority of grants.
Close to 191819 became.
Units of government overnight.
There are still quite a few out
there, um.
Um, 9 or 8 or 9 more that fell
into different categories in
terms of language status.
Based on they were either Mr.
Chair statute-specific.
They were not part of the
general provisions, they were
actually statues specific grants
mentioned in statute.
As article uh
different articles.
And also, uh, land grants that
were also organized as a
corporation, land grant
corporation under Article 2.
We brought those in for the most
part. There's still some of them
that are out there that are not
you know it's a government.
Uh, the true grant is not one.
The Jacona Grant is not one. The
Bartholomemo Sanchez is not one.
Uh, for the most part, we've
kind of keptture all of them.
And uh the problems that we had
initially, Mr. Chair, was
DFA had a
Uh, reimbursement structure.
Is it difficult for land grants
because
Bank grants didn't have money in
the bank.
So how can you build
You know, uh, an infrastructure
project, if you don't have money
upfront to cover it.
And then the state comes in and
reimburses after the project is
completed.
So through the efforts of the
land grant council.
And pressured by leadership, uh,
legislative leadership.
DFA, they kind of minimize that
structure and now and have a, uh
a disbursement.
Process.
Which is more
A tuned to the actual economic
needs of, of the land grant.
Instead of the disbursement
process that was
Um, really chaotic.
Um
And also, Mr. Chair, because
land grants don't have
established.
Revenue stream for capital
outlay.
The, um,
The, the planning is real
faulty.
So, land grants can't really
plan ahead in terms of their
capital needs, in terms of how
they're going to acquire the.
The the the the funding to meet
their capital needs.
So it's very helter-skelter in
terms of the way land grants
approach.
Capital L.
And uh
And the other complicated thing,
because there is no established
revenue stream.
Land grants basically depend.
On their own local legislators.
To see them through.
The thing is that
Local legislators for the most
part,
And not tough up.
$900,000 for a land grant
project.
$700,000 for a land grant
project.
Even $100,000 for a land grant
project.
Based on this, on the needs of
that post particular legislators
to kind of cover the overall
needs of their district, Mr.
Chair.
Dealing with the school as a
community centers the Asea
systems, uh, the roads,
projects, you know, school
needs, etc. etc. that we really
out kept allowing money to.
And uh
And then Mr. Chair in one
particular case.
With one language and San Miguel
County, the local legislators.
Where the enemies of the land
grant.
The, the senator flat.
Viciously to deny the partition
land grants, a unit of
government status.
The the state wrapped in that in
that uh that covered that grant
voted.
Continually to the very last
bill to House Bill 268.
In the 2023 session against
partition land grants having a
unit of government status.
So you could see that this land
grant, because of the political
dynamics,
In which that land grant.
Existed, but not depend on the
local legislators for any
capital outlay.
Because they're basically
opposed to them being an
existing as a unit of
government.
So there's that element, Mister
Chair.
Now what's happened,
Throughout the years and through
these learning experiences is
that we have a very
collaborative process in place
right now.
Thanks to the leadership of the
land grant council and the
staff.
I'm telling you that it's really
brought sunshine.
that capital LA process.
So, what's that? what what that
what that collaborative effort
between the land grant Council.
And the land grant.
Council staff.
It's been able to kind of
Put a smooth sail.
On the granting process.
Between DFA local government.
And the land grant.
Well, now there is that.
That interlocular.
Relationship between the direct
land grant.
Members
Uh, representatives of the
process of the of the capitality
process and local government
division.
And the helping hand with the
land grant council.
So we're seeing
That process starting to run
smoothly.
Most important,
This was also starting to see
the procurement process runs
smoothly.
Whereas before, because there
was, there wasn't this kind of
interconnectedness between the
land grant council staff.
The DFA local government
division in the Mercer. These
were like
In the bay.
Just out there, it's kind of
floating, so to speak, Mr.
Chairman.
And uh
Um
So I wanted to bring that to the
attention of the board, is that
Um
Yes, Mr. Chair.
We can jump in the water with 2
ft.
When we create a language er
infrastructure fund.
Because we already have an
infrastructure.
The system set up within the
land grant council to be able to
expedite.
All the processes that Mr.
Thompson put forth in terms of
the tribal infrastructure, you
know, to where we don't have to
create, we already have these
apparatuses.
In place
I can further expedite and move
forward the the languages
infrastructure fund.
And uh
I wanted to uh share with you
this handout that I put
together.
With the help of legislative
council.
And unfortunately, I was only
able to do it for the 2024.
Uh, capital outlet here.
And what you have is you have
Underlying grants that put forth
a capital outlay request.
And you can see that
On page 3.
Uh
We have a color code.
In the white color code, we have
land grants that put forth
capital outlay.
And were fully funded.
Or partially funded.
You can go down the list there
and see.
That the partially fundeds are
overwhelming.
The fully funded are
You can count them on 2 fingers.
You know
But then, Mr. Chair, on the um
on the red color code.
We have Langrann Delta LA
projects.
That were not funded at all.
You could see that these and the
red color code are big items.
100,000, 300,000, 500,000.
3,150,550,000, 600,000.
400, 800,000.
But look at the, Mr. Chair.
Look at the purpose.
They're all worthy projects.
They're all projects that merit.
You know, funding in order to
keep that land grant empowered.
And growing and meeting the
needs to the fullest.
Of its gran ears.
Very viable projects.
But the way that our system is
set up right now.
Is that these projects will
never get funded.
In the red.
Mainly because
There is no
Kind of uh
Uh
Light at the end of the tunnel.
Mr. Chair
Let me give you an example.
Mr. Chair of a light at the end
of the tunnel.
Those the 90.
Became a political subdivision.
In 2023.
of 2023.
Along with
Uh, 3 other.
Or other
Uh, partition land grants, a
royo Hondo Riva County.
And
Geronimo Miguel.
Yeah
Yeah, and I'm losing sight of
two, the two other ones, um.
Um
Um, we toured one this year, um.
Yeah.
Lower the uh lowerasinas and
Saint Augustine are, are the
other two.
The in the light of tunnel.
Because the heless, they got
one.
Point Winnie or $1,220,000.
This past session.
Yeah, in 2024 for their land
grant.
And you could see
That's a very last column on
page 4.
That land grants in 2024.
Only that.
$3.2 million.
Out of 13.5 million requested.
Now, keep in mind that 3.2, Mr.
Chair.
Includes the $120,000 over
theitas.
How did those eheas do that.
They have a senator that fought
him forever.
They have a state rep that voted
on house built against House
Bill 268.
We met in Las Vegas.
In 2023, that summer, this
committee.
Those thehela gave a
presentation before this
committee.
And they say to Mr. Chair,
The main need for them.
Was heavy equipment.
A bulldozer, a grater, and an
excavator.
They were total $800,000.
Heavy equipment. Why? They
needed to get to the burn area.
They were coming off a burn area
that torched 85% of their common
lands, which is all forest.
That fire was so hot and goes
butheless, it burst.
boulders, it burst them.
Amita.
So
The other thing about Los
Bajitas in this light at the end
of the tunnel, Mr. Chair.
Is that we toured the Agra.
Right after our meeting the
following day.
So the majority of these 10
legislators that contributed to
that $1,020,000 or put mainly
those legislators from the
committee that attended the
tour.
And they saw the need, and they
saw the tears in the
representatives of the mercy.
Sharing their experiences of
what they went through with the
fire. So how can that not affect
your soul.
In terms of wanting to help
them.
These are,
these are all people.
We're one with them.
We're not gonna let him down.
That's why it goes to got the $1
million. It was a team effort by
10 of us.
You know, and, uh,
That doesn't happen with the
land grants.
We have no light at the end of
the tunnel, like Los Vijelis
did.
That's why the land grant.
Marseilles Infrastructure Fund
is so crucial.
So that all the land grants can
have that light at the end of
the tunnel.
You know, and, and you know, Mr.
Chair, that Los Beile is gonna
do wonders with that heavy
equipment.
They're gonna be able to open
roads through the torched areas.
And clear those areas.
They have the capacity to kind
of improve their road. You saw
the road.
You went up that road,
polabaro.
We're lucky that none of us went
down the boladeo.
You know, and uh so that
bulldozer and that excavator are
gonna smooth out those main
roads in the La Mercer.
And, and they're gonna use that
heavy equipment to also
refurbish the Mercer, replanning
it.
He looked to say.
So, Mr. Chair, um, that's
essentially it on my
presentation.
And I'm hoping that we will have
the opportunity.
Uh
If the drafters are done with
the bill.
During the time of the agenda
where we look at endorsements.
And uh so we'll kind of keep our
fingers crossed.
And say a prayer to San Isidro
Labrador.
You know that uh the drafters
have that bill ready by.
by this afternoon.
And, um, and I stand with
questions or stand for
questions.
Or any other questions that the
company might have of Mr.
Thompson.
I
Thank you, Representative, and I
want to thank you for taking
this on. I do see the need for
the landed infrastructure fund,
because capital outlay has just
become a band-aid that we can't
fully fund projects, and it's
just a band-aid that
That gets them a little bit of
money, but I sure hope that the
infrastructure fund bill is
ready, um, if I had a vella
right now, I would light it to
make sure that they, they're
working at it, but Mark's
working as quick as he can. Any
questions or comments from the
committee for either Mr.
Thompson or Representative
Garcia.
Sigmund, thank you, gentlemen,
for your hard work.
Oh.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I, uh,
raised my finger, my pencil a
little too late. Anyway, uh.
Representative, I guess one of
the big questions that came up
when we were working on Tiff
was what percentage?
Of the New Mexico population
would be part of this land
grant.
It's going to come up if you
come up with a beer anyway, so
I'm just curious, you got a
number?
But if you know where to get
one.
What?
Mr. Chair, uh, that's a good
question. And if it's something
that's gonna come up, especially
in debate in committee.
I think it's important for um
Kind of our resource people, to
maybe look into that.
Especially the UNM land grant
studies program and uh.
Then Gran council staff.
Uh, to maybe have something.
Available, you know, for the
presenter and the witnesses.
That'll be bringing the bill
forth and in committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
want to comment, I think, I
don't know if I've got this in
reverse or not, but I think our
Native American population is at
9% and at the time we started
the TF program we were starting
it at 6%. I hope I got the
numbers right by reading, uh,
basically, the population of
Native Americans in the state of
New Mexico was at 9%.
And we were allocating just 6%.
Of the fun so
there's something to think
about. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Thompson and
Representative Garcia.
Thank you for your work on this
and thank you for the
presentations.
Thank you. We're gonna move on
to the next item on our agenda,
which is the land grant council
expansion of land grant
services, and I'm gonna call up
my good friend Arturo Archuleta.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, uh,
members of the committee, it's
always a pleasure to uh be here
before you, um, and present, uh,
the wonderful work that you all
do to support our land grant
communities, um, and we are
happy to be here, um, as
Representative Garcia pointed
out, um, the, the New Mexico
Land Grant Council, as well as
UN migrant studies program does
do quite a bit of work for land
grant communities, um, and I'd
be remiss if I didn't, uh,
recognize the hard work of
All of our staff, um, we have,
uh, Doctor Jakovo Baca, who's
back there working hard to try
to figure out, uh, coordinate
the lunches, um, make sure that
she, that we have a good lunch
for everybody today, um, that
was provided by the New Mexico
La Grant Consejo, uh, and then
also, um, the sunshine that uh
Representative Garcia spoke to,
um, Ms. Anissa Baca, who I think
she went out to probably go meet
the folks with the food, um.
Who really does provide a lot of
support for land grant
communities, um, with their
capital outlay, um,
expenditures, you know, helping
them through the procurement
process as well as, uh, with
just the process for, you know,
filing the notices of obligation
with DFA and making sure that
they've got all their grant
agreements when they, when the
capital outlay, um, project
questionnaires come out, helps
sort of them make sure that
they're able to get those
submitted, and then the tracking
that goes on and the, the
reporting that happens on a
monthly basis.
um, for those projects, uh, that
all sort of happens, um, at the
council offices, um, and we try
to provide as much support as
possible to the land grants. And
so, um, kind of want to just
talk a little bit about the work
that we do and, and what we'd
like to expand services, um, but
we do, um, provide quite a bit
of assistance now with the staff
that we do have. Um, we, uh, not
only do we work in those areas,
but uh as it relates to sort of
just the expenditure of capital.
We also have great Archuleta on
our staff who couldn't be here
today, uh, and
provides land grants with
support with their finances. So
with the pulling together um
their budget requests, doing
their quarterly budget reports.
Uh, we've got, uh, out of the
27 land grants that are
political subdivisions, I think
we've got about 16 of them that
are all, um, working on
QuickBooks now that the council
was able to purchase some online
subscriptions for them, uh, last
year, and then we renewed them
this year and we'll be handing
those off to them, uh, and so
she's been helping them get set
up so that they're able to
actually manage their finances
in a way that makes it easier
for them to have their audits at
the end of the year, uh, and
then we also do provide them
with support. Um, that's another
thing that Anisa helps land
grants with is put getting those
audit contracts.
In place, uh, making sure that
they sort of meet all those
deadlines um with the state
auditor's office. Uh, and this
is all very uh important for the
land grants because it's part of
the check that we have to do,
uh, to ensure that they're ready
to, to be eligible to receive a
land grant assistance fund
distribution, um, every year,
and so, um, you know, we've had
some, uh, definitely some
growing pains in terms of
getting land grants on board and
making sure that they're able to
sort of do what they can do, but
I, I do think, um, from the
presentation this morning.
Representative Garcia was
correct. We've kind of come into
this in a little bit different
way. Uh, I remember being here
at the legislature all those
years ago when they were passing
the tribal infrastructure fund
and the colonial infrastructure
fund and, and I remember having
sort of conversations with
legislators about, um, you know,
is there something possible,
something similar for land
grants, uh, and at that time, I
don't think land grants would
have been ready to sort of have
projects that were ready to move
forward, uh, and get things
going. And so we've, we've
definitely grown into um their
status as local government.
And and been able to provide
those that assistance to them.
Um, but we do, uh, do a lot with
what resources we have, but we,
we have sort of reached sort of
our capacity to limit in terms
of um what we can do in-house
without um doing some contract
services and then they need to
just expand. So this last year,
uh, we actually, um, the, our
budget remained flat.
So, um, and that was a sort of a
conscious choice that we didn't
push to try to get that
increased, um, because the
focus, uh, last year that from
the council was really to try to
get that fund set up for land
grants to do acquisitions and,
you know, we were able to sort
of work that out, uh, with the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
um, but we really didn't push
hard to get a budget increase,
so it stayed flat last year, and
then, you know, there was some
automatic increases when it
comes to salaries as well as
just inflational costs, um, that
have that have uh
You know, affected our ability
to, to sort of grow. Um, so,
With that, I kind of had a
couple of things that I passed
out. Uh, one is just this, uh,
PowerPoint presentation, which I
wanted to talk to you all about
a little bit of the services
that we currently provide and,
and where we'd like to go uh in
terms of, of the future and if
we have the ability to, uh, to
grow with, with, uh, funds from
From this body and from the
legislature.
So, the first area um is legal
services. I think everyone on
this committee knows throughout
the years and has recognized how
important um those legal
services are for land and
communities, uh, in making sure
that they're able to uh not only
protect their community's
interests, uh, protect the
common lands, um, but also, uh,
you know, uh, be able to do
transactional, um, things like
entering into contracts, uh, you
know, one thing that we've
learned now in, uh, going after
some
of the loan funds to the New
Mexico Finance Authority, uh,
you have to have legal
representation, um, that's
required to sign off on some of
um the certifications that they
require.
And so those are all important
things that we're able to
provide, uh, for those land
grant communities. Uh, in 2000
and uh
4 or in FY 2024, um, you know,
we accomplished this through a
variety of uh different
contracts and partnerships. Um,
we have a, you know, we, we
It
Included uh this year uh an
additional contract for New
Mexico Legal Aid, which is
already sort of up and running,
uh, and we were able to get that
contract, um, started pretty
close to the beginning of the
5th school year, which is always
important, so that they don't
have a gap in terms of those
services, uh, and that contract
has been, um, for a couple of
years now at 60,000. Um, what
that meant last year in 2024 was
um working on 3 active
litigations, which are still
ongoing and pending, um,
providing, uh, litigation
services for land grants in a
variety.
matters, um,
One administrative adjudication
uh that relates specifically to
the tax exemption for land
grants. Uh, that's one to sort
of area we've been working on,
um, pretty actively in this past
year, and most counties have
actually recognized uh land
grants as being tax exempt now,
being that the units of
government, uh, we do have one
county, Sandoval County, who is,
uh, opted to deny um that
request for exemption for the
San Anton de las Huertas land
grant, and we're providing them
through our legal.
services provided New Mexico
Legal Aid, uh, with assistance
in that administrative hearing,
they actually went to hearing
earlier this week, but, um,
they're, they were #2 on the
agenda and the first one went
ran so long that they had to end
up postponing, um, or um
rescheduling the hearing for
December, uh, and so that's one
area that, um, you know,
definitely important to be able
to provide land grants with that
legal representation when they
go before um those
administrative boards and try to
help them sort of work those
those
issues out. And then there's
also other various
representations, um, that the
The New Mexico legal aid
provides for land grants, and
it's really on a, the way we
sort of do the services is if a
land grant comes across a legal
need, um, they'll make an
official recommendation or
request, I should say, to, to
the land grant council, and then
the land grant council, um, norm
usually approves uh pretty much
everything that that requested
and then they're put on the
list um for those services and
then we try um at the staff
level to figure out how do we
actually then you triage that
and send him to a place where
they can receive those services.
Obviously the contract is one
place that we are able to send
folks for services, but if
they're backed up in terms of
the amount of, of work that they
have, uh, then we try to look
for alternatives. One
alternative is we work closely
with the New Mexico with the,
I'm sorry, with the University
of New Mexico, uh, School of
Law, their clinical law program,
um, particularly with the
natural resource and
environmental law clinic, and in
fact, um, this year and last
year, uh, the clinic has been
actively involved in.
in a a litigation matter that
relates to an encroachment, uh,
on the common lands. And so
that's been a, a really
wonderful experience for those
clinical law students that are
actually practicing, uh, in this
area, they're they're learning
some of the law and they're also
getting familiarized with land
grant communities, which is, um,
I think a very important uh
aspect of those partnerships
with the law school, uh,
considering how many of our uh
young law students come out and
and go on to become either
legislators and
policymakers go on to become
judges or just active um
litigants uh in these cases.
And so it's good for them to
sort of have some exposure to
land grants. And then the other
thing that we do specific with
the law schools, we provide uh
externships, um, with, uh, law
students to actually work with
our legal service providers, um,
normally what we've done is
we've had them, uh, external
with the New Mexico legal aid.
Uh, we've been in discussions
with the Department of Justice,
uh, and
Um, to be able to place externs
with them as well, and that's
something that they're very open
to, um, and then that's kind of
the other partnership and, and
really, um, that we work closely
with is the Treaty Guadalupe
Hidalgo division of the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Mr. Enrique Romero and and his
um staff, you know, they, they
serve as counsel to the council,
so we're able to sort of go to
them directly when we have
questions or legal questions
that
Either affect the council or or
relate to policy, uh, in general
for land grants, which is, um,
you know, it's important for us
to be able to sort of receive
that advice and consultation,
uh, and then they also, um, you
know, consult on other matters,
uh, and we're really starting to
sort of, I think, build some
more opportunities uh to working
with them and potentially maybe
some future uh litigation that
they may even able to, um,
partake in, you know, we've done
stuff in the past, um, and
Tierra Maria, for example, the
AG's office you
may recall, took the lead on um
getting them back uh around
roughly 200 acres of common land
that was uh sort of being
In threat of loss, uh, as a
result of uh of an out of state,
um, nonprofit that was trying to
sort of take control of that and
so um we are always welcome of,
of those kind of partnerships,
but we recognize even with all
that, um, and, you know, last
year, uh, the council invested
about 73,000 in into uh legal
services for land grants and,
and we really do get a heck of a
deal in terms of the hourly rate
with New Mexico legal aid, um,
but that's just, uh, a drop in
the bucket when it comes to
making sure that we can maintain
and provide consistent service.
Uh, this year, the council
budgeted about 70,500, so about
3000 less than we had budgeted
last year again just due to
that, um, budgets staying flat.
Uh, what we would like to do
though is continue to expand
those services, um, like to
either hire directly an attorney
through the council. Um, now
that the, we've created the La
Mercede Institute at the
University of New Mexico, we
have an option to maybe even
think about creating um another
peeler under that right now the
La Mercede Institute houses.
the council through the
intergovernmental Service
Agreement as well as the land
grant studies program, uh, been
really kind of thinking about
the option of creating maybe a a
legal services um arm that can
work directly with the law
school and with the Enel clinic,
um, provides some of those
opportunities and also have some
of that continuity for clients.
One of the biggest challenges
with um
The law school, uh, in the
working through the clinic is
that you have new students every
semester and then you also
sometimes have the professors
switching out, um, so that makes
it challenging, um, to maintain
long litigation that may last
several semesters, um, and, and
ensuring that you're doing
justice and and and due
diligence for the clients, um,
and so, you know, this could
sort of help, um, build that
bridge uh to be able to have
some consistency, uh, to
continue to do that work. So
that's definitely one area um
that we're
interested in expanding, um, if
we can continue to grow our
budget.
Uh, the next area, um, is
surveying services. This is
something that we currently uh
do through a contract. Uh, we
don't have a contract in place
yet for this fiscal year, um,
just due to some delays in
getting our contract executed at
the University of Mexico, that's
all been put in place now, so
we'll actually be going through
the procurement of those
contracts now, um, last year we
were able to contract for
$50,000 worth of surveying
services, uh,
This year that budget is 40,000
again, just because um we didn't
grow in terms of our uh amount
of funding that we had, um, what
this meant last year is we had 5
land grant communities that
received direct serving services
on 6 different projects, um, and
that includes uh a land transfer
for the Tierra Maria land grant,
they received some property from
Rio Riba County. We were able to
get in there and help them with
the survey that they needed to
complete that transfer. Um,
we've had some work specific to
some of the lit
that's been ongoing, um, that's
one thing that's we've kind of
recognize the the real
importance of having um a
surveyor as an expert to be able
to not only go in and help with,
um, figuring out what's sort of
on the ground in terms of some
of these encroachments, but also
doing some analysis, uh, on some
of the, you know, the deed work
and stuff that goes into um
these cases to identifying, you
know, where exactly are these
parcels on the ground and, and
what is the potential um risk
for those encroachments, uh,
and, and then just get.
to sort of serve as an expert in
some of these cases.
Uh, we also, um, had a boundary
survey done for a land grant
that received their property,
um, and then there was uh the
San Joaquin del Rio, the
Chamalan Grant had an irrigation
project that they're working on
with the federal government,
with the US Forest Service, uh,
and being able to ident help
that land grant with some
services to identify um the old
Osekia, what the potential um
irrigation areas are and be able
to make that in a.
format that um easily readable,
uh, and they can help in
advancing that project.
And so, um, you know, we just
continue to sort of, um, do that
uh ideally what we would have is
a surveyor on staff that could
just chip away at Lang Grant,
uh, surveys, um, you know, we
recognize that we've had some
really great strides in terms of
the the repeal of the adverse
position statute, um, but
there's still
A lot of portions of land grants
within the exterior boundaries
that have not been surveyed. And
so being able to sort of fix
those on the ground and
understand like where are the
common lands, uh, and then as
land grants acquired new lands
to be able to sort of survey
those, uh, and make sure that um
those surveys are recorded and
then there's, there's some
notice for folks to understand
where the boundaries are, uh, so
that we can avoid, um, boundary
conflicts into the future.
Uh, and so, you know, that's an
area that I think was gonna be
around for quite some time in
terms of land grants as, uh,
any, any entity that has a, a
land base, um, surveying
services are always going to be
important to uh to
Those communities
Uh, the next area is natural
resource management, and so we
try to do as much as we can, um,
with our, uh, sort of limited
resources, but we do recognize
the importance of um assisting
land grants with managing those
natural resources, uh, in a way
that is beneficial for
conservation purposes for
watershed health, uh, and, and
also just uh forest management
and then providing opportunities
for fuel wood for local
communities, um, many of you
from the rural districts
understand.
the high cost of propane and uh
what a big difference it can
make if you can have Lenya in
the in the winter to help heat
your home and offset some of
those costs.
Uh, last year, um, we were able
to do a contract, um,
With the many of you may know,
uh, Mr. JR Logan out of house,
um, who does a lot of work on
develop these type of fuel work
projects, uh, to try to see
about how we can expand and get
some of those myomo type
projects, uh, in with the Carson
and other federal partners, uh,
and then also with the land
grants themselves on some of
their common lands and so I'm
trying to look to move to expand
that over into Rio Reba County.
I did some work last year. We're
hoping to bring him on again to
do some additional work this
year. Uh, we also funded a
couple of um
youth projects, um, YCC
projects, we did have some uh
Um, the junior money that
allowed us to do that last year.
Uh, and so one project we did
with the Ancestral lands, uh,
indigenous lands program, um,
where they actually uh ancestral
lands as part of um a larger um
conservation legacy
organization, and they have a
specific program where they
target um indigenous youth, and
then last year they actually
started a land grant, uh, YCC um
out of the East Mountains, and
they actually have an individual
who just does recruitment, um,
and we were able to sort of help
them, um.
With a project in Torreon, uh,
where they did some water shed
restoration of the creek bed,
and then we also did work with
the East Rio Riba Soil and Water
Conservation District, um, where
they were able to develop
natural resource plans for for
land grants, um, up in uh Rio
Ribo and Tao areas.
Um, we also provide direct staff
support for fieldwork projects
um with the state land Office
that took place in the East
Mountains um that served uh the
canon and the Conway Land Grant
chili Le Toron Tarique,
uh, Monzano land grants, as well
as um Project in Villanueva with
the San Miguel Lovaldo La Grant.
Those projects are ongoing. Um,
they were just sort of, um,
they've been cleared by state
land office and every year as
they get funding, they do these
projects and they partner with
the local uh land grant
communities to get the wood to
them and then they distribute
the wood.
Um, to those most in need in
their communities. And so we're
gonna, you know, continue to
work with them again, this is,
um, all of this has been with
our existing funding, but what
we would love to be able to do
is actually bring um full-time
individual on that could work
and concentrate on these areas
of natural resource management,
um, help land grants not only
plan and implement projects, but
also seek funding uh and assist
those land grants with the
administration of those funds,
um, as you all know, there's a
lot more opportunities now when
it comes to
of this um natural resource
management both at the state
level and at the federal level.
Um, now that land grants have um
access to the nursed assistance
fund, they can actually utilize
those funds as a match to
leverage funds from the the
federal dollars or state dollars
and so uh we want to be able to
sort of help, um, move them in
that direction and and provide
him with that direct support and
assistance. Um, we will continue
to sort of budget for um
Natural resources this year, the
council included 10,000 towards
towards that and that's likely
going to come in in again in the
way of a contract.
Uh, community and economic
development. Um, we try to
provide support to the land
grants to the extent that we can
now, one of the areas that we
focused on last fiscal year was
with the Mercedes Unida Center
and trying to kind of keep that
project moving forward, and we
were able to do a contract for
10,000 to to work on some um
kind of update their planning
and and help them sort of figure
out what they need to do, uh, in
terms of next steps in terms in
their development. Uh, we also
Um, work with their uh pro bono
legal service provider who's
been assisting um with providing
them with some of the use
agreements between uh the land
grants that are involved in that
project, uh, and we'd like to
continue to expand those
services and, and not just for,
you know, this type of project,
which I think is a great pilot
project for uh a regional type
project between land grant
communities, but also um be able
to provide direct services to
individual land grants on their
immediate economic development
needs, uh, and so, you know, our
expanded budget with the
that we've always requested, uh,
every year is, uh, to be able to
fund a position of a community
and regional uh development
planner, um, that can help land
grants again, go in, identify
projects, um, and also, uh, help
find funding for those and
another big area is actually
work with land grants on
updating their comprehensive
plans, a lot of land grants took
advantage of their ability to do
zoning several years back and
and started doing comprehensive
plans, but, you know, those have
to be renewed every 5 to 10
years.
Um, be able to work with land
grants on those and have the
in-house capacity to do that.
Um, we're also going to work on
partnering with the um, School
of Architecture and planning,
uh, we've been in in discussions
with them um to figure out how
we can start um doing some
cross-campus partnerships under
the Merced Institute to to be
able to do um more assistance to
those communities, so they can
take full advantage of those
authorities that they have that
already exists for them in the
statute.
Uh, and again this year we
budgeted 10,000 in our budget
for those type of services.
Uh, youth development, I already
kind of mentioned, um, we do.
The best that we can to do that,
um, primarily, we have, it's
been funded through junior fund,
um, as well as some of the
council's own budget has gone
towards uh investing in some of
those projects on these programs
that already exist, these YCC
programs, and we recognized long
ago that it um it's uh it's
better to partner with some of
those programs that exist
because there's a lot of
overhead in terms of pulling
those off, those type of
projects off, you know, a few
years back we had thought about
maybe we should start investing
in trying to develop these ICC
programs and we realized um
there's already some good
programs out there.
Um, particularly like ancestral
lands and what's happening there
with East River and Water
Conservation District, um, that
we can just help support those
programs and build up um the
work that they're doing.
But we also recognize that apart
from sort of those type of
programs, there's, there is a
need um for continuing to sort
of build leadership in our local
land grant communities, uh, and
connection to culture, and so,
you know, because of some of the
funds that we've received in the
past through junior money, um,
we've been able to uh support
actual youth programs. We did
one in Tierra Maria, um, that's,
uh, targeted high school youth,
uh, last year, um, and then we
also, or the year before last,
and then we also
one with um Cristobal de la
Serna and their Comanche
dancers, and that was a targeted
towards middle school youth, um,
and their Comanche culture and
sort of teaching them some of
those dances, um, that local
land grant has decided to sort
of continue that work, and they
now with the money that they
receive through the assistance
fund have been able to
supplement that program and keep
it going. So it's good to see
that land grants are also very
interested in investing in their
youth and, you know, if we can
help kind of kick start some of
these, um, they're, they're more
than willing to
been able to sort of take on
some of those projects
themselves. Uh, and then we
continue to do oral history
projects that are both um
cross-generational with elders
and then to the extent that we
can, we involve youth in those
projects as well, um, and have
them do some of the interviewing
and and sort of get them
connected um to their culture.
So, um we would like to continue
to do that type of work, um, to
the extent that's possible
within our budget and as it
grows, we always have the
council always does a good job
of figuring out um what are the
projects that we can invest in
and how do we, how do we keep
that growing? Uh, it
Great, um, maybe through the
studies program to eventually
have um either a part-time or a
full-time coordinator that could
help, um, coordinate these type
of programs to get started in
local land grant communities,
uh, and work with some of the
curriculum that's been developed
with, um, in partnership with
the New Mexico Highlands through
the um Osean land grant
education project, uh, and
actually start putting together
um youth programs that could be
sustainable long term um within
these different communities. And
really that's where we're gonna
grow uh future.
sort of leaders in the land
grant communities that can serve
on boards and, and better serve
their communities and just sort
of strengthen New Mexico as a
whole.
And then the, the sort of the
last area um is research
services, research services are
important for a variety of
reasons, um, one of the things
that um has been
Really evident in all the sort
of recent litigation work is
just how important some of those
research support services are,
uh, and, and Doctor, Doctor Baca
does a really great job and he's
just a seasoned researcher in
these areas and is able to, you
know, um,
Find uh materials that have
really made a difference, uh, in
some of these cases as we
litigate and a lot of times
there's, you know, we're we're
talking about a history that can
go back 20 to 300 years, um,
and, and
Modern memory doesn't have a lot
of some of the, for example,
chain of title or some of the
history of what these land
communities underwent, uh, and
he's really done a great job of
being able to identify materials
that um lend themselves to
making stronger positions and
cases for these land communities
and protection of their common
lands, uh, and so that's
something that we know we'll
have to continue into the
future, um, and then, you know,
over the past several years, and
I've mentioned this before,
we've been able to start
digitizing some of the
microfilm, um,
that we were able that the
language studies program, uh,
purchased years back, um, the
reels of the Spanish and Mexican
archives, and we've been
digitizing those, uh, and as
well as other materials that
we're able to find archival
materials, and we've also been
purchasing um
Materials from the Center for
Lan and Studies from Mr. Malcolm
Ebright, um, you know, articles
and things that he's done, and
we've been able to take those
and put those uh in print and
get them out to land grants, um,
and what we really need to do
now is sort of focus on
organizing all that and um we
need to seek some funds to be
able to probably hire some
students here at UNM, uh, kind
of get, uh, a real robust.
Uh, archival online repository
that we can have make it
accessible to the general
public, um, that folks can do
research, uh, and be able to
access these resources that
we've been able to collect and
and start to digitize over the
years. And so uh we'll be
looking towards um expanding
those opportunities as we move
forward into the future.
And so
The other thing that I sort of
passed out was just the budget
or FY 2026 budget request that
was submitted to uh the state.
This year, and this includes um
The uh increase uh from our
current uh operating budget, um,
right now, our budget, uh, in FY
2025 is $626,000. Um, so this is
an increase above that and
really it's to expand some of
those um opportunities, have
more staff on hand in some of
these areas like the natural
resource, um, the community
economic involvement planning,
and be able to expand some of
those legal services and
continue to provide for
servinging contracts as well.
Um,
and so, you know, that.
Total request that we put in
this year is for $998,701. Um,
we're always very optimistic and
we, we always shoot for the
stars and then what, whatever
we're able to receive, uh, in
our annual budget, we make um
good use of those dollars and we
don't ever let it go to waste
and, and we provide as much
services as we can. Uh, and so
that, with that, Mr. Chairman, I
will stand for any questions.
Thank you for that presentation.
I'm going to start off with
Representative Ortiz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Arturo. What's the total budget
ask, and I'm sorry if I just
missed it.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so, uh, for
this year, the council's budget
request was uh $998,701. It's on
this, uh,
separate I missed that sheet.
Thank you very much.
It's somewhere it's buried and
we have more. Thanks.
Senator.
No, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Archileta all the
work you do through the years
and, and today the um couple
quick questions, the um
This, the, uh, how are the
surveys going? I remember there
was a bill a couple years back
regarding um.
The lack of surveyors in New
Mexico and how do we incentivize
folks going into that
profession.
Uh
How, how, uh, tell me about
that, how expensive are they and
how they're so necessary, you
know.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, uh, send a
message, that's an excellent
question. Um, we still face that
same issue, there is still a
shortage of surveyors in New
Mexico, uh, anybody who's
looking to get a land survey,
there's um there's usually at
least a 6 to 12 month delay, um,
at best, uh, for moving that
forward. We've been quite
fortunate, um, in the past
several years that we've been
able to contract with uh
territorial land serving, um,
here out of Santa Fe, uh, the
individual, um, Mr. Chris
Chavez.
Uh, is a retired, uh, he's a
surveyor, uh, full time now, but
he retired from the US Forest
Service, uh, and so, um, in that
capacity, he had a lot of
knowledge of and survey work is
it related with land grants and
some of these overlaps and so
he's also like a bit of an
amateur historian, and so, um,
he does an excellent job of
really sort of delving in and
and getting to the nuts and
bolts of some of the issues. Um,
I know that at the point where
Mr. Chavez is no longer um
willing or able to do this work.
gonna be kind of hurting, uh,
and so we've really been trying
to figure out how do we, how do
we address that? Um, one thing
that we've had, um, Mr. Travis,
uh, has been gracious enough to
do as he's worked with um the
East Reba so water conservation
district when they've done some
of their projects, um, some of
the days that they've actually
gone out with some of those um
youth that are working on those
has been with Mr. Chavez in the
field and locating um boundary
points and stuff and trying to
hopefully spark some interest as
to say young folks who might be
willing and interested in to go
into that field and maybe if we,
we had the budget, we could
actually bring somebody in and
say, hey, let's let's bring you
on. It is a it is a, uh, an
expensive field in terms of the
the startups just because of all
the equipment, um, and that's
something that years ago we
actually received um some junior
monies to try to hire a servier
for a one year term and the
startup costs were sort of
didn't work, so we were able to
just do several contracts with
surveyors, um, but in terms of
the work itself, it's really
made a difference, a huge
difference for land grants and
being able to, like I said,
said file, um, and put notice
for everybody exactly where
their common lands are on the
ground, um, and push back um
some of those encroachments, um,
uh, and really draw here's the
line today, um, most land grants
received a survey when they all
land grants received a survey of
the exterior boundaries when
they were patented, but, you
know, those patents are all over
100 years old now, um, and
there's been changes within the
interior boundaries in terms of,
you know, ownership, and so, um,
we know that that's a long term
project, meaning
able to help land grants map,
um, and survey what's on the
ground in terms of what they
currently own, um, and then as
they, uh, you know, hopefully as
they were able to sort of
acquire um lost common lands in
the future, be able to provide
those services as well. Um, you
know, in my mind, if we had, uh,
we'd have work.
For a survey or for at least the
next 10 to 15 years, um, easy if
they even if they were just
chipping away, you know, one
perfect example is the Anto
Chico Lang grant. We've been
trying to sort of figure out how
we can provide them with some
services to support them and
their exterior boundaries are
about 110,000 acres. So, and
there's, you know, kind of
cookie cut it up and so that's
just such a huge thing and it's
like, how do we get in there and
sort of chip away at that, um,
and figure out a way that's
going to make sense and
manageable without it just
being.
huge cost that's going to be
prohibitive, yeah, no, thank
you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Archul.
No, that's true, we, we should
keep an eye on that and uh.
figure out how the state could
offset some of that expense
cause ideally it would be great
in the last, in the next 5, 10
years to get everything
surveyed.
And and literally mapped out for
the future. The, uh, on the, on
the research services, the
Center for Land Grant Studies,
tell me about that, where, where
is that house where? So that, so
that it's interesting, so the
The, the one that's referenced
in here that we've been making
some acquisitions, the original
Center for La Grant studies was
a project that came out of
actually, um, the state land
office, we used to have a state
planning division, um, uh, and
they did a land title survey,
uh, project, and they actually
went through and looked at all
the issues. This was in the 70s.
And they looked at the issues
for land grant communities and
some of those, um, you know,
what happens in terms of these
common lands and sort of the
encroachments and what about
People who are these tenants in
common as a result of the
patents, and that was done by a
lot of young attorneys that were
coming out of law school at the
time, including Malcolm Ebright,
um, Emlyn Hall, uh, and so, um,
there was quite a number of of
attorneys who Charles Dumars, I
think, was another one, and they
started working and they created
this thing known as the Center
for La Gran Studies, and they
were actually, you know, doing
research and litigating and uh
and eventually, um all those.
Young attorneys went off and
started doing either private
practice, became professors, and
so the only one who kind of
stayed with it was Mr. Malcolm
Ebright, and so today, um, Mr.
Eright no longer practices law
and he still does a lot of
authoring. Uh, he's in his 90s,
um, but he's still kind of
active and going out and and um
still produces a lot of uh
academic research, um, but we,
we're trying to acquire some of
those um things in his
collection as they portrayed the
land grants before um that
opportunity.
goes away. Now, um,
We do have the land grant
studies program, which is
separate, that was an entity
that was created by the
legislative body here, um,
through, um, our research and
public service project through
UNM back in 2008, um, and that's
where we've continued to do a
lot of our research and work
through um that has been
converted from an RPSP and now
it's funded through um the ING
through UNM and so that
continues on. And then most
recently, we were able to create
the
Langer said Institute as a
category 3 center on UNM campus,
which means we're a standalone
center that can work across
campus, and we report directly
to the office of the
vice president of research, uh,
and that entity we're hoping to
be able to house like um not
just the council and the city's
program, but maybe, like I said,
grow additional programming
maybe as it relates to some of
the work um with comprehensive
planning, um, with land grants
as well as with legal services.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Archuleta, thank you for that
because they, um, they capture
that history is tremendous. M
Hall I haven't heard that name
in a long, long time, and all
had a chance to study with him
at UNM Law school back in the
day. We did a
A land grant conference back in
February of 1998, which was the
150th anniversary.
of the treaty. Um, and then Hall
uh.
Total back East guy moved to
northern New Mexico, fell in
love with it, did incredible
research on land grants, um,
And was roughly the fictional
character character depicted in
Milagroinfield War that became a
book and he was the lawyer in,
in the, in the book, in the
movie that was.
Um
But then, uh, so yeah, to
recapture and I saw anyway, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate you
reaching out to the law school
building that relationship
because there's some good stuff.
There that we need to capture
and and.
And caught a fire and then put
into um.
I used to call it microfiche,
but.
The, uh, to archive those
materials, um, digitally.
Uh, is key. So appreciate you
bringing this budget forward and
You know, let's, let's stay in
touch between now and the end of
the budgeting process, thank
you. Appreciate that, Mr.
Sherman and that's funny you
mentioned the uh conference, uh
Doctor Akubuaka just recently
found the web page, so there's
still actually a web page of
that 1998 conference, and I, I
saw a, a, a very young senator
Moas and I thought, man, like
that I was in college at the
same time, but I was at Eastern
during that, that time when you
guys had that conference, but it
was really great to see we
actually have some of the folks
in the audience today, Mr. Juan
Sanchez, who was at it back
then, Mr. Steve Polaco from
Tierra Maria. They were all
involved in that conference and
it was really great to see Paula
Garcia, uh, a lot of folks who
are still active today and sort
of helping try to preserve and
protect our communities.
The high school students in my
district would have said, you
attended that conference in the
1900s, so I'm happy.
or cheesy peo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Arturo, thank you so much, uh
very impressive report and
what's been accomplished and
where you're heading. I just had
some questions about the budget,
and I wanted to, uh, first of
all, the, the, you're asking for
600,000 for salaries and fridge.
How big a staff do you have? I
mean, how many people are there?
So,
uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator you
know, right now, um, our staff
consists of 4 people, that
includes myself, um, Doctor
Baca, Anissaaka, as well as
Hareta, um Archuleta, and um,
this budget would allow us to
expand that to 2 additional
staff members, uh, Natural
Resource planner as well as a
community economic development
planner, um, and then also be
able to figure out how we also
deal with the, with the legal
services, um, as you all know,
one of the requests.
It's being made and is going to
come up, I think today in some
of the bills as the community
governance attorney program and
sort of tweaking how that sort
of works, um, and that may be an
opportunity for, uh, in the
future if we can get that.
You know, fully up and running,
um, to maybe have the council
pull in one of those students
who graduates from that program
and work for the council and
some of these, um, thanks, yeah,
that, that's good. So, um,
The other questions I had were
just, you know, first of all,
the FNA at the bottom there, is
that, is that the
Basically the
Whatever the term is, the skin
that the UN puts on the, on the
contractor. What is that? What's
happening? So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Tino, yeah, so that's
the uh facilities and
administration overhead costs
that's been um negotiated with
the University of Mexico, so,
uh,
The University of Mexico has an
FNA rate for various things. So,
for example, if you're a
federal, you have a, a, a, a
federal grant, it's 52%, um, at
the state level, they've been
able to negotiate a 20% FNA
rate, um, and that's something
that's across the board. It's
part of um what's been
negotiated with the Department
of Finance Administration and
all of their state agencies.
There's a, a few state agencies
that have uh a separate FNA
rate, um, but that's the, the
sort of standard rate that's
been negotiated with the state.
And what that includes is that
includes all of the
payroll services, um, it
includes um rent, yeah, um,
utilities, all that facilities,
um, it also includes, um, you
know, various, uh,
Um, whatever, whenever we do
projects, um, when we expand uh
dollars and you know, those it
helped that we, we have access
to UNM's procurement office, so
they do all our contracts. So
there's a lot of little things
that are sort of funded that
we're able to sort of tap into,
um, through that, and that's
just, that's the standard rate,
you know, we look at it also and
we're always like, oh, what we
could do with those funds, but,
um, that's just kind of what it
is for us to sort of, uh, sort
of work with you. And I mean,
it's been a really great
partnership. I think we need all
to grow. I don't think we'd be
able to have had the
relationships we be able to
develop with the law school.
wouldn't be on campus, so, um,
we do appreciate sort of, but we
recognize it does come with some
costs.
And,
and then, Mr. Chairman, because
of that then are the four of you
that are currently on staff,
considered staff for the
Uh, ERB or the retirement
program and things like that,
the insurance and so on, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Ortizino,
that's correct. So we are all,
uh, UNM employees, um, that are
on staff for the council and the
studies program, so we do pay
into ERB um we are term
employees though, because it's
um considered, you know, soft
money. So, um, we have to renew
every, every year our contracts
renew, but for the time that
we're there and we're funded,
um, we do put into ERB uh and
those type of retirement plans.
And then Mr. Chairman,
last question has to do with the
travel. It seems to be listed
twice, or is that two different
kinds of travel. One up above in
your in-state and out of state
and then down below under the
intergovernmental Services
Agreement. It's listed again,
but a different amount. Yes,
Mister, Mister, uh, Chairman
Senator Ortiz, you know, the
great catch. So, um, on this,
this, uh, little, uh, one pager,
everything in the gray is what
is the stays at Department of
Finance Administration because
the council is
Administratively attached to
DFA, um, and then everything
below in the white, um, is part
of the intergovernmental Service
agreement. So the out in state
and out of state travel for in
the gray is for the council
members themselves. So that pays
for their travel to get to the
meetings as well as any out of
state travel they do, and then
the.
Um, in the way it's the
personnel, so that's for staff
in.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Ena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Arturo. Thank you for your great
work, um, we're deeply
appreciative really of
everything you've done in a
leadership role to bring us
where we are today, so, uh, very
grateful. I just wanted to know,
uh, do you have the executive
support on your uh budget.
Uh,
senator,
how our Senate Mr. Chairman
Senator and representative
editor, um, yeah, we, we, uh,
We're typically where our budget
ends up um on the what portions
of our budgets that usually end
up on the chopping block or at
the LFC level, um, normally we
get, um,
The, at least in the past, in
the recent years of the current
administration when we submit
our request, DFA submits that
whole, and, and we've had in,
uh, endorsement by the, the
governor, uh, in the past, uh, I
want to say 2, at least the last
3, budget cycles. They've
recommended that as part of the
governor's budget, but then when
it gets to the uh final workings
out, um, we usually end up with
less based on um the House
Appropriation Finance Committee
or, you know, whatever the
The committee that adopts it at
the legislatures where we
usually end up sort of um less
than what our request is issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Arturo. Um, so how much less
did, how much were you uh did
you get a shorter budget last
year and what was the level of
that and where did it happen?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative editor, um, last
year our budget, uh, stayed
flat, so it actually didn't
increase at all from the your
previous, um, and so the, the
legislature, it happened um
during that process with the
endorsement, that was the the
LFC endorsement was a flat
budget, and so that's what ended
up making its way through the
final session, um, but the
governor did, um, include our
increase on last year, I want to
say the increase was around
800,000 is what we asked for,
uh, and we ended up with 600.
626, which it just stayed flat
from uh the FY 2023 budget or
2024 budget, I'm sorry.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. The
only person I see here, I could
be wrong on the LFC is uh or
house preparations is uh
representative Montoya, but, um,
call us when you have to appear.
OK.
And uh let me know because
that's another mechanism, but we
can be of service to you, but uh
Uh, I have to know when you're
gonna go before that committee.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you for the budget and
uh thank you for the outline,
um, it's a very much appreciated
and we have a good debate to
take to uh committees in the
house with this information, so
I appreciate it.
Representative Garcia.
That has a
Germany, Arturo.
Uh, excellent overview of
The presentation was really.
Enhancing, um,
The for knees that I jotted down
was um
Bringing him on board a new uh
full-time attorney.
And bringing on board a
full-time surveyor.
Uh, bringing on board a
full-time natural resources
planner.
And bringing on board a
full-time community and regional
planner.
So you mentioned just a couple
of seconds ago that the
The 600,000 understaff and
salary.
Uh, really in
Encompasses the full-time
natural resources planner and
the full-time community and
regional planner.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Garcia, uh, yes, it was built,
this budget that we submitted
back in July, that's correct.
OK.
And uh so what is the, the
projection on
Bringing on board an attorney
and a surveyor.
So, Mr. Chairman, we do include
it in that number, we do, uh, we
did include the, the 55,000 to
keep uh the contracted services
for a surveyor, um, and we have
to sort of still figure out just
because there's a shortcoming in
that area in terms of folks
actually getting into the field,
um, how we address that long
term, uh, in terms of the
attorney, uh, we want, we're
Obviously interested in sort of
what happens with the community
governance attorney program and
making sure that girls were
going to be working with them
directly, um, just found out
that um we do have some new
appointments, uh, to the
community governance attorney
program and, and we have another
one that should be coming here
soon, um, which will make that
commission itself strong, um,
and, and I know it's, uh, at the
last interim committee hearing
that we had in October, I think,
uh, you had a presentation from
Adrian Oglesby, and at that time
he um had indicated that I had
graduated
Graduated from law school and
had passed the bar, which hasn't
happened yet. Um, uh, he was a
little bit ahead of himself and
hopefully he's projecting for
the future. I, I will be
graduating now in December. I'll
be sitting for the bar in
February, um, and so, um,
hopefully without any actual
need to change in the budget,
I'll be able to sort of practice
law and we can move in that
direction. Um, and then we can
really work to figure out how we
get maybe a student coming out
in the community government
attorney program, um, and then
bring them on. And if, if we're
able to do that and make the
changes this year, um.
To that program that would
remove the um,
Requirement that only that that
that uh only 50% of, or that
none of the, the
Buttons that go towards paying
that salary because 50% of the
salary comes from the program
itself, and then the other
program dollars can't come from
state dollars if we can remove
that cap, um, then we can
definitely find a way to fund
just a half FTE knowing that the
program would fund the other
half until we build our budget
correctly to be able to just
have someone full time as an
additional attorney.
Thank, thank you for that. Um.
And I guess that was my other
question, Mr. Chair.
I, um, how does the um
Langright counsel in herfaced
with the community governance.
Attorney
Program.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Garcia, there's a
couple of ways. Um, one,
because, uh, the
That program is very important.
It is something that the council
as well as the individual land
grants have advocated for over
the years. We've made sure to
sort of stay uh engaged with
that program and, and attend all
the meetings and, and sort of
have provided input, um, we also
have uh one of the commission.
Members themselves is required
to be a um
One of the, the shortlists is
you have to have served on
either the land grant Council
currently or were on the
council, you have to either be
on the assea being a member of
ansekia, um, or, and then also
the colonia Infrastructure Board
past or present member, uh, and
so that's um one other way that
we say involved, the current
member that's uh assigned but
was appointed as Mr. Macaio
Griego, who served on the
council for many years. Um, he's
actually looking to get off of
that and so we've been um in
conversations with the
governor's office.
a new appointment, which should
be coming um very fairly soon.
Um, we're gonna continue to work
with them. Um, we've really
strengthened our relationship
with the School of Law, um, and
we, it, it is possible, I mean,
we don't, we don't know exactly
how this is moving forward, um,
but there may be a possibility
that we'll have a um uh.
Clearer role, maybe not from the
council, but maybe from the
Langgrammed Institute uh into
helping administer that program,
uh, as it moves forward into the
future and keep uh keep growing,
um, you know, over see the
administrative part to the
commission and then help with
just the functioning of um the
day to day stuff with that as
well. So we're still trying to
figure out what that looks like,
um, but we do have a sort of a
positive um response from the
school of law and they're
interested in figuring out how
do we, how do we sustain this
long term and how are we a part
of that conversation?
Well, thank you for that. You
know that program, uh, the
community storing program.
You know, uh, center of Tippio
was
Our driver on that one.
You know, and he kinda.
Saw it through
Uh, you know, that, uh, that
project that initiative.
Really ended up on the rocket
docket in 2020.
Mainly because the governor in
her first year,
OK, uh, vetoed a lot of
legislation that had no
dissenting votes.
And that the community gardens
was one of those programs and
fortunately,
You know, instead of trying to
go through an override we put
together a
A rocket docket
we passed all those bills go
pocket veto in 201919, but you
know, we have to kind of give
enrotiipino credit for kind of
carrying this really model
program and.
And also, um,
You know, our, our, uh, our, uh,
our draft on that was.
You know, Mark and uh.
And he went through a lot of
drafts, you know, kind of make
it right, but we got it done,
so.
So thank you Arturo. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions.
Thank you, Arturo, for all that
you do on behalf of land grants.
Thanks for everything, Mr.
Chair, if I could just one last,
uh, comment, um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Garcia. I also
wanted to just echo that and
think, uh, Senator Tuppio, I
know this is gonna be your last
meeting with us. You've been a,
a great champion for us, um, for
our land grant communities, if
it wasn't for Senator Ortizino's
leadership, we wouldn't have the
community government program, as
you mentioned. Uh, we also
wouldn't even be at UNM. It was.
was the senator sort of
suggestion when the council was
floundering around and and uh
trying to figure out where we
land and we were having some at
that time, the relationship with
DFA wasn't as good as it is
today, and, and it was Senator
PCP said, well, have you guys
thought about UNM maybe you can
work something out with them,
and that was really kind of what
set us in that direction and
it's really been quite positive,
so we really appreciate all that
you do, Senator, um, from the
bottom of my heart, I know from
the bottom of a lot of our land
grant leaders. We really
appreciate anything that you've
ever done for us over the years.
Thank you so much. And you know,
we've established a quorum, and
so since quorum has been
established, we're gonna go back
to our meeting minutes from
October 3rd and 4th. What's the
pleasure of the committee with
those minutes.
There's been a motion by 3
different people
and so we'll take it.
So we'll take it from Senator
Pinto actually shouted out it as
well. And so is there any
opposition to approving the
minutes?
No opposition, and so I also
want to welcome we have my good
friend, the county assessor from
County here, Mr. Joaquin Valdez,
thank you, Joaquin, for joining
us and thank you for what you do
and helping our land grants and
Riba County, your hard work and
dedication to assisting us is
noticed and I appreciate you.
And so we're now gonna break for
lunch. We're gonna take a quick
recess for lunch. We'll be
coming back in one hour, so, um,
10 minutes early, so we'll come
back at 1:05 p.m. And so with
