Working on the street cutting
people's hair for cash, um,
because, um, he didn't, he was
not able to get a license or
anything here. Um, he just
recently was able to get his
license in the US, um, and he,
um, and now is in school to
become a more advanced barber,
um, through working with our
recording in progress.
About it because it makes it, it
makes the mission more real to
me, um, just like Kelsey and
Ellis said, all of us have this
passion for this mission and we
very much would respect for you
to continue to represent
agencies such as Quando, um,
when you're making decisions
related to children's programs,
to the nutrition programs in the
state to the housing programs in
the state to not let that
continue to, um, be put as a
last thing because people have
something in mind.
about homelessness that may not
be the whole picture.
Thank you.
Could you, could you just share
with us which state contracts
you are able to get, do you get
pre-K or do you get uh childcare
or which ones do you get and
which we do for our little guys,
um, that are, um, the infants
and toddlers, so we take care of
um 6 weeks to 5, right before
they go to kindergarten. For our
little guys, we get state
subsidies for those, um, for the
kiddos and for the, um, pre-K,
we are part of the pre-K program
and, um, we have the
number, um, like we are very,
we're very highly credentialed
in that state and so we're, um,
we're granted the maximum
contract for that. We're also in
the food and nutrition program,
um, through the state, um, and
so, um, we do have other
agencies that help us give the
food for the weekends, like the
Bishop's storehouse and such,
um, and other disgracious donors
that bring us food, um, to give
to our families. But, um, and
then obviously several grants,
um, that come either from the
county or the state so.
Do you have vouchers? Do you
distribute vouchers yourself for
housing, or do you have to go to
some other agency to get the
family we actually have, um, we,
um, impact about right around
500 individuals per year in our
housing program, and we do have
the vouchers. The difficult
problem and I, um, saw, Madam
Vice Chair nodding her head when
I was talking about this, um,
there are fewer and fewer and
fewer resources of where people
will accept vouchers in the
Albuquerque, um, and in Bernalio
County, so part of the
challenges you have the voucher
but you don't have anybody on
the other end to take that
voucher. Um, so I know that
there's been programs that are
being sponsored on building more
places for low income that will
accept those vouchers, but
that's been the challenge. So
yes, we do have vouchers and,
um, and we actually got, um,
supportive housing Agency of the
Year last year. Um, and, um, we
were one of the few agencies
that actually got the least.
Out of cuts, that sounds funny,
but some of the agencies last
like over $200,000 for this
fiscal year that just started in
July. And, um, we lost 30, but
we were able to make that up in
other ways, so.
One last question just generally
before we go to the committee
for their specific questions.
Um, you mentioned that you do
case management, but you don't
get reimbursed for that. So
you're not a, a Medicaid agency
and have you given some thought
to becoming one? Does it, would
that help or, or what would be
the issue there? So we actually
went through the rigor of
getting our agency so that we
could do Medicaid. Right now, we
don't have anybody with the
credentials after their name to
bill Medicaid. Our case
managers, so I want to clarify
that our case managers do work
with the folks that, and they
are
Reimbursed for the, for that 508
individuals that we
get reimbursed per grant for
that. Some of those grants are
just for the voucher. Some of
those grants are for some of the
wraparound services. We just
kind of go ahead and wrap
everybody in those services, and
then we have donors that provide
things like, um, furniture and
bedding and um house good stuff
to help put somebody in the
house so that they're not just
in four walls with no furniture
and no supplies. The places that
the people that were doing that
for free are
People that we can't take into
our program because we don't
have the capacity. And then
we're, we're case managing some
for them to help them access
resources.
I seem to remember during either
during one of my visits or on a
TV.
Of
Issue the an item that came up
on the TV news about Quidando an
interview with the woman that
works there who used to be the
head of CYFD's Protective
Services Division is it Adam
Marie? Anna Mariet those
credentials be sufficient to to
get you uh Medicaid
reimbursement for work that,
that's done.
Anna Marie has now gone to YDI,
um, but she, her, um, her
background, she had a bachelor's
in
Social work and to be able to
build Medicaid, you have to have
a master's in social work. So
even when Anna Marie was there,
you had, there was, there was
that hiccup there. So, um, and
the grants that are available
for, um, for covering some of
those kind of programs are
around $400,000 for a year. That
doesn't even pay for somebody
that would have those
credentials, um, to do that. So
you know that you would be
taking a grant and then having
to supplement that grant to to
support that person's salary.
Well, let's go to the committee
then for questions and we should
have plenty of time.
Let's start with you,
Representative Thompson. You're
gonna set the timer or are you
just gonna let us ramble?
Ramble for a while. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Vice
Chairman is our timekeeper, and
she is usually ruthless about
this.
So,
so it doesn't matter.
So thank you so much for the,
some people do, that's true. I
just remember the lawbreakers.
Um,
so thank you for this, uh, Mina
McGonagall has been such a
champion for, I mean, and I call
her a nag in the best way cause
she was like representative, are
you gonna do this representative
we and, and, uh, so kudos to her
and kudos to you for using her.
But going back to all the aces
that your kids, I mean.
Undoubtedly have.
Do you have kids who are
actually developmentally
delayed.
And so are you working with the
fit programs? Do, do they, they,
they provide therapy services
and, and classroom, um,
Suggestions and things like
that.
Yeah, so we're really fortunate
that we have a very tight
relationship with McKinney, um,
Vento, um, and they, um, since
they're kind of our avenue into
the Albuquerque public school
system. We start our kiddos with
counselors when they're little.
And those same councilors follow
them all the way, you know, like
through our program and on into
kindergarten and on into, you
know, the rest of their
schooling. And so it's not
uncommon for us to have several
counselors during the week that
are observing the children and
working with.
Teachers to make sure that we're
reinforcing the behaviors that
we need to. And like Alice said,
it was a proud moment when, um,
and this is not an uncommon
proud moment, um, that when
you're graduating, your pre-K
kids into kindergarten, and none
of them are going to go into
special education. They're going
straight into regular
kindergarten. They will, they
will still have access to their
counselors and to their support
team, um, which is, I think,
really a cool wraparound, um,
and, and I keep saying Quiddando
doesn't have to.
everything. Um, it's, it's
really, are we providing the
right access to the, to the
support structures that people
need. Um, and a lot of people
are afraid to ask for the
support that they need, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your answer. So do you know
which, um, early intervention
agencies work with your kids? is
there a specific one or does it
depend on where they were born,
etc. etc. Um, there's, there's
actually several, um, but, um,
and a couple come to mind, but I
think we really like with the
child, it's we have so many MOUs
or several like, um, just
handshake agreements with other
agencies to say this.
needs this something specific,
and then we bring those people
in and we rarely if ever refer
the kid out, um, that we bring
the, the experts to the child
and to the family instead of
taking the kids out because we
know that that's when you lose,
you know, you lose the child or
you lose the parent because they
don't really have the resources
to get to these other places. So
we bring them to the kid. OK,
but with early intervention, I
mean, they, at least when I was
doing it, we went,
What do we need to do to make
this, I mean, it sounds like
it's doing fabulous. You are, I
know you all are doing fabulous
work, but what are you missing?
Yeah, I think, um,
sustainability, frankly, um,
every year we're, you know,
frantically writing grants
frantically making sure that
we're applying for all of the
state or, um, county or city
funding sources that we can, but
it's always an unknown until you
actually get the letter back
that says you got it. Um, you
know, federal appropriations,
we've had, um, a couple, we've
just got another notice that
we've got that they've
It's passed through the first
committee and it's on to the
floor to be approved. Um, but
that can take up to a year to
get those, those actual monies.
And so, you know, we're very
frugal with our money, um, and,
you know, other than salary
dollars and rent, basically
everything goes straight to our
families. Um, but I, I would say
that that's the biggest thing
and that's what really scares
me, frankly, is, um, as you
watch the political pendulum
swing back and forth is, um, the
things that
We're reliant on to make sure
that our families have the
support that they need can be a
red letter strike, um, in
somebody's budget. Um, and so
not necessarily having a face
and it's part of the reason why
we're always bringing the faces
to the forefront so that you
actually see who's being
impacted.
Just one more follow-up
question, Mr. Chair. So you do
not have a line item in the
state budget.
OK.
Do you want one?
Well, we'd like to get you one,
but we'll see that would be,
that would be awesome. Yeah,
seriously, I think those are the
things that keep me up at night
because I would hate to have to
cut even the services that we
have. Um, we thought we were
going to have to cut our
workforce development team
because, um, we, um, originally
we lost the county money, um,
for that, and they renegotiated
and we got, we got to keep our
money for that, um, but it's
things like that that I don't
think people understand the
complete devastation that would
happen to an agency.
Such as ours if we lost that
funding. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
to follow up a little bit more
on the financing part of
everything, um, you mentioned
that, um, you had a cut of
200,000, was that right? Thank
you. Um, some of the, some of
the agencies had as much as
$200,000 cut for housing. We, we
lost 30, um, and we were able to
make that up in a different way,
um, through donors, but, um,
yeah, and that, so the whole
county of Bernelio County is
what I'm talking about with
those cuts.
Thank you. And was that Mr.
Chair and, um, was that 30,000
from the county.
That was the county sheriff. So
if we were able to get you into
the budget and have all that
funding just, you know, I wonder
if that was our money, some of
the recovery money from
From the feds that flowed
through the county and, and,
and, but then it ended, you
know, it was time limited, so
that may have been why there was
a cut because, uh, I don't think
the county itself cut its own
budget, but the federal money
may have run out.
That that was my concern,
whether it was federal or, you
know, state.
County, whatever, but we need to
get you know that for a fact,
but, but is that, is that the
case? We don't know. We just
knew we got cut, so yeah, OK,
thank you and thank you for all
your great work. I think it's
wonderful. Thank you.
Royal Caballero. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and
Thank you. You're one of my
favorite, um,
Organizations and I appreciate
all that you do so very much
and, um, this is what I spent.
I think it was about,
uh, 30 years directing, uh, an
in-home daycare, um, child
development program.
And, um.
Really appreciate all of the
concerns and issues that you
pattern around, um, the care for
the children. And also, I wanted
to mention that homelessness is
not just, as you mentioned in
your About Us, it's so much
bigger, especially when we're
talking about, um,
You know, the cultural, uh,
linguistic, and also cultural
practices and traditions because
we don't.
Necessarily have people out in
the streets. We have multiple
families living together, um,
that causes even an additional
amount and then many of those
children in those families, Mr.
Chair, do not get attended to
for a number of reasons. The
parents, grandparents, aunts and
uncles are working 2 and 3 jobs
at a time.
And so through no fault of their
own,
These are the the children that
end up in a quote unquote,
homeless, um, uh, situation.
After a while, it gets terrible.
Anyway, I have questions, uh,
just a couple of questions
about, uh, sustainability, what
you mentioned about
sustainability. And, um,
So first question, do you have
an individual giving program?
We have, um, several people that
are either one time or cereal
donors, um, that, and anything
from that we have one, sweet
lady that uh gives us $5 a
month, um, just forever and has
forever, um, which is just
absolutely amazing. Um, and then
we have others that will just
graciously give, um, you know,
several $1000 per year. And, and
that has been sustained.
Um, we have seen the amounts.
Start to, um, shrink a little
bit as the economy has done what
it's done. It's like, you know,
people, I think people have less
excess right now to donate. And
so that's part of the reason why
I, I get a little nervous is as,
um, as laws change related to
giving and as, um, you know, I
think some people will continue
to do it out of the, out of the,
their soul, basically. But I
think people that do it for the
tax break may start dwindling
off a little bit. Have not seen
that yet.
Just, that's what I'm worried
about.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and that's
a very for the types of programs
that I say we because I've been
in this.
Shoot in your shoes before, um,
for sustainability, I would
suggest that you structure a
real strong actual giving
program just set out, set it up
as a membership or set it up as
some sort of a, but it has to be
structured to where it's, you
have a special account, they
Um, recur. They're giving on a
regular basis and you don't have
to worry. And that sets up my
next question, and that is, um,
how many months.
I'm assuming that the funding
you get from government is
reimbursed on a reimbursable. So
right now, how many months do
you have in your budget reserved
on the reimbursable basis to
address the reimburse.
Um, it would depend on the
program, um, Mr. Chair and team,
um, the, um, some of the some of
the, some of the programs prepay
on an annual basis, so we can
bring down those dollars during
the, during the year. And then
others reimburse on either the
monthly or the quarterly, um,
and so,
It kind of depends, but my goal
has been to have minimally 6
months of cash on hand in our
operations, um,
Kitty, so that if any of those
funding sources start to dwindle
or whatever that I can continue
to sustain the mission, um,
while I'm seeking for other, um,
for other funding. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. That's extremely
important and that's where the
giving comes in because that
sustains you and you can have
people give and commit 1 year, 3
year, 5-year, 10 years. Um, and,
and that just structures it so
intentionally and it also helps
to leverage. So my final
question is,
Um, in terms of philanthropic
grants and funds, do you, how
much of the budget is made up of
those kinds of funds?
Um, about 40%.
40
And that's another, um, Mr.
Chair, that's another way of
Really building the
sustainability, but when you
establish a real structured
giving program that gives those
that are giving a lot of trust
and faith that you're going to
be able to sustain their what
they're giving. So and also
gives the philanthropic, uh,
community, a way of knowing that
you know what to do and you 6
months is absolutely right on.
So thank you so very much and I
would really suggest you.
Building that up. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Herndon.
I think that there's one of the.
Oh,
I'm following the, the, I'm
following the vice chairman's.
So it's.
Um
We usually just go around the
table, but we're kind of
freelancing it this morning. Go
ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you very much for your
presentation today. You know,
I've always been a um an admirer
of all the work that you do at
at uh Quando Los Ninos Ninos.
What I don't know is what
happens to the children after
they reach age 5. Where's the
handoff and how do you follow
them so that they, we don't lose
them.
Yeah, so as I mentioned and
thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam,
um, the, as the, um, kiddos
transition, we transition them
with through the help of
McKinney Vo, um, and, um, which
is an agency that is helping,
um, do the sustainability of
programs for children that are
still either
Right now experiencing
homelessness or have experienced
homelessness and they make, they
follow those kiddos on into the
Albuquerque Public school
program and they're following
their families as well. Um, they
have pretty robust programs as
well, but for older, older kids,
um.
And so, um, that's, that's our
handoff right now. And so
they're in our facility about 5
times a year, um, doing, um,
interacting with the parents,
interacting with the children,
getting to know the children,
especially the pre-K, um, and
the mixed pre-K kids so that
they, the kids aren't afraid of
them as they navigate out of our
program into a different
program.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair and
Madam Speaker, when you say in
your program, are the kids at
your, at your program all day
long, you watch them as in a
daycare
facility,
so it is a licensed daycare, um,
and we have them, um, from 7 in
the morning till 5 at night.
Hm
right next door to the John
Marshall Center, if you know
where that is. I was just
wondering why 5 o'clock that's
so early for most people who are
working and the other item with
respect to how many children do
you all have now?
Uh, 52.
was 60 on the waiting list.
OK. And is that the maximum 52?
OK. And then, um, my final
question is you talk, I, I just
wanna make sure I understand the
kids that are actually in the
program, so you talked a lot
about immigrant kids that are
coming through and that's really
important. Can you tell me about
the diversity of the children
that you have, so we have um
my final question is you talk,
I, I just wanna make sure I
understand the kids that are
actually in the program, so you
talked a lot about immigrant
kids that are coming through and
that's really important. Can you
tell me about the diversity of
the children that you have, so
we have
several families that are
indigenous folks representative
of many of the different tribes
that are surrounding Albuquerque
and New Mexico, um.
The majority of our children are
of Hispanic or black um origin.
We have a few that, um, look
like me, um, better blonde hair,
green-eyed, but most of the
children are, um, Hispanic or
Native American.
Some and then about.
Uh, probably about 15% would be
black.
All right, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the answers.
Representative Chavesson and
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for, for being here. Um,
a couple of questions. So you in
the beginning you said something
about 700 families would not be
able to be served because of the
cuts at the city, I think you
said. Can you go into that a
little bit deeper, what happened
and why, yeah, so, um, both
county and city lost money, um,
and,
and one of the, again, this is
what I, when people are making
budget decisions and everybody
blames people on the 11th.
Floor, wherever the 11th floor
is, um, but everybody blames,
um, the finance folks of where
they drew the cuts. Um, and
there are several agencies that
all work the same list for, um,
for housing and housing vouchers
and Quando is just one of many
and, um, and so, um, several
agencies lost more than half of
their budget.
That's a lot, um.
All right, so then my next
question is you talked a little
bit about being able to give the
family food to take home, like,
for example, on the weekends and
maybe in the evenings when they
go home. So are those families,
do you know if those families
are also receiving SNAP
benefits?
Um, that's one of our very
first, um, things to help them
access as all of the different
programs that they can access so
that they can get their EBT
cards and such. The challenge
that, um, a lot of them have is
for whatever reason, they don't
have all the right documents to
get, to get different, to get
onto different programs. It's
amazing on not having a physical
location with a, um, utility
bill. How many things that that
cuts you out of, um, because
that's kind of
The first step into receiving
any benefits. And if you're
living under a bridge, you don't
have a physical address and
you're definitely not paying for
utilities. So, um, getting some
of those. So we work really
diligently on at least getting
them, um, a PO box so that we
can get them into the program so
that they deserve. But, um, some
of these folks, um, and I think,
Madam, uh, representative Royal
Kabi. I never can
copy head there like.
My Swedish tongue doesn't do
Spanish really well. Um, the,
um, but how, what she said
about, we're seeing probably,
um, a corner of the pie of this
family. And when you think about
some of our some of our kiddos
are couch surfing with lots of
family members and there may be,
um, 3 different 3 different
family units living in a
two-bedroom apartment.
And so when you think about it,
maybe one or two of those have,
Some kind of form of
Something that they can go get
food with, but a lot of them
don't.
So maybe we need to think about
how, how to make it easier for
them.
And then my other, my last
question is, you, you talked
about expanding, um, you said
that you have 60 on the waiting
list. So what would your
expansion look like and how many
more, um, families and kids,
would you be able to serve if
you were able to expand.
Yeah.
Thank you for the question. Um,
one of the things that we're
looking at is minimally 3 more
classrooms, um, which gives us
anywhere from, um, about 16
more, 16 more kids per
classroom. Um, we want to be
conservative and, um, in our
expansion, um, especially when
you start looking at the kiddos
under the age of 5 in
Albuquerque have started to
decrease in number and so you
don't want to grow so much and
then now you have a building
that you can't fill. um.
And so expand and then possibly
expand in the future. Um, and
then, um, being able to, um,
house more housing coordinators
and such to actually help the
family members access the.
The different services.
Then I just thought of one more.
Um, in terms of you said
something about also, you know,
thinking about building your own
or having your own shelter, is
that also part of your
expansion? Not, not at this
point in time. Um, we actually
somebody approached us just a
couple months ago to see if we
would manage one of the shelters
that, um, was not being managed
well. And we just don't right
now, like it would not be
fiscally responsible, nor would
it be organizational responsible
for us to take on that extra,
um, burden right now.
I don't want to call it a
burden, but that extra work that
that would take, um, because
they really take a lot of work,
um, but it still is an expansion
thought for the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Pinto. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee and thank you for your
presentation and the work you
do. I think a lot of the
questions here could really be
answered if we saw a
spreadsheet, um, especially for
this committee, um, when we talk
about homelessness and all the
services you're providing for
all the services that this
committee in particular would
like to see provided in the
state because we really need to
evaluate the needs and the gaps.
And if there are needs, you
know, it's not really the, the
way we help is monitor.
and,
um, they think coming forward
and hearing a couple of
presentations from certain
nonprofits, that's not really
what, you know, it's like we
need more money and I'm like,
where? Because we need to know
where to put it so you can
access it. So I think a lot of
questions could have been
answered that way if we saw a
little bit more on the budget
and, um.
How the 52 kids are really
serviced and how many services
you're giving, um, so thank you,
Mr. Chair. Just next time when
you come up. Thank you.
I had a couple of of.
The things I wanted to follow up
on first, your whole issue
around getting money into a
private agency brings up the
anti-donation clause and what an
incredible barrier we've allowed
that to become. Other states
have dealt with it. I mean, it's
not like we're, we have to
reinvent the wheel. This is
stuff that, that, but for some
reason, as soon as you say
anti-donation clause, every
attorney who just got out of law
school has been hired by a state
agency, immediately jumps up and
says, we can't give you money
because the anti- donation.
And it doesn't. There are ways
there are exceptions in the, in
the Constitution that, but we
also need to make it possible
for local government to say we
need to have this service done.
It's really incredible.
We don't think it makes a lot of
sense for us to start a new
department of City Quan de Los
Ninos to hire the people and to
do it ourselves. We just would
like the money to flow directly
to this organization. We'll
watch over it. It's not like
we're going to give you a blank
check, but there are guardrails
in place that that would prevent
misuse of the money. I mean,
all of this, all of this stuff
has been handled in other
states, but in New Mexico it's
like we just consider it, oh,
this is impossible. We can't.
director used to come to some of
those meetings and so I would
urge the members of the
committee to, to keep an open
mind about
The speaker would like to just
eliminate the anti- donation
clause totally. And, you know,
there are moments when I think
that's not a bad idea, but to
find language that would make it
clear that it's, it, it is
possible for public funds to be
used by a private agency for a
public purpose.
It, it, you know, and they,
well, and, and this really, we
have contracts now that, that,
that would do that, but it's,
it's a very onerous process.
They have to submit a bid. They
have to it's competitive many
times. There's a, uh a value an
RFP process that, that, that
takes months to judge and pick
the winners and then there's
appeals and it's a very onerous
process.
Beyond that,
When it comes to capital, and
that's what you're really, you
know, concerned about right now,
the expansion money.
It has to be owned by the city
or the county. It can, they
can't, we can't just say, why
don't you build a new classroom
building here? No, we'll we'll
make it much more complicated
than that for you.
And so we, we just, we, we, we
waste so much time and use up
all of our available red tape. I
mean, we only have so much red
tape available, but we, we
somehow make it
anyhow, I that was one little
thought that your presentation
brought up. The other one is,
could you share with us?
Your expansion plan if you, if
you added at the current site,
What would it be and, and how
much do you need and how much do
you have?
Um, thank you.
Mr. Chair, I, I couldn't, I
wanted to do a stand up and wave
like you do at the sporting
events or something because um
I, I do think, um, I just moved
back to New Mexico from the
state of Washington and I look
at the things that we had access
to in the state of Washington,
um, that we don't have access to
here in the state of New Mexico
and it's like, wow, um, it's
just difficult. Um, so our
expansion plan right now, we
have architectural renderings.
We do not have drawings.
Yeah, um, but it is related to
we had um $2.1 million that came
from the state, like you said,
through the city as the, as the
fiscal agent, and they just
finally started, um, that
happened about a year and a half
ago, and that, um, they just
finally started getting the
drawdown numbers from CIP, um,
for us to be able to start doing
things, so we were getting
pretty darn frustrated, um, the
board and the agency about
Well, should we just be looking
for different places and kind of
walk away from the money that we
worked really hard to argue for,
from all of you to give us the
money because it, it literally
was impossible to, to access.
um, there was a lot of squeaky
wheels, um, that kept talking to
the city and we finally, um, we
finally now are starting to get
the pull down money to start
addressing that. It, what it
does is expands on the physical
location where we are. By 3
classrooms, we will take an
that, that is in the back that
right now our housing
coordinators are in. We have 7
housing coordinators in one
office, so obviously that's a
hybrid, um, situation because it
can't be on campus all the time.
Um, but we will take that
building and, and, um, turn the
back part of that building into
our kitchen. The front part of
the building into basically
conference room slash, um,
Uh, eating room, um, for
everyone. Um, the, where our
building is now, um, where our
kitchen and our toddler
classroom is the toddler
classroom is literally on, on
the other side of a wall that's
not fire rated from our kitchen.
And so, like, that just makes me
so nervous that we're, we, we
pass inspection all the time,
but it's, um, it just makes me
nervous about like having little
guys in a room that's right side
of a, a kitchen, um, in case
there's ever a kitchen fire or
something.
Um, so those two, it will be 3
new classrooms that expand out
into the parking lot, um, with
some office space and then the,
um, addition of a, uh, more of
a, uh, an industrial kitchen and
break room for us, too.
The total project cost you
anticipate would be, well, I
guess it goes up every month
every month,
yeah, I mean, originally they
said it was probably going to be
about $400. I, I would imagine
it's probably going to be higher
than that. And between our money
that we have both from the past
through from the state that was
a gracious pass through that,
um, that all of you approved for
us, um, that, um, between that
and then, um, that's what I was
talking about that we would be
kicking in, um, a portion of the
money as well, so.
Through our, um, McKenzie Scott
grant. We've, um, our board
graciously has restricted those
dollars for expansion or for,
um, moving to a different
building.
Well, it does sound like you're
gonna need some more capital
outlay from the state, so those
of you who are going to be in a
position to award capital that
you might want to keep ulando
Los Ninos in mind.
Yes.
OK, well, thank you so much for
the presentation. Thank you also
for the work you all are doing.
And if members have a chance to
visit the site, uh, it's really
very special. It's, it's, uh,
you, you always leave a visit to
Quando Los Ninos with uh a
fuller heart. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you.
OK, next we have, uh, a
presentation by the
community-based coordination
solutions Enrique and Guidanos.
Dr. Nguidanos is uh
Here to explain what they do and
how they might be of help to us.
I think particularly in regard
to the CAA program, but but
maybe broader than that. So
thank you for coming, doctor.
Thanks for
I'm, uh, Doctor Enriqueguidos,
um.
Chair, committee members, thanks
for the invitation to present.
I'm going to present an update
on the program we've been
involved with since, uh,
February of this year, there's a
handout that you'll have that
I'm going to follow. I invite
you to follow along.
I'm an you do by training. I'm
based at in Seattle, Washington,
and this work really got born
out of my experience of seeing
folks coming into the ED over
and over again, 100 times plus a
year. We take care of a crisis
event.
But the underlying social issues
weren't addressed and so they'd
cycle back through.
And knowing there's a better
way.
That's where CBCS got formed and
we've evolved quite a bit over
the last 15 years.
Page number 2, really to
summarize, we're navigation
organization.
So people say we find the
unfound. I would say that we
find.
The disengaged.
We help them navigate back into
a health care system that really
was set up for people like me,
docs and administrators, not
necessarily set up for our
patients and then we connect
them with the various community
resources. So to go a little
more in depth into that.
We have contracts around the
country. Usually we're
contracting with either state
Medicaid agencies or Medicaid
contracted MCOs sometimes we
work with a county or a city,
but invariably the person we're
contracting with the entity has
1 million lives, a few 100,000
lives.
And a percentage of those,
usually about 5% are utilizing
about 80% of the resources and
if that cohort of about 5%,
about half of them.
About 2 to 3% of their cohort
are individuals that they don't
even know where they are and in
fact, our enrollees typically
have 5.8 care coordinators
assigned to them.
From the hospital, the MCO, the
jail, the, the treatment center.
But none of them are actually
working with them.
And we don't want to be the
6.8th when we want to actually
try to synergize what's going
on.
So that's really our lane.
is how we go about finding
disengaged. I'll talk a little
bit about that, but once we find
them, it's also listening to
their story, finding out what's
caused that disengagement
often social determinant of
health issues and I put 24/7 365
down there. I'll talk a little
bit about that later, but it's
imperative that we have to be
available for crisis is when
they occur for our patients. So
it's integral for the work we're
doing for our lane of finding
the disengaged that we be.
Available live in a community of
care and available 24/7 365.
That's our unique lane.
And then it's important that we
connect with the various
resources, so I'm on to this
page, uh, 3, about half of the
time our staff spends is
engaging with our enrollees,
finding them and working with
them. The other half is engaging
with all of these entities who
all are doing great work.
All have wonderful individuals
working for them, but as you
know, our healthcare industry
works in silo a lot.
And so it's imperative part of
our mission to not only hear and
listen to our patients, but hear
and listen to the community
resources that exist in a
community, hear about their
experience and try to see how we
can synergize that. And when we
do that well,
A few things happen.
The
Enrollee gets better care.
That's most important, but all
of these entities start learning
more about what the other
neighbor entities are doing and
there's a decrease in the
duplication and triplic equation
and quadrplication of efforts.
So everyone becomes more
efficient and then there's a
synergy.
Of all these resources working
together so the community
becomes more effective. And
finally,
Maybe most importantly, the
enrollee.
Doesn't have 8 or 9 or 10 voices
speaking to them. That's hard to
follow and sometimes even
telling different information,
we try to get 1 or 2 or 3 voices
and make it much easier for the
annual E to synergize
information. Moving on to the
next one says what
differentiates CBCS.
We work in teams and our teams
currently consist of a program
manager and several navigators.
And by the way, I'm, I'm just
giving you a little insight.
This will be the last page
before I jump into the Carra
project just so you know a
little bit about us.
Um, you know, every MCO around
the country has community health
care workers has care
coordinators. They're all doing
great work. Our lane, as I
mentioned, is being that unique
service that's available live
24/7, finding the disengaged.
And to do that well, we have to
be live within every community
we're serving, so in New Mexico
our staff consists of New
Mexicans we live in the area
we're available to not only our
enrollees but our.
Sources, the EDs, the jails
24/7, 365 to work with them.
And we staff for lived
experience. So our staff have
lived experience of the
incarceration systems of
struggles with substance abuse,
mental health issues,
homelessness. It's not required,
but that's very imperative for
us in our hiring process and
then.
Understanding how social
determinants of health play into
that. Training, we work very
closely with several national
organizations like the Camden
Coalition, like find help, like
Point click here, entities that
work in this space to synergize
all of our efforts and advance
the cause together.
We also
Empower our staff so we do that
in several different ways. Our
staff, to be fair, make about 2
to 3 times what the going rate
is for community health workers,
um.
The US federal government has a
statistic called by the by the
Department of Labor and
Statistics called the minimal
livable wage. It's about 700 and
our mission is that no one in
our organization should make
less than that. We shouldn't be
paying no one less than the
minimal livable wage. So that's
what everyone starts at, and in
some communities, CHW is making
about 1/3 of that. So, anywhere
in the country, that's what
we're starting to go up from
there. We provide our staff with
a lot of.
of other resources 401ks,
medical help, but also we want
to give them the tools so they
can get enroll in what they need
at the time. Every one of our
staff has a card they can use
immediately when they go to an
ED at 2 in the morning and meet
someone in Alaska doesn't have a
coat.
We go out and get him a coat and
bring it to them before they
leave the ED. We've had folks in
Alaska without shoes in the
we've gone and bottom shoes. A
lot of our enrollees don't have
phones. We carry phones with
them, give them a phones we have
Walmart credit cards that you
use sometimes 25 bucks, anything
we can do to try to engage in
annually when we hear about
them, that brings us then to the
next step of process and
eventually lead them to the
resources and the
We know that they've been
missing.
Uh, the last two items, I'll
touch on a little bit later, we.
Every community around the
country has different data
sharing platforms, so it's
important that we understand the
data sharing platforms. I'll
share a little bit about the New
Mexico platform and how we use
it. And then, uh, we contract at
risk basically, we guarantee our
work. We know we're gonna save
money if we don't save our
contracting entity money we pay
back the difference of what
they've spent on us. Um, and
it's worked, we so far in our 15
years never had to pay no one
back yet. So we're going to keep
That process going on.
So the career pilot program onto
this page.
Uh, Laura Lee Kellogg, your
previous Medicaid director about
2 years ago had heard about us
and called me up and, uh, asked
to talk, see what we could do in
New Mexico and several months of
dialogue proceeded. One thing
that happens historically as we
engage entities is will engage a
state Medicaid director and they
hear about us, say this is
wonderful, outstanding. Talk to
the MCOs, they should own it. We
talked to the MCOs, they say
it's
Wonderful. It's outstanding.
Talk to the Department of
Medicaid. They should own it.
And we've literally had
conversations ongoing for 4 or
567 years with states with that
cycle till someone owns it, uh,
Laura Lee said, look, we're
gonna find a way to do something
as a pilot, as an 11:15 pilot.
so eventually she landed on the
care program now Kara, pardon me
if, uh, comprehensive addiction
and recovery.
React Biden sponsored program
that targets families struggling
with substance abuse during use
during pregnancy. So to qualify
as a carer family, uh mother
either has to have had a
diagnosis of substance use.
During her pregnancy or their
cord blood at the time of
delivery had some proof of
substance in it.
Uh, and prior to 2023 in that
fiscal biennium.
Only 17% of the.
Care of families in the state of
New Mexico were engaged. It was
one of the lowest engagements in
the country and the MCOs were uh
facing a penalty due in June of
this year, July of this year,
uh, for that poor level of
engagement. She Laura Lee said,
you know what?
In lieu of this penalty, which
was going to be about 7500. I
want you to work with this
entity.
Improve on that 17% and you
won't have to pay the penalty.
So we negotiated contracts with
Presbyterian, Blue Cross Blue
Shield, and even Western Sky,
even though they left and we
launched in February of this
year. Now,
There have been several career
programs going on we're just one
of those programs and in our
lane was very specific of the
4000 approximately 4000 career
families that were identified
last year. There were about 300
that no one knew where they were
and we were asked to find them
and engage them at a level above
that 17%. So.
Of those 4000 we were asked to
find the the most difficult
minded the 300 that no one knew
where they were.
And the program was funded
through
December of this year, so we, we
got paid by the end of the
biennium, but we're contracted
to continue the work.
And the next page gives us some
of the results, which really was
what we were invited to present
so we actually got 346
referrals. We started with about
300 and we've had ongoing
referrals since February. We're
up to now 346. We've actually
found, physically found and
dialogue with 159, so over half
of those families, well above
the, the 17% level, but it's
even better than that.
Those 346 referrals.
Slightly over 100 have aged out.
Uh, care of family, you only
qualify as a career baby up
until your first birthday and so
100 of those actually aged out
before we even had a chance to
find them. So literally of just
under 250 we've engaged well
over 60% just in six months.
And we're continuing without
canvassing yesterday in Colorado
and, um, Espanola and
Albuquerque, uh, trying to find
some more. We got to the end of
this year.
We've engaged, so it's a
voluntary enrollment of those
159114 have said absolutely we
want to talk with you, we want
more services and we've engaged
them with the MCOs and the
formal care health risk
assessment has been done with
over 50.
Of them, so about 44% of those.
Again, funded through December,
so I'm gonna come back to that a
little bit later.
That's the data.
But I also want to touch on the
SDOH.
Uh, items we, we recognize
because we recognize that a lot
of this is due to social
determinant health issues. We're
tracking that data as well. We
work with Find Help and other
national entities to track that.
This is self-reported data by
our enrollees.
Who say it's interesting because
the thought was,
I think the thought amongst most
people was the biggest issue is
going to be substance use.
For our enrollees, they felt the
biggest issue in 14% of the time
was education. And for most of
them, that meant they hadn't
graduated from high school.
Not in every case. 11% felt
employment was the biggest issue
for them individually they were
not employed.
Almost a third were struggling
with housing. We're homeless
couch surfing a couple even out
on the street.
Almost 20%.
felt that they themselves were
in an abusive situation.
And interestingly, only 8
individuals were involved,
engaged with CYFD. I, I think
that that was, it would be
closer to 50%, but it's really
not a big cohort that's CYD has
been involved. We work with CFD
closely, but we make sure
clients know we're not CYFD.
We're here to just help you
engage with resources.
Our experience so our staff's
experience.
Is that absolutely substance use
disorder is not the biggest
issue with this cohort. Many of
them don't even have a strong
substance use disorder. They may
have been given a Vicodin
prescription because of a motor
vehicle accident the week before
their pregnancy and the cord
blood tested positive, but
they've never injected anything
or used. Others have had
temporary use but no longer
using currently. Um,
Social determinants of health
are by far the biggest issue,
according to our staff and what
our staff have felt that the,
the biggest reason for our
success is our flexibility in
approaching our enrollees, both
in when we approach them after
hours, but also the fact that
we're live and we're on site
whether it's in the ED or in
their homes, talking to them.
And that we're addressing there
immediately what they feel is
most important that then brings
to the next stage of the
dialogue.
Um,
Also, the last bullet there
about partnering, we're one
piece of the puzzle, but it is a
big puzzle and doing it in
conjunction with the other
resources, the MCOs, the
hospitals, CYFD is very key.
Testimonials from
Some of our community partners,
so the managed care
organizations and I will say I'm
a managed care organization
proponent.
I'm here to tell you that we
have enjoyed working with them
and I personally or staff feel
they're doing great work like
any organization, there's holes,
there's things we can do better,
but we have find your MCOs in
New Mexico to be strong allies
of ours. Isn't this work?
Um,
They've told us that our efforts
complement.
There are other Kara.
Activities and specifically
they've said, you know what, no
one, no one is doing what y'all
are doing. We've had
administrators from Presbyterian
walked the streets with us,
canvas from Blue Cross Blue
Shield.
And they've all said yes, we
have strong efforts, but this
walking around finding 24/7 we
are not doing and it's
complimenting what we're doing
very well.
And we report monthly to them
and they found that reporting to
be very helpful as well. Uh, I
do want to call out.
Senator George Munoz, he, he
heard about us before we
launched. He was instrumental in
working with Laura Lee to get
the program funded and recently
I just updated him out of
courtesy on our work with some
of the data and he provided a
letter of support to Secretary
Armijo that I've attached to
your pamphlet that's at the end
of this work. I, I won't read it
for you, but if we got time
later, I could.
I also a previous group spoke
about the power of stories, and
I just wanted to share the
story, a couple of stories.
We have 149 wonderful stories.
Each that's the one thing I
found. Each story is unique and
it's important to listen to
that, but
For time's sake, I want to share
two and the first one I'll call
our stroller story, so in canvas
and knocking on doors, we found
a mom of a 6 month old who.
Actually was at the right
address, but she didn't have a
phone and so all the efforts to
reach her by the MCOs has been
unsuccessful. Her kid had a G
tube, so it had some high risk
involved and she wasn't getting
to any of her appointments.
Uh, because she didn't know they
were happening. She knew she
wanted to get to a PCP but they
have been trying to reach her
quite a bit so we actually gave
her a phone that day we met her,
put our phone number in, called
her MCO called her PCP made sure
they knew the phone number and
she started getting several
phone calls right away and made
an appointment within a week to
go see your PCP navigators set
up an Uber for her to get there.
And 15 minutes before the
appointment, she called the
individual to make sure she was
there on time, got in the Uber,
and she, there was a lot of wind
in the background. Turns out the
Uber showed up, but because she
didn't have car seats for the
kids, wouldn't take her and the
kids, so she was walking down
central.
To her appointment 2 miles away,
which was happening in 15
minutes. Our navigator knew she
wasn't going to make it, so call
the PCP said, look, this is
what's going on. Can you delay
here? Can you give her an extra
half hour? I said, now we're
overbooked, but we'll get her in
at 3:30. This is 10 in the
morning, her appointment. We'll
get her in later today, so our
navigator called back the mom
was still walking and said, get
back to the house and by the
way, I'm gonna go to Walmart,
get some car seats so we can get
you there.
no longer exists. She had to go
to Target, spend a few hours
finding the car seats, but we
got mom to her 3 p.m.
appointment and you just think
about the number of times things
could have fallen, not even
falling apart, not finding that
mom, the one.
Where she was, the fact that
She didn't have car seats. The
fact that they were going to
cancel her appointment that day
alone we had 3 points of impact
where things could have fallen
apart but they got saved.
Nothing miraculous, but all
significantly important.
Story 2.
I'm gonna call the roof story,
so we, in addition to
canvassing, we find folks by
getting a pin at 24/7 from the
emergency department when
someone shows up that's on our
list of people we should find.
So we got a call, a ping at
about 2 in the morning on a
Saturday for a mom up in the
Espanola area. It was actually
grandma with her kid and we met
her, she wanted to enroll. We
decided to meet her later that
day at her home.
It turns out the grandma was now
taking care of this young couple
of month old child because her
mom, who was still addicted,
dropped her off and said, I
can't take care of her
disappeared.
Grandma also had a 15 year old
granddaughter from another
daughter who she was taking care
of and when we went to their
home, they were living in a
mobile home, half of which had
no roof.
This is April, mind you, and so
for them to stay war, they were
all huddling up in the bathroom
of this mobile home with a space
heater.
Keep on. So we quickly mobilize
some friends call a friend, put
some plywood over the mobile
home, worked with Habitat for
Humanity to remodel the place
now we're working with the
housing authority to get them
better housing, but those are
just two.
Of 1049 different stories I
could share 159 different
stories I could share with you.
I'm gonna transition to what's
next, because I think that's an
important part of this dialogue
as well. We, as I said, we're
funded for this pilot through
December this year.
But we've kind of put ourselves
a little bit out of business. We
found
Many of the unfound care of
families who were tasked to
find. They will still trickle
in, but it probably won't be
enough at this point to sustain
a program like ours, but really,
there are other opportunities.
What we do.
I
Find the disconnected, not just
carer disconnected, but anyone,
in fact, most of our programs
are with emergency department
frequenters around jail
recidivism or substance or
mental health abuse and I'd like
to share two pieces of data with
you.
From your New Mexico ED tracking
tool. You have a tool called
PointClickCare, you being the
state of New Mexico that every
emergency department uses.
And tracks to utilization for
every visitor in an emergency
department. You had that tool
for 10 years now.
It's also a tool that pings us
in real time when someone shows
up to the ED.
So based on this data in 2022.
The state of New Mexico had 3000
over 3800 individuals.
With 10 or more emergency
department visits in that year.
If you step back and think about
that, how?
drastic that is
Almost 4, 3800 individuals with
10 or more crisis events of the
20 visit 63,000 emergency
department visits. As bad as
that sounds.
Within a year, the next page is
the 2023 data.
Which shows that number has
increased to over 4400.
An increase of 15%.
So this is a true crisis that's
getting a lot worse and it's not
getting controlled. 71,000.
ED visits from that cohort.
That the psychosocial, the
medical issues related to that
we can spend hours on but just
looking at the finances of it.
The federal agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality
every year determines how much
each state spends on ED visits
in New Mexico 2024 an ED visit
costs $1,722 so those 71,000 ED
visits means the state of New
Mexico is spending 123 million
bucks.
On ED visits for this cohort.
Not counting the admissions, the
transportation, the pharmacy.
Other care that comes from that,
which probably triples it. So
easily, that's probably around
450 million bucks a year just on
that cohort alone. That's where
we feel the next opportunity.
Exist
This
Gives just 3 sample states we've
worked in I chose these states
because purposely we got super
rural Alaska, more rural I'd
argue than New Mexico we got
Washington, my home state, where
we have a mix of rural and
urban, and we've got from
Northern Virginia, where we've
got super urban and the results
are all the same. We see about
50 to 60% reductions in EDUs and
admissions and cost in opioids.
ions
And that's where we feel the
opportunity exists to put a few
numbers on the, the uh slide
that's called Opportunity.
This modeling we, we've modeled
a 30% reduction in costs knowing
that we've typically produced
about 50%. 1.
Team
Of ours typically can manage
about 200 individuals. And that
cost about 1.2 million to run
that team. Our team in New
Mexico currently is only 3
individuals, which is why we're
getting by on a lesser cost.
The Edi costs alone.
For 200 individuals in New
Mexico.
Currently is 5.5 million bucks,
not to mention the admission and
other costs, so reducing
conservatively.
By 30% we'd save 1.6 million
bucks, more than covering the
cost.
Of the program
What we propose, I'd like, I
would like to take advantage of.
Laura Lake Kellogg's thinking
and innovation.
Of let's, let's just try
something and see what we can
work and get around this finger
pointing of MCO versus state.
And so we've, we've come up with
a proposal that's actually
worked successfully in one other
state. It's, it's relatively
new, but, uh, we've approached
the state and said state
Medicaid, we would like you to
fund.
A team
1.2 million bucks.
We'll begin working.
Each of the MCO's contracted in
the state will have a portion of
that, of that usage. And at the
end of the year, they will pay
you back the state according to
the portion that they've used.
So you will be completely funded
back from the 1.2 million.
We
On the other hand, no, we're
going to save the MCO's money,
so we're going to guarantee the
MCOs.
They're going to achieve saving
similar to what they've spent or
greater, and if not, we will pay
them back. So what we're asking
the state to fund upfront,
they're gonna get it paid back
in a year and the MCOs are going
to get paid back or we will
actually fund the difference.
And the reason I
One of the reasons I wanted to,
to spend time today is that our
current staff.
It's funded through December. We
have great
New Mexicans doing great work,
making a difference.
And I owe it to them if we don't
have sent something set up by
November to say look, I need to
make sure you have a good job.
To turn to next. So we have a
window from now till about
November to get something done.
Um,
Chair, committee members, I
thank you for
For listening and I welcome any
questions you may have, Doctor,
I have to tell you in
In 20 years of these hearings,
this has been one of the most
exciting presentations I've ever
had. This is really very good.
Thank you. And, and what is the
current status of your
negotiations with the Medicaid
division around that contract,
which makes so much sense.
There's got to be something
wrong with it. It's too
reasonable.
You know, we, we are engaging.
I've engaged the MCOs and I will
say that Molina.
Chair committee members to, to
answer your question, Molina has
been very uh desiring of working
with us. We have worked with
them in other states as we have
with United and so they are both
on board with finding a solution
as is present, Blue Cross Blue
Shield. We're calling it
Generation 2.
we're kind of looking for a
champion with they they are kind
of waiting to see, let's see
what the state does, and we've
engaged, um,
The Department HCA and we're
waiting.
To hear back, but the window
worries me as far as November.
Would it, would it be useful for
this committee if the vote is in
favor of doing so, to send, we
have,
Strongly worded letters we have
mildly worded letters and we
have pleats, outright pleadings.
Which would be the most useful
letter from this committee to
the Medicaid director saying,
this is too good to be true,
just do it. Uh, what, what, what
chair committee members, I,
first of all, I'm honored that,
that, that you would consider
that and um.
I will leave it in your hands to
feel what was better. I, I guess
I was pleading is maybe the
most, the quickest, the, the,
the timing worries me that we're
now at the end of August. We do
have some contracts with some of
the MCOs in place. We can
probably often those are 6 to 7
month negotiations. We should be
able to expedite those and if we
work quickly, I think November
is still reasonable to get
something done, so it would be a
1.
$2 million contract, correct?
How many staff do you have? We
have 3 right now. This would be
for a minimum of 5 staff. Gosh.
I wish Dr. Hickey had been here
to hear your presentation, but
he'll read the notes. He's a
fast reader. Uh, this is, this
is, this is one of, as I said,
this is just really a great
opportunity and we ought to be
building this up. I've got
several members who've asked to
ask questions. I'll go to them
and then I have a couple of
final comments. Uh,
Representative Chasey, let's
start with you then
Representative Chavez and uh.
And we're gonna try and stick to
3 minutes.
This is me.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
just making sure Senator Hickey
knows which handout to look at.
Uh, in fact, for the strongly
worded letter, let me just refer
you, Mr. Chairman, to the LFC
chairs, um, letter to the
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority.
Outlining some of this and then
I think we can use this, but
He's really just saying I urge
you to leverage. I think we, we
need to do the begging part, Mr.
Chair, given the testimony we
hear, typically in front of this
committee and unfortunately, um,
we do not enough problem
solving, but what we were
hearing yesterday about the um
shortage of MSWs in the state,
the, the social workers are the
ones who do the problem solving,
and that's what we're looking
for, whether it's in
The child welfare system or it's
in that housing issues or the
public defenders and the
district attorneys, everybody
needs.
And establishing problem
solvers. But, um, I'm wondering,
Doctor, if you would mind. I
understand that you have a,
there's a backstory to what led
you to start this program, and
I'm wondering if you could give
us a short version of that.
Yeah,
sure. I,
I'll say coming to New Mexico
for a few months, I never ceased
to hear good words about your
career, so thank you for for
your career, um.
Yeah, as an ED doc, I work out
of the business or worked. I've
now dedicated myself fully to
CBCS just because of the demands
around the country, but, uh, I
worked at the busiest ED in the
state of Washington and we
literally had about a dozen
folks back in 2006 when I
started that had come 100 or
more times in the prior year and
as we, we met with them and
listened to their stories. Some
of it was pretty simple, just
need.
In the dark, needing a
glucometer to check their
glucose, leading to asthma spray
and not having access to it and
so we started.
Doing work outside the walls of
the ED and people started
hearing about the success and
asking us to go and help them.
And that's no one in, in
medicine kind of owns.
This care, this cohort, you
know, we got good docs all doing
their work in internal medicine
or surgery, but it was an
opportunity to make a difference
in a way that that wasn't being
done really.
Thank you very much and um with
regard to the uh CAA program, I
I, I worked in um as a court
appointed attorney in child
welfare cases for a number of
years, um, and
Carra came a little bit later,
but I did have clients who had
Been through programs at the
university so that they could,
um,
retain custody of their
children. They, um, clients who
entered programs when they found
out they were pregnant and got
clean and, and so forth. But I
think the, the program might be
misunderstood.
By a lot of people, and is it
not true that these are the
participation in that is
voluntary on the part of the
family. That's correct, there
are some cases that get assigned
to CYFD, uh, but for this, for
our program for many of the care
programs, it is voluntary
participation in our experience
has been that many jump at the
opportunity once they hear about
it.
I, I think that's just not
entirely clear, Mr. Chair, to
members of the legislature when
they start getting on board with
the CRA program is failing and
blah blah blah that families
don't have to do this.
So, but then, um, anyway, I
think at some point in time we
might be able to clarify that
for, um, members. Thank you very
much.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the presentation, very
interesting, um, a couple of
things that that I wanted to ask
a little bit about, um, and I
noticed in the,
The 2023 ED visits, there's some
specific, it's kind of hard to
read,
but there's um 33 pieces, one of
them is suspect suspected
homelessness and another is
behavioral health diagnosis. And
these are the folks who have had
repeated visits to the ER and I
guess one of the questions that
I wanted to ask about in terms
of sort of your observation and
experience, um,
you know, in addition to your
program, you know, I'm, I'm
wondering if
Our ability or lack thereof, to
really, um, build up our
behavioral health system and
then add additional, um,
affordable housing, um, and some
housing with, you know, case
management services. If that
wouldn't also reduce the amount
of, uh, visits to the ER members
representative Chavez,
thanks for the question.
Absolutely as we've done this
work not only in New Mexico but
around different, um,
communities.
In the US, I for sure, the one
issue that's lacking is housing,
um.
I love that there are innovative
ways we're thinking about
approaching that as a country.
But we are far from solving that
for sure and uh around
behavioral health, you know, you
can go back to 65 when
We started
You know,
Having folks leave institutions
and whether that was good or
bad, I think there's a lot of
good that came from that, but,
um, the, the wraparound
services.
Sometimes aren't always there
and if they're there, they're
not always around the house and
that exists and so we work very
closely, not only in finding
folks, but in making sure we
identify.
All of the housing options. I
mean up in Alaska we had a
retired New York City cop that
bought uh 20 unit apartment, and
that was just his mission and
retirement was to run that and.
You know, we'd work with him to
find housing for that and
there's very interesting and
unique situations in a community
like that, but part of my role
then is to advocate as well for
in addition to the CBCS work,
make sure I go around the
country advocating in
legislative bodies for Morehouse
and then more behavioral health
to address those issues.
And then the other question is
um in terms of the behavioral
health, are there, I'm sure that
you've already identified, um,
agencies that can do the long
term, um, therapeutic
intervention or anything else
that's needed medication
management, that kind of thing.
So which agencies have you been
able to work with in the
community thank you we,
we knew, I am very impressed
with the New Mexico Bridge
program that's been, I, I had
mentioned that.
Surprisingly, not a lot of.
Our enrollees felt substance use
was their main issue.
Social terms health were, but
when we've had to avail
ourselves.
Uh, New Mexico Bridge has been
there has been very effective.
Each of the hospitals also have
programs and you know, our MCO
partners have been really good
and, and once we get people
engaged, getting them to
resources. So once we take that
step, it's a challenge, those of
us that have been through.
Substance or any form of
addiction treatment, you know,
it's a daily thing. It never
goes away, but um, I am
impressed with the resources
that have been there in New
Mexico.
And who else?
A representative of, OK, let's
just, let's just go around. So
Representative Royal Caballero,
we'll, we'll go to you next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Doctor Aguaguans I love your
last name. Thank you.
Um, this is just close to my
heart because this is what I
have, well, I'm older and
retired now, but spent my life
um doing and so I really
appreciate your work. As you
were speaking and as I was going
through all of the um.
Uh, the handout, I was
envisioning, um, I just had this
vision, I thought this is a
clearing house effort.
Everything under one.
Umbrella
Uh, wouldn't it be wonderful if
we could, Mr. Chair.
have
This type of clearinghouse of
services under one roof.
Where we could court where you
can continue to coordinate,
refer, build the resources.
Um, and, and at the same time,
um, take care of the immediate.
Needs I, I just had this vision.
So we, I would like to help you
think bigger, um, as this rolls
out. I know we have an
immediate, uh, need, and I
think, Mr. Chair, a very
strongly worded letter.
Such the one that, um, the
senator word it is absolutely in
order and I would support it and
I'm going to refer to his
letter, Mr. Chair, because this,
this is really staggering what
he mentioned, um, Senator Munoz,
more than 10 emergency room
visits, totaling 71,794
Costing the state 1,722.
And resulting in a staggering
$123 million expenditure. Surely
the 1.2 million or whatever that
is.
is something that that's
absolutely doable and this is a
crisis. I think, uh, the doctor
and his efforts are in a crisis
which calls for a really strong
effort on our part because
if they mitigating all of these
issues and assisting with what
we've seen, then, um, most
definitely the results are
proven. We have a proven record
of, um,
Which was, which is one of the
questions, Mr. Chair, that's
always asked, you know, what is
the, the, the, the quality, what
is the delivery, you know, the
track record. So I have two just
real quick questions. Um, are
you at UNMH, University of New
Mexico Hospital?
No, I, I actually practice in
the state of Washington.
So our staff go to you
absolutely we go off to UNMH. We
know the staff there very well,
particularly the emergency
department staff.
And um so this is really
important to me. I'll wrap up in
just a second, because
unfortunately, I've had the, had
to sit at UNMH emergency room,
uh, more than I'd like in the
last year for my husband's
health, and that's where we get
our healthcare and I probably
have run into your stuff because
one of my big concerns and I'm
always mediating for, for
whoever is in there. I sit there
waiting and waiting and waiting.
But seeing the needs and I have
oftentimes gone directly to
The persons that I think are in
crisis, and I've sat there with
them and I've asked them, that's
the social worker and that's my,
my social worker hat and asked
them what they need, how to get
it. I'll go to the desk and I'll
tell them we have these people
in here. They probably don't
need this kind of care, but they
do need this kind of care. Can
you facilitate it? And so that
removes 3 or 4 people waiting in
there and getting care. So I'm
sure it was your staff that was
in there because not.
Many people want to go to UNMH.
So that's a commending you on
that and, um,
I think, oh, and.
And, and UNMH being the trauma
hospital, uh, the only one we
have in the state would make
logical sense for us to, um,
increase, uh, work there, but
also I think we really need to
Think of long-term
sustainability as far as what
your effort is and try to get
you to grow into a
a more institutional setting
non-traditional, but yet in one
setting clearing house. Thank
you for your work.
Thank you, may I take 20 seconds
to address one real quick.
I, I will thank you first of all
for your life work, but we, we
don't.
Care what
Uh, a partner.
wants to use as the criteria for
enrollment we'll take everything
pregnant woman, babies,
homeless, whatever the medical
issue is our work will be all
the same. So yes, we try to cast
a broad net.
Representative Haram, did you
have any questions?
I believe I'm not allowed to ask
you for the presentation,
I forget the, the, the fluid
rules that we resentative
Ferrari.
Mr. Chair, you mean they're not
hard fast. Yes they are.
Um, thank you, Doctor
Nguindalamos, Donos, I'm sorry,
um, there's an accent on the I'm
sorry.
OK.
It's not the first time this
happened or is it misspelled on
their thing, um, anyway, I'm,
you know, really impressed with
how, um, you've worked so
quickly and um
You know, bringing together, you
know, um, the needs of people so
that they can get the health
care they need, um, and it
sounds like, um, your return of
investment is likely, uh,
Um, better than 2 to 2 to 3, you
said overall cost of care likely
2 to 3 times what the cost would
be.
To provide, is that correct?
There's specific statistic that
the emergency department cost
the overall cost is probably 2
to 3 times that number. The
number quoted there is just the
cost of emergency department
care. OK, I see. But yes, we
typically produce an ROI of
about 3 to 1, sometimes up to 5
to 1 to our partners. That's
fantastic. And,
2 years, um, it's totally funded
by Medicaid.
So it doesn't cost our state
anything. It costs you just the
time to, um, re, uh.
Submit for reimbursement, is
that correct?
Um, chair, committee members
answer the our proposal would
ask that Medicaid, the
healthcare authority, however.
Fund the launch of the pilot
every year, the MCOs would
reimburse the full cost of that
based on their percentage of the
usage and we will guarantee the
MCOs have saved money or else
we'll.
Pay the difference between what
they've spent each one of them
have spent and what they've said
they'll have to share their
total cost of care with us, but
they do that traditionally with
this type of arrangement.
So, um, Mr. Chair and, and
Doctor Y're pretty um positive
and and assured that, you know,
you're going to be able to
reduce those costs. Yeah, I'm
blessed with my wife when we
started out was wanting to put
our house on lien to make this
work and thankfully we've still
got a roof over our heads.
Well, thank you, and you're from
Seattle Seattle.
I'm from, yes, uh, LA area via
Puerto Rico.
Wonderful
Um
So I just think this is a
wonderful idea and once this
two-year pilot and to reach, I
believe you said 200 people.
200 per year, is this is not a
pilot, how many people do you
think you could expand to
chair committee members to
answer that the 200 is a minimum
we need for the team. We can
increase the, there's no limit
on the upside. We just hire more
staff to address the higher
need, but to do it effectively,
that's our minimum launch team.
OK, thank you. Thank you. Wow.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for your presentation
and your work. So your proposal
for the 1.2 million is that
specifically for ED or will you
continue with the care work? We
would continue to accommodate
the care work within that, OK,
and I could see many um many if
we get if when we keep you, that
we can start um expanding you,
you know, into HIV or hepatitis
or.
Any of the, the problems that we
have really a hard time solving.
Absolutely a very I don't want
to say easy, but we often start
with jail recidivism because
when you leave a jail you don't
have meds, you don't have
connections. Often you come to
see me and they so one of the
first things we do is work with
jails so we can know ahead of
time before someone gets
released and we can just meet
him at the gate and have stuff
set up for him. So that's kind
of a low hanging fruit for us if
you would.
And so I'm just sitting here
listening to you, you talk about
the savings as far as ED, but
those savings go far beyond
healthcare. I mean, special ed,
like the, the, the child with
the G tube, you know, if he gets
an infection and, and gets, you
know, gets behind in
development. We're going to save
money in places we didn't even
know we were going to save
money,
thank you
chair committee members, um,
one, another thought, you know,
EMS calls long.
calls when they stopped going
out as much they don't have to
build as many stations we, we
get a lot of support from local
EMS and law enforcement because
they automatically see the
benefits even though it's hard
to put a hard cost on it.
And then, um, who do you who do
you hire? What kind of, what
kind of employees do you have?
Thank you. I appreciate all the
accolades, but it's really our
staff that that deserve all the
accolades and I will let them
know, um, we use the term
navigator. We used to use
community health worker.
Um,
And traditionally that might
indicate a high school education
or community college education
we a couple of uh we got one, we
have one navigator who has her
PhD. We have two that are social
workers we've got several that
have master's degrees. We've got
a couple that don't have high
school educations. One of them
got his undergraduate and
master's degree while in the
prison system in in Georgia.
Um, so for us it's really about
the people. And, you know, it's
a testament to the health care
system that a social worker
might make more with us as a
navigator than working as a
social worker, but, but yeah,
that's.
Thank you for that and then one
final question, Mr. Chair.
So it's incredible to me and
it's like we can't lose. If you
don't save us the money, then
you pay back, so I mean this is
like we're playing with house
money and uh and so, wow, I
just, and I will say personally,
anything I can do to help you.
I, I can write my own stuff,
strongly worded letter if you
need me to. So thank, thank you,
Mr.
Chair
50 years of getting this
representative I I had to come
up with something better, so
that's our attempt at that.
Representative Johnson, do you
have any questions?
OK. Representative Herndon,
Mr. Chair and thank you very
much. Um and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Presenter, just for me for
clarification, who utilizes your
services? Do they, I am trying
to understand is that someone
who has been incarcerated and
been on drugs, so that's the
first, that's one criteria.
No, it could be,
it could be we welcome our
partner and contractors to
decide what the
Criteria are many states or MCOs
will say, here's a list of our
5000 people with 5 or more ED
visits, find them.
And connect as many as you can.
Some will we do have programs in
which they say we just want you
to find folks with the substance
use disorder or someone leaving
the incarceration system. It
could be any of those flavors,
whatever our contracting entity
ask us to do. We have the
ability to engage across that
entire spectrum and provide the
same results if I would.
Chair and Mr. Presenter, with
respect to the
of either um
Emergency department visits that
these individuals are engaging
in, do you all become their
primary care physicians. I'm
trying to understand how you are
transitioning them out of the
emergency room. Chair, committee
mayors, representative, thank
you. Uh, I find that to be a
very important question. No, we,
in fact, myself being a
clinician, we have clinicians
we've hired EMTs, paramedics,
social workers, we are very
specific about saying we are
Going to do clinical work and we
have to train our staff not to
we really are gonna navigate and
we're gonna
Work hand in hand with their
primary care doctors. 11 thing
that does happen is folks don't
have a primary care doctor and a
lot of primary care
When they know we're addressing
all of that. They're much more
readily and willing to take
people on so uh FQHC that has a
3 month wait might do us a solid
and get someone in within 4 or 5
days because there we know they
know we're taking care of all of
the other issues. So it becomes
synergism, if you would, in that
way. Did that answer that
question,
sure how we're stopping the use
of emergency rooms, which is one
of the
issues and, and with respect to
your services, uh, because it's
such a high rate of use, and
then that really does affect
when people do need to go to the
emergency room. And so that's
just not clear to me how you are
helping to cure that. It's my
experience as an ED doc, um, and
I also have a hat in the
American College of ER doc so
it's something I've been working
on for a while.
These crisis events deteriorate
because
SH issues aren't.
So if I can meet folks and
address the underlying causes
that prevent evolution to
crisis, then they'll go to
outpatient visits instead
scheduled vis instead of waiting
for a crisis to evolve into an
ED visit or an admission, and
that's how the reduction occurs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just had
a follow up, um, not a question,
but a statement. Remember when
we talked yesterday about, um,
people being reported for child
abuse or neglect. The story that
he told about the mom with the
kid with the G tube, she could
easily have been reported to
CYFD for medical neglect for her
kid and it was that she they
couldn't contact her, she didn't
know about the appointments. She
didn't have a car seat, so she
couldn't get to appointment. So
it was nothing about being a bad
mom. It was about the
System, not, not realizing what
kind of difficulties she was
having.
If I may represent that that mom
is amazing. She loves her kids
so much and I invite any of you
to come, feel free to come and
join Canvas and, uh, Mariana has
joined us already walking the
streets a few times, so we, our
team loves that if you ever want
to.
And I would just remind us that
they focus on the social
determinants of health.
Which is, which are the things
that many people making
emergency room visits are really
there for something other than a
physical, I mean, they may
present a physical problem, but
they're really coming with some
other issue. This chart is
incredible and, and, and, and
when somebody is going in over
100 times a year to the
emergency room.
They're going for something
besides a pill,
they've got some social need
that they're trying to, whether
it's just a warm place to spend
a few hours or whatever it is,
there's something other than a
physical illness that's driving
them to use the emergence, but
it still costs the hospital $722
to provide a warm room for a few
hours. So that's, that's the
point of what he's trying to do
is divert those that really
aren't physical from the
emergency rooms into other
things.
So Representative Vincent, do
you have a question?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was
looking on the New Mexico Cara
pilot program and of the 4000
New Mexico Cara families,
um, the 300 that's unfound, how
do you, what's the process of
finding them? Yes, uh, chair,
committee members represent,
thanks for the question so we
get a list of qualifying members
from each of the MCOs and every
month they update that list, um,
so we there there'll be a
Um, most of them have a phone
number and an address.
Sometimes it's actually correct.
Oftentimes it's not. So we
start, I'll do a quick
explanation of the problem. We
start by actually taking those
phone numbers and interesting,
we found over the years texting
is a lot more effective than
phone calls, so we do after
hours and weekend texting and
the textant will say I'm going
to call you in 5 minutes. We
follow up in 5 minutes with the
call, and we reached about 20%
of the folks that way. We'll do
a 3 times the first week.
Then we got the address and
we'll go knocking on doors and
we find another 15-20%, but.
Another 10 to 15% of the time,
whoever lives there now knows
where they're at. It might have
been a cousin. It might have
been someone that moved in but
knows where they're at. And so
that connection leads to the
next connection and then the
final piece is the ping we get
from that IT tool because we're
available 24/7. We developed
these relationships with the
hospitals when we get the ping,
we call the hospital and say
we're looking for
This individual may we talk to
them, explain what the program
is. It's just an explanation,
and if they agree then to have a
dialogue and do an assessment,
we'll meet them either there in
the ED or at their home the next
day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And do you
work, do you communicate with
CYFD so there's not wasted
efforts. Yeah, that, you know,
our population for this pilot
is, as you might imagine, afraid
of that term, right? Someone's
going to take their kid away.
Uh, and yet we know we're, we
know the CYFD folks. They're
great folks. We like working
with them. Uh, we make it clear
to our annual release, potential
annual releases, we are not CA
YFD.
We really show ourselves as a
representative of the MCOs and
want to make them knowledgeable
of all these services they could
access for free, that's already
covered through their MCO and
that begins the dialogue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I just
thought that it might keep them
from getting their rears chewed
when they come in front of this
committee, if you could just
communicate and it showed, you
know, the car was working.
And you were finding these
families and they could at least
report and maybe even take a
little bit of credit for your
work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
Even though he didn't hear the
presentation, I'm going to ask
Senator Dr. Hickey to make a few
comments because when he was
when he ran an insurance
company, uh, a co op.
They saved a lot of money by
doing precisely what you're
doing, so I thought he might
have a few comments on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize for missing this
program, uh, as I read through
the materials, I'm going, oh my
God, deja vu all over again, um,
uh, we had one of the co op
health plans here in New Mexico,
True Health New Mexico. This was
our business strategy.
We reached out to precisely
these people, uh, and we had 4
times as many case managers, uh,
per capita as any other health
plan per member we had 3 medical
directors because connecting
with the docs to do the follow
up and get all that was critical
and it saved us and, and it led
to my bill 3317, which got rid
of cost sharing for behavioral
health.
Um, which was a potential
another barrier for getting in
people where they needed to go,
but I, I would urge the state,
the ROI on this is huge. I mean,
it literally became the business
strategy. It allowed us to be
the cheapest or second cheapest
in the exchange almost every
year because we were saving so
much money specifically we had
30 to 40% lower, and this was
measured by an outside agency.
And he is dad emergency room
visits compared to all the other
health plans in New Mexico and
our risk was actually higher and
um we had 30 to 40% lower visits
and as you note in here,
subsequent, once you enter an
emergency room, that's like, uh,
I mean, if there's an empty bed
in the hospital and in last year
don't have insurance, but, um,
if you have insurance of some
sort, they're going to fill that
bed with you.
And so it also reduced
admissions by 20 to 30% compared
to the others. So
congratulations on bringing this
in. I've consulted for companies
who kind of do similar work and
how you find those 400, um, it's
really tough, but that's the key
is, is actually going out
finding and build a
relationship, and when you build
a relationship, and this is why
social work is so incredible,
then they start to accept that
individuals being able to
intervene at the
home and very positive ways and
keep people and get them to the
health they need
rather than.
Accessing health through this
very expensive, very profitable
component of the healthcare
system.
Thank you.
Thanks for your work.
Um,
We had a presentation in um
where were we in
I've lost all track of. No, the
one where they talked about the
navigator, I guess it was here
in Albuquerque. The CYFD talked
about hiring 17 or 19 navigators
of their own for the CAA program
that would, I think she said
would be at the um at the
hospitals.
Where the the majority of the
deliveries are made, which made
a lot of sense. How would that
integrate with what you all are
doing? Is that, is it, is it
feasible to talk about those two
being in place simultaneously
and fitting together?
Absolutely committee members,
thanks for the question. It's, I
mentioned how we're one piece of
the puzzle that that's a huge
piece and I can, I don't know
who thought of that, but that
that's.
A huge component having.
Folks in the hospital, I know
there's 5 hospitals that that
are being targeted in the state.
That's huge and I mentioned the
synergism between some of the
various Kara pilots. It's, you
know, when they can capture
folks in the hospital.
That's a wonderful approach and
absolutely there's a couple of
potential handoffs. One is
That transition then out of the
hospital if they're staying, if,
if that staff is staying in the
hospital, it avails us an
opportunity for a warm hand off
to then continue that work. The
other thing from a safety point
of view, we never send people
out alone. They always go at
least in pairs when we're going
on site, but that pairing could
be us and an MCO, um, navigator
or a hospital navigator and you
you start then sharing that
information and that.
That's where the community
synergism starts in, so, uh, I
think all of those are important
pieces of the puzzle.
I had one other question you
mentioned that significant
percentage of the families that
hadn't been found when you found
them, it turned out they had
aged out. The kid was over the
one year and that just seemed
strange to me that there would
be a
sorry, if you just got here
yesterday, but today is his
birthday, we can't
does it make any sense to have
that kind of artificial aging
out figure used, yeah, it's um.
I'm sure someone created that
for a reason. There must have
been some funding and we had to
limit it put a target somewhere.
I can tell you it's painful for
our for our staff and when we
engage them with a month left.
They got a sense of urgency in
those dialogues. We're like,
let's get as much as we can done
in a month because that's,
that's when the clock runs out.
It, it, it just seems so, so
bizarre to to have that,
especially if the family is
willing to collaborate and
cooperate with with whatever
services are being offered.
Well,
We could go on at great length
about this, but let, let's,
let's deal with the issue of do
we want to sternly written
letter, a, a mildly written
letter or an outright on our
knees begging letter to the
Medicaid division, asking them
basically, not just to copy
George's letter, which is great,
but to write our own based on
the proposal that he's made
specifically for that 102 for
the over a 3 year period.
Um, 3 would be wonderful. I, I
did propose a 2 1.2 per year per
two years is what the proposal
let's stick with your proposal
because hopefully it'll grow
after that.
I think we should do a strongly
worded begging letter, a
strongly worded begging that
kind of a hybrid in which we
exert our authority but also
plead our our deep need.
I think it should also point.
OK, that's all right, so, so
this is a letter that's going to
have many many characteristics.
Luckily, Xander is an incredible
craftsman, a wordsmith, uh, go
ahead, Senator, complete
agreement. I just want to be
sure that we're not in any way
interfering with the um
appropriate or not the
appropriations the procurement
process.
Oh,
yeah,
I mean, this is a $12 billion
budget that Medicaid is
operating on this year. So that
they could scrape together a few
little.
To test out this can't lose
model, I think makes sense. So
I, I think that that within
their existing budget they
should be able to find it and,
and maybe we do say, you know,
do it as a pilot or whatever it
would take to to get around the,
the need to go out to bid on
something like this.
Just don't want us Democrats to
get another slap on the wrist.
No, we get slapped on the wrist
all the time. Very good.
So do we have a motion to, to,
to write this multifaceted
letter so move seconded by
Representative anybody opposed?
OK, so we will get that out and,
and hopefully,
When we next hear from you,
there will have been some
progress made on this, but thank
you so much, doctor. uh
Inguidonos for for coming and
sharing your, your you're very
interesting and and effective
program. You almost lost me at
one point when you said you
wanted to thank the MCOs for
their great because I, I have
never found the MCO care
coordinators to do much care
coordination. I mean, obviously
they do, but we don't see the
evidence of it.
And I have this impression that
they basically are stuck in
corporate offices and the
headquarters building somewhere
making phone calls and, and your
people are on the ground
knocking on doors.
walking down back alleys
fighting off pit bulls, whatever
it takes to get to the families,
and I think that that's where
the action is. That's what's
going to make a difference.
I'm sorry, just one last
observation knowing how a lot of
Medicare works and contracts and
so forth. Um, they may say, oh,
now this is part of the contract
for the MCOs that they go and do
this, and I, and, but, but it's
a new contract year and that may
be the reason why there's not
moving along and so I think that
that we should note in our
letter that while this might be
something MCOs take up over
time. It's the take up
capabilities after an
organization is already known
out there, and that's a huge
part of this to be able to
repeat and I mean as a building
those relationships to throw
that away would be awful. And so
I just think we need to work
that in so they don't come back
with the excuse, as I've heard
him come back to me sometimes
and over the new ones are going
to do it, we're gonna leverage
them.
It, no, it won't happen.
And, and I just emphasize the
staff you've hired seem to have
street credibility, and that
makes all the difference too. I
mean, it's one thing to hire
somebody with a master's degree
uh in whatever field to come be
the care coordinator.
But if they can't build a
relationship with the people who
are trying to reach it. It's
kind of a wasted resource,
whereas your people seem to be
able to do both. They know the
resources and they have the
street credibility, so thank you
again.
Chair, committee members, thank
you. So I'm honored to have for
thank you for your interest in
the program and your support.
OK, members, um, we're a little
behind schedule, not terribly,
not terribly, and we do have
public comment now. We have
public comment in person from
April Leon from uh
is this QLS DD waiver agency.
Good, April, thank you for
joining us. You have 3 minutes
to share your thoughts.
There we go.
Good morning.
Hello, my name is April and I am
the owner of Quality Life
Services, a leading DD waiver
provider agency in Las Cruces. I
am here to address concerns
about the recent rate study and
its implications for our
operations. The rate study
appears to overlook critical
overhead variables that agencies
like ours face as one of the
largest duty waiver providers in
Las Cruces, serving 100
individuals. We employed a
diverse team, including nurses,
service coordinators, house.
Managers, medtech, finance
specialists, billing, time clock
specialists, trainers, incident
management, HR directors,
receptionists, QAQI specialists,
and two on-call personnel for
nursing and behavioral issues.
Each role is essential for
meeting state standards and
passing audits. We also have
mortgages for our buildings,
insurance and cover expenses for
clients who are currently not
receiving Social Security
benefits.
We also cover overages of rent
due to inflation and them not
being able to afford housing.
We also contract approximately
180 direct support
professionals. However,
following a recent $1.5 million
lawsuit over misclassification
issues for classifying DSPs as
contractors rather than
employees, which despite being
aligned with the New Mexico code
8.314.5.10, which states Matt
through its designee Department
of Health DDSD.
Follows a subcontractor model
for DD waiver Services. The word
subcontractor is also repeatedly
written throughout the Didi
waiver standards and our
provider agreement is approved
by the Department of Health.
Contracting DSPs has been a
long-standing industry practice.
Now we face significant
challenges.
The lawsuit has exasperated our
current staffing crisis with
many agencies, including 7 out
of 9 that I contacted also
relying on contracting DSPs.
The situation heightens the risk
of similar legal issues for
other agencies.
Given the current rates and
widespread staffing shortages,
is becoming increasingly
difficult to sustain our
operations. The need to pay
substantial overtime to
classified employees is
unsustainable.
Contracted DSPs who previously
helped build relationships and
stability for individuals we
serve, will now be limited to
fewer hours, forcing them to
seek conditional employment to
support their families. This
change threatens both the
quality of our care we can
provide and the financial
stability of our workforce.
Furthermore, many DSPs have
expressed expressed that if the
current situation remains with
the low rates and inability to
follow the subcontractor model,
they will be
To resign and look for jobs
elsewhere, which will lead DD
Waiver clients open to more
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
due to massive shortages.
The contractor model has proven
effective, which is why many
individuals have relocated from
Albuquerque to Las Cruces.
Thanks to this model, we had
staff ready to assist when we
learned Mary Malera was being
transferred to El Paso and
required someone to stay with
her at the hospital. We were
able to send someone
immediately, ensuring she was
not.
Alone during her final days,
despite the severe abuse she had
endured.
In her last moments she was able
to experience compassion and
care.
Another significant issue
affecting our vulnerable
population is a shortage of
funding for guardianship. Many
individuals require guardians,
but insufficient funding means
that these needs often go unmet.
As a result, these individuals
lack the necessary support for
decision making, increasing
their risk of abuse, neglect,
and exploitation.
Considering these challenges,
I'm requesting two key forms of
assistance.
First, we need support to
mitigate the financial impact of
the $1.5 million lawsuit.
Second, we urgently need higher
rates for our DSPs to ensure
they are adequately compensated
and motivated to remain in this
critical field. Our goal is to
offer the best care to our
vulnerable population while
ensuring our staff can live
Concerns will be vital for the
continued provision of high
quality care and sustainability
of our agency.
Thank you, April, and members of
the committee, we will have an
item on tomorrow's tomorrow
morning's agenda, a report on
the DD waiver update from the
healthcare authority, so that
will be an opportunity for us to
follow up on some of these
issues. Thank you, April, for
coming in. sharing your
comments.
We have 2 others online, uh,
are we ready, Grace?
This time
And even though they didn't get
to speak yesterday, we're still
gonna limit them to 3 minutes a
day. Um, and we're gonna start
today with Mike McMillan.
Hello, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you, Mike.
OK, thank you. Uh, my name is
Mike McMillan. I'm the
operations officer at Southwest
Bone and Joint here in Silver
City. Thank you for some time to
comment. I want to first follow
up on the surgery plus program
that I've
Presented or commented about to
this committee previously, I did
send Xander over some additional
information and I hope he was
able to share that with you. And
again, just wanna express my
frustration that um
legislatively created
organization in NISA.
I contracted with a group that
uh basically will be
Going against everything the
legislature and other state
organizations and agencies are
doing to help.
Recruit, retain, and build up
our health care system
throughout New Mexico. When I
checked on their website uh
yesterday.
There's still only 2 providers.
Uh, contracted in network with
Surgery Plus in New Mexico, both
in Albuquerque, and there are no
hospital systems. The only uh
surgery center available is in
Albuquerque with those two
surgeons as well. So I think
that speaks volumes that uh this
program is not a positive
program, not a good program.
For uh New Mexico healthcare.
The
The second item that I want to
bring to your attention is a
medical malpractice and
There was 15 million that was
appropriated uh from the
legislature, and, and I believe
the executive.
To help provide or create what
is called
The mal medical malpractice
premium reduction program.
This program will provide a
rebate, um, or a subsidy.
Of the malpractice premium that
providers paid in 2023.
For
Any providers, the, the subsidy
is gonna be 60% of the premium.
That was paid in 2023 or
Up obstetricians and other
providers, they will get up to
80% subsidy from what they paid
in the premium. A couple caveats
with this MMPR malpractice, uh,
premium.
A reduction program. One, it
does not apply to physician
assistants. We have a physician
assistant that um is not
qualified for this uh program.
That's gonna be, and I assume
other mid-levels probably will
not qualify. So that's um an
area that we need to look at um
expanding if we can continue
this program.
Um, in the future.
Uh, the other aspect is, this is
just right now just a one time.
A rebate for premiums paid in
2023, and it only applies to the
premium itself. It does not
apply.
To the patient compensation fund
premium, which in most cases is
the higher amount that is paid
in combination with the medical
malpractice premiums annually.
So although we're grateful to
receive a small bit of um
subsidy back from premiums we
paid in 2023.
Um, it's only one time and it's
a small portion of the total
medical malpractice premium
that's paid. So, if we cannot uh
find uh uh
An ideal fix to the medical
malpractice Act that is
Provide protections to both
patients and providers at a
reasonable cost. I would ask
that the
Legislature continue programs
such as this.
We also look at um House Bill
234, which represented Hackman
Viejo introduced last year,
which I believe would be a
reasonable
Help or assist for providers
throughout New Mexico.
And I appreciate your time today
and look forward to seeing you
in Silver City.
Yes, we will be in Silver City
next month, Mike, so you can
make your comments in person
that day. It'll be good to meet
you in person.
Um, and next we have Nat Dean.
Uh, good, uh,
A couple of minutes to
afternoon, Mr. Chair. Can you
please indicate if you can hear
me.
We can hear you clearly, Nat.
Thank you so much. I'm going to
request uh I would like to
request 6 minutes because of the
3 minutes I lost yesterday. Um,
And while you're thinking about
that, happy birthday, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you. Now you do get
6 minutes.
Thank you very much. Happy
birthday to you. I, I could
continue singing, but I'd use up
my minutes. Um, thank you so
very much. Uh, I have interfaced
with some, uh, representatives
and senators when they have had
a difficult scenario for a
constituent and doing almost
exactly what uh your presenter
from CBCS was describing,
Although what I have done is not
paid, and that often surprises
people because
I'm paying it forward for the
beauty of what I learned through
my difficult experience. We only
learned how to be consumers of
health care when we become a
consumer of health care, and
then begin to have a successful
interface, and I'm gonna run
through a quick list. Yesterday,
there was someone in crisis, the
uh care coordinator for a
complex case reached out to me
and had questions. What is the
rep payee? What, how do
Why, what is guardianship? How
do I do that? What, how would
that work? Who does that? These
are important questions that not
everybody has that technical
expertise or experience, but it
is building the bridge to help
support what they're doing
because we can't be all things
to all people all the time, and
that is how we build
partnerships.
So, there is another case, there
is an adult who's pretty much
right back where they started
from to enter another crisis.
Um, despite having many, many
years of interface with waiver
services. They were on a mediaa
waiver, which is a self-directed
waiver, but really more needed
to be on the DD waiver which
provides more support and
guidance on how that individual
would um be the consumer of
their services, and they were,
there was a crisis, they were
removed from the family home,
they were placed under
guardianship, after year they
would return back to the
Home and we're now in another
wash rinse and repeat cycle
where the crisis is occurring
again because of the inability
for the family unit, including
the, the
The very vulnerable adult.
A child with disabilities.
Being back in a scenario where
they're unable to connect to the
services, because they don't
know how to consume the
services, nor does the family.
On another note, I was very uh
Um, excited to hear from you,
Mr. Chair, uh, that there is a
possible brain injury waiver
afoot.
That's great news, but remember,
not everyone who has a brain
injury is going to be eligible
for Medicaid and Medicaid is the
avenue to waiver services, so we
need to have that dual-pronged
approach for non- Medicaid
eligible individuals to have
that bridges through programs
such as the brain injury Service
Fund.
Um, I am a former Washingtonian.
I grew up for a few of my early
formative years in Seattle, um,
my neighbor across the street in
Playmate was Trey Gates, who is
Trey because he was William
Gates the 3rd, and that was Bill
Gates, but it didn't, doesn't
give me any access to computers
or technology, but it's just an
interesting fact though, um,
another repeat.
Uh interface individuals have is
within the judicial system and
with law enforcement, and that
is a place where uh medical need
or behavioral health needs can
be identified and then met, and
again, we only learned to be a
consumer of a system if we have
the support to learn how to be a
consumer of that system, and
this system helps identify the
underlying causational factors,
and then we meet the uh can help
with the unmet needs.
I just want to end with a brief
reflection from Habagerma Haban
Germa, a deaf blind attorney,
who wrote a book that she broke
the Harvard Law School. She made
a comment during the 24th, 34th
anniversary of the ADA. G.
If people bring their own
chairs, we'd save a lot of
money. We wouldn't need to buy
shares if they bring their own
chairs with their wheelchairs,
why should we have to buy chairs
for people who don't use
wheelchairs?
They're not bringing their own
chairs. We shouldn't buy them
chairs. She also said, gee, if I
don't need the lights on, they'd
save a lot of money, not having
to turn on the lights for the
people who need lights, so if
they need light, why should
they, they should pay extra to
have the lights turned on. I
don't need the lights. I can
save them a lot of money. So we
can look at things from that.
You know, double-edged sword or
two sides of the pancake, but we
can also look at things through
Different viewpoints, how do we
resolve the problem, and what
can we do to lift one another
up. Thank you so much for being
part of what works so hard to
lift people up. Let me know if I
can be of any help because I
think a lot of these models will
work better if we have more
collaboration. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you. As usual, Nat,
you've, you've given us much to
reflect upon. And um I wanna
The man whose arranged for our
lunch today and give him a
For where, where did she go to
school,
goes to Sania Sania Prep. Well,
it's great to have you with us
and it's great to have your
daughter here too, and thank you
for lunch. Not many of the
people who arrange lunch are
willing to come and actually eat
it with us. So that that that
that that that says a great deal
about, about your courage and
and bravery under fire.
So with that, we'll break for
lunch. We'll, we'll come back,
we may come back a little early
because of Project Echo, as you
know,
Um, has a great deal of
information and if they get here
in time, we'll go ahead and
start a little bit before one
and maybe as much as 1010
minutes early.
So enjoy lunch. Thank you, Joe,
and thank you members.
