Good morning everyone we're
gonna get started here in the
next couple of minutes so just
letting everyone know the world
begin a program ten o two ten o
three thank you.
Yeah.
Good morning everybody think you
everyone for joining us again on
our second day of language in
term committee i'm sure and
describe and we have a lot of
our committee members back it's
easy it really i'm excited for
this conversation to talk about
you know all the recovery the
healing that you all have been
working so closely on in our
communities after the fire and
and all of this so i'm excited
for the conversation just to let
everybody know we'll have this
next panel we have an hour and a
half for it i'd like it if we
did a two sets of three people
so that we have enough room and
on everyone's are crowding
around the mike after a public
car after that it's public
comment and we'll go ahead and
add and then a number of the
members are going to go to los
angeles to to the burns garden
understand you know more closely
um you know again the the
recovery efforts that are going
on right now and and I think
they'll be really helpful as
we're looking forward you know
all these conversations about
you know these these fires are
cascading events and how we can
continue to help so welcome back
I want to welcome it's good and
have any internet with los
angeles with chile and pollow
the mexico as techie association
for stuff and just like assure
if you could do in around ten
fifteen minutes to urten let's
say ten minutes each and then
we'll open it up to questions
from all of our pet our our
members and then we'll do
another round with um debbie
hughes jeremy class and gerald
romero afterwards so thank you
and any i'm happy to have you
madam chair could I also have
another gentleman join us mister
jeremy cross is with homeland
security here are I know he
wasn't on this schedule but I I
would like for him to comment on
on efforts of mitigation efforts
moving forward for loss of us I
believe he's going to come in
the second half but if you
wanted to come up right now we
can have them you know whichever
works yeah
so also have during class he's
the recovery mitigation bureau
of homeland security and
emergency management department
he's the chief there i'm so
again about ten minutes each and
then we'll have an or other last
folks go as well as all get set
up first.
Yeah.
And a reminder to folks the
audience we have coffee and
pastries over here if you would
like any breakfast again
provided by highlands university
so thank you make sure I think
them for not being so generous
with us thank you.
Good morning madam chair voiced
her automate members of the
committee
are once again welcome to las
vegas in beneal salasma
I want to thank mister keller
for the invitation to speak
today on behalf of los languand
uhm
so thank you mister keller
what i'd like to do this morning
is just.
Go through a quick review of the
twenty twenty four report for
lost vehicle as langrand
in twenty twenty four
we did not have a whole lot of
activity at the time
primarily because we were
awaiting some heavy equipment
that we have purchased through
capital outlay funding uhm
that particular project would
consisted of seventy five acres
of hazardous tree removal around
her access road and so losby
healers entered into m o a with
the mexico state force you
division to take on this
particular project
I believe that most everyone
here is familiar with the hermes
speak kafkan in fire by this
time.
Los was directly impacted by the
hermes be kept can in fire which
destroyed pretty much ninety
percent of our landground and
those who will be making the
tour will see that that
devastation first hand and so
again we entered into a a
contract with new mexico state
forestry to take on this project
part of that project insisted of
hiring a contractor with a
proper equipment to then come in
and cut trees are masticatories
the limiters and stock while the
timber for our beneficial use
for the members of the language
and the community
of the contractor did uhm
report back to the land grant
that there was a total of three
thousand five hundred and eighty
six trees our cut there were
stem cut
and that approx millions one
million one hundred and eighty
four board feet of of a material
moving forward two thousand
physical here twenty twenty five
some of our goals and management
objectives are as follow and I
believe everyone has a I
tenerally in front of them so
i'll be following that
uh
los vicious continues to focus
primarily on the mountain part
of our infrastructure projects
consist of heavy equipment
uh that we receive through
capital out there
we were very fortunate in los
vehicles to receive one million
thirty thousand in capital
outlay two undertaken that many
projects that we have on the
mountain and in and within our
infrastructure projects
part of those infrastructure
projects are
installation of coverts
we've already identified several
areas in the property longer
access road that are in need of
coverage primarily because when
the flooding season occurs a lot
of the drainages in the
tributaries are tend to erode
some of the access roads that we
have to travel through.
And so it makes a lot of sense
to us to then begin the process
of installing coverts in those
identified areas
of the other project that we've
undertaken is are our access
road through the canyon coming
on the lower
during this time of the year we
have our flooding season and so
in the past we've seen a lot of
flooring pretty much erode the
the main access road going up to
the conyon
and so it was a challenge for us
without heavy equipment at the
time to then hire somebody
private contractor to come in
and fix those roads so that we
can have access to the top of
the mountain
since then that is not a problem
for us anymore because now we
have our equipment to do the
work ourselves and so i'm very
grateful for the legislators
that provided that funding to us
so that we can continue the
work.
The next thing on our list is
reforestation.
We are currently working in in
in talks with a gentleman
are his name is our new devia's
he is with a group called
canalists are this gentleman
here is currently growing
approximately forty five
thousand pondero supplied trees
sealing trees and we're in the
talks right now of potentially
purchasing some of those trees
to then uh begin the process of
reforestation are that processed
of course would consist of
identifying locations within the
property that makes sense right
so we can just plan trees
anywhere the soils the soil has
to be in a proper and so we have
to yet identify those areas
where it makes sense to then
begin the process of that
reforestation.
Are no commitments yet but we're
in the in the beginning stages
of that conversation
the other thing that we're
looking to do is up possibly are
getting a contractor on board to
perform mastication on the trees
for the northwest management
area are the project that we
took on with mexico state
forestry initially we were going
to do this and two phases our
phase one is complete but the
second phase because of the
the the timber and and the
the life spent of the timber
we're not able to take on phase
two and so the question for us
is what are we doing with all
that material and so
would make sense to us is then
to bring in a masticator and
then start chip in those trees
down uh to which or it would
then produce new transfer the
soil
and that's an ongoing project as
well
the other project we have is are
a community center
in los vehicle as we have an old
school house that we've been
looking at a restoring
the initial plans were to
restore this building it's an
old building
but after
uh looking at it closely we were
able to hire a
structural engineer to come in
and assess the building because
of the cracking on the
foundations and on the walls
the structural engineer
determined that this building
was actually unsafe and so are
their recommendations was than
just terror down and start new
were in the planning stages of
an and designed there are
demolition and software.
Um the last thing that I have
for twenty five goals and
management objectives is land
acquisition
we were fortunate enough to get
a parcel determination from
female for our losses on the
mountain
and what we would like to do
with a portion of that money if
it's allowable is then to then
purchase land that is adjacent
to landground property
right now we are in the talks
with the united world college to
purchase approx family hundred
and sixty three acres of land
which they have purchased from a
private land owner
the united world college is in a
position was in a position to
purchase our property they did
so were the understanding that
they didn't want the property
they would be more than glad to
sell it back to the language.
The only stipulation is that
they would want an easemen on
the road and on the trails for
the students to then enjoy
hiking recreations and so that
is an ongoing project that we're
working on as well and more and
likely we're not going to be
able to make that transition
until december okay so
lastly the funding sources are
grants capital outlay and then
of course female money money
awards all up and I will just
end my presentation with with
this
one of the challenges that we
face as a landground is easy
many issues
and so what I would like to ask
this panel as legislators if
there is legislation that can be
up
done for langrands such as ours
that would help us with easeman
issues often times you have a
landowner why is a piece of
property is an outsider he comes
in and wants to land lockers
that happen to us back in twenty
twelve twenty thirteen we had a
gentleman not a mobile alabama
command by a piece of property
and he landlocked us so we were
forced to go to court and battle
that out luckily for less we
heal as we are we want that
judgment in in the district
court and also in the appellator
and so we were able to get an
easement through that section of
property but this continues to
be a problem for at least our
language I don't know if it's an
issue for other languages as
well but it is for us so I would
call upon this panel and and
other legislators to consider
legislation for easement rights
for for language.
Thank you
i'll turn it over to mr jeremy
plus and I wanted to check with
you mister
I was just told that you have to
run to get ready for the two or
later on is that correct do you
want to take questions now
before we offer to the full
panel or do you what would you
like to just wait till we do it
i'll take this
so other questions of he lists
at all
of representatives you
thank you manager
then thank you
eddie for your presentation and
most important for the
outstanding work that the line
ran is doing in regards to her
the cares traffic destruction
devastation of
the keft can and hermes beak
fire
manager some of us in this
committee were fortunate
to look at the unfortunate
you know a result of that there
was station in two or two years
ago and it was very emotional
and the
we are very saddened that one of
the leading members of your
landgram that was with us on
that tour is no longer with us
and that is just so far by the
end and
and we know many chair that the
johnson was on a milestone kind
of a courageous and outstanding
leader of not only the language
but this whole area
some miguel county last week as
in particular and
and I know that that kinda left
the big boy but i'm proud to see
that that you and the rest of
the board are kind of following
in this what steps are
persevering moving forward and
keeping a positive attitude in
terms of the accomplishments
that you have laid before you.
And I think it's a good
indication of what you
shared with this committee now
in terms of what those plans are
and
then we're also very gratified
man in chair that
that you put the good use on day
one
you know your equipment that is
so meaningful to
can you restore in the grant but
also to kind of enhancing kind
of the stability of the language
itself in terms of the land
beats itself and the roadways
and you know the the training
systems etcetera etcetera to
kind of
hinder to kind of
basically prevent further
catastrophic events like what
happened but I do have a
question I am sure that's the
world college property that was
a non chair a hundred and sixty
acres
madam chair representative of
garcia the property is
approximately a hundred and
sixty three acres
and as I mentioned before they
just recently purchased it from
the private land owner are and
sold they have agreed to sell it
back to the landground at
appropriate time yeah well
manager that's a very good
relationship that you have
developed overall college in
terms of being able to kind of
work out so the transaction such
as this because madame chair
that land owner was a pain in
the **** where you guys you know
sort of it's a double wammy in
terms of the sales that you get
rid of kind of loggerhead type
not nutmon you know and kind of
really move forward with that
piece of property there are so
meaningful to accessing the line
rent further up so
and but also.
What are their properties are
you considering or are looking
at possibility of purchasing
with the settlement money
madam chair representative
garcia at this time I don't i'm
not aware of any other
properties that are adjacent to
the language that are offer sale
however if those lands do become
available and i'm we're in the
position to buy them that is a
priority of the los visa slang
round to add to the common lands
are and so are the only one at
this time is is the hundred and
sixty three acre.
And
thank you for that idea and one
last question managers on the
request or the
the easeman issues.
I'd like to order request that
the committee cannot undertake
possible drafting legislation
and looking at the at this
question and possibly
having something at their last
meeting in terms of endorsement
of what that would look like and
I don't know if ian has enough
time doing this interest season
to do that but I think we should
try to at least attempt to put
something together cause that it
is very problematic manager not
only for those of the healers
but other languages that have
had some under paddles in terms
of accessing their comments
because of these newcamers that
are purchased property within
the common that was illegal
stolen from them to begin with
so i'd like to make that request
the manager on
a viante look at the drafting
some legislation regarding that
particular issue and with that
man to arrive
i'm done thank you
madame chair represent garcia I
just want our end with thanking
you for bringing up joseph bodia
are usually he is setting next
to me and these presentations
and he was a true chapter for
the language and he's missed
dearly he was a mentor to me and
sold
you know he is he is
mistremendously and so I want to
thank mr garcia for bringing
that up because he was a true
chap in for this language and
for many languages as well thank
you
thank you absolutely we'll look
into the easement question as
well I think that's something
that mean the vice chair we're
looking at each other with
spring about it as well and I
think there's some movement
there on
a couple of questions that I
want to check in with you as
well so that's over the easement
rates since the ruling one in
your favor with a court that
didn't set any precedent.
Are for you know future usement
questions at all it's still
ongoing an issue in that way
madam chair are the particular
land that we're the section of
property that was in litigation
at the time
was pretty much about a mile in
an invent that we were dealing
with specifically
the land we are now talking
about these hundred and sixty
three acres is is two different
private land owners and so the
individual that sold to the
united world college
was always challenging us and
threatening us that
we do not have an easemen
through this property and so
that was a continued challenge
for us now he never did take us
to court on this are to to get
that final determination but you
can see that when when people
come from the outside and by
property in that's fine
but
when they landlock you
you know that's a problem for us
because we have used these
access roads for decades and
decades to access our property
and so
that particular case was only
for that section of property
thank you for that context yeah
absolutely something we should
be working on you know I think a
lot of us would be interested in
making sure we did this in the
in a way that's lasting and had
that larger product perspective
I was also curious so you said
that the female ward moneys were
coming at how much was it wanted
to lost
madam chair the
overall
award was roughly thirty two
million now
that was part of the reform
station part of the claim
after paying the attorney are
they lost we healers land run
ended up with twenty six point
three million
was are award
and with having so have you
already received that award is
that being held up still
have you have you been able to
spend down some of that twenty
six million.
I'm adam to we have already
received that we have it in a
money market account right now
interest bearing account and and
so we have not
at this time done anything with
the money in terms of spending
that answering projects that's
yet to come thank you
are you working at all with the
department of economic
development on again you know I
think before looking to spend
this money have they've been
helpful and resourced you at all
some of this the reason I bring
it up is that as I mentioned I
was in or so last week and one
thing that one of the groups was
looking out was what do you do
with the waste that's come down
for the mountain and you would
say there's a lot of waste
where the million
pounds rate of a waste and I was
just curious that there's
anything there's a business that
was using it for things I don't
know that was also an option
appear as well I know they're
very very different than the
south i'm so not comparing the
two at all but I was just
curious if economic development
has been you know coming forward
to offer some some support or
resources at all that might be
helpful i'll madam chair at this
time we have not worked with
economic development however
mister cross will allow to some
of the efforts on his and that
he may be able to help those who
is with
those are my questions on you
know I mean it's my vice chair
thank you madame chair thank you
mister president for presenting
this morning I like carrying
that you're investing the return
on investment so what you're
going to be gaining at an
interest do you many chance have
a guest a bit about how much
money you're going to be getting
on an interest based on your
credit investment
madame chair my sure how to meal
some of the guest amounts that
we we have hurt now and they're
just a guest the met with the
twenty six point three million
that we now have in the money
market
interest bearing account we're
looking at roughly ten to twelve
thousand dollars of interest a
month
you know like hearing that
representative alice and I were
talking yesterday about another
lab grant.
But we would like to advise them
to start investing because then
those interest rates could go
into helping the lamp rant in
any type of let's just say about
fixing up easements or any type
of work that needs to be done I
think that was a smart move on
your partners to president on
the board so when I thank you
for doing that because those
returns are going to be huge for
the lab rent so thank you for
that but for their questions for
common spending check
I mistreated done and we're
happy to let you go to the next
thing I I do want to also point
out that you use your funds to
buy have you equipment to get
the job done and that is the
resourcefulness of the north and
of new mexico and you know again
you all were presented with a
huge problem and you all become
experts and navigating things
that I don't think you know any
of anyone would have anticipated
so thank you for that work i'm
really looking forward to seeing
you know all the things more and
thank you bad and chair thank
you our members of committee
happy to go to the next panel.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is one suntest
I am president of number to say
that we've got a treaty and I
will be presenting today on post
recovery of
our fire back in two thousand
and sixteen known as the dog had
fire
the dog hit fire and you have a
slide the presentation on before
I get started on the
presentation itself
the fire itself are
before it started was an
initially started as a then in
project between three agencies
which was treatedly language d r
or his service and the private
of its letter we were going to
ten fifteen hundred acres and so
initially that was the project
the fire started on the floor is
site
right next to the slate of
boundary and so you know it took
air eighteen thousand acres that
was though sides of the fire
thirteen thousand of those acres
were inside the langrant itself
and so.
As a part of the
recovery we were in partnership
show with the
soil conservation district we
had an architect we had the
equivalent was let out we had
homeland security and we had the
forest service but you know the
biggest part was community
membership for proposed recovery
that that was air that the
biggest a part we had a soul
as you know
or you may not know but science
has three basis for recovery
one of them is fire suppression
repair which mean they repair
the fire lying to you got a road
that were used for the fire you
know clean up of the retardent
and then actually making sure
that the fire is fully contained
the dog had fire went on for
months and we still had log
smaller in there
almost a year after
that the roots were still
burning and number two is
emergency staples and assessment
to make sure that they're not a
threat to live at property while
lived and also the cultural and
natural resources and number
three long term recovery and
restoration which includes water
shed held the roger and control
flooding dining projects and air
and department din burn note
that that's something that
you'll be hearing from other
fires as they happen your new
mexico but for me and a
community I say instead of the
three pages there should be poor
faces and the phase that nobody
ever looks at is the emotions of
a fire
you know in poetry covery ears
you have to fire so you look at
it and you see first of all when
it's done the emotion that the
community just went to
you know that the second one is
when you.
First drive up to the mountain
and you see you the destruction
you know that data motion is you
know first you know you go up
there you see
you cry
cause your mountain is gone
to second one is
you get mad
because it happened no why did
it happen you know it just
nature it happens and the other
part is the other emotion you go
through is when you go up there
and you see that you've lost
that part of mother nature note
that that mother land of yours
your mountain in order something
that your grandkids will never
get to see or actually you know
what I seen when my and sister
seen how we used the mountain
and how we lived in it before
the fire you know that that's
something that I always
experience and so you know that
has to be put in post recovered
because you know that that's for
generations that's never going
just like anything else in the
fire but as we get started on my
presentation as you can see and
up
in the first lied we have the
dog had fired that happen in
june two thousand and sixteen
right around the close true and
the other son want no I think we
missed it by two days and that
something will never forget no
you go to the neck you have as
you see on the left side in
august you see the washouts of
the auto and you'll see the what
it looks like in president day
network and this is the first a
total kid that we have a first
dirt pond that we have going up
to the mountain as you can see
the sale
but it looks like in august and
what it looks like today.
Dial
we have three pounds up in a
mountains yeah the first two
were
impacted by the fire at this
first one
yeah one of the things we did on
all three of them is and we had
a you know
it it's our land so we really
get have to do what forest
service said we should do it
shouldn't do but we went and we
breached the pont
you know that there is people
that say you should have reached
him and there we got
some advice from
other individuals that had been
through a fire up in real goat
should be for indicate and
actually also win the fire
happen in los angeles with some
of those on they didn't breach
him so you can see the pon has
silten it but if we want to
breached it that would have been
you want to be able to see the
burning on the left side by me
standing there because of the
sale that works at building up
on it and saw
the right hand picture that what
the pan looks like today we
actually got we're able to get
punding if you go to the next
week we got funding for more
soil conservative district to
clean that one out and you can
see that's the pile of salt that
was pulled out of it which we
call that's the fifty three
thousand dollars dirt pile
because that's what it cost us
to remove it error so
and if you go up to the next
line you'll see some of them
roads going up to the mountain
in august and you see what it
looks like today you see the one
on the left side you could still
see the trees it was freshly
burned the trees still had some
of the planet on them you could
still see some of the.
We're still turning out and
that's what it looks like today
after all the trees are down and
drawn and
so it's a big difference
the next one is continuing the
same road going up as you could
see the one on the left older
gravel that was brought down in
the debris to the road and and
the other road air on the right
hand side as that you mentioned
you know that that something are
you mentioned to him earlier
yeah roads will always be a
problem after the fire nine
years after we still deal with
the road and the flooding as any
mentioned there are working on
putting culburts
to try and get prepared for the
floor in that it's going to
happen
we finally got tired of
the flooding taking we would
replace the culburn
would get a flood and a culpre
would be a mile down the road so
we'd have to hold it back and so
what we ended up doing is just
working the road to where we
made it in a ball to where the
floods come removed although
culburg and just left the road
passable to where we could go
income and it made it a lot
easier for the flooding because
the water would then just go and
we try different types yeah it
sizes are culprit places what we
had a twenty four inch cober we
put a forty eight cover thinking
you know maybe the flooding the
water will just go through there
but it doesn't work it's still
so you know roads are all we're
gonna be an issue as I chat nine
years after the fire we still
deal with that on an annual
basis at the next when you'll
see our second authority and you
can see that one got more sealed
because it was further up toward
the mountain
as you that one was also
breached but yet that one it has
yet three canyons that come down
and.
The water comes into that are
pun so that collected more shilt
and the other one and you can
see on the right hand side where
it looks like today we've
cleaned partially some of the
plan but we haven't cleaned at
all and so we're still working
on that part but that's what it
looks like to do with
budgetation over some of the
sealed and some of the clean up
that we've done on it
this is a view of it looking
west
so you can see as a sealed came
in and this is what it looks
like now that some of the parts
that we've cleaned.
And so this is some of the shelt
on the road again
as you can see right on the road
to run off that sander and under
right side that's what it looks
like today.
And this is some of the
sandbacking we work during the
early stages of the fire
protecting homes at you know
that this was their all new what
that this is something that
different from other buyers it's
that
we've got some help from female
and home line security and like
I mentioned and she has a but
most of the work that was gun
was us the community putting the
sandbags filling down you know
making sure the hundred were
protected you know all the roads
that's gone up everything that
we've done it been the community
because
you know we reading get no
funding like other fires so
the next when you could see we
placed our hesical baskets that
was something dad was
recommended to us day initially
on land security said that maybe
we should use that jersey
barriers concrete barrier to use
in the highway for construction
they said that these work better
and so where they're baskets
that are made out of clock and
wire and you feel them a percent
day use these and military basis
quite a bit and so this was
recommended to us so we are put
the hesical baskets together and
we filled them with sand with
the help of a slide of private
and this is one of the locations
by the community that the royal
runs on the left hand side were
protecting the home that were on
the right and the next when you
can see the hesical basket were
actually placed along the home
act because the royal runs right
there and one of the flooding we
got the second year the water
was all the way to the doorstep
so that's why we ended up at
placing the esco basket that you
see there.
Yeah the other one that we work
with chair closely as you see
that that we share a boundary
with altree with his letter and
the origin service and when the
white fire came through it
actually burnt all the fence and
saw we had issued with cattle
going on to the forest or two
slettle and so working with them
we finally came into an
agreement with forest service
that if they would provide the
material we would provide the
labor so as you see in the
picture there what we went and
did as we opened
twenty five for eastman and then
the community got together on we
removed the fence the old post
and we replace four miles of new
wire.
That took three years to get
accomplished because with the
fire and and depends being
gone blm had to come in and
reserve a four miles off the
boundary
and so we finally got that done
on this slide you'll see
adjacent to the community this
is right next to our motor
thought to a couple santa and
which thank god yeah
it's a meeting but you know
don't do
more data and I should have put
a picture of it and a couple of
sont door
the firewind completely around
it didn't even touch a stem of
grats inside the cemetery or the
model but everywhere else it was
told he burnt and how it was
next to the community
we were able to get an rcs and
we masticated eighty acres
completely masticate right after
the fire we must do the fire was
in june and a november it was
all masticated but how
domesticator leaves some stumps
and would be breed we weren't
able to drive or use a tractor
to seed it so the community
receipt at the entire eighty
acres by hand that's my grandson
in my son helping with the
receipting
and that's what it looks like
now as you can see the greener
spot is the gap the grass that
we use for her for the receiving
the seat came from our against
oil conservation district we
have great partnership with
themselves you know a lot of
they are
the work what we've done has
been through them
and
you see the next slide
mentioning road being an issue
believe it or not that's a road
that we use to drive up to our
check or fences opened a top
there we call it at lunch of
their media so that's what we
see.
Sometimes on a daily basis now
when we go up to the mountain
you got to pack your launch and
your chains help cause there's
some time that you can actually
drive up the road to go check
the fence and on the way back
down that's what you'll see it
just trees that were impacted by
the fire even though some of
that not totally is burned but
the fire was around there and we
can the trees so a little breeze
or not to treat now so.
And then the next slide is
you'll see the left hand side is
a project that we had worked on
attaining project and that we
were done in two thousand and
fourteen the fire was next to
the thinning project then grow
into it totally did some but not
much and this is what it looks
like right to the west of the
partial that was intend that's
what it looks like to.
And then
this is the new growth from the
fire
these are thousands of ceilings
of pine trees that have just
grown have sprouted out
naturally
and saw as I mention recovery
post fire recovery here's the
next big fire that will happen
if we do not manage that and
that's what happened in the
future when when prescribed
burning wasn't allowed on the
forest side or on
that white before risk was so
day tried planting
we had another fire after the
dog hit fire on the forest site
which was called their
opportunity scottible fire which
are burnt about three thousand
occurred
day when earned they planted
forty thousand ceiling pine
trees like that and we know
because they use our access to
go out there and plant them and
one percent of the forty dollars
in trees group the rest of them
all die and this is where post
can ask for protection to make
sure that they get water and to
protect him from the snow and
you know the well taken care of
but even though they do that
yeah only one percent survived.
So with that madam chair member
sell stand for questions
let's go and have the next
present her go on all if you
want to go next and then
and then we'll have questions
for the whole panel thank you.
Thank you madame chair of good
morning madame chair members of
the committee I want to thank
you for the opportunity to be
here and I want to think we can
cantana end on sunshines for
their presentations that I was
deeply moved to see the recovery
work that the language are doing
and.
Oh my impression of how
important it is for communities
this is why we're here you know
we won't communities to under
common land and you can see the
care and store chip that goes
into recovery when when people
have access to land and it just
does beautiful testimonies thank
you one
and i'll be talking to today
about a second disaster recovery
and the first side you're going
to see we see if I can call it
up
there it is
so first introduction my polo
garcia and the executive
director of the new mexico I
said association and
where a state way down profit
membership based or conversation
and we've been around since
nineteen eighty nine mainly
doing community education around
a seconds and
supporting uh local I think your
commissions and marlomos and and
being good caretakers of of
their water and
weird did not use to do designed
to recovery the started and
twenty little and like in the
the late twenty tenth
but we started doing some
recovery work and linking county
andre dosson and learned how to
uhm navigate the different
programs so when hermes peak
have can't up and that's when we
really.
Type into does astric carry
because there are so many asacas
in this in this particular fire
i'm from water and uhm
as impact I fire
we have relatives who last uh
quite a bit of forest uh nap
they last trees I should say and
the way that one described it
when there's a major fire was
was I think very appropriate and
much of impact
the way I describe it is it
feels like the family member
because you have such an
attachment to the land in the
cadency for the land and when it
happens um you realize that
you're only going to see it
you're only going to see it in
your memories it's not we're
going to be seen again and
you're you're the sentence
aren't going to know in the way
that you did and yet we still
have our cadencia we still love
this land and it's still in our
care and and it's up to us to to
take care of it and and to try
to recover
in.
Ah your packet you're gonna see
first a picture of a second
mother the home
and if you come down off of home
and he'll see this massive burns
car really big and high
intensity burns car in this
village it's right at the bottom
of that hill and so now every
time it rains it floods and this
this is second is impacted by
what called cascading events so
after the fire you know as
devastating as the fire is uh
it's the floody that really is
the ongoing concern and those
mountains will never be the same
and the the flooding that we see
for for years after the after
the fire is uhm
sometimes just as intense as
when the first time it happened
so in this particular example
this is a second has had they've
had multiple cats gaining events
and it's been cleaned three
times uhm and you could see this
big bound of debris outside the
the second and and it it becomes
a very big
a big project to do that to
pretty move off
some of the go over um
different disasters that have
happened that are impacting a
second yosian slide to i'll talk
about what i'm sent we get
county granted luna county's
lincoln county reality by and
sand one and terms of the
different disasters and then an
overview of the different
programs like female dhm in our
cswp and the hpc claims at this
which is unique to this disaster
and mdot debris removal which is
a kind of a partnership
combination of different
programs and then i'll wrap up
with lessons learned
and your second slide the the
image that you see is of uhm a
second that somebody else.
And this is in what I counted in
gas gone and to to just get
across the intensity of the
damage um
I wanted to show this with you
because
you can not even see where
there's a second diversion with
you see a couple of of culburts
and everyone when the rains
first happen the bolders that
were coming down were gigantic
and these burned logs come down
like tumble weeds there the
water is so high and so fast
that it's hard to imagine and
and this second has had to be
rebuilt but this was initial
like right after the fire and
you could see the the intense
damage the next slide is
a map showing
where the seconds are located
across the state and in the in
the red highlighted and red are
the areas that have been
impacted by disasters so you
could see it's it's a
significant part of the state
I think is tend to be in the
tribute terry to the major
rivers and that's that's where
the big fires are happening and
you can get an idea of what's
impacted by the by the disasters
the next slide on side for uh
shows the catastrophic parts and
first from twenty two to the
present and i'm highlighting the
buckfire which was in southwest
new mexico that impacted the
health and the main press basins
and there were about twenty five
damaged a second there in the
twenty two hermet's peak caf
canyon there were some ninety or
more a sick as a damaged there
here set up a lot of there was
one damage to second in the
south south work more than
twenty
and and the real time of
flooding of twenty four there's
a damage to second there are
several other non federal
disasters these are smaller
while black fire was a non
federal disaster but there's
other
kind of uh localized uh.
Flash flooding that happened in
dixon and twenty twenty two real
made the on santa fe county
center crews um sera county
money and others and altogether
we've estimated there is about a
hundred and fifty seconds that
have been damaged in three years
and uh as I as i'm sure joint on
the previous letters about seven
hundred across the state we've
worked with the bus eight
hundred and forty of those um
over the last twenty five years
and to be dealing with a hundred
and fifty that are in some kind
of crisis right now because of
fires and post flooding it sites
getting quite well make
the next slide is an overview of
disaster program
these are the programs that that
we have to navigate and uhm
yesterday talk to about
technical assistance generally
and how this disaster work has
really come on very strong
because of all the the extent to
disasters and it if you talk to
in our cs for example I know
gerald is here and and he can
tell you about the wp program it
used to be that there were a few
per year maybe of ewp programs
that that are ewp projects and
he'll tell you what the numbers
in new mexico but it's it's a
uhm a high number
the nrcs chief who was there
during the bite administration
terry cosby uh said that and
they have
uh dozens of disasters happening
at any given time across the
country and it didn't use to be
that so I don't have those
numbers but the uhm the
frequency of disasters is
increasing and we're seeing it
with the asset
here are the programs famous
public assistance and that
covers emergency to be removal
and structural repairs and that
is a reimbursement basis it's a
seventy five twenty five cashier
so it's twenty seventy five
percent federal and twenty five
percent state local.
Dhcm that's for state disaster
so if if it doesn't rise to the
level of federal disaster if
it's not of a certain cost
it would be a state disaster and
that's also seventy five twenty
five state local cashier
in both of these seconds
administer their own projects
they have to apply and have to
do the work and then they
reimburse and so if you can
imagine what it is but that
these are seconds that are
limited restaurants and
volunteered just like language
most of the I don't know of any
that have the resources to pay
up front for this work
in our cswp program emergency
watershed program uhm this one
uhm is um it's it's administered
differently then they go through
a local sponsor usually a
songwater district um hemmers
peak cafe kind of little
different because the state step
down to provide some capacity so
the responses were the local
song and water districts but but
the favors handling none of the
administration and that one is
different because the agency the
sponsor administers the the
project and manages the project
so there's not a reimbursement
the second doesn't have to worry
about applying for money and
getting money and doing the
project that the sponsor does
that they procure the contractor
they do it that seconds don't
handle any money so you can see
how that's very desirable for a
second to have that program so
given the choice between fema or
c s most the seconds are tending
to go uh with nrcs
hpc claims office
this is unique to this disaster
uhm there was an act of congress
passed that waived the cost
share so
covered for for the the projects
here then that is tremendous
it's a little complicated
because the sake as our
political subdivision so they
have to go through female public
assistance first.
And then
get denied and then they get
referred to the claims office so
it's it's a a bureaucratic
process for sure so I think it's
have that choice most of seconds
are using a combination of
putting together like a puzzle
of different pieces of this
because nrcs won't cover coverts
so you'll see
you'll see a
second that will do the inner
csp program but they'll keep
their female claim or
they're covered but to do a
cover up size they have to do an
honest study um which is a a
detailed process and we're kind
of learning that it's a really
hard to do those studies and we
weren't we weren't prepared to
do it it's it's over extended
our capacity for a second to do
their their own ancient each
studies and an enlimited in our
contractors who have tried to
help with that but it's it's
just so much work
so when I go next to
partnerships and disaster
recovery
one of the lessons that i've
learned is is how permit is to
have collaboration and
communication the different
partners and disaster recovery I
think work pretty well together
the uh d h s c m convenience
catastrophes that means once a
month and the all of these
different agencies and and those
of us who are technical
assistant providers we meet once
a month and uhm and
talk through problems and issues
that are coming up and trade a
problems of this is new this
came about as because of the hpc
fire but then um now this task
for it has become a form to talk
about all disasters because
there's a disaster all the time
and so this is going to be a
permanent fixture I think of our
work is to just meet on a
regular basis and what's the
disaster of the day but the
disaster of the month.
But this task force has been
really helpful so
earth up place for a
transparency and collaboration
and chairing information
so first of all the one
partnership on a highlight is
dot and this is for category a
and b to pre removal using
female funding so like I I said
earlier
it's very difficult for a second
to pay up front and get
reimbursed so what we what we
asked for
during the twenty two for the
first time was that the state
would front front of the money
and this isn't the long program
it's that's sbcs and all of that
that's totally different that
came later this is just going to
the governor and seeing can't
think state do this for us and
then the state do other female
paperwork in this take it
reimbursed and that's where an
india tea was brought into the
process in dhm
to to make this possible I think
it's a really a uhm a really
successful
a program it's not a formal
program and I would like it to
be I think it should be
institutionalised because uh
nmotic and mobilised so quickly
that's emergency to previous
mobile and
it's a other still the seventy
five twenty five cushion except
for hermes peak which is a
hundred percent but it's
it can work well
it can this doesn't always
energy as ewp uhm the sponsors
local so the water districts
counties are nacd dfa
it requires the sponsorship the
sponsor provides a match manages
the projects and procures the
contractor um I see a second
bureau is another
partner
uh they can potentially be a
a method to move money to do the
costure.
There's a there's an existing a
second bureau there
but it hasn't been used that way
there's potential for it to be
used that way but they can use
some of their programmatic money
to help with assessments have
needed
lastly weaker enemy
as a as a partner and we're a
small nonprofit and this is
really stretched or capacity but
we felt that it was important to
extend ourselves in and trader
growing bill capacity to meet
this this need and our our
primary role is early in the
disaster to do the outreach to
have the contactless make sure
that everybody signs up for
every program that they're
eligible for and that's that's a
big feed in itself and then so
that's the initial technical
assistance um we also have a
contractor high watermark which
helps the seconds with the more
technical aspects of like the
female public assistance program
and doing damage and victories
they'll accompany female and the
second to do like the damage
inventories in the field and
things of that nature um and so
far we're working with them in
the home it's peak cafe kenyan
disaster mostly and then uhm we
consider that business last and
we try to get reimbursed from
the claims office for that work
that I water mark does but
just to give you an idea of what
that's costs and this is again
where a small non profit um it's
probably been about half a
million dollars in nah in money
spent just for that expert to
help them in the field helping
help in the second so it just uh
it's a really
and
intensive resource intensive
type of work to be out in the
field and in providing that
technical support um
the next one table it's a it
shows you status of different
recovery efforts.
And I won't go through every
detail of it but you could see
that how much peak is there a
black fire assault south for rio
chama and others and the numbers
are pretty staggering uhm female
pay applications there's more
than seventy sixty seven have
been referred to the claims
office the ndot has fifty four
agreements in place with a
second to do emergency to
previous mobile and they're
still happening I mean they're
out in the field right now doing
the previous movement and the e
wp program and this is date I
got from a attractor that dhc
i'm is putting together
one of the highlights that I
think has happened is that the h
s c i'm now his hired
a person who
is focused on a second
communications and being a
liaison with us and and so it's
been her responsibility to
gather data from all the
partners and agencies and put it
into one tracker so we all have
access to the same data and
that's been a really positive
development
so it in terms of inner cswp
and courting to that tracker
there's a hundred plus
applications but some of those
might be private ditches um to
which I think are have the weird
complications so there's
fourteen completed forty seven
designs completed and forty
eight designs at progress so
keep in mind that this is where
three years and to the disaster
and that i'm not complaining
because everyone's working
really hard but but just the
fact of the length of recovery
and which we all you think that
when there's a disaster it's an
emergency things are going to
get fixed quickly it's not in
fact I would say it's probably
slower than if it were just a
normal application for a
neighbor normal program there's
nothing fast about it and and
and i'll give you in my a second
for example which I think I have
a key study yeah so the next
light has a case study that's an
on my second.
And it gets an idea of like how
you have to be putting a puzzle
together of different programs
the the the front side of the
the second where you take the
water from the river where we
have our main pressure that kept
getting filled in was sold every
single time it rained so uh five
times and
at least um they they the second
use that's own money to hire a
backhaul operator to go dig it
up um
and we had to go to public
assistance to try to get
reimbursed for that it got
denied and referred to the
claims office hasn't been paid
yet uhm nmdot contractors
through the to be removal they
did the gym depremental on the
entire ditch um that was a
hundred percent federal funds
that they didn't excellent job
um nrcse p program to come
awhile
nmad got the contract to do
while the design work and I
guess construction I i'm not
really sure how that operation
happens but
they are um did a design and
then they did the construction
keep in mind we did not have to
handle any money they did it are
uh and it took a while but we
finally got water and june of
this year so it took about three
years to redo the the computer
again that was a hundred percent
federal funds but you can kind
of see that you have to be
rarely proactive and putting
these different puzzle pieces
together.
Um someone had just kept the
other case that is in gostride
to the lessons learned uh the
first the first major challenges
cost share reimbursement cashier
requirements
here in each pc we kind of
spoiled a little bit right
because we have a hundred
percent but if you're in the
real chama or bureau and some
other place you're on the hook
for that twenty five percent the
state or the local gaseco is not
able to pay that in any under
any circumstances I can think of
when a second I can afford that
uh so we need to fix this this
is not an issue for a second
only this is for local little
towns can't afford this counties
can't afford this and
work we're gonna have to figure
out how to do this as a state
and uh for it for a second
potentially the second bureau
you could find all some state
money to the second bureau and
then that could be used for the
cushior
in in some of the smaller flash
flooding disasters executive
order money has been used to
cover a hundred percent in some
cases that happens a dickson
flooding um and the black fire
flooding
but that's also a a really
interesting problem that they we
have as a stay because those
executive orders are only seven
hundred and fifty thousand so
that governor has to do one and
over and over and over until I
don't know how many they did
maybe germanos but can you
imagine a seven fifty a pup and
you have tense than hundreds of
millionth of damages and it's a
it's a just a kind of a conque
process honestly um there's a
new DFA match fund and that's
potentially a place but the need
for that fund exceeds it's
available and I can imagine
where all that money's already
spoken for in a disaster happens
and there's no match fund left
for that disaster so it's a
potentially good option by its
functionally not again it's that
it's something reliable
so that kaussia requirement I
think there has to be a a.
Set state pull of money that you
can go to and right now every
time there's a death disaster
where reinventing the wheel over
some where is the money going to
come home parts are going to
come from
and we're not sure
emergency the breeding move all
we think there should be
institutionalized that the drt
program could potentially just
be something that's a go to
whenever there's a disaster you
don't have to wait for it to get
stood up it's just there um
recurring flooding cascading
events the state's gonna have to
think ahead and be prepared for
these cascuiting events and this
isn't just like a one off others
disaster and then we get over it
these disasters keep happening
it's going to be an ongoing
thing so again um I think the
state should be planning ahead
for that technical assistance
resources uhm definitely more as
needed like I said for us it
really stretched our capacity
but it's not it's almost every
agency that serving uhm needs
more capacity
i'm concerned about our reliance
on inner cs the popular program
but fit with federal budget cuts
um a lot of their staff has been
uh laid off uhm local sponsors
need more capacity or we really
rely on local solemn water
districts and and we really you
know we would really like to see
them have the resources they
need to effectively manage these
programs and uh
the reason that early peace
popular is because the sponsor
does the administration of the
project and it would be good if
we could think of how the state
could do that cuz if if we rely
on n r c s i'm just afraid that
something is not going to
be reliable in the future
depending on how things are
going at the federal level and
this again the state needs to
look ahead
more engineering firms are
needed lessly we're finding that
there's a really.
Tight bottleneck in that process
of you look at the a w p program
there's still forty nine a
second that still don't have a
design um and it's not you know
the partners are all working
really hard but there's also
just a lack of engineering firms
that will do this kind of work
and um
and I would also back up one
more thing about the
intersection the program is that
a second eligibility should just
be a matter of policy and it
used to be
i've been working on disasters
long enough to know that
was tough up right away now we
wait for the interest and chief
to give the
and hermes peak it took like
eight months before the n r c s
chief uhm deliver the waiver for
a sank is to be eligible and
that drags out the process and
it's unnecessary you know of a
second eligible one time they
should be eligible all the time
and so again every time there's
a disaster where like who's on
first where's the money coming
from what programs can we apply
for and it just should be more
automatic and and reliable and
predictable than than it has
been so
and the the funding is going to
have to be there and and right
now I I don't feel like I don't
feel like we're
fully prepared for what's coming
so thank you madame.
Good morning madame chair and
committee
I will this is going to kind of
be in two parts request there's
a lot of things I can dress on
the esake side i'll do that
after we'll start with the
initial post fire flood issues
that we were talking and that
mister canton had talked about
apologized some of you this
there's going to be a little
duplicative information as we
saw you all on the natural
resources and water
committee with LFC a couple
weeks ago so
i've got to do my pitch first
off in foremost
d h s e m well first let me
introduce myself i'm doctor
jeremy class I am the bureau
chief with recovery that
overseas a recovery mitigation
program at the department
homeland security and emergency
management dear just here I am
so d h e m is the state agency
responsible for leading disaster
recovery in the state in new
mexico as
everybody thirty presented in
the testimony that's already
been present to you today
there's a lot of collaboration
that we lead and bringing a lot
of our state federal local
partners together in the
recovery efforts and so as we
talk about post fire flood
issues
were out from your
your hand out and will go to the
slide deck first and foremost
the post fire needs in
initiative initiate objectives
we're really looking to start to
build oh I got it cool thank you
okay so we're starting to build
a sustainable recovery framework
by working across all lands ego
systems in jurisdictions in
coordination with the federal
state and tribal local nonprofit
and academic is association in
organization support post fire
recovery efforts
some of the challenges that we
faced
obviously there's reoccurrence
periods are shrinking and
cascading impacts are becoming
the norm.
The reality is really that large
scale wild fire events will
continue to increase in
frequency intensity and scale as
we've seen we're dealing with
multiple
fires large scale disasters
fires across the state within
the recent years starting with
the hermit's peak up can I mean
it's gone back all the way to
the dog at fire but not to the
scale and intensity that we've
seen.
Currently federal programs are
not structured to a debt address
cascading impacts in here to
post fire landscape prior to
major shifts at federal agencies
uh miss garcia just spoke to
some of those issues that were
facing even we're dealing with
it from fema standpoint in our
cs all a lot of our federal
partners were currently
facing a lot of challenges
regarding staffing capacity and
funding it it we're getting
better at understanding that
fire doesn't understand
jurisdictional boundaries as we
can see here in this in the
hermit's peak cafe can in burns
car you guys will see it as we
talk about going across
landgrounds private land and and
damaging the sake years but
we're we're starting to build
that in expand that out to water
really doesn't it here to
jurisdictional boundaries as we
can see
and so this so trying to stand
up this post-fire program is
really trying to address those
needs get integrated at the fire
when the fires actually
happening but be able to move
resources understand programs
and understand needs on the post
fire aspects of things and start
building capacity here at the
state level to help augment
those losses that were going to
see in these federal programs
moving forward
program limitations and lag
times for federal declaration
requests we've currently
submitted our declaration
request for the flood that
recently occurred in read those
so
this obviously limits funding
and what we can and cannot do
even when a fire is burning
because we're fully aware these
post fire impacts from monsoonal
patterns are going to
often times occur at the same
time a fire's burning so we need
to actually build capacity need
the funding and
you know build that framework so
we can actually address those
needs because when an incident
management team is on a fire
they are not suited to deal with
the flooding impacts that comes
directly to our departme.
And d h s e m starts to mobilise
and address those issues as
they're ongoing while the fires
burning so better integration
with our federal partners is
needed
we are at the h s c m
currently with everything that
we're dealing with we are
definitely dealing with the lack
of capacity and funding and
again that's what this post-fire
network is really trying to
develop and start to
be the similar piece to start
addressing these needs here at
the state level
how we are addressing some of
these post fire disasters we're
building a common operating
picture across our disasters in
these burn scars to coordinate
disaster response recovery and
mitigation that is taking in in
jesting multiple data layers
burn severity maps to brief flow
maps with the US g s trying to
identify pinch points and high
priorities where we need to
focus and coordinate our
response recovery and mitigation
efforts
that also is
you know when I talked about
integrating with the incident
management team that's
addressing a fire we did
something very kind of seminal
and important there on the trout
fire when it just occurred
right outside a silver city we
integrated our local amount
emergency manager in with the
incident management team so when
we started to see that
monsoonal pattern come and start
we knew those post fire impacts
were going to come we were able
to model mobilize integrate with
that incident management team
understand where we needed to
get you know remove settlement
address
areas of of critical
infrastructure that we're going
to be impacted based on burned
severity we were closely with
the state forestry department
and the nature conservancy to
build a very quick uhm and dirty
burns of early map so that we
could identify exactly where we
needed to preposition assets.
Move uh heavy equipment gets
with water rescue teams ready
and get him out there and and
stationed
so that we can actually lean
forward in addressing our
emergency management response
also outside of the disaster
management aspects that have
been addressed here especially
by poller we also have funding
for the hazard mitigation grant
program that because that comes
from a percentage of the public
assistance that we receive on a
not on a federal disaster that
we have at the state level to
implement mitigation projects
across the state not only in
those effective jurisdictions
but again across the state and
we're also creating innovative
technological advancements to
address immediate needs one of
the things that we are currently
partnering with in talking
through with new mexico
highlands here in their forestry
department is uhm utilizing
drone footage and an algorithm
that we've developed to address
hazard trees so as we can go out
and scope a project cost it out
and move that forward instead of
what current
female
guidance calls for you have to
go out and in tag and individual
tree deem it is hazard and then
that's how a project is built as
you can imagine that's
incredibly labor attentive costs
a lot of money to go across
three hundred and forty six
thousand acres as we do in urban
speak afghanistan so we've
actually gone back we are
changing policy at the national
level with female implementing
this new technology and so what
we're doing here with highlands
is there an eligible entity
trying to utilize this
technology across privately and
and be able to address the
hazard trees on privately and as
we are all fully aware at the
state
we can't necessarily deal with
private land or apply a whole
lot of money.
Therefore you know because we've
got issues associated with that
as everybody on you know it's
fully wear but this is a pathway
we're trying to actually
implement public assistance on
privately and and get away from
the anti donation clause on that
piece
so you guys are actually going
to go out and see one of the
areas that we've identified as a
priority area in a pilot project
that's gone on in cooperation
with our common operating
picture we've identified worked
with eddie and and that the loss
for healace landgrand it's great
to hear that they're going to be
acquiring some of this down
stream
land but we're looking at this
pilot project in sebastian
canyon and that's going to be a
county road a one one a
from the watershed restoration
plan that is i've brought on a
contractor using hazard
mitigation funds to actually
look at this entire burned scar
in apply the common operating
picture look at those pinch
points and identify high
priority areas where we can
identify projects and there will
be some engineering and design
that goes but again I can't
necessarily go out in apply
hazard mitigation funds to a
specific land owner we need an
eligible entity to be able to
organize that peace organized
and land owners and go through
that channel to apply hazard
mitigation projects out on the
landscape and so that's what
we're trying to do this is a
pilot project showing that
specifically
and it's going to be it's we're
we're addressing this in the
three phased approach obviously
phase one i've talked about
that's complete that's a final
flood assessment that's taking
all those data layers in a in in
understanding and identifying
priority airs right now and face
to that's where we currently
stand and this is a illustration
of what we're going to do you
guys will be able to go see what
we're trying to do the face
three part is a.
Is in that priority area we are
going to expand that concept
development and engineering and
design out out there so this
specific pilot project deemed
the sebastian restoration pilot
project we're going to emphasize
natural process restoration and
implementing natural channel
design so it's not going to be a
lot of infrastructure it's not
going to be a lot of coverage in
concrete as we've been briefed
and testimony has shown those
those those traditional
construction pieces do not
necessarily work especially when
you're dealing with these high
high burn severity areas and the
high flows that result
miss garcia had talked about the
eighteen eight studies those are
hydrolic in hydrological studies
that actually take a new account
what's coming down within a
watershed and we engineer and
design projects that can are
built to actually sustain and
handle that sort of those types
of flows moving forward
this specific pilot project as
we've implemented the
engineering a design in our c s
is going to be using this
through e w p funding and that
program for the actual
construction it just shows you
some of the diagrams in the
engineering that's going into
that area i'm sure eddie will
show you there are multiple ways
to access the land brand in
itself this is the main area
where we're going to actually
probably i'm i'm assuming he's
probably going to take you all
but it also intersects critical
infrastructure a county road
right and so there's a lot of
moving pieces a lot of
engineering and design that goes
into this but this is how we're
going to actually approach you
know the twenty nine priority
areas that we've identified I
know there's a lot more out
there but this is just the best
and in the best thing that we
can do right now given the data
that we have are limited funding
and how we have to identify and
prioritize those areas that
we've identified identified
through science and engineering
right
what is needed for.
The
you know post fire network we
really have to do better at
coordinating across the agencies
and across the road he's across
authorities in across
jurisdictions really what we're
trying to do the post fire
program proposals intended to
establish at the state level
this burned are you assessment
as you all may or may not know
when the national forest service
comes out and does that that's
burned severity mapping that's
only applied on federal land
we're trying to actually extend
that out on as we know thirty
percent was in federal land of
the army speaker candidate in it
burned seventy percent of
privately and we're going to try
and actually get a network pull
our resources and get a burned
area assessment out in privately
and at that state level we're
going to focus on stabilization
and recovery mechanism to
rapidly deploy resources for
wildfire events in the
transition to be cro- in the
recovery soon as possible
I think we're all very fully
aware and as the testimony is
been provided to you it does
take a long time for these
things to to spring into action
yes currently we do run some of
our private property debris
removal that's what miss garcia
was talking about we did an
emotion with uh the dot here in
new mexico to implement that
debris removal program on hermet
speak afghanian on the salt and
south of work fires that
occurred down to redo so in the
current flooding that we were
experiencing d h s c m is the
lead agency and we've contracted
out that p p d r uh so that that
took care of the ah debris
removal all that sort of stuff
in we're able to actually go in
and I can explain a little bit
of the esake of peace in the
next part but it's a category be
its debris removal and emergency
services to go in and clear the
settlement put it on the down
slope therefore that any
settlement that's removed out of
that secret can actually be.
Utilised to further lies the
landscape on that dance downside
side and then in our c s as
we're working with a cat a and
cap be those do not go into
building infrastructure
therefore in our cs can come in
through the edit of a e w p
program and actually do the
construction pieces head gates
stuff like that so that's where
that combination of programmatic
pieces work together and I can
talk about i'll talk about how
were
we kind of coordinating that the
sake here peace here in a second
and then lastly
I think we need to create a
regional working group with
state local leadership this is
going to include agency
partnerships pooling resources
making sure that we adequately
fund that that initiative and
moving on to the sake yet
recovery efforts that d h s e m
is is leading we're supporting
the sake he has impacted not
only by the hermet's peak cafe
can you guys all you should all
have a hand out that kind of
outlines this
so we're not only talking about
a sake he is impacted on the
hermit's peak caf can in fire
but as well as the south for
consult fire the black fire all
those fires that are going on
these includes the sake years
throughout more a county san
magel lincoln county and reo
riba
as as polite addressed and
mentioned dhasiam is leading the
coordination of the assaker
recovery process across fema in
our cs the eighty eight or the h
p c c claims office the new
mexico department of
transportation the local soil
and water conservation districts
and other federal state partners
through the esakia task force
we've also designated our
coordinator as miss what garcia
had as mentioned that is meeting
with the new mexico secure
association and female
counterparts on a weekly basis
right now currently as that
tracker.
We're maintaining and
centralized that a seeking
account tracker that's covering
over a hundred impacted to sake
years with more than three
thousand individual data points
that monitor not only the
progress but identify funding
gaps and insurer accountability
across all these programs the
tracker is covering everything
from female category b c the d
the eighteen eight studies that
are needed the environmental and
historic reviews that need to
occur as well as the in our cs
projects request for information
that come back not only from
the public assistant side so the
stafford accident female but
also the hermit speak afternoon
claims office side and and
working through and helping to
coordinate those e w p
applications with the inner cs
right now some numbers to
highlight specifically on the
hermit's peak afternoon team are
or the can- hermet's peacuff
canyon fire uh we've our teams
are including our public
assistance teams disaster case
managers community technical
assistance partnering with the
asaki association and we've also
supplied state liaisons to
actually go out and do and
conduct over seventy sight uh
visits direct support for over
ninety five public assistance
applications and
help direct over five million
dollars in capital outlay
funding
applications on behalf of
certain sake is across the state
and the task forces supported
over sixtieth sake he is
requiring eighteen eight studies
for the hot hermes peak
cafcaining claims office
themselves additional
documentation is always needed
as paula had mentioned these
claims get kicked back we have
to supply it through an r f I a
lot of the documentation that
needed that a sake on
that asset he has has force is
assisting and helping build
those applications moving.
Forward
the current strategic priorities
idea jessem is working on we're
working to expand access to
technical assistance in
engineering to help the sake
years meet the federal funding
standards and programmatic
requirements additionally were
supporting fiscal sponsorship
models through counties and so
the water conservation districts
so seekings can access not only
in our c s e w funding more
easily but also navigate that
process that that polla had
mentioned obviously it's a very
bureaucratic mess were there we
have the expertise and subject
matter experts to help navigate
that process as well we continue
to streamline coordination
between state and federal
agencies aligning timelines and
documentation requirements
additionally were seeking state
level gap funding to help asaki
is better in eligible or waiting
on federal obligation I can
speak to the senate bill thirty
one that's the state revolving
disaster loan fund that is
currently we're working on the
guidance that should be
available as seeking as our
eligible entities under that new
legislation and those funds in
the guidance should be getting
published within the next week
or so so we're working closely
with dfa to do that if you're
aware of that that legislation
it does require female obligated
projects and so we work through
that unfortunately we asked for
fifty million we only got fifty
million appropriate for that
however we're looking to do more
as as paula mentioned even the
senate bill six the house bill
one funding it's not enough for
what the the state is currently
facing in our disaster landscape
and and the recovery process
that we're currently undergoing
and so with that i'll see to our
next presenter.
Just in light of the time
looking at it I think it'd be
good if we had the the last two
presenters also present that's
okay so hughes are executive
director of the new mexico
association conservation
districts and geralder mirror
was the manager of tiera montes
soil and water conservation
district if you both can come up
we can bring up a couple more
chairs that's alright um and
then will do questions at the
end I just want to make sure we
hear from all the presenters uh
before we we run out of time.
Job will have you gotten your
next.
Madame jeremy members of the
committee my name is gerald
metal and I am the district
manager at getting month on a
water conservation to stick to
las vegas new mexico.
I was born and raised in modern
new mexico came to school the
islands
worked at highlands for about
ten years before I started my
natural resources career I have
been with the district for a
little over eight years and
served as the additional manager
for six years and I was on the
phone with miss debus there was
some confusion as to time of
this panel she thought it was
this afternoon is on the way but
probably won't make it before
but I can cover her part as well
as the the inner c as part it's
interesting but the state
conservation engineer have here
montoya is actually giving me
the opportunity on the authority
to speak on behalf of the wp
because I know it's so
intimately after having
responded to the latter the
state's largest disaster so i'm
gonna touch a little bit on on n
a c d's rule
we at the at the district and
western model is wcd I do not
put together formal presentation
for you i'm sorry but madam
chair if you'd like we can get
you something to the committee
as well as far as a formal
presentation
when the fire was burning
probably in may of twenty twenty
two we begin discussions with n
r c s to go ahead and begin
implementing the w p program I
have a staff of four individuals
western mora has one staff
member and we knew that we are
signing on to something that was
far bigger than we would
probably be able to handle so we
made several requests to
multiple c entities to assist us
in the fiscal management of
and we were fortunate enough to
have the face sign on to that
for us so they run the fiscal
portion of the emergency water
should protection program
and we help them with the excuse
me with a local effort so we
verify ownership we are secure
permissions from landowners and
we're kind of the boots on the
ground for the fa.
So we have two three phases of
wp just to mention we had an
aerial seating campaign that
seated an over sixty thousand
acres on private land and he was
emergent emergency stabilization
work thank you sir
my apologies.
So was emergency stabilization
work to kind of keep some of
that soil up on the landscape
and redo some of the flooding
efforts we had an inner cs
staffer out of kansas the came
and saw some of the results of
that aerial seating program and
he did mention that the heat
farmers in kansas would have
been jealous of the stands of we
that we put up on the landscape
and were received a lot of
criticism for for that aerial
operation
anything from the blend that we
use the timing i'm a very
results or unit person we had a
lot of success on that and we
firmly believe that that
operation really stabilize the
water sheds and has
significantly reduced the
flooding impact of the community
and and when you look at scale
at three hundred and sixty
thousand acres of burned and the
impact that are that are out
there I know a lot of people
have mentioned that we are
definitely
recovering is not happening as
soon as quickly as everybody
would like.
It is the state's largest
disaster and I think you know
i'm a positive person I like to
think positively we were running
our aerial seating campaign in
august in september of twenty
twenty two a month and a half
after the fire was declared out
I think that's pretty dark quick
for federal and stated in local
partners to be working together
right the other thing is is we
that are tasked with expending
tax for your dollar need to
expand that wisely and in the
best interest of the public to
be replacing a lot of
infrastructure within the first
five years post fire is
irresponsible in my opinion
because your water should are
completely unstable some of the
work you put in today in an
explored may wash out and is
that a wise use of funding
probably not you know so we we
are all test you know jeremy and
I all of us that are our
responding to these post fire
conditions are tasked with
towing that line and deciding
when is it appropriate when is
it safe to use that public
funding to really make a
difference out on the landscape
so we have the second phase is
point protection so that's
protection individual homes you
know they has gone bast gets
that mister sanchez spoke about
earlier we've deployed close to
twenty miles a hesical basket on
the HB c z fire you know it it's
on we could almost like the
highway from biggest tomorrow on
one side with all the high
school that we've laid out and
to date we've probably put about
a hundred and ninety million
dollars worth of ewp funding on
the ground to protect people
from the post fireflooding
impacts we still have a long
ways to go and macd comes into
the picture as a hired
contractor for dfa for inner cs
and for the solemn water
districts to provide technical
assistance assessments design
the holding arts when it comes
to a second third team is
probably the most season team in
the state of new mexico in
implementing design and and a
second project.
So we have a really good team on
our side that's putting together
a lot of good beneficial work
we've done a completed about
seventeen projects you know
we've had over a hundred and
sixteen individual applications
for your from massacres we've
they've conducted about a
hundred and fourteen assessments
on those there's probably sixty
main point of diversions that
have been impacted that need to
be replaced we've got about ten
of them replaced already we have
another nineteen or twenty and
design
bottleneck like miss garcia
mentioned is definitely
engineering there's not a lot of
qualified firms out there and
there's not a real desire for
people to go into engineering at
this point so there are some
bottlenecks associated with that
we're trying to navigate those
the best we can to get as much
work as we can done
so norman steam norman he left
for those of you that know him
it's been doing a second all his
life former inner cs employee
he's leading our team with an m
a c d where in concept contact
as we move forward with those
projects and I just want to give
a good bit of good news
so we will recognize that there
was a lot of a secure work that
needed to be done in the state
and mexico following disaster
the sponsors working together
with an r c s made an ask of an
additional sixty million dollars
from headquarters in washington
DC specifically for our seconds.
That was awarded a little over a
week and after two weeks ago so
we have an additional sixty
million dollars forty two
million that will be dedicated
specifically to the h p c c
berns car the remaining will be
allocated to other e w p
incidents down and run those so
in some of the other areas so
there's more more money coming
and what that does is it allows
us to be able to utilize more of
our e w p funding to go ahead
and consider projects like the
sabasin can in rebuild we're
also working on an olivial fan
rebuild in trouble can up in
motor county one in the pedals
and and it's a beautiful
collaboration because jeremy and
his team and put together the
it's in each studies the
modeling the design were able to
adopt those through n r c s in
the districts and be able to get
go ahead and implement those on
the ground and and we know and
recognize that working on
private line is very difficult
and we need land owner by and in
order to get these projects it
installed and the other the
other issue is that there's very
few entities that have the
authority to work on private
land rate the solar water
districts are pro- the primary
condo it for that and we know
there's forty seven sold water
discussed across the state of
new mexico a lot of us are
limited by staff in in fiscal
resources as well so you know to
move forward if we're going to
continue to fill that void I see
two possible options is
bolstering the funds of the so
water districts to allow us to
hire more capacity to handle
that work load or consider
allowing other state entities to
have that authority to work on
private land it may be a
combination of both but if we
don't work together to problem
solve we'll never get anywhere
and and the other wonderful
thing about the sort of water
districts is that we actually
have the authority to work cross
all land ownerships.
As long as we have the proper
agreements in place so that
includes state lan that includes
language that includes a second
that includes federal land so
whenever we have money's free w
p w p has been open to
landgrands this whole time it's
been open to us yes for
assistance this whole time and
it will continue to be that way
the only place we cannot expend
you funding is on federally own
land so none of the forest
service property that was born
burned up here on HB c c we are
not allowed to expand funding on
federal lan that changed in
about twenty eighteen or twenty
nineteen there was an ability to
do so and I think it really
changed the dynamics of w p
because at that point we were
able to bolster whatever the
bear team did they do a lot of
quick work on the ground to try
to minimize some of the post
fireflooding and then they're
gone and a lot of times there's
not action after that this
allowed us to go ahead and kind
of supplement some of what they
have done we no longer have that
ability and and it's one of the
hurdles that we have but we kind
of try to figure away around
so I think i'll spend the rest
of my time talking about what I
think we need to kind of move
forward in the thinking we need
to have we've seen a lot of
beautiful collaboration in the
post fire scheme right.
Where's that collaboration
before the disaster happens.
What can we all do together to
minimize the impacts of future
fire
we cannot prevent fires and we
shouldn't prevent fires.
We cannot prevent flooding
we can do projects that minimize
some of the impacts of flooding
right but if we can do some
beneficial work ahead of a
potential fire potential
disaster are we going to
minimize the threats in the
danger and the post fire work
that we have to do after I
believe we can make it work i've
sat on several panels over the
last three years sharing my
experience on the local level in
responding to to this disaster
and I firmly believe that
we know that there's a lot of
questions about federal funny
when it comes to natural
resources right we're probably
going to lose a lot of our
funding for thinning.
We as a state are gonna have to
figure out how we're going to
bolster the pockets of the
entities that can do the work so
that we can continue those
treatments we not that thinning
response
can actually decrease the
likelihood of catastrophic fire
and that's what we're trying to
avoid is that the the occurrence
in the size of these
catastrophic fires so we can
work with langrans langrounds
own an amazing anchorage and you
know the gentleman mister
sanchez talked about that
collaboration with the s w c d
down on on the dog and others we
need more of that work to happen
we all not need to start
thinking that we need to work
outside our lanes I think for
too long a lot of people private
land owners agency folks have
been very narrowly focusing
thing in only what can I do for
me and us doesn't work that way
in nature nature knows no
boundaries they don't care
then care if there's offense in
the way enough I was going to
blow through that forty is gonna
blow through it so I think we
need to know and understand that
is natural resource managers and
land managers what we do on our
property
what we the actions and
decisions we make in managing
our natural resources affect my
neighbor they affect my
community they affect my water
shed they affect people a
hundred miles down stream from
me if I don't do anything and
and i've been very vocal about h
p c c fire we know what started
that fire but for every
unthen acre of forest on the
national side there was two
acres of private land that was
never touched.
This was a community white
problem it was a failure on
multiple levels for people to
address the concerns that we're
out there and I don't want other
communities to express to
experience what we did so I will
spend my time advocating for
others to take action
preemptively to avoid having to
go through what we did
and I doubt i'll leave that
madam chair and I will entertain
any questions along with the
rest of the panelists thank you
thank you mr center's if you can
come back up for a questions as
well so we do have a few
questions I believe those are
all our presenters what's going
to start worth representative
and you can.
Thinking madam chair I was
trying to take notes and then
they pulled out here for
everybody and i'll try to be
brief I know we're short on time
thank you so much for for all of
your presentations this is a
topic very near india to me to
my district in so
starting with mr sunches
I know you were talked about for
wine this is very hopeful to see
I know it's nine years later
years later but to see some of
those pictures of regrowth
brings you know brings hope to
to my own backyard and to see
where we could be in a few
in a few years hopefully you
know I know you talked about the
the replanting how aggressive
were you in replanting or
receiving to get to some of that
growth that you're showing in
some of your
um your progression pictures.
Okay madam chair representative
are gontalent we didn't do any
replacing its it's just
naturally been growing
as I mentioned it was a forest
service on their side the one
that really did
aggressive receiving and
planting on their side we've
just let mother nature take its
course.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that response I know earlier
in the los
you know presentation and that's
something that everyone's
considering here in this area is
the receipting and you know the
the replanting for their um and
just just as I followed question
to that just on your
presentation um you mentioned
you're at the baskets the
heskobaskets that were involved
are they still in place now I
know you put him in there is
flood prevention for protection
is that something you're
implementing in your in your
mitigation plan right now are
using any sort of that diversion
for some of the natural flow
think you madam chair thank you
madame chair representative
going to listen to his goal
baskets are still in place I
mean apart from a putting him
where I mention uh to protect
the homes we actually put him in
or may not royal in in the
middle of the village of truly
uh to also protect home but also
to mitigate the water to keep it
in the flow of dear oil and
they're still in place I mean
there's been talk of removing
them and but they're skilled
there
yes
if I may matter representative
going on as I can add a little
bit of insight as so
the practices the w p have
considered a practice life so
it's a requirement for them to
leave escalate barriers and
place for four years at that
point there's no obligation by
any of the entities involved in
the install to remove and some
people will choose to start
removing ours our longest
installer at three years and
that is one of the deficiencies
that we've noticed is that
there's no fiscal resources
right now to start removing high
schools for the landers that
decide to do so that's kind of
at their sole discretion right
now I have no in works with the
fa and others to see we can find
find some physical resources for
that but the these bags are
designed to last typically
between five and ten years and
they come with a geotextile
fabric that has you been
hibitors.
But they do deteriorate over
time in fact we have one set of
high school barriers that a shed
burn right next to any
completely torture the the
fabric off so now we're
scrambling trying to figure out
if we need to replace that
entire set there's reports that
need to be made but typically
for your involves what they have
to keep them and then beyond
that it's up to the land owner.
Thank you for that think you
madam chair kets in since you
had the mike couple of other
follow questions along with that
I know a couple members of the
panel talked about
essential and you're putting a
new roads new transport for like
a better words maybe letting the
waterflow right nature's course
in and instead of maybe
fighting the progression keep
reinstalling coverage keep going
against his maybe a reinstalled
new road new path going around
the path different type of roads
um and then along with that you
also mentioned thinning so
cannot both I kind of you know
the thinning in the the
regulations what are current
regulations about
maybe re determining by pathways
like say you're talking about
like a road like a like a man
grant yes you know you have the
freedom to go to determine your
new roads but say when you are
talking say possibly county or
state roads like redetermining a
new halfway if you have any
insight maybe on i'm current
regulations for that and I know
it's like six semi related but
for sake a time just maybe just
current regulations on burn
prescriptions and i'm thinking
when you're talking about
mitigation in future planning
thank you manager so so madame
chair representative gonzalez on
the on the road movement a lot
of it depends on the location of
the road so the crosses let's
see a perannial stream that
takes consultation when you
mexico department court of
engineers were talking a long
lengthy process if it needs to
be relocated the best thing is
is to actually design something
that can stay in place we're
talking low water crossing uh in
most most scenarios it can other
be concrete that could be rock
whatever depending on that each
in each study that the doctor
class talked about so there are
there are ways that we try to
not circumvent the the the
regulation but to work with that
in a way that kind of fast track
some of that recovery work but
there is some some great work by
state forestry on the thinning
portion here locally they
actually have some funding that
that's writing prescription
plans for local line owners.
In the green pockets that didn't
burn we actually are starting
cautious program for thinning to
address
because typically for state
force you have to have ten acres
or higher to qualify for their
program we're looking at helping
individuals I have five acres or
less and that's using similar
some of our miley internal
funding to be able to help the
land on it doesn't qualify for
for the larger programs so so
definitely with a thinning it
needs to be done in conjunction
and lumping across together if
you check her board it is not
going to make a significant
difference in the in and and it
does you know we have some case
that he's here where there was
five acres then within two
thousand accurace and everything
else burned around it and on
those five acres it sat and it
was supposed to do others we did
you know larger tracks of the
the fire just completely took it
all dependent on the fire
behavior that day but I think we
have the data to prove that
thing and conjunction would
prescribe fire can reduce that
catastrophe class.
Madam chair represent
I think you're also as as we
talk about land land grants as
well and you heard about the
easements there's flood plane
regulation adoption and new
zoning requirements that would
have to go and so that that
speaks to the lengthy process of
relocating a lot of those those
critical infrastructure and in
some of the county and state
roads right so it it would be
it'd be a lot like
it would be a lot right on the
hazardous fuels reduction side
so it's it's interesting how I
have to talk about forest
thinning with state forest
reverses my program which would
be hazardous field reduction and
I think one of the important
things is that utilizing this
new framework of trying to go
through
highlands to be able to address
them being the actual eligible
entity and
getting land owner buying to be
able to implement hazard tree
removal it's also going to be a
precursor in a model to address
hazardous feels a reduction
because if I can use hazard
mitigation funding and i've got
a lot of it at because we've had
a lot of disasters.
It's a model to actually utilize
for a county to perhaps be the
eligible entity and be able to
organize large scale landscape
forest thinning as opposed to
how the the state forestry has
to actually navigate they
technically can't necessarily go
and do thinning on privately and
either they have to go through
the water and soil conservation
districts and so being able to
do that it off it sometimes
lends itself to this patchwork
sort of framework peace of
finning and it doesn't always
necessarily and the other part
of that is why we have to
implement birth prescribed burns
because that's the only two we
have to really affect landscape
change rate at because because
of the jurisdictional
authorities because the
boundaries everything that we do
it gets rather difficult and so
that needs to maintain to be a
peace and how we manager for
forest moving forward.
Thank you for those responses
thinking madam chair and one one
last question get I was taking
note there's a lot of hefty
information that was just
presented to us but
one of the recommendations which
a firmly believe it has been
that cash are requirement that
you are touched on palo was
about the institutionalizing
that that match share and I know
right now like a lot of the work
when you particularly talked
about was through the ot and
through the debris removal which
again that seems to be the mean
a lot of the work not the main
work but a lot of the work the
dot has done in our area was
that debris
but you also mentioned possibly
immediately not sure the exact
words but when you're talking
about say female reimbursement
coming in to a local entity that
has that has taken the hit
surrendering that to the state
that the state with antique
responsibility for that matter
but then they would also take
responsibility of the burden for
repairs versus say something
like esp thirty one who has been
thirty one provided the loan to
the entity to then take the
responsibility in the burden
repairs but they would also be
the money manager essentially
rate so thirty one opened up
loans to a second it opened up
to coops in addition to as the
six who has been six was
particularly for her it's peak
and then you had the additional
and I don't know the number on
that one but the fire for the
reado so fire
I would love to see something
like that institutionalised but
it's not just the money piece
because once you take the money
from female you take on the
burden of them the repairs and
the time can you give some
insight to
the capacity I know we're
talking about fun so capacity um
you know I would love it for the
state to see take some ownership
and some of these rebuilding but
that's why that burden has been
on the local entities because of
the lack of capacity in the
state so by institutionalizing
some of this work that is also
then placing that burden of work
on to the state so.
Maybe just some thoughts I may
be where you are thinking about
that maybe that capacity I would
left to see us get there but you
know you're talking about under
staffing at a lot of these
agencies uh the soil and water
conservative conservation
districts are already tapped you
know how to me look to take on
that new work load
the management is nice for the
madshare but then it also takes
on that extra work bridge so
thank you madam chair thank you
madame chair president goes on
as that's that's an excellent
question and that's the the
right thing to be asking.
The the capacity needed in an
agency to do that would be
tremendous honestly I think the
uh the reason that the dot
deprementable works is that is
the debit removal project isn't
as complicated you know doesn't
require design
that and and it's pretty
straight forward so I think that
was the low hanging through that
was uh able you know if there
was something that the different
partners reable to accomplish
and I think
uh I think they did it well I
think that's been a success
um I think that wp's been a
success story to as far as doing
that that the structural repair
work and the the e w p as a
model you look at it's the
uhm combination of an mcd
getting the contract for the
design and that the sponsors you
know
taking on that that work
if if the state were to were to
operate a program it might be
something similar but the solemn
water districts would need more
capacity and the the contract
with the macd is is a good
option the interstate's dream
commission has in the second
bureau and they currently have
five staff members and there are
managing I think in your si- in
jonathan's presentation
yesterday they have a two
hundred and one um a sick is in
their cue for capital outlay and
then they're doing about twenty
per year through the active so
that gives you media of how many
staff are the you know our
needed to manage that number of
projects or I mean I I would
save you doubled that staff you
could probably uh take on a
program where the word and
agency is administering these
projects I think i'd be a lot
more efficient um because one of
the big bottle next and
challenges for a second in in
taking state money is then the
financial complaints and that
you know the audits and
financial reporting.
And it's becoming more more
difficult it's like a deterrent
to people signing up to be a
commissioner as you you probably
won't know as a commissioner
yourself that you're your
responsibility and managing
those funds is is quite
difficult um so I think it's
worth exploring and I I think
we're in the very early stages
of thinking about what that
would look like um and it could
be for disaster but it could be
before infrastructure generally
and and get a second out of the
business of high to manage all
that money themselves and and
have a sponsor like that so what
are district or have a state
agency like I see do it with
people who have that technical
expertise but it's it I think
you know doubling the second
bureau might be a good star and
or having some water districts
have like permanent staff that
do do a secure work or
someone like nmcd having a full
time asset your team that's just
dedicated to this so I think
there are options but III I
couldn't tell you the number of
fte I would rely on the experts
to determine that but
we're going to keep working on
that and get back to you and and
involve you in those discussions
based on your own experience
thank you madame chairman
representative thank thank you
for thank you for that if I may
manage representatives so I I
think the one thing and d h m
had not always done a great job
right in it's been before these
natural disasters were
unfortunately now getting pretty
good at this rate and so we've
worked closely with our local
capacity's always an issue I
think that one thing that we
have learned is to make sure
that we're augmenting staff to
be able to provide you know our
subject matter experts to be
able to navigate to be able to
write projects all that sort of
stuff we've gone out and done
some procurement you know
seminars to our very slow
jurisdictions to be able to how
to you know how do you manage
this how do you navigate this
and so we've done that however d
h e m is is.
Sortly understaffed and funded
right we're we're managing
upwards now of two billion
dollars and disaster funding
that's of a staff with eighty
four that includes state fire
marshal's office where these
disasters have allowed us to
bring on added capacity through
contracts i've got a hundred and
forty four contract staff
helping me do this think about
how much money is going out the
door and it's not sting here
we're not building subject
matter expertise here at the
state level when when these
disasters money go away that
capacity's gone
additionally we don't know
what's going to happen with our
federal funding as well and so
we're sorely under staff and as
we deal with the frequency and
all of these these federal
disasters keep occurring and
they get worse and worse we need
to be able to help provide that
subject matter expertise to the
locals be able to argument that
but I can't do that without an
increased budget and staffing
thank you next time we have
representative here.
Thank you matt insurance thank
you panel
I don't have a question but I do
want to ask why
for the sake of the committee
if
you can kind of give us a brief
overview the in terms of the
the dog had fire in terms of
how it started
who started it
where did it start
what was the impact on the tor
acridge of the chili language
what was the process that you
put out the two of proceeded in
terms of seeking settlement for
the damage and what was the
outcome in terms of
compensation for the damaged
home on your on your loan grand.
And madame chair representative
got his yeah yeah the
dog had fire as I mentioned
earlier was a ten new project uh
between the three entities which
was a sled forest service and
treated it um
so originally it was to ten to
fifteen hundred acres and then
come back
four years later and do a
prescribe burn to actually
manage those fifteen hundred
acres
so happened that when they were
working to contract or was you
set the problem date got hired
on air to do the denied and
domestication there were
masticating and that's how the
fire started by domesticator it
started on forest land right
next to the boundary of this
letter
and
there was a quick burning fire
it didn't take long to scare yet
where it was to highway three
three seven which is old south
fourteen it took seven hours and
it wiped out eighteen thousand
acres thirteen thousand acres of
those were in the treaty
language or common ad it was
other uh partials with then the
area of the fifteen thousand
down were held by private owners
uh in an area that we call in
change
and so with that the fire was
done and it was over we are
started to discussion as to
was it the forest service for
allowing these letter to work on
a windy day uh knowing what the
fire has was doing and it deared
and so we initially um filed a
last suit against a for a
service claiming that thirteen
thousand echoes of our common
land were burnt and sold daily.
Core ah federal court
and rejected the case saying
that it was a project between
three entities and one you
cancel the prevalent and two air
forest service
with the buyer had no blame on
it because mother nature took
its course and it and so really
got no compensation further the
common land of the correct
thank you one thank you manager
thank you representative of
representative
thank you thank you ma'am chair
I was just listening to you
girls comments and
we have this situation where we
have
um
your billions for recovery n
thousands or maybe millions for
treatment and it's it's you know
basically penny wires and pound
foolish like if we were spending
serious money approach we could
do a lot more to improve or
forced without having these
catastrophic fires but it's just
hard to convince appropriators
to spend that money
and it's it's really
bitterly ironic that some of
these biggest fires hermit's
peak cafe and dog head sera
grande were all started by
treatment work I mean we are
doing things that we should be
doing in these forests
and apparently
not doing them well that you're
not doing them with sufficient
safeguards in place.
So like how we address that I I
don't know and it it it's always
seemed to me that
you have the treatment of our
forced lands could be just an
incredible job's program if we
can find willing people willing
to do really hard work
and that jobs for him I mean and
in the offseason they could be
working on the forest and you
know that the skills need for
those thing projects pretty easy
you know serving the same ball
park of the skills needed for a
while then firefighting and we
could not only be working on the
force when they're not on fire
but we can have a work force a
much larger work for us ready
and train to address the fires
when when they do occur so I I
just there's a lot of
opportunity here and I just
you know I I don't know how to
get either our state government
or you know the federal
government especially in your
current circumstances to really
commit to funding this in the
way that I think it would it
would be a sound investment of
public funds thank you manager
thank you
we didn't have one more question
from a vice chair how to meal he
also just had a a brief common
as well
madam chair that's what happened
to be able to jump juggle a full
time job well being a volunteer
legislative
policy just wanted to say thank
you because you're in mind me of
that story and the bible of two
low percent too fish that
multiply run over again and the
amount of assistance that you
help in quite district
completely with their seconds
and we're now having a major
fire which is the french best of
fire which is near guy you know
which is going to affect the
sandwich kind of little the
comma landridth and right now we
have a number of cattle that are
being burnt and so they have
been moved to the real repair
event center i've reached out to
the federal area the help of aj.
Doctors are not seriously all
volunteered time to come and
assess the cattle that have been
affected we need so much we're
going to be needing had a come
in to feed the cattle but I
wanted to just thank you for
what you do because the
representative and I carpolled
we talked about the amount of
work you do with the staff that
you have and how you even took
on disaster recovery which is
something that was completely
new to the
and that you've never complained
about any project and you always
do it with grace and I wanted to
thank you for that
and took one last thing is you
talked mister sanchez about the
fifty three thousand dollars
pile I have a solution if you
sell to me not yet for one
hundred dollars
five hundred and thirty people
to purchase them but we can move
it up to a gold level to be not
here for a thousand bucks and I
think you can get that coverage
so you can start selling matter
and that was just a little joke
but I want to just think you
pollar and thank you madame
chair
we we do have two more brief
quote questions I am hoping for
our our folks as well as senator
thorton
thank you madame chair
I won't repeat what everyone
else is already mentioned in all
representative already as we
need the questions that I had
the only question ahead with for
doctor class refer to modeling
and for
the modern that was used for
birds and management response
and and a I was winning have you
worked with any other to two
laboratory sandi or los alamos I
know sandy for fact has modeling
capabilities in fires and I was
curious whether not that's
incorporated in your modeling or
not
manager
senator thorton we we have a
little bit the where the los
alamos lab is their looking at
fire behavior and modeling fire
behavior so they've been working
closer with state forestry we
are now I believe it was senate
bill thirty three that recently
got past that talks about
expanding the task force
and deals with the insurance but
we're also dealing with a risk
m.
App and associating that and so
one of the actual stipulations
of that legislature was to build
a risk map and so we're we're
working closely with state
forestry and los alamos I
believe at that last committee
with the natural lands and water
committee of the LFC doctor
herto was actually up he's used
he's out of unm he's been
working closely and expanding
and working through utilizing
those models that at least alan
or so I haven't we've been
working with another researcher
out of los alamos who uses a eye
in emergency management response
and so
you know it's difficult because
I could probably be talking
myself out of a job here where
we are very reactive in this
kind of goes back to represent
mcqueen's comments were very
reactive and we're not very
forth thinking and so
you know emergency management is
never necessarily thought of as
in necessary need until
something goes wrong and happens
and so I think one of the things
that we can talk about is the
loss of federal funding and what
they're talking about as lou as
eliminating hazard mitigation
that goes directly to speaking
to what we do for preparedness
how do we start utilizing some
of our instead
agencies and academic and all
these other is federal
partnerships to start working
together and so again not trying
to sell it but like that we need
to to a saver supposed fire
network where we start utilizing
that it builds our risk
assessments because ultimately
my my department through fema
develops and funds hazard
mitigation plans right and then
there's also
the firewise communities that
say force it like we're very
silo and we need to start coming
together because I think if
anything has shown a credible
incredible things can actually
done when we all start
coordinating and working
together but again it goes to
everybody's comments like this
has happened in a disaster
setting.
And when we start talking about
mister romero's comments like
how do we start leaning forward
and and get better planning and
mitigate what we're actually
dealing with an instead of on
the back end and that's the only
time when we can actually get
funding appropriate it's kind of
it doesn't make a whole lot of
sense
manager I thank you for that I
have I appreciate that I
I think you mention that we need
better coordination across the
agency she said authorities and
just restrictions and III
totally agree with that like you
said fire and water they don't
care
they when you go they go and
they don't really care about it
in these jurisdictions and start
thinking getting the agencies to
work across all these and I
think it would be helpful to to
get a mapping especially for for
removes to respond to get a
mapping of what the needs are
across all these agencies and
you all your probably better
polite special probably better
to lay out what that map looks
like it turns out here you got
to go to so and so also until to
do this you can do this in this
and map it all out and figure
out how we can streamline
and so if but you first need to
lay out what that map looks like
this just listening to the
horror stories in the difficulty
it is to get emergency response
and the the recovery aspects of
all this it seemed like it's a
nightmare for anybody who had to
go through this and so if we
could understand what what that
looks like for individual and
individual community and missake
if you will and then map that
out for the entire process maybe
there's a way we can streamline
it we can figure out how we have
legislatures can fund an effort
away around this post fire
network if you will to make make
it easier for everybody else in
the future so thank you for that
and rep thought is will ask
I will try to make this short
that's a tough one
this is wonderful information
i'm so amazed and I appreciate
how simple you made it look and
I say that only because I was
sitting with polar.
At another event at a community
college when the fires were
bursting and becoming
uncontrollable and it was a
mazing to watch you parliament
in action you were working right
then and there you had been
teaching us about all the things
that you all did in the
association and to historicize
to incorporate culture we had
anthropologies we had people who
have really studied in depth our
cultures in new mexico and the
practices associated with a
second as in landgrounds and you
were making calls to networks
that you had already established
for many years and since before
you created the second
association so for decades and
you were able to communicate
with people save lives and also
you were able to get some of
this I believe started even
during that meeting because of
the phone calls you made and you
are an amazing resource to our
state I don't think we could
ever duplicate you and so as we
look at this critical point in
our history in new mexico and we
look at the critical point in
the generation of fires that
were experiencing
we are very blast from the work
that you had already established
that that was able to contribute
to people coming together and to
the decisions that were made
based on all the information
that you had shared with us how
you gathered information and the
practices that we want to
continue with our future
generations and so I want to
think you I want to know if
there is any possible way to
institutionalise that with dumb
I don't know if there is
but how do we incorporate some
of the things that you had
already done and that year group
had already done into a bill how
do we incorporate the cultural
the trust all of that into
whatever it is that we design do
you have any ideas on that.
The.
Madame chair and representative
and ask his first thank you very
much for that recognition that
it means a lot and
I know you're probably referring
to our youth curriculum work
that we are doing and
file this fire was on and and
they are I was evacuated during
that time when that conference
was happening and
the
the reason we were able to to
participate and contributed to
meaningful way is that there had
been decades of relationship
building and and justice in my
presentation yesterday well they
start with history and culture
cause that's for the assectors
are are coming from and
um I knew at that point that the
disaster recovery was going to
get highly technical but that we
had to stay rooted and in those
relationships of trust and
that's probably why we are able
to move quickly and in places
like modern which are very very
under resourced and even even
compared to other places that
state like task which is very
well resourced compared to mota
or other
you know as gerald mentioned
they have four staff motor has
one there's all that so going
into a very under resource
community and and in a in a
place at distrustful of the
government and saying he were
gonna get you all signed up for
female you know that was it was
a
it had to be approached with a
high degree of cultural
competency and so I how how do
we institutionalise that is is
really something we're thinking
about
and
we talk about building capacity
but it's not just capacity as
that is you don't just plug
people in and then turn and
loose um.
Yeah it there's a a lot of
context it has to be provided by
how you work in an in the second
community and
what uh what we're doing is
we're building out our own
but we're coming a recovery
recovery in resilience a team
that um that has that cultural
competence and developing like
on boarding materials for our
new staff some of them who were
here yesterday and
you know developing a handbook
uh doj yesterday mentioned
they're working with seven a
second and channel circle about
how they can prepare for a
disaster in advance and and I
think that that
um
it's it's like any other work
it's organizing it's organizing
bringing people together
building relationships and and
it you know there's a thing that
sometimes is the people of her
to has called moving at the
speed of trust.
And when there is something that
happens like a disaster is
unexpected
to be able to move more
efficiently together if we
already have the relationships
and we have the uhm and not just
between the asset but between
the second and their county
emergency manager between dhcman
and in having that comfort level
with with navigating those
systems with relationships I
in the short term the way we're
doing it through employed
training and and building out
the team
and placing this in the
historical context of her we are
too in the climate crisis and
this inflection point.
Of
um tapping people's deep kid and
sierra and care for the land and
saying we are not going anywhere
working to stay here working the
health land we're going to heal
ourselves.
And that's in that that longer
continue of being mind these
people and um
not making it just about female
but females are tool it's a
building block dhm these
programs are tools but centering
the human element in the
community arment and that work
and um you know doing like like
anything else organizing
educational materials that are
uh done with a cultural length
and language
thank you for that question
appreciate it thank you manager
thank you thank you everyone for
today's presentation I know we
went a bit of home blile over
but this was all super helpful
and i'm sure we'll probably be
talking more of you very soon
and we was it as well so i'm
gonna move it on to public
comment we had one piece of
public comment panel I think
we're good here.
Mr o.
And do we have any online any
public common online okay so
nothing online this is the one a
public comment we could still
keep it about two or three
minutes i'd be great thank you.
Yes madam chair and committee
one of these later I know it's
working to yourself
and I just wanted to share it
and maybe offer something that's
always in the works like i'm
always talking with the
you are wonderful scholars that
are here in the room that have
done far more formal work than
than even I have and and in my
own work with my community
trying to understand our history
of a language and with the
distinctions are in it and I
wanted to see if if there are is
any interest please let us know
from the committee because I I
think sometimes we're here
talking and presenting in this
wonderful space and then
sometimes it gets a little bit
more a stressful one where the
round house and other species
one where when we're trying to
better understand the terms like
spanish language mixed conland
grant on what situations between
hene subtles and the range of
them right and and so what I was
trying to remember is even for
myself when we talk how do we
make sure we don't get confused
when we say the spanish language
because historically we think
that means everybody there are
spanish
rate when in actually we're
seeing a title given by the king
is being that even art are
indigenous families from the
travel nations say well who were
they to give our land away even
if they give it back to us right
and then what does it mean that
the mexican language error
and so with that I just wanted
to you know humbly say if
there's any interest from the
committee you know I know I have
an interest and I know i've
talked with the language council
if there's some way we could set
something up outside of these
venues to even offer one or two
hour like here's a here's a
history let's not just leave it
out in the table participatory
discussion with you are to say
willing your regions what does
that mean you know the people
that maybe within your districts
you report to what is their
history that we can briefly
summarize and then say well how
do we understand that a more
respectful way so we're not
feeding into the contentions
because it in the final resource
reality right in in the
community social work or always
think about that we were all
pitied against each other when
we're asking for the same part
of money.
But then how do we get ready to
be respectful before we get into
those kind of battles and say
well let's have some agreements
on it's not whose more blood
quantum than the other who has a
better claim than the other
according to spanish mexican are
you a church or your laws
and so I just wanted to put that
out there very respectful way
and see you know even when we
present from our land
landgranted what we're asking
for support we're always
internally saying how do we be
respectful to not excluded right
tells public who are neighbors
in our family and we still have
leaving lineages with them and
we want to make sure you all
understand even though some of
us come up with we're forget to
say all of that we want to make
sure that is a committee you are
feel supported behind the scenes
and how we can make you feel
better versed in an asking
respectful questions and then
asking us to remind us he well
what is this mean for these
lineages and if we support you
with this law how does it not
benefit other people i'm so
that's all I wanted to see today
in public comment and if you are
having the interest in a will
definitely set something up for
you while the best week council
with that I give over my time
thank you thinking mr
appreciated are everyone with
that will go how to drink arm
the foot there if some folks are
going to go on the tour again I
will connect with you as well
but thank you everybody for a
really encyple and interesting
chair
can you give up mr kington app
and there was negative language
of some time so that he can
explain the situation with the
tour interest of words were we
started doing what to expect
once we get to i'm going to go
ahead and adjourn but absolutely
afterwards we can have that
conversation as well thank you
so we were drink
that if you want to can I fill
this in on the details for the
tour thank you matter so just
some final instructions are
immediately after lunch I
believe lunches in the plaza
okay so immediately after that
I would be the pilot truck to
the world college i'll be on an
f two fifty of my pickup truck
so whether is going on the
actual tour if you'll just
follow.
And we will be meeting at the
united college there'll be a
parking area there for us just
past the security I will check
