All right, I guess uh mics are
back and our, um,
Light stream is on, and I'm
going to say to my, um,
DLA, she's texting me. We know
the live stream is messing up,
and we lost power here, but we
are back now. So if we lose it
again or something, please know
it's weather related and, uh, we
apologize. So, um,
Madam Chair, I believe Ruby Ann
went to the restroom, be free to
come back sorry.
OK.
No, yeah, yeah, yes, I'll give
you 3 minutes and the way the
crowd is, uh, is, uh,
diminishing up here, you may.
Get more, but we are behind
schedule, so, so bear with us
till we get reorganized here,
but we are back on webcast and
we know it went out, it was a
power issue.
OK,
we are back. I'm sorry about
that. I thought, let me get
something hot to drink because
I'm freezing. And we will go.
We will go back to
Representative Herndon in for,
for the, the millions listening
on the web. Sorry for the
interruption and, but we're
back.
Um, manage Representative
Herndon to answer your question
and to remind everyone what the
question was, was the connect,
how do you get services? Yeah,
thank you,
very much Ruby and so there are
so many people who are needing
housing, and there are people in
my, in my district and other
people that I deal with on a
regular basis simply because of
the work that I do, who are
looking for housing and this
paper seems to say there is lots
of housing, but where is it? How
do they get it? Please.
Explain that they're listening
to you.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hernan, unfortunately, there's
not a simple answer. I think
just like there's lots of
housing programs you just heard
about everywhere. There's lots
of hoops you have to go through
and and lots of places where you
can access the system, so I
think it tends to be mostly
local governments, so through
your different local
governments, there's, um, you
can go to like we just listed
the the new programs in
Albuquerque, you know, the ACS
and that new housing office.
in Albuquerque, so you go
through those, you can go
through the linkages program if
you're in correct, so there's, I
don't think there's one simple
answer, and I don't think it's
simple to do it. So, um, it
depends on your income, it
depends on your circumstance, so
unfortunately, I don't think.
It is
Easy. There's no one stop shop,
no wrong door like how we're
trying to do through other
housing or rather other support
services. I don't think housing
is, is that simple. So, uh,
convoluted answer because I
think there's convoluted
programs.
All right, thank you. And as I
look at your slide 14, where it
talked about uh New Mexico
preserve built 61,730 homes.
Where were they built?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hearne, that was over time. So I
think that all of these
programs, these these um
The
The different housing, the the
infill, the, the multiple
housing units, the apartment
building, you know, all of that.
I think this was across the
state over time and
I, I know in Sanofi there's a, a
lot of housing and development
unit's being put up, I think in
Albuquerque, all across there
have been the, the, the.
Like the, the motel, hotel units
that were rehabilitated, the
some of the office units then
just new developments in, so I
think most of these likely are
in Albuquerque, but there are
some dispersed throughout the
state, and there are those any
number of those units that can
be new retransition,
redeveloped, redeployed, all of
those.
Our
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you.
I'm yielding my time.
We will go to uh Representative
Anaya.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I am
just gonna build off of
Representative Her did. You
asked where are they and how do
you get them? I'm asking, do we
know how many are available?
That's, uh, that's a good
question, Madam Chair
Representative Anaya, um, again,
that's that's that question
where, where do you apply? It's
the same thing and when you
apply, you one, there might just
be units available for rent too.
You might get, there's so many
different avenues because rents
1 bedroom, 22 bedroom, 3
bedroom, um, multi-use, you
know, commercial recreational,
and then you might get the
voucher and then the vouchers
are whole different story. It's
who
will take vouchers in the
regular rental markets, um, then
there's the different type of
vouchers, all the different
types of vouchers, and then
there's all the different
programs with the different
wraparound services. So again,
it depends what your needs are
and what, where you access the
programs. Sure. No, I definitely
understand the access points and
also all the essentially terms
and conditions, if you will, of
being able to access these
spaces. I was just wondering if
there is some kind of tracking
program that we have to let us
know whether or not um these
affordable housing units or
rentals are available. Um, Madam
Chair representative Knight,
that's a great question and
Emily, during during our forced
break here with the power
outage, um.
Emily and I were just talking
about that that I think the
vision with this office of
housing is to try and do some of
that as you know, we're trying
to work on that with the
behavioral health, right? The,
um, the new behavioral health
systems trying to look at
compiling the data and having it
live on the fly where we can
look in and enter into the for
behavioral housing where do we
have services available at any
given point, so I think this
Office of Housing is
The envision to start doing some
of that, but I don't think
that's currently existing. No
biggie. I was just wondering if
it was available and the second
question I have is on page 3
where we have this huge uptick
in the number of unhoused
people. Is there a reason why it
is so significantly higher than
it has been in years previous.
Um
Madam Chair Representative.
I think you might hear different
stories on that, so I was
actually um Berlio County and
City of Albuquerque are going to
be presenting to legislative
Finance Committee on these
issues on Wednesday morning and
to the subcommittee there, and I
think they'll be addressing that
more so.
I think I, I'm not gonna
positively right at this point
on that.
That's all. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Going or something
representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you for your presentation,
um, you know, when a vested
interest for me is of course
like rural housing, you know,
here, um, just looking at, at my
district, um, we are in and
looking at the different
programs that are available.
Thank you for your inclusion of
all the statewide programs. Um,
one thing I guess just my wish,
my big wish list is, well, there
are a lot of voucher programs
like say you look at a community
here like Las Vegas, um, those.
Those help maybe the unhoused
that have or have the access to
those vouchers, but a big need
for us and maybe just to look
for for the future is that
middle income housing and so,
you know, there is, I, I was
happy to read the inclusion
about the recent grant program,
um, but especially here in our
area, you're looking at the
growing of our university. We
talked earlier growing about BHI
trying to pull in people, there
just isn't housing, um, just,
just middle income housing
opportunities, um, and also
Along with that, um, one thing
to consider in areas like ours
or possibly Ridoso is now the
need for new housing when you
have a lot of displaced, um,
displaced individuals, so, you
know, anybody from the burn scar
that still has not had the
opportunity to rebuild, is
looking to rebuild somewhere and
we would love for them to be
able to stay local, but and then
even looking at some of your
grants that you had, um, it was
nice to see two other counties
on there that weren't urban
counties, you know, say Grant
and Socorro, you know, were
listed. I don't know what those
look like, um, but
maybe for future suggestions or
even future legislation, ideally
is just a real look at that, um,
yeah, middle income housing and
also rural housing, permanent
housing, not just voucher
programs, not just reimbursement
programs because housing doesn't
exist in communities like ours
as well as housing in
Albuquerque or Las Cruces or
Santa Fe.
Madam Chair, I'm Representative
Gonzalez, so the new, the House
Bill 195 that through the New
Mexico Finance Authority that
revolving loan fund, um, I think
that'd be a great place to look
at and, you know, targeting.
Just housing development and
it's workforce, but it's also
just general housing development
needs, so that would be a great
opportunity. Maybe you can speak
with NMFA to try and address
some of the specific needs here.
Thank you.
Thank you
I don't know what to do with
myself here.
Um, Representative Garcia, I
have no questions, madam. Oh my
gosh. Oh.
Great.
Yeah, really, maybe we need some
more lightning strikes.
A representative Torres
Velasquez.
Madam Chair, it's not a
question, um, but I would like
to just say thank you for who
whoever decided that teachers
could rent some homes, as you're
talking about because over the
years I've worked with many
teachers who had families and
they were married and it was a
two income family and they still
had to go on food stamps because
of the salaries at the time, so
I appreciate, I think that'll
help recruit teachers as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
You know, this, this is a great
overview, um, MFA is meeting
today and I had to decide
whether I was gonna come here or
go there because I, I'm a
Remember there on on the
oversight committee as well,
but, you know, one of the things
that I, I, and I've been on the
oversight committee since I
started, um, for MFA. So one of
the things that I've been trying
to draw and uh being on
appropriations is just the, the,
the efficiency of MFA and I'm
gonna say MFA I know now
they're, they're the housing.
New Mexico housing. So, but
they've been, they've been here
with us for 50 years and the
record is just really
impeccable, I think over these
last few years, uh.
And efficiency is, is their game
and they're doing a good job.
What I wanted to draw attention
to Madam Char here on page 23 in
this, um.
This, uh, information piece, the
housing, uh, the special
appropriations balances as of
July 24th on um the line item on
22nd for the New Mexican
mortgage finance Authority carry
out the provisions of the
Affordable Housing Act. So
pretty much every year we've
been giving him $50 million to
carry out what they do for the
state. Um, and this, this budget
year, I just wanna, I want this
community to be aware of. We did
not give them that $50 million.
Instead, it went to DFA for the
housing office, which
If, if you wanna fill me in, I
think that was $120 million that
they, they benefited from.
They're having a hard time
getting that money out. Now, one
of the reasons why we, we, um,
we created the housing office
and I think a lot of us were on
board for it, and, you know,
supportive of it and still are
to a degree, is because we were,
we were trying to figure out
what, why we have
To the question asked by
Representative Ana and others,
why we have this big boom in the
numbers of unhoused and and
populations. I think
specifically we have better
data, we have better
information, and we know that,
you know, the, there's a little
more accuracy in that.
And those numbers and we're
visibly seeing it and COVID was
an effect of that, right? So,
um, but what we found out is
that some of the reasons why we
diverted some of this funding
wasn't going to answer some of
the, the questions we didn't
have answers to. And right now,
I just wanted to draw that, and
if there's any added information
from, from, um, our presenters
about that. Um, it's something I
fought for that $50 million in
the budget just so everybody
knows, because I know the work
of MFA and
You know, it was thought that
they take too long of a process.
We now know that that's not
true.
So please, if you have anything
to add to that.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair,
Representative Lujan, if you
look on page 24, which is the
last page of the presentation.
Um, this first line, it's for
110 million, that is what you
are referencing, um, and that
was funding to DFA to support
housing, affordable housing
transitional housing, and as I
spoke to earlier with the
transition of the Office of
housing, moving to workforce, I
think that has created a lot of
pause with funding getting out
the door with DFA, uh, going
into
to a memorandum of understanding
with workforce of how they want
to flow the money out and I
think post veto, um, both DFA
and Workforce we're trying to
figure out where this funding
should be allocated, um, but
that is correct as of when this
data was pulled a week ago from
today, funding has still not
gone out the door and we've been
hearing from local governments
as well as some um
Issues with being able to apply
for the funding. Thank you,
madam. I, I just want to add
really quickly that, you know,
the big, the bigger reasons are
um for us not getting this
funding moving, you know, not
particularly on the wrong side
for the state, but it's because
of our local governments in the
zoning, which we now know is one
of the biggest effects and we
weren't able to pass some
legislation this year. I
understand that as well that
could perhaps help in those
those areas, but I just want us
to be diligent that this is, we
need to get this funding out, so
we need to ask ourselves how
we're going to do.
that really efficiently and
effectively, because if we wait
until the next budgeting uh
session, which is this the 30
day session that's, that's time
that we could have actually, we
can probably uh do something in
in the meantime. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Vice Chair Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you for
Disinformation, um.
It answers a lot of questions,
right? It gives us some data
that we need, um.
to kind of get a, a, a bigger
picture of what we're doing with
regards to those who are
unhoused, as well as those who
are looking for um a home.
In many different communities,
uh, Madam Chair, I just have,
um, Senator Pinto had to leave,
but I wanted to, to bring up,
and I too had noticed this, um,
as I'm sure others have.
But what about our tribal
communities? Um, there's nothing
listed specifically with
specificity about, you know,
tribal communities. I know that
there was a listing here that I
had seen about um.
For families uh with domestic
violence and then there is some
money put in for the Northwest
corner.
the state of New Mexico, but is
that?
Um, was that to be, I mean, is
it in San Juan County, McKinley
County.
And, you know, if what you may
not have the, the answers, but
um it was a directive for those
dollars.
And then the other question,
Madam Chair, is around McKinney
Vento.
That was a federal HUD program
that works with students who are
homeless.
But I know that there's some
availability. I think that um
McKinney Venter was also
supposed to be able to help
provide housing.
Shelter uh for families, um,
students and their families who
are homeless, unhoused, so I
didn't see any mention of that
through HUD.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, those are good questions,
and as I alluded to, there's
housing funds everywhere, right?
So the, the second.
initiative that you mentioned,
I'm assuming those funds are
administered through PE and I
didn't include any of, any pet
funds, so I am not familiar with
that. So that's an area we can
follow up on and look at that
and then regarding the first
question you had and the
initiatives and targeting Native
American, um.
I did in the compiling all of
this information and I, I didn't
see per se any initiatives
targeting directly Native
American, however, um, in terms
of communities and community
access to that, you definitely
have, you know, linkages funding
and you know, some of the state
funds dollars going to uh
McKinley County, San Juan
County, um, and there are
definitely initiatives there for
uh.
Support and help for
Yeah, domestic violence, of
course, and that kind of thing,
so they're in shelters and you
know all of that, but in terms
of
And I know there's local
government initiatives going on
in those areas too, but in terms
of any of these specific
programs that we were mentioning
here in funds going there. I did
not, did not see that. It was
not listed here, so I think it's
really more um local initiatives
and but then there's, of course,
the 100% state funds and
vouchers there. So those flow
there as well.
Oh, and I appreciate it, Madam
Chair, I guess for just uh we
talk about inclusion that we
need to make sure that tribal
communities are also on the
list, especially when we're
looking at legislation for
access purposes, um, just to
make sure that our tribal
communities are mentioned.
Um, so it just something for us
to always keep in mind. Thank
you.
Thank you, and I think I just
have one question. Um,
Do, do you have data?
What the cost of housing a
person versus the cost of them
living on the streets.
Do you have those numbers?
Madam Chair, that's a great
question. No, I didn't compile
that, but I think we know,
especially when you look at the
multiplier effect. It's
significant, so it's always
better. You will always have
better outcomes and reduce all
those multiplier effects if you
were housed. Correct. Yeah, and
I was hoping we actually had
data that um that would show
that um, so if, if you
If someone is
You know, just bored and.
Looking for things to do, do
that. OK, so thank you so much,
both of you, and we will go to
our last presentation.
And for those of you who are
still on Zoom or on the webcast.
We apologize there have been um
there's been a power outage and
I, I'm, I'm getting texts that,
that what they're hearing is
spotty and I'm sorry, but
Life, life's life, I guess. So
we will have um Joy Annesley,
Christopher Lopez, and Veronica
Cerna and Matt. I think Matt is
like our um.
Forever child.
Go ahead whenever you're ready.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. Yes, I'm
up here again, Sheriff Lopez is
uh.
His sights we got that,
the presentation earlier that I
told you to hang on to.
Um, the one that, that starts
Youth Voices real priorities, so
that's what we're gonna be
working. I'm sorry to interrupt,
I just wanted the members to
know, oh, there's another,
there's another 2. There's 3
total, yes.
They're handing them out now.
So, uh, with public safety
duties, so I am, uh, you know,
we're, we've been a tag team on,
on this initiative that we're
going to, uh, on both the
residential treatment center
that was already presented so
well by Doctor Shields and team
and also the youth centers, uh,
component here as well, so, um,
So I'm, I'm pinch hitting for,
for our share of, uh, so yes, so
we have the youth voices
document, which you'll notice on
page 8.
Uh,
what, what are you saying, not
just those that were here for
the EAE program I told you
earlier who said we needed
residential treatment centers
and youth centers, but the youth
from across the state, uh, are
saying strategic recommendation
number one, safe places for us,
i.e. youth centers, OK? So we
have that, we also have your
federal policy brief from the
National Advisory Committee on
Rural Health and Human Services.
Uh, I, I'm appointed member of
this committee and
And, uh, the committee, uh, we
held our 96 convening, we meet
twice a year in rural places,
was in Las Vegas, New Mexico,
last fall, and this policy
brief, as well as another one
regarding what we discussed
earlier and um medicated
assisted treatment services and
expanding, um, access, uh, is a
second we, we, uh, had two
federal policy briefs posted,
um.
Uh, based on that site visit,
uh, in this, uh,
Assessing the needs of rural
families affected by the opioid
crisis is also a link to this
national article in rural health
initiative RHI hub, um, which is
lifting kids up with grace, how
in New Mexico community built a
grassroots youth and family
center from the ground up. So
those are three documents, um,
I was charged to bring together,
uh, our doers in this community,
uh, to specifically discuss
projects uh for the opioid
settlement funds. And as we
heard earlier, um, you know,
yes, residential treatment and
that downstream I use this river
analogy of, of days like today
when floods are threatening and
if welcome to Vegas with powder
outages, this is just our life
now. There's also a PTSD moment
every
the guy gets like this that we
all have, um.
And with that, um, this river
analogy. So yes, if we look at,
um, trying to address the opioid
crisis and so many, we could use
that same.
Metaphor for just about any
chronic disease from the
downstream side that is trying
to catch our most vulnerable. I
describe that kind of like a
precipice. People are falling
off of Niagara Falls, if you
will, the choro at in Tierra
Maria, right? If you fall off
that thing, you're probably not
going to live, but we have to do
everything we can as a society
that protects our most
vulnerable to catch as many as
we can. I describe it like
hospice work. Um, my dear, uh,
uh,
colleague, uh, Chris Ruoi and
the providers documentary, um,
you know, with the, the El
Centro or EcoCar's program, you
know, he doesn't say this in
there, but he would always say,
hey, if you're batting 250, you
feel pretty good in this type of
work. In other words, if you can
save 1 in 4, it's like oncology,
that's what you're, you know,
that's, you feel good about that
type of work, but it takes an
enormous amount of resources,
and that's the reality, you're
not going to save everyone when
they're that far downstream. So
what do we
we have to do?
While we are doing that work,
not one or the other, we also
have to look upstream and saying
why are so many people falling
in this river, right? And, um,
and you have to go all the way
up to the headwaters and the
headwaters of that uh of that
devastation and chronic disease,
especially, um, substance use
disorder is, um.
Is our youth
And so I think you probably all
have heard me at one time or
another talk about Aces and, and
childhood trauma and all of
those things that we have to
prevent up there.
I, I, I only mention that
because um as an expert in that
area of healthcare, I no longer
talk about that.
You need to know what's there,
but, uh, I left my water glass,
but I always say in the water
glass, uh, transparent water
glasses.
The trauma happens in the part
of the glass it's empty.
So what's my job now to fill
that glass with water, because
the more water there is in
there, the less room there is
for adverse childhood
experiences and child trauma. So
what is the full part of the
glass that is, um, opportunity.
And what is well measured with
something called the childhood
opportunity index. I mentioned
Doctor Masaro earlier as one of
uh co-creators of the New Mexico
Hub and Spoke project that uh
was a colleague of Christian and
I in the pandemic to bring this
uh expansion system.
And so how do we do that? If you
listen to our youth, if you read
the federal policy brief, if you
read the national art article, a
big part of that is youth
centers.
And as representative Herndon
asked so eloquently earlier.
What about summer's evenings and
weekends because it's nice that
at school you can be fed even if
you don't get food at home and
you can have those opportunities
to learn and receive mentoring,
um, but there's no school in
summer in most places. What
about dinner, right? What about
evenings? What about weekends?
What happens there? What happens
there, unfortunately is not just
the obituaries we're trying to
prevent, um.
As I explained to Senator Block
earlier by having residential
treatment centers. We're also
talking about the obituaries
we're trying to prevent that
happens when kids don't have
safe.
Faces
On the weekends and uh we
experienced yet another tragedy
this summer with uh motor
vehicle accident that took two
of our young people too soon.
It also took the life of grace,
who are youth center is named
after Grace Gaylegos, who was
not necessarily a child, uh, uh.
labeled
Labeled as at risk.
She was a two-time state
cheerleading champion. And if
you watch the video, there's a
link on here on how to get to
that. You'll hear her mom talk
about.
Through a sports injury, she
started using her provider, not
me. Um, I was her sideline doc,
not her in clinic doc. Um,
prescribed uh prescription
painkillers and that led as an
entryway to um.
Many things including fentanyl
that took her too soon.
So in her name, we have built
this youth center, the first and
ever, uh, youth and family
center in New Mexico. It opened
4 years ago for 4 years now
we've been struggling for
resources and programmatics, um,
tonight, as you're all invited
at 6 p.m. I mentioned there's
uh, uh, Quentin Ledger, um.
Nephew of, of Terresa and and uh
son of Martin, uh, hosted our
summer music camp and those kids
at 6 p.m. tonight at Kickstart
Cafe will be showcasing
everything they're working so
hard on all summer.
Um, so we have those types of
programming programs going on,
but we need to upscale them, and
this has been going on now for
years, um, in San Miguel County.
Some of you were at this, uh,
ceremony and, and when we broke
the ribbon on uh on that mural.
Um, on the front page, um, but
it's not just about here, it's
also about Mota County, about
every county, how do we in every
community, how do we provide
these safe places. So there's a
new opportunity here.
And that is the opioid
settlement fund. Uh, uh, our
attorney general, uh, current,
uh, attorney General as well as
Hector before him.
That there is possibility, not
just for, you know, medicated
Medicaid assisted treatment and
those direct components of, of,
uh, treating, uh, opioid
substance misuse substance use
disorder or opioid use disorder,
but also these upstream primary
prevention efforts to keep our
kids from falling in the river.
With that being said, I've got
representatives from both Mora
and San Miguel County here with
me today to talk about plants.
I'm gonna
start with Joy Annesley County
manager from San Miguel.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the council, thank
you for having us here.
With regards to opiate
settlement funds, San Miguel
County has taken a little bit of
a different approach. We have
focused, we've put a lot of
focus and energy into the youth
center. In fact, we had even
dedicated some ARPA funds to
coordinators for
For the youth center for after
school and for summer programs.
We just had a really hard time
getting anything to stick. We
have a lot of really good ideas,
um.
And plans to move forward, we
just need a little bit more.
collaboration and some, some
assistance from, from the other
school districts, from the from
the municipalities and other
entities who will be affected.
We do have $100,000 of grow
funds that were dedicated by
Senator Stefaniks um through the
North Central New Mexico
Economic Development District.
We are working on those funds we
have dedicated them to the youth
center. We're working on
stipends for um adult mentors as
well as youth mentors, and we
are trying
put together committees to come
up with the things that the kids
want to see. Uh, we would really
like to focus on a lot of trade
type things, so looking at
certain days that are dedicated
towards
EMS and first responders certain
days that are dedicated towards
welding, autobody mechanics,
things of that type. So we're
trying to figure out what the
kids want to see, uh, opioid
settlement funds are also a very
big possibility. We do run a gel
here.
A regional facility. So a lot of
those funds will be dedicated
towards medication-assisted
treatment, but we would like to
see them go to the youth also,
so.
So we'll now hand it to my wife
to Commissioner Veronica Cerna
from Mota County.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
legislative members. um, thank
you for.
Can you hear me?
OK, how's that? OK. Well, thank
you for having us here this
evening. Um,
I think they've, they've got
wonderful plans, Mora to you, as
you know, Mota County does not
see, I don't think San Miguel
even sees boundaries between
More County and San Miguel.
We've been through so much.
For the last
3 years now.
Um, and we're experiencing a lot
of the same things. We, um,
Sonora County has a $2.5 million
dollar recreation, quality of
life grant. Uh, I don't know if
anybody realizes this, but we
don't have playgrounds in Moner
County outside of the school.
So with that money we're
building a playground um right
behind the David Cargo library,
and we're going to build a
recreation facility, uh, we're
hoping that we have enough money
to build it with a basketball
court indoors. We have a lot of
home school kids and in the
evenings and weekends, a lot of
these kids have nowhere else to
go, so we're gonna hopefully
have that facility ready for
them.
Uh, we're building out our
complex right now, uh, the
courthouse and it will have um
an area for public health, and
we're also gonna include an area
for a counselor or
A therapist, someone to help
with, um,
Um, substance abuse treatment,
but we're gonna focus a lot of
our efforts, our opioid funding
on prevention.
We plan to have a lot of
programs going we want to
partner up with programs like
Boys and Girls.
Club, um, Big Brothers Big
Sisters, I, we already have them
in Mora, but we want to enhance
that program even more.
But we could partner up with
some of those programs. I think
we could help man that facility
24, well, maybe not 24/7, but 7
days a week and as many waking
hours that we can host the youth
and their families as well.
Uh, there's gonna be some office
space and and uh physical
fitness area and um.
We plan to have a lot of um
activities for them to stay
focused, um, like Joy was saying
that they want to incorporate a
lot of the trades in the
hands-on programs for the youth
on, you know, I've, when I
worked at Luna, we worked with a
lot of at-risk kids you never
heard any, uh, in my experience,
I never heard any child say that
they want to go up, grow up to
become an addict or an
alcoholic.
So we need to help those kids
live their dreams and um I think
a lot of them we were talking
about the trades, how a lot of
this younger generation is is.
I guess focusing on some of
these trades because, um, I
don't know college sometimes
doesn't appeal to them, but we
need all of them to make our
world go round, so we'll
encourage them to live their
dreams and, and introduce
whatever we can to them to keep
that dream going.
So whatever resources we can get
from the state, we welcome them
because, uh, at this point, just
the opioid money is all we're
gonna have to to help uh the
facility function and it's based
on population, so more county is
one of the counties that's
getting a a lesser amount of the
opioid funding, so we need to
partner up with the state and
any other program that can help
us get that program off and
running.
As soon as the facility is
completed.
We stand for questions.
OK, we will start with the
representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this
is great, um.
You know, I want to be as as
helpful and supportive as as we
possibly can in some of these,
um, the issues that are, are
happening in, in, um, in Mora
in, in Las Vegas and throughout
the two counties in San Miguel,
my, um,
So, you know, some of the things
that you mentioned with this,
the um.
The hands-on approach, continue
the, probably the CTE um
programs we have in the school,
which you also said we have a
population of kids
in more uh I guess it's a big
population, they are
homeschooled and I'm aware of
there, there is an application
right now for a charter school
in Mora. So my question is, what
is the best fit there when we
have a community school model
that we could be looking at and
it would be addressing these
approaches that you're
highlighting in this.
Um, this, uh,
Report that you have in front of
us, I, I just maybe some
feedback on that. And the second
question, when I had the youth,
um symposium um summit that I
put on, I had a, a group of
youth from Water County and Las
Vegas attend and lead, uh, the,
the summit and the biggest issue
they said for rural um schools
is transportation. So if we put
these things together, how, what
is the plan in the
transportation for our youth to
get to some of these, these
programs, the youth, um,
participation.
Man.
So, um, right now, and Joy was a
part of this, uh.
The, the RTD.
bus on Tuesdays and Thursdays,
uh, we're going, as a matter of
fact, Joy, we're gonna be
getting a new bus.
Um, uh, Senator Heinrich.
Um, sponsored that and they,
they're
Get it fitted for a
transportation for Mora and it
will be traveling continue
traveling on Mondays and
Tuesdays, but if we get more
ridership, we will get more
students involved in programs in
Vegas and Mota, uh, we could
probably encourage that.
Um, transportation to expand,
you know, throughout the week.
And to the exact locations, I
think right now it's stopping at
the hospital, but at the rec
center or I don't know where
your facility is gonna be at.
Your activities we can have that
stop scheduled and hopefully get
that transportation, but that's
just during the day and during
the week, uh, we need to have
something going on on weekends
and in the evenings, uh, even if
we do get the charter school set
up and going, it's not gonna be
all day long and we still need a
safe place for those kids to be
after hours. It's, it's
unfortunate how many of these
kids go home to an empty home.
A lot of times these kids go
home to no food.
And if we can at least provide
that for them, um.
And a safe place for them to be
more than anything, but with
something to do, I think that
would be beneficial for them
too.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, one of the
things that San Miguel County is
looking at is we do have an
appropriation to buy a 12
passenger van and we would like
to operate that to transport
students to the youth center
from the other school districts.
So it would be, and the reason
the county has agreed to sponsor
it is because
If one school district did it,
it would be very difficult for
them to use funding to bring
kids, students from other school
districts. So we have two school
districts in Las Vegas and then
Pecos that are part of San Mingo
County, so.
So, so I'm sure, yeah, what I'd
just like us to emphasize and
really look at what that, that
transportation looks like and
how we can do that. We did put
$150 million into the PED budget
for after school programs and,
and, and, um, it's not enough,
and we know that, and there, but
when we're really talking about
a real uh schools and our school
districts, um, what are those
needs? And that's why I
highlight that because that was
one of the main um discussion
points for our rural kids when
they said they wanted all these
things, and they compared
themselves to the, you know,
To Santa Fe and Albuquerque, and
they said, look, well, you guys
have a lot of good things going
on, you need to take advantage
of and we would, we would take
advantage, but these are some of
the barriers. But so thank you
for bringing that to light.
Thank you. Thank you.
I cannot one little part just
back to funding and what you
guys are looking at here in in
the inner room, madam chair and,
and, um, representatives.
And senators is that uh Joy
mentioned it, um, actually the
idea our youth centers located
on West Las Vegas school campus,
um, thanks to Superintendent
Gutierrez gifting us a building,
um, to utilize for every child.
However, there are, there's
language and restrictions and
policy around, you know, you can
get an audit finding if you're
not using the funding only for
West Las Vegas kids. So back to
community school language.
You know, what's the idea of
community schools? It's every
child and their families, right,
rural families affected by the
opioid crisis. So some that's
something that needs to be
looked at in this, you know,
anti-donation clause, I know
that was never the intent, but
there are some hangups there
versus in Mota County, this will
be at a county facility, which,
you know, will hopefully also
have a, we'll need to fund a
walking trail because of that
Yano between the the the
facility and the school needs to
have.
a walking trail, right, but just
the idea that once you're now
you're at a county, now you're
past some of those restrictions
on the school districts.
Thank you, Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Well, um, thank you for the
presentation and I have a lot of
questions and comments and I,
um, I'm not sure where to start.
Um,
My first
Well, OK, so I'm going to ask
that hopefully Representative
Garcia talks about the potential
of involvement with land grants
and education and initiative
there. I'm not sure if you might
or not. Um, but that's the first
thing that came to mind, um,
just, uh, just very important
for me, um, the next thing that
came to mind is that right now,
we are, we have the PED has
scheduled.
Some sessions to gather input to
provide remedies for the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuits, and
it would be very important to
hear from your communities, what
are the things that you feel
would be most important to the
success of your students. And so
there's a link on the PED site,
but I can also send it to you.
And that link will provide the
dates of the different sessions,
the list.
sessions that will be held
across the state and um one of
them at least, maybe 2, but at
least 1 of them will be held by
Zoom and any, any ideas that you
have will be heard, and so I do
hope that you join the effort to
create the remedies that are
needed for our children in New
Mexico and so then that takes me
to the Hispanic Education Act,
um, the Hispanic Education.
Act received some funding this
year and thanks to people at
this table, um, who pushed it
with the LFC and so did the
Black Education Act, um, that we
weren't going to get it all, and
it was, the budget was gonna be
0 and we pushed for some
funding, um, and so there is a
grant that is available for
schools and so if you can work
with one of your local schools,
To, um, one of the teachers or
one of the principals to submit
a proposal, you might be able to
get some funding through that.
It is a competitive grant and
um.
I'm not sure how exactly they're
going to select who receives the
funds, but that has some
potential and that will also
inform the PED and the Hispanic
education Act liaison and
advisory council on the things
that matter most to you.
Um
I do hope the transportation
allows the students at your
schools to participate in sports
and clubs and activities that
they might not be able to
participate or attend without
the transportation cause I think
that's, that's really important
for kids to be able to connect.
Oh, and so that means that
Representative Garcia, I hope
you talk about a little bit of
the education initiative with
the land grants in Oseki if you
don't mind, but I bet you had
other questions too, so we'll
see. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
just a reminder, you can always
contact these people afterwards.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, first of all, uh, Joy,
congratulation on, uh.
The uh um the treatment center,
um, that was a vision that kind
of a joint vision that basically
involved the county.
And uh your leadership was
instrumental along with your
chairman Harold Garcia.
Uh, intact team with uh Matt.
Uh, who kind of, uh, worked on
the concept for maybe what, a
decade, about 10 years. So it's
finally, uh, it finally came to
fruition. I want to congratulate
the county for really taking the
bold measure and seeing it
through and.
God willing
You got an operator.
You know, in terms of the
behavioral health, uh unit.
You know, Tim Shills, he just
presented a a couple of minutes
ago, so that was a godsend,
Madam Chair.
You know, uh, because that was a
problem that you guys had when
you started the construction.
Remodeling the old building was
who's gonna operate it we're
gonna get the funds and uh so
that that's a bigger for
Northeast New Mexico.
The first treatment center in
the south quadrant.
You know, and um, so
congratulations, um, you know,
the
The or treatment uh opioid the
settlement moneys uh do not
involve in anti-donation
conflict.
So that's not to say that a kid.
Who's on a treatment program.
Male female.
Uh, has some, has a vision of
maybe becoming a welder
beautician or whatever.
You know, there's nothing in the
books that says that a county
government.
That's using operate ceremonies
can give an educational stipend
to that child.
In order to get the certificate,
the degree, etc. etc.
So there's different options
that we have not explored in
terms of settlement money.
But San Miguel County is kind of
a model program in terms of
You know, the medical assistance
that you're providing your
population in different ways and
different modes. And then you've
got an intellectual base here,
man,
that complements that.
And uh I know for a fact that
I've been trying to garnish to
start injectable opioid
treatment program.
And we tried it and we were
almost there, madam chair at
UNM.
With the uh uh the substance use
disorder.
Substance of opiate substance
use disorder unit at UNM.
Uh, and it, it got blown out of
the water by the CEO of the UNM.
Hospital
Who intervened at the wrong
moment.
And said no, we're going to put
the brakes on this initiative,
but I think you've got.
You, you've got the roots of
doing something like that here
in San Miguel County.
With the treatment center.
With Tim Shields, you know, with
this core of professionals at uh
health professionals core
intellectuals here in this
community to begin something
like that.
Because your opioid treatment
initiative, injectable opioid
treatment program is much
needed. We don't have it
anywhere in the country, but
where countries that do have it.
Our accomplishing great feats
with the with their cohorts, the
individuals that go into that
program.
And I know I'm out of time.
But it's something that I like
to work with you.
In terms of the future.
Especially the utilization of
opioid monies for that kind of
specific program. Thank you.
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, no,
thank you both and um you are
entirely right, commissioner,
that I don't think we live, we
see a boundary. I think it's
just, you know, the, the Mora
Las Vegas area, I think tends to
do a lot of things together and
happy to support each other and
also by saying that um very
happy to see both of the updates
that both of you presented in
that um with you talk about
youth programs, uh, living in
that space. I think it's
entirely needed and in all, in
both of our communities, um, and
all of San Miguel and all of Mo
is just really looking to see,
um, yeah, help us to support our
kids and how to support it
collectively. I think oftentimes
programming is thought of in
terms of school district or in
terms of city or in terms of, so
the beauty of working within
100% community, the beauty of
working within um county
operations is that ability to to
serve all students to to not
have to work within those
restrictions, you know, that
oftentimes just for compliance,
you know, are placed upon their,
um, and so no, that's it, just
wanted to talk.
for my support and, and I'll add
on, um, Representative Torres
Velasquez's comment. We've had a
lot of meetings here also with
regards to land grants, Osea's
water, and um.
I'm sure just you all living it,
right? They're recognizing that
cultural importance of
educational programming and
there was a lot of presentations
over those meetings that just
talked about the different
educational programs that they
offer. So, you know, take
advantage of those at the
centers, take advantage of
those, um, in your programming.
There's a lot of educational
provider work, possibly some
funding collaboration between
programs that they have to
offer, um, and it's the stuff
that those those students, the,
the, the youth in our area
already know they live it. It's
their, it's their culture, it's
where their
families are from and that could
possibly be integrated, but
thank you for coming and
presenting to us today. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
if I can, um, just, uh, I
mentioned it briefly to start
the day, but we just, we, this
community and and Senora props,
uh, as, as a leader on that just
developed this Spanish heritage
tool kit that the whole world
can use with
On a caller grant through Mexico
Highlands University with our
own erencia with our own
language, with our Norteno
Spanish with our chicharons with
our posole with our, uh,
everything that is who we are as
a people here. This is a huge
thing that's gonna roll out. So
back to these curriculums and
when we talk about um uh the
opioid crisis and uh rural
families and kids is, uh,
instilling a sense of pride in
who you
are as a people.
And a place, um, and a culture,
and so we're super excited to
now implement that, uh, uh, tool
kit into our local school.
Representative Renaya.
OK. Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for those final words
because that was where exactly I
was gonna go.
In terms of um.
Two points that I wanted to
make. I'll start with the other
one and then um
proceed to this last one. So I,
I just wanna
Your recommendation number one
is perfect.
But I think that um it's not
just about.
Stigma reduction, but we need to
place it into the larger
perspective of tackling the
broader socioeconomic,
emotional, um.
Impacts of poverty.
And how we can use our
collaboration and our partners.
In finding ways to constantly
bring it back so that we put it
back on the shoulders of.
Society and communities and not
just the individuals, as you
know as a clinician and I as a
clinician.
We want to tackle.
What we think is clinical.
But uh more times than not, it's
not clinical. It's related to
the overall conditions that our
children and populations live
in, so I wanna make that point
because it's so very important
for our successes in the future.
My second point was, uh, is tied
into what you just said about
building on our cadencia.
On our cultural traditions and
so with that I do have one
question. We live in a very
deeply rooted traditional
Hispanic and Native American
land, uh, lands and cultural,
uh, traditions and so we have
cultural healing.
Um, traditions, how are these
practices healing practices
centered.
At the very core of the
relevance of how we reach.
These individuals are children,
uh, who are facing
These
Socioeconomic conditions that
they have very little control
over. How do we turn that
around, uh, medicinally
introducing them to natural
healing, um.
And not just cultural in terms
of art and music, but the deeply
rooted cultural connections that
make them so critically
important for future
generations. How do we, how do
you do that? And do you have to
be in a place of asking
permission to do this or
How are you driven to do this?
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Royal Caballero, um, before many
renditions of funding, uh,
streams that were potential to
get the residential treatment
center to where it is today. At
one time it was going to be $200
million as a comprehensive
recovery center federal dollars
that never materialized, but in
that plan was absolutely that,
not just the short term
treatment facility that you
heard about today that was now
getting open, but a long term
recovery in
Marcia in the mountains of
northern New Mexico that roots
someone to a sense of place and
purpose and our ways, um, uh, in
the youth center programming,
you can't see it in this
picture, but for those of you
who like uh Rep Garcia Garcia
I've seen it in person on the
bottom we had our lead artist,
um.
Or multiple lead artists, uh, a
local artist who, um, uh, did
lessons with the youth 80, 80,
uh.
Students painted this mural over
the course of 2 weeks, and they
had lessons, uh.
About the medicinal purposes of
the plants, and they went on
site visits to see the plants
that grow along the asea, and
then they had to pick a plant,
and that's the plant they play
they painted in the bottom of
the mural. And so, yeah,
absolutely ways to, uh, uh,
incorporate that in, but
incorporating it in on the
fringe, I think is uh
Your point
We have to do better at making
it at the core.
And, uh, uh, my wife is a
Spanish immersion teacher in our
local school districts here,
says, well, I get to use the
Spanish curriculums, heritage
curriculums, but they're not our
Spanish, and the reality is 95%
of the time I have to focus on
all this other stuff, and then
for the few hours that I get to
focus on our local stuff, oh, my
gosh, the kids get so excited
and not only them but their
parents and their grandparents
and everybody gets so excited.
So that's the idea back to the
core.
they've done with that
curriculum is flip that, so that
90 95% of it is our culture, and
yes, they'll be, they'll be, you
know, plenty of making sure that
there's proper Spanish in there
as well.
That that's the idea we need to
really take into our clinical
treatments, social treatments as
you described them.
Representative Herton.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation. Can you tell me,
did you all do a survey or did
you have focus groups for right
now on the programs that the
kids want to see as we get ready
to go into the school and what
are they?
Madam Chair Representative Her
Herndon, so the, the 15 page
document, I believe in front of
you, the youth voices, that's
what that is, that's those
groups of those kids from across
the state. Now that being said,
that's that recommendation 8
that was pointed to. Now that
being said, we had the AAA
program that was mentioned here
earlier, uh, that was year
before last, so we didn't have
it last year, but we did have it
the year before and those
students in the Laser program
pointing to this and, and this
is exactly what they said. They
said,
You know, we want to have a
place where we can have dances,
you know, what we can do, you
know,
Have fun, right? And so that was
a big part driving back to here.
Now that being said, um, as our
county manager has said in this
$100 100,000 dollars of growth
fund that's been appropriated,
there are stipends for youth
leaders to be at the table to
continue to evaluate the
programs as they get in place to
inform us of what are the
programs and uh and also, um,
you know, equipment and things
that we need in our center.
Thank you for that. I was just
looking at the policy
recommendations and I just saw
the committee recommends and and
I didn't see specific programs
for the students. I wanted to
recommend to one, the New Mexico
Academy for the Media Arts is
looking to focus and uh to work
with other schools as they make,
as they make a film and
production in alliance with the
New Mexico Film Academy in terms
of putting things together. The
second thing that I want to
bring to your attention is that
the US legal Federal Credit
Union has the only junior board
of directors in the entire
country right here in New
Mexico. I want you to encourage
your students to join that
junior board. They get their own
funding to make sure that
they're looking at programs to
help students with financial
literacy or even growing uh
their own as uh assets as they
continue to move forward. So I
present those to you and I, and
my only last question is with
respect to the list is, is the
um the total amount.
That is needed is it in here?
I'm sorry, maybe I just missed
it for the programs that are
that are requested.
Madam Chair, Representative Her
Herndon, know right now what's,
uh, there is really just the
plans of where we are today, uh,
but the potentials of all the
programs, um, you know, in each
of the representatives from the
counties can speak on that
individually, but, you know, we
have facility money and in Mora
and, and uh thanks to
Commissioner Ser Serna's
leadership already starting to
think ahead when this facility
is completed, what programs can
exist and what will that cost as
you heard, you know,
Settlement fund is aren't the
only thing that, you know, that
that's not gonna be enough, and
then from uh San Miguel County,
um.
Our county manager here. I don't
know if you have any other
specific budget or ask.
We don't, I'm sorry, Madam Chair
and Representative Herndon, we
don't really have a budget ask
right now. We just kind of
wanted to talk about the
programs and the ideas and, and
we'll see where that takes us.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Uh
I want to say thank you to each
of you for um presenting for us
this afternoon.
And I remember being at your
opening when we were here, just
seems like yesterday, but time
goes by quick, um.
And Madam Chair, you know, the
There is so much and so much
potential in each of our
communities.
And, um, everything costs money.
That we, you know, when we want
to build something, when we want
to bring in persons to come in
and do program, whatever it may
be, there's always a price tag.
Uh, but Madam Chair.
The price tag for our children,
for them to have inspiration for
them to have, uh.
The pride, something that, you
know, brings them.
to their full potential is
priceless.
And
I guess the the bottom question
I wanna ask, and I, I know, and
congratulations, I know that
you're, you sit on this
particular um rural
Committee, um,
With regards to uh you know,
the, the opioid crisis and the
monies, a question, Madam Chair,
that always goes back into the,
the position that we find
ourselves. Are there any
potential cuts?
That you're looking at
Because again, you have money,
you have a plan, there's some
things, but.
Federally
What are the cuts that you're
anticipating, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Lopez, uh, members of the
committee.
It
It's, it's too expansive to
measure, I think right now,
because when we look back to
that kind of holistic ecosystem
that makes all of this work,
we're not just talking about
direct healthcare cuts and
impacts on school-based health
centers and Medicaid and youth
programs like, uh, the hears of
funding that we lost for the
community careers program, the
education cuts.
I mean how again you're trying
to dream and build this next
story on this building and and
just the basic funding after
school programs, um, so I think
it is, uh, you know, it is
something that's across the
board, um, the one thing that I
would say that's, uh, the, the
full sight of that glass is that
there's a bunch of doers in this
community that still figure it
out and um we've done so much
with so little and promises.
of funding that never
materialized, uh, which I'll
just say that's why we don't
call ourselves 100% San Miguel
anymore. We do use the book 100%
community cause that book is
solid how you organize doers
together, but the
institutionalization of a
movement has led to a challenges
and things that never
materialized. It didn't stop us.
We have the first and only
functional youth and family
center in.
New Mexico, and it is happening
in, and programs are happening
there regardless of funding that
never happened and never
materialized here because doers
do. So, you know, we'll figure
it out as we go, um, uh, uh, uh,
but that's, I, I don't have a, a
projection of the impacts
because when you talk about them
across education across housing
across all the social sectors,
it's, it's, uh, it's vast.
Thank you. And this resilience
that we have, um, as
communities, so thank you to
each of you as leaders.
Um
And, and Madam Chair, it just
goes back to, you know, a
question, um, for the secretary,
US Secretary Kennedy to see if
there's still support for the
initiative that was begun by the
prior administration.
And I'm hoping that there's
still a support, um.
For, uh, this particular
Organization group of persons
that you're associated with, Mr.
Probes, that
Um
I'm hoping that there's still a
support from the US Secretary of
Health and Human Services that
it doesn't dwindle or disappear
either.
Just a statement, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative co-chair, we do
hope that the 96th convening
here in Las Vegas, New Mexico
was not the last.
After 48 years, we are on pause
right now. I will just start
with the positive though, that
we were told that our policy
brief, which is listed on their,
on the website, um, as January
2025 didn't come out until May
because it was in the Federal
communication freeze, but it
came out in me.
Which meant that it didn't, uh,
it, it, it wasn't stopped. I
don't know that it's blessed
yet, but it was permitted, so
that's a start.
Fingers crossed. So thank you
all for your attention. reminder
we start at 9 tomorrow and lunch
will be provided. It's not on
here, but um.
But we will have lunch. We will
have a working lunch
representative Lujan. I just
wanted, uh, uh, to thank, um,
Steven Salas from Senator Ben
Rayhan's office for being here
with us today, so I, he might
have stepped out, but I just
wanted to thank him for being
here. Thank you, Madam Chair.
All right, so we are in recess
until 9 a.m. tomorrow.
Have a good evening.
Thank you all.
