This will drive
good morning everyone welcome to
the final morning of our meeting
in silver city I kind of hate to
go
uh
I just found a couple of things
last night today had done yet
here so
i'll have to come back sometime
this morning session is uh we
have two.
Pretty important in and very
interesting panels the first is
from the department of health
and it's a report on the
silicyban project the the work
this is going on regarding
cillos open and its uses in
treatment of mental illness
so we have with this a think we
have when it's all come up of
the uh so we have a doctor leave
and larry lemon the professor
from UNM who's doing a lot of
the work uhm miranda durham the
chief medical officer DOH.
Gary french doctor french is the
medical director for the center
for medical canada said DOH.
The.
And aria lamb.
Are you going to be the the
moderator of this panel area
yes senator
alternative routine then thank
you thank you so much and
members we do have a a handout
can you hear me okay
yes thank you it's really good
to see you all this morning
thank you so much for having us
here today I just wanted to
briefly just introduce everyone
to the panel and talk really
briefly about what we're going
to present here for you today so
we have with us doctor lawrence
lehman he is a professor of
family and community madison at
the UNM school of madison he has
also the medical director of the
melagra program
we have also with us doctor gary
french he is the medical
director of our medical canabas
program at the department of
health and we also have a rant
at around with us who is our
chief medical officer at the
department of health so just
briefly we are going to present
to you really just
some highlights from a report
that we did we had a
collaborative effort that we
pursued with
are between mdo the health here
authority and you and am so
we've been working on this for
quite a few months and what we
intended to do
was not really proposed a path
forward essentially we what we
tried to do was do a a pretty
thorough survey of the research
that's been gone ongoing around
solicited as a as a therapy
madison we wanted to look at the
regulatory environment maybe
different challenges that other
states are facing and
implementing these kinds of
programs and just really wanted
to provide both the community
and the legislature the
executive just have foundational
knowledge about sort of where
we're at in the country with
with this as a matter and just
sort of.
You know open it up for any
questions that you might have
here today
I wanted just to say though if
we were to
pursue you know policy a policy
avenue in the future it would be
important to really engage
community in a very progressed
way we would want to engage
state holders and make sure that
we're really providing adequate
time to do that community
engagement especially with
providers I think and and our
community members
and beyond that I think that
i'll alturn it over to our panel
and have them to a brief
introduction before they get
into the power point thank you.
All right good morning i'm
doctor gary french on the
medical director at the medical
canada's program now called the
center for medical canvas here
in the state of new mexico and
that is the department in DOH
and thank you for having us here
today i'd like to go ahead and
talk a little bit about society
so I think when you are looking
at your phones in your doing
your your news fees have you
noticed a lot of bright pictures
that pop up and all the senders
a new sacket society or
psychodelic therapy that's being
discussed i've noticed that
quite a bit then sell a sideman
as one of the psychedelics that
really has the potential to be
very very beneficial for
patience and for mental health
conditions in particular.
And this interest in southern
has caused many states to pursue
legislation and to try to
understand the effective
necessarily similar to also look
into the fees ability of having
a solicitor program and also
develop the regulatorian
statutory framework to sustain I
sold a saving program now before
we talk more about some sudden I
want to talk a little bit about
canada's which is obviously
something that i've been dealing
with in the medicine for medical
candidates and I I want to do
that because I want to sort of
set
the the the difference between
the two I think many of us might
be approaching the silic i've
been with the same lenses that
we approached canada's but the
two are a little bit different
and I think and talking about
that it will help us understand
the difference between the two
but also explain why certain
states that had very successful
canada's programs chose a
different route when it when
going to for sellers and
developing civil saving programs
so canada and among the second
slide here.
Canada's often times is the
daily use substance and it can
be used at home in the privacy
of the home now sill assignments
a little bit different it's not
necessarily dose daily in fact
it's typically two therapy
sessions
and and those there be sessions
can sometimes be two weeks to a
month apart and whether those
are repeated research will tell
us that and again it's used
during a dosing session which is
obviously by medical there's a
medical oversight and then
supervision to make sure that
the patient is benefiting
appropriately from the society
so you have one that still is
daily and when it might be twice
a year so he very very different
I cannot typically you utilize
the canabas and there's no
additional therapy that's needed
but with cillocyban typically
there's always a traditional
stack of their peak component to
it.
And so that is often times
before but mostly following
there is there that it that is
in town and with sellers having
to really get the benefit from
the dosing
canada's we have thirty
qualifying medical conditions
for medical care of us.
They'll still probably would
have fewer because silicible
typically is addressing more
mental health concerns so again
the number of qualifying
conditions that would be treated
the southern likely would be
much fewer compared to the
what's being utilized for canada
and then with regards to
canada's candidates as complex
there is often it's quoted over
five hundred and forty
substances within the care of us
that the create many variables
in the often makes it really
difficult to study as well the
seller saving house when
isolated and a synthetic version
for better used in research it's
so it's a little bit easier to
study and I think that's one
reason why I still don't have
breakthrough therapy designation
from the FDA i'm that's a shared
canada ever will because again
it's very difficult to study so
with that background i'd like to
go ahead and to the time of an
after doctor leaving
thank you
thank you appreciate the
invitation mister tere or
penalty miss vice chair it was
thompson I thank you for
inviting me and and the
committee members I mummed base
of the university of new mexico
professor family medicine
trained in board to certified
family medicine addiction
medicine and attorney care I
would have described as for a
second before I go back into the
sides like why i'm interested in
this wire where do that come
from so i've been directing a
program that I think you're
familiar with call me the grow
for you know for a redecade
taking care of them mums and
babies with that period all
substance is exposure and
eventually I cannot realize
something that we do I thought a
great job of taking care of
addiction we're doing good we're
doing it great job taking care
of people in pregnancy
but two years later people were
back they were pregnant again
and they were back using her
when in fact nil and it realized
it was initially getting at the
root of some of these issues I
wasn't getting it the read of
the the tramma that was also
involved so with the support of
the university of fellowship in
research the psychiatelic
therapies.
Really with an interest in
trying to focus on a substance
used in trauma and ways that we
can help that and that's kind of
my own interest as far as in it
in this area so i'm you know
boost been delivered for to
participate the dealings from
present that but I want to give
the idea of where that came from
the same time.
Great thank you
so with that background again
i'm gonna go back into the
slides here go back to the side
that talks about silicib in
mushrooms little bit of an
overview so saw cybers and
natural curring a second
compound it's converted from
society to solicit which is the
active agent in the blood of
effects include callusinations
change the perception
distriction of time and the
perception and maybe of having a
spiritual experience the effects
of relatively short acting they
come on about fifteen to forty
five minutes of peaks at around
four to six hours and after that
there they're done so many eight
hours the whole session is done
the roadly easy to cultivate the
masters and they can be grown in
multiple environments
synthetic source saving is
different in when we talk about
them the research I want to
carpet most of the research has
been done recent that exorcive
in but I think the interested of
the status in the home assurance
so synthetic student source
savings a lab created version of
a society this synthesize here
can assure supply control for
potency dosage and consistency
several companies both non
profits in pharmaceutical are
currently producing synthetic
source I have been a doing
research and pursuing fda
approval
that the pattern is would likely
elite to roll increasing class
compared to the use of the
cultivated source i've been
mushrooms
so big question is safety
considerations i'm you know as
as the state looks at this I
think that that everybody is
concerned about it that the
state decides to move forward
help calculated one before it
safely so there can be side
effects from society and a short
term side effects paranoia loss
of boundaries distributed
perceptions if this occurs in it
and control settings there can
be problems with mental health
problems with people.
I do that to me may go back home
they may still be in a paranoid
state they can have altered
states they can also hurt
themselves during the period of
time i'm in the the injuries
that happened from society but
or not touch the city from the
drug there things like somebody
following after the building or
different things happening like
that so a safe setting is
important i'm as far as the
physiological side effects them
increase the heart rate a nausea
anxiety are or things that can
happen rarely people in
experience in a flash back to
the original like experience
that's actually quite uncommon
with source i've been but that
can happen so somebody like a
year weaker too later for all
the sudden they get a little
distracted in your feeling some
of those feelings
you know another rare condition
that they're actually seen
anyone with this mushroom
workers along hypersensitivity
and and ubanitis which can
happen for producers who were
we're growing the society
so i'm as different french
mentioned this this is a very
different thing can I be so
people are looking at at this in
other states and particularly in
research and you know i'm really
speaking from the point of view
of other much of this as a
research and we'll talk about
what we're doing at you and for
research it's it's a third
partic model that we're looking
at we're not looking at a
recreational model i'm into it
involves integration with
various forms of second therapy
patients are initially assessed
if so the side of intriguement
is appropriate so who may in in
the studies that's actually
quite rigorous I mean we won't
include somebody for instance if
it's a study and we have a
setting to pression we won't
include you if you by polar if
you've had a history of skits of
renewal if you actually have
substance use disorders to the
studies tend to be fairly of
fairly rich it there of the use
in the first colorado is perhaps
not a secret rigid
there's usually about sixty
eight hours of preparatory
sessions that happen with the
facilitators of between the
initial assessment in the day at
dosing.
What happens during those that
people get prepared for what's
involved with the experience um
you know important things which
is you know through a basic
thing somebody needs to drop you
off and pick you up them for
doing that what's involved in
the follow up certain
contradications here that
medicines people can't be taking
during that time but unlikely
that is actually trying to
develop a sense of connection in
safety with with the with the
facilitators there's a
traditional term in psychedelic
research set and setting the set
refers to your mental state as
you're going into it the setting
is where you're doing that we
want people to feel comfortable
i'm parentally does sometimes
happen we want to make sure
people they know that their
facilitator so in our research
to you and we always have the
same facilitators doing the
preparation is doing the actual
section and then the integration
the dosing for source i've been
yeah in the research and I think
as they're doing and some of the
other states sixty eight hour
session comfortable setting with
session facilitators i'm guiding
the process and actually that
that's maybe it overstated make
the person's processes guiding
itself we're supporting their
process.
I want to mention one thing that
is is felt to be very important
in in the research other
settings is what we're calling
the but the postal sessions are
often described is integration
so someone made how their
preparation they do their
sixteen hour session what
happens after that into its
what's called the integration
they'll have a series of visits
and it depends what's being
studied if you're studying
something like addiction I
probably needs actually more
therapy afterwards because we're
looking at helping with
behavioral change but I think
that integration is really
important and I think it's
important both for the safety
and also properly for the for
the benefit of the medications
and so I know that there's some
states that are not really
focusing merchant people are
doing the session and may not
have a good follow up for
integration I think that's
something to consider there's a
concept as far as me when I
script integration to probably
sound somewhat deputies like
what's actually happened during
that some of the ideas that the
way that society works on the
brain is increases what's called
neural plasticity near a plastic
city is sort of a tiny period
after the use of the source I
have been where new connections
are made made in the brain
people are receptive to change
and so the integration is felt
to be working with the neural
place to city.
So as we talk about research I
just want to give a little
review of the faces of clinical
trials this is real what the fda
looks at a which is days one two
and three studies pays one
studies or the the beginning
trials this is for the first
time use small group of people
studying to learn about safety
and identifying side effects of
that may happen with his fewers
you know
fifteen twenty year people there
it's looking really safety those
can be done in normal volunteers
or they can be done people with
the diagnosis these two is a
bigger studies that we're doing
some of these UNM with a larger
group of people determine
effectiveness and further study
it's safety so you have to go
with the FDA one of these first
you apply for one into and in
three face three and i'll
mention the second we are part
of the face to be trial so a
saving for depression at UNM
this is giving it to larger
groups of people in the hundreds
even up to thousands to confirm
effectiveness monitor side
effects and compare with
standard treatments that's the
stage right before people go to
the fda for for approval at this
point time there's only two
psychedelic medications that
have been in pays three trials
their solicitor
these force is a trial but it's
really actually it's it's follow
up so let's say that you do
these studies on a thousand
people on the FDA approves it
that still won't determine
uncommon side effects so the fta
often has a phase for a process
and so you'll then follow the
other first number of thousands
of people that you use that to
look and see well how come it is
period how common you're
different sort of things to face
one to for the research pathway.
So as first looking at the fda
pathway and one thing I want to
clarify is the f t a is focused
on synthesized drugs talk a
little bit about fda study of
botanicals because there is an
emerging role
what we see right now from the
fta is that source i've been in
md have both been given
breakthrough status for so cyber
it's per for depression major
depression and treatment
resistant to pressure that's
being fairly biggerously studied
around the country part of the
reason is that depression is
relatively common condition if
your pharmaceutical company
that's actually what you want to
study because of a lot of people
with depression there but
there's other there's other
issues some of which you know
we're interested in which is
substance use harder to study
substance use here dealing with
that's hard to study that but
there may be great great benefit
and so we are working on that
but it's not anywhere near as
far as long as the depression
has.
Um the fees two trials of source
I have been for
you know for a depression and
anxiety as well as for um a
whole use of have all showed
evidence of a benefit that's why
the fee is three trials have
been approved their state about
three phase three trials going
around the country a we're part
of one of them that we started
in a couple months ago and this
whole study will take about one
year at for each patient
probably two years for the whole
study are estimate is that
twenty twenty seven is probably
the soonest the fda could
possibly approve society if they
approve society and from that
you would be approved for
depression that would be all it
would be approved for that so
it's important to to realize
that they're different pathways
the FDA pathways very specific
for the indication.
The.
That reference is remaining a
substance used for they
appreciate as you know that's my
passion so I don't want to skip
that here so what we don't in a
new mexico there's been a study
that when my colleague some
doctor stay hold by desert head
of dictions like a tree lead
looking at alcohol i'm it showed
the decrease alcohol and take
after twelve weeks with
psychotherapy with soliciting
sessions were hoping that
they'll be that that removed to
a larger multicenter national
trials but that hasn't been
funded yet at this point their
active study is looking at dub
society per cocaine that's being
steady now about and better mean
indicating this disorders nasa's
funding a multi center trial for
continuing these disorders
the other area that's being
studied actively is then apply
things in the stress and there's
several pays two studies these
are happening for people they
may have counts through they may
have other short terminal
illness and any helping with was
something which
it's always the normal process
the anxiety and distress of
having a terminal illness but it
seems that it may be helpful
potentially to use society but
agents for that so that's being
studied in different areas of
one interested in arizona our
neighbouring state has approved
actually five million dollars to
be studying the whole mushrooms
there and that the two point
seven seven million dollars is
going to go to one site that's
looking at um and about things I
eighty with home mushroom so
hopefully will learn something
from our neighbor in arizona.
In a tripeco reductory franchise
thank you mister chaired by
shared in the committee for your
time.
Right this return committee
members i'm going to go ahead
and resume and so when we took
the challenge on
addressing this sort of second
issue I think we can see that
definitely there's some cost for
some proof of effectiveness
they're studies going on there
still a sibe does have some
benefit for people so we looked
at what other states were doing
to try to figure out you know
what what would be a good way to
what's the feasibility of
establishing a program and the
next like the rich has
legislated legal and escape in
reading about these different
states approaches three themes
really seem to manifest
themselves or three routes and
one of those top there is to
criminalization and I think that
the state the best represents
this is probably colorado so in
colorado individuals twenty one
and older are allowed to possess
society and give it to those who
are above the age of twenty one
but they cannot sell it so this
is the sort of growing gift
model so anybody over the age of
twenty one they can have it on
their person they can use the
seller's sibent they can share
it there is also some other
substances that were passed in
that ballot measure but we're
just going to focus on this i've
been for right now another state
that taken an approach like that
new york they haven't actually
passed the legislation yet but
legislation was put forward this
this past summer.
Um to establish also
decreasation for individuals
that obtain a permit so what
happens as there is an advisory
board that determines what
conditions qualify for treatment
with cellosive and and then a
car this issue to permit his
issued to a patient and that
patient has to have the medical
evaluation but also education
four hours of education and then
they'll have their permit then
they would be able to grow and
gift as well so that's the
interesting approach a little
bit different than the colorado
approach that new york is
taking.
Research again we've just heard
about arizona the whole mashroom
pennsylvania also is another
state that's been very proactive
with research in fact the their
department of health they've
mounted it that they
licensed just two cultivators
because they wanted to really
keep and I on the cultivation
and then their using that for
research in that state so
research is definitely an option
as well.
And then supervised use and
supervised use actually I think
oregon might be the best example
of this i've think sometimes we
get confused that oregon didn't
they decriminalize that that
really is a whole different
subject matter on ballot measure
one or nine and organ created
therapy centers and so what
happens in these therapy centers
and and I think organ the
promoted other rules have a
billy back the twenty twenty
three but the service that
therapy center is where a
patient can go and that's the
only place that they can legally
consume and you license to the
site they cannot use it at home
they can't buy it at the service
the third center and take it
home it is administered there in
the protective confines of the
therapies center where there is
the facilitators that are
observing the patient typically
there's two facilitators there
is video cameras you must make
sure you have a ride you have to
make me all the qualifying
conditions before hand but it's
supervised.
We'll talk a little bit more
about that and then you taught
another state that's taken sort
of the supervised approach where
they're allowing certain health
systems to administer the
solicitor and monitor watch the
patient and also empty ms
something that you taught is
tackling as well.
So based upon that landscape.
Four program types sort of came
to my like to talk a little bit
about the pluses and minuses of
what these could look like again
i've i've asked between these
fourth as far as what would be
best for new mexico because
they're all have good positive
things about them in the
question is what is best for new
mexico so the first program
consideration is really sort of
what we already typically are
hard wider for with current
medications this wait for the
FDA less that the fda do their
approval process.
And that might be the most
economical thing the state could
do is just sort of sit back left
the fda do there do their work
there would be a limited state
rule the federal government will
receive the regulatory aspects
and if approved the the FDA does
further testing as well so doses
would be developed and and this
might be you know the state
could wait a couple years and
then this approval would be
there and then the cost of the
solicitor could be covered by
insurance or insurers.
Says coverage they'll could be
limited.
Only to those conditions that
were of researched so again uh
the only I I think only
depression is indicated in
current fees three trials at
this point so there could be in
a cost coverage but then only
depression would be allowed to
be treated with the solocited
and that would of course limit
the equity of solicitor
the implementation will be
dependent on how the fda
approval time so really time
frame it'll be up to the fda and
when they do approve them.
And
turn the pitch
another program consideration
could be just approved the for
the use of the therapy centers
this would be the the oregon
model and so again guidelines
for the civil statement assisted
therapy the pat would be based
upon the research protocols that
we've already heard some about
with the third period of
protocol that doctor lemon was
talking about again we want to
screen patience carefully close
to provision this is what keeps
it safe and then say society
administration making sure that
the cell site that is being dust
it's come from a reputable
source and it's as appropriate
this approach really minimizes
risk because you have uh small
number of patience you have the
supervision of two facilitators
you've got this admit the sets
that therapy center that is
being monitored as well
but it's going to be very costly
as well
I think in in oregon three
thousand dollars for a dozing
and if you don't have insurance
and it's not being covered by
medicator a different program
that is going to it it's really
choosing out there's those
wealthy people to deep pockets
there is a really people that
really simply be benefiting from
it so the equity to sort of.
Throw into the way sign I think
in that model
again there are preparatorial
followed visits
the facilitators again doctor
limitations these are these are
trained individuals that some of
them take pls basic life support
so they can be there to make
sure this is a safe therapy
session for the patient they
have hands on training they have
and there's different levels of
facilitators but I think that if
I talk to limit described is
that that that they are trained
and and really good at what they
do of course the level of
training will be dependent upon
what the real making process
demands of licenser.
And of course with that the
therapy sellers you would need
to have a source of society that
is consistent and viable and
could be used for the patience
as they tend to senders.
Another approach could be the
particularization and that
potentially commercialise it
and this would be again the
colorado model or that new york
model where patient would be
unsupervised so they would
consume the solicitor and
wouldn't necessarily have that
person overseeing them but they
also wouldn't have the therapy
afterwards the integration
session so that would be
something that might be missed
if this was simply recreated
sort of agree market for
society individuals may
experience subjective benefits
but there would be risks because
again there's not that
supervision going on you could
have a patient that takes a
dozen might be too much and then
they could have one of those
negative experiences and not
that point know how to process
it.
So again there to be issues
there and then that would
definitely require some
regulatory framework to make
sure that you know the cell side
in that is out in the community
that it is of good quality we
don't want patience this
identifying masters and
harvesting mushrooms that are
not civil sibling mushrooms and
hard themselves so there's needs
be some education as well for
patience and for the population
so that they access the
appropriate mushroom type
and this would conflict with
federal law we'd sort of be in
the same situation we are or
have been with canada's that
that that even though the
solicitor has all these
potential upsides deprivated on
the state level would be in
conflict with the fed federal
law again
last consideration is funny
research and again I think that
we've heard how research is
progressing
the state could establish a
third point so the five and fund
to provide dressed new mexico
research institutions and these
research and decision
institutions could focus on cost
effective approaches that could
be prioritised for example the
group group therapy model so
instead of having two
facilitators monitor one single
individual imagine if a group
could benefit so again that's a
way we could cut the cost and
perhaps open up there a bit more
individuals across the state
wholesale aside the motion
realization as well will likely
drive down the cost of the cilic
side in itself.
And that would also likely
benefit more people would be
able to participate in some of
seven therapy.
This implementation could occur
quickly because we do have as
we've heard many studies going
on here in the state of new
mexico already and we we know
that this research is being done
facilitators are getting trained
this is the limiting factor is
having the facilitators to
actually run these therapy
centers so if we have a couple
years of research and are
training facilitators that could
provide a better spring for it
down the road perhaps the spring
ported to therapy centers like
the oregon model that we'd
already have our facilitators
tra.
So ethics equity and engagement
so given the promising research
with some assignment especially
with end of life issues it
really can provide a quality of
life for end of life and so it
it's it's just an ethical thing
that we should look into can
cancel the site and work for it
for some individuals.
Equity we want to make sure that
as many people can access it
and also this is interesting
insure that our facilitators
also represent our new new
mexico population as well make
sure that we have equity in our
facilitators so that people can
have that unique experience that
they need.
I'm and then we must engage with
the tribes and pointless in
nations to protect the rights
and transit traditions
as well and how insure the
respect for the indigenous
sovereignty and their
traditions.
Next slide it says additional
considerations but I don't think
this should say first steps in a
way because are these program
considerations probably cannot
take place unless we've really
addressed some of these items
right here and I think this is
the spring board where we can
start the dialog in the
discussion about what happens
next.
But again efforts to sub-
support community engagement we
need to find out what the
community was in include them in
that process and those who do
research will need protection
immunity from from a uh.
I have planned for its motor
from from legality
we need to find out where to
obtain safe so are we going to
keep using sympathic that's
again mostly is for research or
looked around the whole mashed
remote where we could have
potentially cultivators here in
our state create the measurement
the sellers have mushrooms that
would be utilized in our
research here
the facilities we need to get
facilitaries trained because
sometimes this training can
eight months if not up to a
year.
And so again looking what other
states have done the smell start
time would probably be about
three years two to three years
and we'll talk a little bit
about more more how
other states did approach
implementation
so cost of the state would be
dependent hon what route was
taken what could program was
considered.
Um but but regulatory structure
of federal enforcement
discretion and the collection of
taxes and fees would all have to
be determined to discussed.
For example colorado in arizona
to establish their programs I
think colorado was it was about
four million and an oregon seven
million over two years so they
had a two year rollout period
there a lot of seven million for
it and their expectation for
costs are after a three point
one million a year and they hope
to pay for that all with taxes
and fees licensing fees fees to
the therapy center taxes on this
other side and
fees to the cultivators so that
that is the goal in twenty
twenty three I think the only
took it about three hundred
thousand and for twenty twenty
four so far boost upon the
numbers about one point seven
million and and again i'd rather
wait to the end of twenty twenty
four to really have a firmer
number for you but based upon
the number of facilities they
have in therapy centers and wet
their licensing fees are that
seems to be a estimate so
they are not necessarily
breaking that three point one
million um threshold each year.
And then expectations again is
that the revenue from and a fee
program fees would cover the
cost of running the program
itself there's going to clinical
costs.
So the current third thirty
model is pricey the third period
of model where you have the two
for facilitators uhm and and
would not be covered by fda
would not be covered by
insurance until fda provide the
solicitor would not be covered
the current models are safe but
costs very costly and but which
was nice to know is that
research is being done with
regards to group sessions as
well as the whole mushroom to to
bring down the clinical costs of
civil site in therapy.
Mexico medicaid cannot cover the
cost of solicitor better keep
currently does not cover the two
facilitator therapy model use
for society and assisted therapy
either however other
psychotherapy more
not models for example the group
therapy
could potentially be covered by
medicaid.
Only makes you could decide to
cover socials have an assistant
therapy with other state funds.
Okay so thank you any questions.
Let's.
Okay doctor drum did you want to
have anything.
The.
Uh mr chairman no thank you I
think they've covered it well.
Yeah.
Well let's go to the committee
then
let's start listening here with
you representative choves will
come around this way
thank you mister cherry do have
a couple of questions one of
them
excuse me I was interested in in
what you said in terms of the
work that you're doing at me
logical umm so my question is.
What do you have an age
breakdown my first question do
you have an age breakdown
certain may be demographic is a
better better way to ask that
and then also um
how long
after
treatment do you continue to
follow.
To follow the patience.
So is there a point in time when
they stop taking the philosopher
and then you follow them or do
you only follow them well there
well it's been administered to
them.
Thank you mr care I think you
representative each others the
the only study that we're doing
now that is involved in malaria
group people is a study with
mdma it's not with source open
and what what we're studying is
for people seventy may is what's
been study the most your ptsd so
we have people who are post
pardon they have ptsd they have
opio use disorder that is
stapilized on a method of
interview pronouncing it so we
do early eighteen week sequence
of their appeal with mdma
sessions of the outcome through
looking at for that or comptsd
can you treat ptsd in this
population resumption of the
point use since or we're
following people for six months
out afterwards um and the
russell looking more and
experimentals to help us
actually affect the bond bonding
between the mother in the child
you know we know that there's
intervenerational transmission
of of trauma addiction we're
trying to see is this a
potential way to effect the two
weeks have a part where we
actually refill me in the
mothers in the babies before the
there p in the middle of the
therapy and and afterwards but
six months is sort of the time
frame earn on that.
And then my other question is in
terms of the use for depression
and anxiety um
have have any of the thirties.
So my question is is that a long
term use for anxiety and
depression
so life long use
yeah i'm thank you again that
thank you mister share and
representative show this so the
studies that are being done are
this is very different than the
model for instance of using you
know pros account other
depressions and the study is
that have been done have
involved a use of air usually
one or two different sessions
and they've been relatively
short to follow up of six months
and we have now a fees through
trial that were one of the
people in the national trial of
this trail will follow people
for up to i'm sixty weeks so we
will actually get one year data
so that'll answer the long term
follow up and depending people
have the ability to use up to
for for doubt this is a source
i've been over that period of
time what I know from the phase
two studies is that source I
have it appears to be a very
effective in the short term
there's
the depression improves
dramatically usually within a
week or so and that continues
for them you know for up to six
weeks and some sturdy is six
months that others but we don't
have the longer term but but
it's important to realize that
it's not involved being
continuous source I have been
uses no studies of new daily
year these are basically one
taped when to chew three all day
sessions and then
follow up after that but it is
part of all that if so so I have
been as approved by the fta that
they'll be some a need for
reassessment and in if people
they say wall you'll is that
better worse than what what I
can say is that for because we
have a study we have people that
are on daily and they depressed
instant a lot of them interest
into being in the study because
they because of the side effects
of the other depressed center or
because it doesn't really work
for them so I think that if if
it was approved through may well
be models that would involve.
Yes some continuing use like you
may have a repeaters to twelve
months but that's all still to
be determined.
Thank you mister chair.
Representative right thank you
mister chair and thank you this
is so interesting and um
informative
and one of my questions is the
three thousand dollars producing
um I wasn't sure if that was um
from dr lehman or doctor french
you mentioned and can you tell
us what that includes
thank you mister chair thank you
representative for our the three
thousand dollars is from for the
whole
therapy event so sellers the
silicen portion of that would
probably be about five hundred
dollars and then the facilitator
and the therapy session would be
the remainder but three thousand
is about the the amount that was
coming out of oregon with
regards to what it would cost an
individual to have an experience
that there is session just one
session.
Okay
and is there any way to
economise that like having
several people at one time or
this is a very individualised
thinking mister chair I think
you representative or will that
the group model is a way of
addressing that in bringing the
costs down and again that would
require facilities to be trained
to handle more than one
individual
and so I think time will tell
whether that is a viable option
it likely could be
I think you are correct that
often types these therapeutic
journeys as well can be very
personal there might be some
discretion based upon the
patient if they're willing to do
prepare appeared they want to
participate that might be the
option that they'll have to
participate in but that that
would be a way of bringing more
equity to the situation great
and mr chair I also was
wondering if you've looked at
the return of investment you
know the savings over long term
you know someone not living with
severe depression or ptsd or
substance use disorder.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative then maybe you do
a little add on here but with
regards that if you think about
a daily dosing of an attitude
present and all the side effects
that happens with that and if we
are able to transition and
patient to two therapy sessions
and some good psychotherapy
afterwards you're talking
a great return on investment i'd
say all the side of it's all the
multiple medications that
patience often can find them on
themselves on we could reduce
that bulk that pill burn and and
you know have it with the
session I think that the cost
would be definitely worth it.
I would I would add on its heart
to answer without the long term
studies this point in time and
that's why I remember excited
about the one that's happening
now we're really skill one year
outcomes people have done costs
modeling are with them mdma and
ptsd consider study selling that
those effects appear to to be
stable up to about a year I mean
it it doesn't get cost effective
there else want to mention that
it's not it would be one thing
if we were dealing with the
situation where we have great
treatments for all these
problems like if we already had
AAA pill that made your
depression as I do go away or to
your ptsd some of the interest
in the research is that we don't
want to me with these are these
are depression society and of
life care substance use are
areas that we
don't necessarily have a good
comparison because we don't have
a good treatment
thank you thank you mister chair
thank you I have a lot of
questions so i'd appreciate
brief answer so dosing
our is like with canabas there's
stronger strains and weaker
strings is that true with
societies
thank you mister chair thank you
representative thompson
will the synthetic they were
able to dictate the potency with
the synthetic and it's very you
know metered and and regular now
with regards to the measurements
you can have different it can be
very very and also there's talk
that there's also a synergy as
well they call it the entrance
effect where some individuals
feel that the whole measurements
really what gives people the bet
the better therapy than just
this synthetic but yeah
you would have to test and make
sure that the potency
was maintained they could be
variable okay and and is the
dozing by wait
I thank you very much missus mr
chair and vice chair
the dosing of the synthetic.
Attempts to be about twenty five
to thirty milligrams the
equivalent of that in the homas
room is probably the equivalent
to roughly three grams there is
very esim from stream to strain
i've been in touch with the
tubed after susannie who's with
the scotso research institute
and they're actually as far as I
know the only one who is fta
permission to grow mushrooms for
research they're working on fda
approval with the goal to have
it within five to ten percent to
others if you had through
grounds of solicitor but then
you would be reproduceable
between that that amount okay
and will miss will or is there
any studies that show that the
need for prozac or whatever uhm
is decreased or discontinued or
do we have those kind of studies
yet.
We don't have those kind of said
he said
I think you and who qualifies to
be a facilitator do you have to
be a behavior of health
professional art can you be a
pair professional with training
who will qualify
thank you mr based chair it
varies and i'm gonna give you in
the research point of view and
so and what's generally required
is that there's one therapist
that needs to be your license
therapist it can be an mda can
be a ph can be a psychiatric
nurse practitioner the second
person can have a lesson level
of trading in that and is there
any research going on on
microdosing.
Thank you mister chairman I
think you're sending the
thompson
the the one study i'm aware of
eh with regards to my protesting
and microducing as it does it's
about five to ten percent of
what is standard doses so this
is a very very small amount
they won't say that that i'm
aware of uh they say it's no
better than place so there isn't
a lot of research to promote
microducing at this time okay
thank you and my my final thing
is more of a statement
we in the legislature.
Not not as so much as the
finance committees but look at
return on investment is is
anyone are there any studies
that have been done or in the
works to figure out a return on
investment.
So that we can use that.
Thrown in these studies that
have happened to date we are
starting to claribry with the a
group called second health
equity initiative that's once or
but get the issues of return
return and an investment in and
are our interest in the in the
group there are p model is much
focused on the economic and just
to elaborate a little bit of
aunt after french said so if
you're talking about two
therapists for one person for
sixteen hours compared to it
another model where you might
have for people of which likely
only one or two of them would
need to be licensed therapist
others could be facilitators
could potentially decrease the
costs by two thirds so will work
I think it's important to study
that model to look at the return
and investment thank you mr
chair and that I think that'll
be really important if we try to
do legislation
i'm gonna ask your question for
senator hickey who's following
this online
this is not my time so I get
more time
it's his time
could the two presenters craft
to bill for an oregon approach.
Not a valid measure for new
mexico.
Include regulatory process in
how medicaid could cover
including extra costs by state
for medicaid.
Include budget with recurring
doctor hiki and other
legislators could help craft
could it be done by beginning of
session.
Could include two year phase in
return on investment for state
could be huge.
Especially with the addicted
population
thank you.
Now you didn't really make a
recommendation as to which of
the for approaches using he
saying let's take the oregon how
would you feel about that and
could you get it done for this
upcoming session.
Thank you mister i'll tackle
that
i'm not so sure that it would be
necessary the right model
again and i'm only speaking from
you to my experience with
medical candidates where
we had a different approach.
There's a lot of moving pieces
there
and again I think there's a lot
that needs to perhaps be better
between now than accession
before we could really have a
bill like that that fine too and
also looking at the organ model
i'm not sure that there's really
the equity piece there that we
as new mexicans I think cherish
and it's a costly one as well.
So.
I don't want to say no but that
that would be a push or eat are
you all recommending any of the
four or just putting him out
there and letting us make our
own richard decisions ourselves
yeah
thank you for your confidence in
the legislative price
doctor leaving you to have yeah
thank you mister share thank you
that's sure thank you center
hickey as well I have to say i'm
i'm here as a as he receive
faculty and and sort of a
medical advisor and consulted
and I can't really actually make
recommendations on policy I
would certainly be happy to
participate in any process
however having said they're them
I I would give some agreement
with reductor french that I
think that from having gone over
this I think there's a potential
for a new mexico model that is
better addressing or stayed in
our and our needs of the
problems issues of health equity
community engagement that could
potentially have the best from
the different models.
Then he he responded already
said
one of the third it would have
to include the inequity piece
you know if we draw again
apparently does it so your idea
of the new mexico model may be
the way to go but I think i'm
sure he's heard this so we'll
we'll move on from from senator
doctor hickey's views and go to
representative chase you who has
her own views
a vegan mister chairman and
thank all of you and i'm gonna
ask a couple of questions if
there's anything you already
addressed because I was late
donates for it just tell me to
watch the video because i'm
going to and I do apologize for
that
I
wonder I doubt that you have it
now but could you get or can you
tell us how to find out how much
arizona and pennsylvania
appropriate for their clinical
trial research
and and so maybe there would be
a per patient cast we might want
to have that information.
I don't expect an answer now but
if you could direct us we have
we have competence down here and
and uh.
I'm yeah I can take a stab at
that time thank you and very
much and mister terror based
here that majority leader
chassis the I can forward who
i'm sender of the bill that was
a passed in arizona they
approved five million dollars
it's going to three different
studies and I think that would
be in that internet for home
mushroom research I think that
would may be helpful through
that
they also the and white paper
report that came out from the
doh meetings with you and i'm
collaboration I believe is being
distributed today to the
committee and that has some of
that information
thank you and mr chair i'm I
will I was intrigued by I have
gone through the handouts and
that.
There needs to be probably at
the national level but i'm i'm
not so sure but what the states
are looking at it to an
occupational medicine evaluation
of the product and handling
cause it look like there could
be some
risks that need to be addressed
in the whole process for the
safety of them people producing
it.
You just agree with answer.
Oh think of mr chairman think of
represent chasing yeah I think
that there is an occupational
health portion to this that's
going to be probably more though
with cultivators that are doing
a large scale so that would be
something to write into rule
making with regards to
conditions at the cultivators
okay thank you and I I guess I
was always interested in this
from the standpoint of having
represented parents and I
represented a children too but a
lot of the parents I represented
whose children had been removed
to because of perhaps neglector
or so forth were themselves
subject to the childhood trauma
and ptsd and and so that's
that's kind of a continuing
cycle and
so i'm interested in that and.
So I was thinking of it for a
ptsd but then you said mdma is
more for ptsd does this not hold
promise also for ptsd.
III think source over does whole
promise it just hasn't on the
level of study that mdma has
done under our studies that are
starting to happen for a for
that I think
one area that I think would be
prickly right would till the cat
would be a source I had
differences for first responder
try trauma veterans trauma and
potentially for the transitions
of intergenerational trauma
that's actually very much what
we're studying with media may
right now you can very much
mister chairman
thank you representative
representative to hernin you're
next
thank you mister chair and when
you first begin europe
presentation that I understand
that this drug could be used
help prevent suicide when it
makes you did I do that.
Correctly or not
I think mister chair
representative here and no not
not not necessarily I think that
that.
Some benefits that are gained
from a session
would be helpful for somebody
with treatment assistant
depression however it would not
be at you know curative that
that that simply upon having one
session or two sessions that you
could definitely say the person
would not have any to the
satellite additions down the
road I think we're a little bit
too early to know that I
definitely think it could be an
outjunked into helping
individuals that do have that
type of depression though.
So could you display thank you
mr chair thank you presenter
could you just explain that the
statement in the in your
tend out that says that this
could be used to improve the
quality of life for people who
are
suffering from a terminal
illness and my question
understand what that means and
maybe you could explain that it
just jump in here one mike at a
time because we're getting
feedback so if you're not
speaking turn it off
well.
And
oh
sure there so thank you mister
thank you representative from
the real quick the end of like
what that's talking mostly about
the depression at the end of
life so it's not to
help the individual.
Terminate their life is to help
with all of those end of life
issues that oppression that's
associated with it it freeze
them from some of those burdens
so that they can have AAA
happier existence as they do
reach that milestone.
The.
And and
thank you mister chair
representation
we don't have direct evidence on
suicide though it is reasonable
that it to assume that if if if
source I am and successfully
treats major depression that
that would have a possibly
effective and suicide but
there's not specific research
i'm as first the end of life
terminal caring say atm there is
now increasing studies i'd be
happy to share the studies
perhaps with them mr darson in
and send that out to people in
the group that is one area where
as as doctor french mentioned
there's that some of compelling
case for supporting a
compassionate use of that
doesn't require another five
years of studies for people who
have a material it's expectancy.
Thank you and then one final
question there have been so many
children in new mexico who have
committed to the site as the
where i'm going with this line
of questioning and i've been
very concerned about that and so
the question has been s
specifically about the age for
which this joke has been tried
upon and I don't know that you
ever specifically state it at
that they bottom line each for
which it could be tried and if
they were ever included in any
of the clinical trials.
To my knowledge I made twenty
one thank you very much mister
age twenty one is been the the
lower eight limit a lot of the
studies used eight sixty five is
the upper limit that's not
happening so much anymore
current society study rules you
out for health conditions but
does not really you up but we're
using age twenty one thank you
mr chair
thank you representative
representative block
thank you mister chairman thank
you guys for your presentation a
lot of information here so I
appreciate it so first quick
question regarding the actual
drug itself you know how how
does this differ from other
drugs like I began mdma other
things that were testing and
looking at how does this where
are we focusing on this one
specifically and I get I don't
know if you can have a answer
for that send a little
legislature usually tells you
what to do or whatever but why
specifically this and then also
regarding the the folks that
this would actually affect I
know you guys talked a little
bit about the folks that are not
eligible so to speak such as
people who have skits of friendi
are people who have these very
very traumatic
issues that they're dealing with
i'm wondering what's the
population if we take others to
focus out so we don't have any
adverse effects mister chairman
I know it's a big couple of
questions but I know you can do
it.
The.
Thank you mister chairs thank
you represent representative
let me give a brief overview of
the different tops and so so
a source I been works very
similarly to mascline which is
the chemical in in pody and
similar early tell sd and
similarly although longer acting
to dmt those were all what we
call classical loose editions or
classic psychedelics and they
have similar effects i'm way so
sipping the one being focused on
I think there's a couple of
different reasons it's compared
with say to lsd a melisti last
pretend to twelve hours
difficult to study with that
sort of a time frame and
difficult to deliver just six
there
I think
compared to masco analysis
basically some of the issues
have been a cash in it and and
it with extreme respect to our
native american community is
some of which would prefer that
mescal and not be studied you do
it's being by reported so I
think brings up its own issues
so I think of the classic
secudelics source I hope it's
probably after more
you touched and I began I became
as a very different situation in
them I begin has seemed to have
specific effects and upcrading
as well as psychedelic effects
it may be particularly effective
for a use disorder it is also a
magnitude less safe and then um
you have source i've been so the
studies that they need to happen
with them I begin i'm involved
with more of a medical eyes
approach includes cardiac money
during included seen a morris
scanning so I think there is an
important role for I begin
research but it's it's far from
so side been where I think the
interest of the your committee
in the legislature is actually
bringing this to the population
sooner.
Thanks so much mister chair and
then last question I guess it's
on I don't know what page nine
talking about this unm study i'm
wondering mr chairman and I
don't know if you have much
information on this but
the question which i'm gonna ask
any weeks i've i've been really
good this and this committee um
mister chairman what what is the
monitoring of these these folks
and if you want to answer very
quickly how do we monitor him
between treatments thanks mister
chair.
Mr chair so i'm unit described
that that through one study in
particular to the society steady
people are in that study for
sixty weeks they get phone calls
every two weeks to assess their
depression symptoms potentially
they can have a repeat does the
source I have been that they
have online a second social
education about integration and
peer support so it's it's
particularly rich in i'm in the
continuing follow up.
Thank you a representative
representative vincent thank you
mister did you get your head
back yes sir you found it okay
very far without the.
You know I guess my question is
i've got several but how is it
administered.
The organic versus the
synthetic.
Mister chair.
The understand that it is for a
pretty easy it's it's appeal you
to swallow the pill and the the
organic I spoke to the people
there is owned that I mentioned
earlier they're actually looking
at a mf approval for a product
that has the standardized dose
of soul saving mushrooms in
chocolate
thank you mister chair and the
reason i'm interested in that is
in the pre hospital setting
running on an ambulance for
twenty five years I have seen
the people's you know use so as
I haven't for recreational and I
didn't really like the side
effects of it and I was
wondering what's its
administered.
And I thought I heard you say
the house life of it is probably
somewhere around six eight
hours.
The.
If they get in four hours deep
and they're only halfway into
the treatment and they don't
like the way that it's making a
filler you don't like what it's
doing until is there a drug that
can counter out counter
counteract the effects of mister
chair.
Mr chair there there's not a
reversal agent for social been
like we have for you know we
don't have a nurse can for so
saving to m to do that there are
medications that can be used to
a chance for a challenging
experience there bench a days of
peans i'm speaking as because it
also trained as a as the
therapist there we try to have
to do that I mean the feeling is
that the challenging experiences
author associated with the
behavioral change in the pivil
experiences or our goal is to
provide increased support and
try to avoid a a medication
approach but having said that we
have emergency medication in the
board we including beds are days
opinions if we need them.
Thank you mister chair so what I
hear you say is once you take
the ride you're taking the right
the whole eight hours and
whether you like it or not
you're gonna you're going to
finish it up and the other thing
you mentioned there was five
million dollars put into the
study three different studies.
The three different agencies are
folks that's going to be doing
the studies are you guys sharing
data with each other mister
chair.
Mr share and
those three studies have been
started yet
i'm in touch particularly with a
person that's involved in
having the fda approval for with
it with call the investigation
on new drug and we're we're
looking into the potential of
using that same fear approval to
potentially do studies at UNM so
yes we're in in touch with their
is owner.
That's all I have thank you
mister chairman
thank you representative perfect
timing
representative for three c a
robot cover you know you're
turn.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
to all of you
I am
it's amazing to me.
Uh that we are
seeing.
The vast degree of.
Steady and focus on.
This the together drug and
process it's not really a drug
but but natural substance vs
what we saw with canabas.
The histories are very different
the researchers are very
different however they come from
the same natural.
Um.
World.
And long term traditional use
for centuries so.
I can't help but.
See that there is a way that
we're handling both discussions
very differently so it makes me
wonder
on many planets so in
preparation for.
Today I didn't little better
research mister chair and I
found a home an article that you
may be already familiar with.
Done by doctor kevin bunky from
university of michigan and here
associates.
The study of um salad is.
The seller say then sorry
to chronic pain.
Similar to the study that cannot
because was related to in terms
of handling chronic paint and in
his first paragraph he
introduced the fact that and I
wasn't aware of this april of
this year the fda arm issued a
announced there are plans to
change the
classification of canada's from
a level one to a level three
to consider with
other drugs such as thailand all
coding to start thrown and
animal like steroids.
So that's that's a good thing
because.
It then reduces the federal arm.
Uh legal issues and that's
important for this study as well
so.
Rather than go into a lot of
detail about why I believe
there's reasons for handling
this differently the studies and
the discussions I want to ask
when a few questions.
What pharmaceutical companies
are in lying right now to
distribute I don't know why i'm
having such a hard time said
seven site seller site and sorry
silly
right now can you can you tell
me that thank you.
The.
The the pays three studies that
are being done or being done
largely by two different groups
of one is so now who sign is a
non profit and they're not
actually a farm promising
company that's actually the
study that we're involved in
here you and them and so it's a
non profit there's another
company called compass compass
has at least two or perhaps
three face three studies that
are there so I would suit those
who be the most likely I mean
i'm not sure what the path we
would be through selling as
because they mention they're not
a farmer suitable company they
would likely need to collaborate
with other people.
Thank you mister chair and uh.
Well that's that's um.
Good to hear that it's not major
corporate.
Distributors or of of this
particular.
Study and therapy.
So the other question I have has
to do with
let's see if I can find it
and I want to thank you for your
page sixteen euro statement on
ethics and equity because that's
very important for our state to
continue uh in to consider.
So.
I didn't strap my question sorry
mister chair give me one second
and find it.
The other point that I wanted to
make and question is that you
mentioned that there's
on page nineteen the use of home
measurement products as opposed
to synthetics could disk
decrease the costs throughout
the discussions in these pages
concerning regulation and class
had to do with
insurance companies also so that
you see my concern is that.
Once we get into synthetic it
makes it a lot more lucrative
for companies and insurance
companies because what's the
payoff that's what they're
considering and so it concerns
me that we're doing it that we
not develop from actually.
The use of whole product versus
synthetic because I understand
all of the ramifications health
ways that drugs such as pros
lithium and others I can the
list goes on the chemical
substances associate it.
With those medications how very
deep.
And long term devastating could
affects on the body
as long as we can get away from.
Going towards the synthetic
versus natural um
I would make that.
A strong recommendation when
you're looking at new mexico
thank you in a stretch
thank you representative
senator so the olympics thank
you mister chair this is all
very fascinating
so thank you for the
presentation I was curious how
how does a psychological
psychedelic work is it a
chemical effect on the brain or
is it opening somebody to break
through about their trauma
with how does it work well how
does it work where other
treatment resistant depression
has not.
Okay so with regards to
solicitor
mister chair I representative
city office and with regards to
society and works on a receptor
in the brain.
And in doing so creates sort of
a status of your plastic city so
essentially it opens the mind up
to rewire itself.
And so you're you're helping the
sections of the brain
communicate with each other but
you're also helping it grow and
rewire and through that process
is how you know when you could
take a tramatican situation
rewire the circuitry so that
then a more normal way of
processing it or more about
functioning where processing it
could take place.
Um and I will defer to doctor
limit for more
thank you mr mister care and
representative i'm just to a
little bit too doctor french the
way that may happen
psychologically and what one
question that often comes up is
how can source side in so many
different conditions you know
we're off the bigger okay just
drag treats lukimia and they're
here talking a lot we think
there's a certain commonality
that baby being affected there's
actually that if there's
something called the default my
network that we think is
affected by source i've been and
what it may be affecting is
things like rumination
rumination may be a quarter part
of it and so if you think about
anxiety we do these leaves to be
ruminated if you think about ocd
we remember if you think about
trauma we're after bruminating
back in the past so that may be
some of how it's working in the
psychological level there's also
a process of refraining that
that happens with trauma and
this has been shown with mdma
but I suspect happens with
others where by being able to
process the trauma in during the
psychedelic state of you may be
able to process it it may be
similar to something prolonged
exposure therapy for ptsd where
we expose people back to the
trama so that maybe another way
that it works having several
that there's there's a total
need to actually look at this
and so all the studies that were
involved in have scales such as
the challenging experiences a
question here emotional
breakthroughs mister will
experience is trying to look at
it at what is happening so we're
we're we're pretty much curious
about the same thing you're
curious about think you and how
does it compare to kitterman or
some of the other types of drugs
that are being studied for
similar purposes.
Yeah.
Kettiman is being study for some
of the same some of the same
indications that the degree
mister share for the question of
the
the question kept me is actually
very complex because kettiman
can be using ways that is just
being infused or it can be used
more similar to society where
it's part of that there are
piece of it can be used both
ways kennemy into me tensor work
a different way for instantly
trauma instead of actually off
in a bursing u towards the
trauma which had me happened
with mdma by its associative
effects to give him on some
space from the trauma and you
may be able to to process that
there so I think it works a
little bit differently on a
neural chemical process most of
the research with catamin has
been for for depression
thank you thank you mister
chocolate is the very
interesting
uh
proposal appreciate it.
Representative to thomson thomas
you have an a thompson you have
another
seventy percent of your it's
your turn right.
Thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation I had a
similar question as senators to
the olopes just about i'm again
I get the gain and and what are
the pros and cons compared to
solicitor I know the I begin
does have some cardiovascular
challenges with it but I know
that there's similar like
rewiring of the neuro
plasticity and the brain to
override some of those trauma
responses can you
explain that a little bit.
Yeah III think part of the
difference is where these are
add as far as like the studying
process right now there have
been no phase one studies of
ipane in the country I I know
there's active discussions with
you in new mexico about train to
support separate really I think
what we'd have to do is started
a fees one study that would
either have normal volunteers
and actually work with that to
ensure safety there's a recent
study that came up in was done
from
with his organ actually that
don't have stanford that looked
at am I beginning in traumatic
bringing injury and they for
instance looked at using it with
a with a magnesium to decrease
the cardiac taxicity so I think
them I begin may be very
promising but it more needs
those early those phase one in
two studies to look at safety
where face where we're so saving
were passed that we feel like
we're at the face three studies
and that's why other states were
looking at the idea is there a
safe way to do so aside then
I don't think we're at that
point now i'm sure we're not at
that point with that beginning
but I think I begin this
promising thank you so much for
your response thank you mister
chair
thank you center
and I only had one question
left.
Well actually I too where do you
get the patience for the current
study a doctor are they referred
from private practice or the
outcome through the u n system
thank you very much I appreciate
the question
most multiple ways in the head
of parameter interest and before
the city we actually have in
email that people can email us
we so people can reach us
directly so it says kind of a
mixture of all of these we get
people that are referred
directly we get referrals
through unm weird people in the
in the community ross of very
interested in maintaining
diverse cities equity here so
we're trying to do outreach two
community clinic systems and
other in and other systems there
but but I would say no they're
they're they're definitely not
all from from you and and
they're they're a diverse group
and and are you still accepting
additional participants in the
study we are.
Thank you mister chair thank you
we may have some referrals
no no and currently here right
i'll be in the hallway i'll be
in the whole way thinking
applications
but my other question is no it's
not a question as much it's just
to comment we also have an and
you'll notice it I just wanted
to make sure you don't miss it
uh an additional white paper
that the department of health is
prepared and sent to us but with
much more detailed information
on on the same topic so it's it
should be in your mail boxes
and is there any.
I i'm you know you're not
advocating on one approach over
the other three of the four that
you presented but the one on
research is is is one that I was
kind of leaning toward and then
I started asking myself is there
any precedent to your knowledge.
For a state government to
finance research into a health
issues uh this state government
do we have do we have a system
in place for doing that uh is
there a lane item in the doh
budget for research projects I I
i'm trying to figure how we
would do it and how we would say
well this is one that's
important but your sixteen
suggestions aren't as important
how would we make those choices
mr chair I i'm not sure if the
member of i'm the right person
to answer this question it's not
familiar to me as a mechanism
however I would have to look
into it I feel like there has
been maybe I I feel like that in
the past there may have been
appropriations for research
purposes.
I'll get back to you on that III
can remember at one point
somebody from unm.
Not from the whole science the
center but from I think the
department of psychology or so
wanted to do wanted to do.
Research in he asked for junior
money for research into this is
before we had legalized
candidates into.
Agricultural approaches to
maximizing canada's or how to
reduce water use in canada some
it was something it wasn't
really the medical effects of
canada's for the emotional
effects it was more like the
economic impact effects and and
I thought we we founded we we
couldn't figure out a way to to
do it but I I would be open to
if that if we keep that on a
list of four approaches we need
to figure that out.
Stem research
stem cell research to refund it
I don't know
sep representative chasing also
reminded me that at one point
there was some
in an issue around funding stem
cell research was state money.
So then we couldn't remember if
we actually funded it or not do
you remember senator rodriguez
you remember specifically for
years anyhow that that'll be if
we keep that on the on the
possible list of four
possibilities we are to figure
out how to do it in a way that
because it immediately would you
we would if we funded it I can
see that next session we would
have fifty requests for research
projects in in we need to have a
way of deciding which of the
ones that really are appropriate
for us to fund and which ones do
we see
you know if this is too
important to pass up on let's do
it right and senator i'm happy
to get back to you on that I
think I think the purpose of
what we did with the white paper
and with today's presentation is
really just to provide
foundation on the allege about
what is happening right now and
sort of what these four various
pathways might look like but
I don't I don't know if we're
were at the stage to new mexico
of making you know really
confident recommendations that I
think there's a lot of work to
do and even if you know the
legislature the executive agreed
on some path forward you know a
program itself would take
probably two most likely three
years to even do you know
continuously and to do the right
way with all the different
elements that play so
I don't know if that's helpful
but I I sometimes think that we
just need shared knowledge we
need to sort of level sat and
understand you know together
like what we're actually not get
ahead of ourselves not get too
excited about it because it
really is exciting work but just
do that level saudi and and
share share knowledge and
research first sell but benefits
senator rodriguez you have to
comment mrperiod chairman thank
you very much I just yes I do
have a quick question if I may
ask mister chairman and dr
lehman probably would be the one
you mentioned after leaving that
um if the fda approves you to
hear that correctly if they
approve silent siben that they
likely would approve it mostly
like.
For depression.
Okay now that being the case but
wouldn't that actually be
effective overall for substance
abuse issues or something that
because they cost impression
depression is usually the the
final here when people are
crashing or or or just ongoing
depression and someone from
substance abuse or other mental
health issues do if this is a
case it seems like we would be
addressing the issue as a whole
mister chairman doctor
thank you mister chair
I think this is someone unknown
because and the approval of a
second electoral hazard happened
yet and in general there's like
a specific indication all the
studies that are being done of
source i've depression have
excluded people substance use
disorders so there's no data
there you know for that no I do
think that if it was approved
for depression that one could
likely use it for end of life to
pressure in exactly so I think
there'll be an overlap there I
think if it was approved for
depression and it would likely
not get covered for use for
substance use disorders without
additional research that's my
own opinion thank you very much
and I would think that
incidentally it would impact
you being taken for a depression
that it would impact other
issues but thank you very much
mister chairman thanks
well thank you senator and thank
you all this has been very
inlightening
eight I think uh we will will
you you will certainly hear from
senator hickey it not from
anybody else but you know
possibly working on legislation
it may be a little premature
we'll find out how premature it
is it you know if we read it up
to flag pulling it
suddenly a shot to tethers but
it could fly high in mighty for
who knows how long so thank you
for the presentation thank you
for the work you're doing is
really important stuff and
hopefully we'll have a way.
To deal with some of these
mental health problems that that
continue to play new mexico okay
members so we now move to the
second item in our agenda this
morning and that's
you know we created the health
care authority it's now up in
functioning and we were all
worried that maybe some of the
programs it used to be uh what
we thought of human services
department the flagship programs
uh might have gotten short trips
who were here to find out that
that's not the case in what
they're doing to make sure that
they don't get ignored we have
with us the social safety net
programs at the health care
authority and we have with his
cairo children the deputy
secretary and nicky because
lusky the director of the income
support division.
So welcome and they're passing
out a hand out for us.
The.
Little person icon on the
coaster chair and just a little
cautionary note
not to have both of the demand
at the same time we get feedback
in an exportable sounds leaves
us in a bad mood.
Thank you so much mister chair
kirocha deputy secretary for the
health terr authority i'm very
happy to be here with you today
and i'm sorry i'm a brand new to
your committee and to presenting
to it so my question is
the screen ready to go for
everyone who needs to see it on
the screen as that something we
need to do.
We don't have.
Okay
great well good morning we're
very bit happy to.
Be with you here today
as you know as the healthcare
authority we
start with a land acknowledgment
and so we
humbly acknowledge that we're on
the unseeded ancestral louns of
the original peoples of the
publo a patch and in a past
present in future with gratitude
repair or respects to the land
the people in the beautiful
communities that contribute to
what is today known as the state
and new mexico
I know you've all seen our
health care authority mission
vision and goals
as we moved to page two but I
just did want to point out as
you mention mister chair yes
for those of you watching
online.
While we can't show the on the
screen that the hand out it is
posted on our website so if you
go to the website go to the
committee's good a legislative
health and human services go to
hand out.
You'll find it's the last one
listed for today's so it's there
you can follow along with the
presenters thank you thank you
mr chair
so
here at the health care
authority as you mention mr
chair
we are here to ensure that are
folks and our state retain their
highest level of health
by providing whole person cost
expective accessible in high
quality health care and safety
net services you know most
studies as I don't have to tell
this committee show that about
thirty to fifty five percent of
people's health outcomes and how
healthy we are depend on our
ability to feed our families to
shelter our family it's to
transport kids to school and get
ourselves to work to pay our
utility bills and so the health
care authority hasn't last sight
of that extremely important
element of health in our new in
our new version of ourselves
we also have a goals around
really as you know leveraging
all the federal dollar we can
get through the state and new
mexico programs since a million
people roughly in our state rely
on these are services
we have in the income support
division nine hundred and
seventeen of the roughly twenty
four hundred employees and the
health care authority and and I
really
so honored to be able to
represent and lead up this
incredible group of people I
know many of you have met them
out in the community but these
are the heroes behind the scenes
who are really the people who
help people and are working
really really hard to get new
mexicans what they need to get
through their days and be well
and finally you know one of our
big goals is providing an
innovative technology
so that we can really maximise
everyone's access we're happy to
report that yes new mexico is
live right now.
With our new version and so that
gives even more access to our
new mexicans in need am I as I
mentioned on page three
am here to give you a year and
review some key accomplishments
that we are proud of this year
some of our upcoming priorities
and income support and also to
present as we are
obligated to do on the community
services block round obligated
and happy to do
am curator i've been in the role
since as the deputy since
january and in february began
acting as the acting director of
isd as we meant some leadership
changes and that was a wonderful
way to start my time in the in
the department and
it was an intense time it's been
a very intense year as I think
you all know for this team and
it was a great privilege to
start with them at that time and
then could not have been happier
to welcome nicky because lovsky
are new income support division
director in may nike comes to us
with about thirty years of
experience and the private
sector much of it running large
global call centers for customer
service so she really
understands
I I call her operational wizard
you know how to maximise the
efficiencies how to train how to
build staff morale which is some
stuff will be talking about
today and we wanted to introduce
you as we do here at the health
per thirty to a customer and
also to a case work or so on
page five you'll meet down yell
at a customer who's real typical
of the many people we serve
although not we serve so many
people as you know
daniels are single marms she has
got a three year old she works
at a convenience store on she's
been enrolled that can community
college but she had to drop out
as it's all to come in because
our car needed a repair she
couldn't afford
so she currently only receives
medicaid but she came into isd
to apply for snap and also lie
heap the energy associ.
Stunts her monthly and come as
one thousand three hundred and
forty four dollars she was
working about twenty eight hours
a week at twelve bucks an hour
she doesn't currently receive
child support and her monthly
expenses were exceeding as you
can see
her ability to meet those
payments that they coming in at
fifteen fifty so she submitted
those applications and she is
crossing her fingers that she
won't have to wait too long to
get some relief
we also wanted to introduce you
to a composite of our many nine
hundred and seventeen folks this
is a case worker may is a family
assistance analyst one she
started in twenty twenty three
and I really did hear this
everywhere I went I started this
job because I wanted to help
people in need that's why those
folks are in those offices of
course they want a good paint
job too but they also are there
because they really care she has
a high school deployment she's
got two years of experience and
customer service and her monthly
income is four thousand one
hundred and fifty eight sixty
seven right now because she has
an eight percent temporary
differential from a settlement
that the department negotiated
with the federal partner
and we were able to use that
temporary money to give her a
little bit of a bump the normal
base rate is twenty two thirteen
it's now with that eight percent
at twenty three ninety which
helps a little bit she really
loves the work but sheep does
struggle with the complexity of
these federal programs I did
myself try to sit down and learn
how to do a case I encourage
everyone to do that at your
local field office it's hard
these folks are not only ningers
of the system the aspirin system
that they use to get people
eligibility they are
also finding out in subtle ways
whether the person standing
before them is housed or not
house they're very sensitive in
large part.
When they can be when they have
capacity to be and we do
encourage that because people
who come in come in
sometimes embarrassed to ask for
help or you know not wanting to
be there and they really do an
amazing job of both the
technical and the customer
service side
to make people the old good
about being there but
you know she's really glad that
we're out of backward because
that was incredible pressure on
you know people were we're going
home i'm in tears at the end of
their work day during that
because they were so frustrated
they can help people.
But she is a little nervous
because that eight percent is
temporary and you know she may
need to join
her the twenty percent of our
work forced in the health care
authority who are on these
benefits themselves.
If she doesn't keep that eight
percent
the officers really having
trouble recruiting and retaining
staff because it's really a
complex job and my
intercoworkers really need more
training and financial security
on page seven we're gonna go
into our year of review and
will follow up with the diane
mayer at the end of the
presentation
we have had an absolutely
unprecedented unwinding from the
pandemic as i'm sure you heard
about
we also
really
wanted to make sure we took
every opportunity we could to
take waivers give get those
flexibilities to make sure that
people in the mexico were having
a hard time during the pound
damage and coming out of it
we're able to get those benefits
that meant that.
We really leaned in to make sure
that every new mexican receive
what they could be eligible for
we had you know auto certified
extensions and in term report
suspensions this all contributed
to our backlog because when it
came due when it came time to do
normal business we had a lot of
applications and you can you'll
see someone that numbers on the
next slides around how backward
we were
we also I just want to point out
on slide you know we had this
automatic extension we had
waiver of reports we had a lot
of flexibility we didn't have to
do interviews and the snap
program um federal partners
normally require us to interview
people over the phone or in
person to find out what their
status as that was waived i'm at
the same time.
You know there was a temporary
increase in benefits and I
eligibility much much higher
case loads for everyone because
of the need and our state you
know a lot of people sought
benefits they never had to have
before but also kind of a
perfect storm we had lower
staffing than previous years and
that that graph to the rate
shows that we had problems with
our great resignation returned
to office was tough for people
who had been a customer working
at home and we have less
scheduled flexibility in
previously we lost from two
thousand nineteen the last time
we were timely on all of this we
had eight hundred and twenty one
case workers with accumulative
level of experience of six
thousand one hundred and sixty
nine years on back in september
of twenty four now we're down to
six hundred and eighty one case
workers right with a tumiliant
level of experience because
that's important this is a tough
complex job of two thousand and
two hundred and sixty years so
please you know note that with
that you would expect us not to
have done what we did on slide
nine
but we did and I should I stay
thank you again to nicky because
you'll see that we had a
mountain of work on page nine we
went we were um underwater with
new applications and snap of
eighteen thousand eight hundred
and sixty eight applications in
the unable to process some of
those were expedited you know
they they that's when they're
required to get them within
seven days and they were not we
were not meeting those calls uh
had thirteen thousand eight
hundred ninety new medicaid apps
and recertifications are also
collassonally backlogged eighty
two thousand three hundred and
ten three three thirty eight
thousand on medicaid thirty
eight thousand six hundred and
thirty two on snap so mountains
and mountains unpreceded and
things that folks who had been
in the department for sixteen
years fifteen years I never seen
before.
And look at where we are now
that's the happiness the team
pulled together got really
efficient looked at daily data
got transparent and got down on
and climbed that mountain and
actually we had meetings every
day called the moving mountains
meetings and we moved them on
him down we maximised everything
we could maximize went to
automated processes we had
statewide queues it used to be
in the old days you go into an
office and you're you know in
local in us and your case worker
only processes those things in
your county these days case
workers on every office or
processing applications for new
mexicans all across the state
which is a huge benefit for
efficiency among other
efficiencies that nicky will
talk about so on page ten you
see that we are doing well and
timeliness right now we're
delivering benefits very timely
and we have um as I mentioned
our meeting our goals on
medicator snap
high chances that people will
get those timely ninety nine
percent in medicaid and ninety
six
without a ninety four yikes
ninety four percent sorry
getting muned in glasses i'm in
snap how long are people having
to wait for expedited stop which
we are federally required again
to give people within seven days
because they're urgent urgent
they don't have anything in
their fridge you know there it's
a desperate situation we have
seven days to do that we're
doing it within ten at two days
now seven days requirement we're
doing within two days on
expedited snap we have thirty
days to get people their regular
snap and we're doing it within
fifteen so we're very proud of
that and i'm very part of this
team for doing that and they
couldn't be happier for new
mexicans that they're able to do
that right now
I do want to point out that we
are
gonna see and we'll talk about
that a projected increase in
snap and medicaid customers.
In fiscal your
we have because essentially.
The general plan contribution to
this division has been pretty.
Flat over the years we are
seeing
a very concerning under funding
of case worker
salaries were at a negative
fourteen point three percent
funded vacancy rate rate now
which means that we need funding
in twenty six for a hundred and
fifty eight case workers just to
maintain what we are doing right
now.
On page eleven eleven
this is something were real
proud of and I hope you're
constituents aren't ringing your
phones after hook the way they
were
the weight times when you call
the call center for help and
getting benefits or two to five
minutes right now that's to get
to an isd case worker as you
know in many cases we people
were waiting for hours and hours
and
you know you can see sort of
that mountain that we got
through as well so brag in a
little bit about this team they
pulled every lever they could
they figure it out every
efficiency they could they did
every staffing thing they could
do nicky came and actually talk
about how she analyzed the data
and really looked at it and said
we could do this we could do
that so we feel like we're a
real lean mean customer serving
machine right now but
you know there's always room for
things we can do more of but
mainly we need those people who
help people account give them
short shrift on p twelve slight
twelve I mentioned first of all
thank you so much to all of you
on and your colleagues for
voting for those snap expansions
we are projected at about sixty
thousand new households now
that's all federal money but in
terms of the benefits that
people receive that doesn't cost
the general fund anything but it
does cost in terms of processing
it does cost in terms of you
know
responsibilities that our staff
have to meet those new goals
want to just
underscore something our
secretary did mention at the
finance committee some of you
may have seen the data coming
out of nationally around new
mexico now being twenty two and
child poverty as opposed to
fifty or forty nine datas in
supplemental income having
increased through the wonderful
earned income tax credit.
But also because of these
expand.
The.
A bill our ability to get people
snap we know that people use the
food supplement until they use
the cash they're saving on that
food to do other things to meet
those other social determinance
yes mister so just I just want
to underline which you just said
says it's so crucial that we we
consistently berated ourselves
in fact we did it earlier this
week by saying we're always
fiftieth and everything.
And in fact the steps we've
taken the tax changes the snap
benefit the the uh
the uh tenant increases all of
those have had an impact.
We don't just I mean it feels
like we operate in the vacuum a
lot of times because we do
things and nothing seems to
change this has changed and we
know or or at twenty two we're
the twenty second
lowest in the country your
highest I guess we lower highest
in the country in chope already
not the fiftieth not the first
time it's thank you mister how
were better off than we were so
and were halfway there to being
number one in terms of how well
we take care of our children in
new mexico which as you all know
once we do that in ten years I
would hazard to stay will be
interesting to see what it
happens to our costs around
health care costs around
you know behavior a health care
all of that we're making some
headway here and it'll be great
to see us gap even further even
crane even drug abuse a lot of
those things are directly like
to school achievement a lot of
those are linked to poverty and
if we cut childhood poverty we
should be having a few years
from now evidence of the benefit
that's result thanks.
So we have to keep up the good
work rate and to do that we have
to again support these case
workers
we've expanded these
eligibilities that means we're
going to see new new numbers of
caseloads and we have a
projected case load a graph on
slight thirteen.
Isd's implemented many many
operational efficiencies and
strategies but stopping remains
a concern and we've got a
thirteen percent projected
increase and snap and medicaid
customers and fiscal year twenty
six and.
I would say that's a good thing.
In the short term with a long
term goal of obviously having
these programs function the way
they're their function exposed
to function where people can get
on their feet when possible and
do their earned income rate on
as of march twenty twenty four
though each case workers
responsibly has increased quite
a bit twenty percent since two
thousand and nineteen and so
they're doing more.
With less experience and and
fewer people
do to increase in households
were really underfinded as I
mentioned for those case workers
on plug in that
maximising efficiencies and
automations alone is just not
going to do it for us
again not fourteen point three
percent the funded vacancy rate
and you can see that product at
caseloads growing
up but
here's the first department
printers come before as it has a
vegan series under twenty
minute that you've been able to
do this with only a fourteen
percent vacancy rate I
congratulations thank you sir
and
i'll put in a plug as I did at
the hotel we're hiring
and we hire all over the state
you know we've got a thirty four
offices around the state i'm
from firmington to hobs to las
vegas to last crucials and all
the way in between pertalisar
teacher these are good jobs and
our communities and people can
feel good about them
we love people who can serve
customers we love people who
carry in that way they can learn
the technical stuff and it takes
about a year or more to get real
proficient but they can do it
and once they do so many of them
stick with us for so long
they really are valuable assets
to the state I am good for the
economy so
nicky is gonna talk to you about
our next focus.
The.
Yes so as you heard i'm getting
through the backlog was our
first priority and making sure
that are
could our customers were served
i'm in a timely manner there
were other things that came
about in regards to that and so
when we are looking through and
errors and were we processing
correctly so we are um you know
there are federal requirements
that were held to and regards
terrors whether it be an agency
error and one that we made or
one that the customer has met as
well so potentially they
submitted a document wrong we
reviewed it wrong there's others
few things that were there due
to the backlog we did have a lot
of our leadership team also
processing cases so usually the
step is their reviewing their
case workers work and making
sure that they're effective and
in the minimal errors that they
should be having and so that
payment was taken away as we
were just trying to clear and
the customer accused the make
sure that everybody was getting
a timely focus on here so we
have implemented this quarter
what we're doing for a quality
perspective and so we are
getting back to our supervisors
reviewing case workers on
behaviors and however their
processing are we following
although it correct steps are we
doing them correctly
so all of those are starting to
come interparation there were a
couple of things that we also
implemented that to knew
so what we've done and see I
really want to know the error
trends now so what we currently
do with our federal partners as
we take six month look backs so
they'll pull cases from february
and I might that doesn't help me
as much as yes we did process
something wrong in february but
i'm really focused currently and
so we still do those ones
because we're we're required to
but we've also created a small
team that's looking current day
alongside our supervisors we
have a quality team.
Alongside our supervisors
finding out what are our trends
are happening today so we can
limit those errors when the six
month look back comes for
september if you well and so
this is really proved to be
beneficial both for our
employees as well as our
leadership team the employees
are really excited because
they're getting to get new
knowledge and go I had no idea I
did that wrong and we're we're
catching the errors as well for
the constituents in a timely
manner that we we process
something wrong let's fix you
and so they're not having to
come in or do a fair hearing
they're actually getting
corrected based upon our errors
being caught in a timely manner
we've also made a quality
council and so we have groups
from each of our bureaus in our
division which would include
training quality
or operational staff etc that is
kind of talking through these
errors and determining what is
the best approach is it just
more mass training is that one
on one is a quick tips so we've
implemented quite a bit of
things to make sure that we meet
our quality measures which we
hope will in turn lead to that
experience gap though that cura
spoke to of you from six plus
years of two years were hoping
this knowledge as it becomes a
little bit more prevalent in
there that their knowledge will
be in I guess obtained in a
faster manner because they're
being coached more often i'm not
just a six month look back at
this point so we're really
excited about implementing that
and seeing what that can do for
the knowledge as well as the
timelines and what we're back
logged
and then on p each fifteen will
talk about some of our
accomplishments but also are um
upcoming priorities and so a
couple of accomplishments are on
slate sixteen i'd like to
highlate was our ability to
implement the summer ebty
program which is also known as
some but.
We had about a six month lead
time from approval to
implementation which is a really
i'm short time lane in being
able to implement something this
large scale for children and new
mexico so happy to say that we
did very well in getting this
implemented as one of the first
states to do so as well and so
once we found out about the
final ruling in december we were
implementing by may with first
insurances that are beginning of
august and i'm happy to say this
week was our last issue went of
our first round and so we did
all of that and with minimal
errors in conjunction with a ped
team and see why fd
you can see the benefits issued
and how many children serve so
really exciting to say over two
hundred and eighty thousand
children were served with this
program
as you know on slide seventeen
we've had a marriage of
disasters that have affected our
state from fires and floods and
the federal government did issue
are disaster snap approvals and
so this is really exciting to
know that you know we did a
large disaster snap for some um
our previous fires two years ago
but we really did not do it
since since then and didn't
really have true protocols to
say when this is implemented how
do we do it so while this was a
reimplementation we also did set
up separate those protocols to
make sure that we're ready to go
any time they're a disaster
streaks in the future but we did
take care of lincoln o terrible
and miscaller patchy as well as
our sound one in a rebook a real
rebut counties with this and we
were able to serve over twenty
six thousand people
as well as three million dollars
in benefits issue to these time
customers
and d stop related helps because
if you have to flee your home.
All they were food that was in
your your fridge we supplement
to all of that we give you
disaster benefits for that as
well as
eligible criteria if you happen
to have to leave your home and
need a different place to stay
so really we go to outlaying
counties as well as the affected
county to serve folks so it was
really an exciting especially to
know that we're ready for any
future once that may come
knowing the devastation we faced
over the last few years.
One of our upcoming priorities
and as cura mentioned just from
the knowledge base of what we've
lost in in our staffing
resignations and
hiring pauses that we had during
covered really looking at
knowledge and what are we doing
in a different way so um when I
came in really looking at our
training team and understanding
currently training people was
very length the in forty five
page power points documenting
policy and telling you all the
things of that it really wasn't
geared towards how I would say
young adults and adults in
general learn and so really
making sure that we're adopting
to that you kind of were in the
light of the tech top fees if
you will people will be you know
can become professional chaffs
and fifteen minutes so we're
trying to adopt some of our
knowledge because into bite size
trainings for our staff and it
has really helped to say you
know let's talk about how you
process an expedite instead of
sitting through a forty five
minute to an hour training
talking to you about all the
policies behind that and how you
process we're talking about
quick tips and remember don't
forget to look at this don't
forget here here's where you
would click here's the questions
you would ask and it's really
helped in some of the timelines
that care of talked about
their learning faster their
remembering quicker as to what
they need to process and so we
are seeing improved timelines
time frames from our case
workers because they feel more
knowledgeable because they can
take these bite size also these
are also part of a greater plan
for what we want to do with our
new highers as well so as care
mentioned it takes about a year
for us to get proficient at
at their rules and so that's
because they learn certain
things they do on the job
training their only process see
things then you go back you
learn another step.
You only process those things
that any other that you previous
learned so we're trying to
figure out how we can chunk
those trainings into faster
pieces to where you can do on
the job training and you can
learn things and a multi
facility environment as well as
yes the policy is important but
how do we simplify the policy
without giving you a a grand
history of why this is what it
is and how it's going to be we
do speak to that we do make sure
that they have those pieces in
there but when you really want
to look at driving retention of
our employees and as you mention
you know where are under a
twenty percent vacancy rate a
lot of this is because they feel
like they're contributing at a
better rate I feel like i'm
doing things rate i'm getting
the coaching that I need from my
my supervisor who's reviewing my
cases i'm able to take training
senate different way that
teachers me and I feel
successful in my job so we are
finding that a lot of this is
coming into
I guess a whole approach of how
do we keep employees how do we
keep our leaders and make them
more effective i'm so really
excited what this is going to
come through so we have only
just begun with some of our
micro learnings and some of our
real time demonstrations we do
want to do a specific fall over
hall of the new higher training
that signature that's going to
be a little bit larger under
taking from what we need to do
and how we incorporate each of
those pieces of a little bit
more of a a grandeur thought
process there but it is in the
works and we are building our
arm are operational plan to say
how long will this take is there
any systems that we may be need
to be developed etc ourselves
i'm really excited about
building in a little bit more
interactive training for our
employees as well as
you helping them to retain
knowledge and it differently
thinking nicky uno.
Moving on on to slide nineteen
we have a happy ending for you
and you'll be up to learn how
we're really happy to actually
be having a happy ending for you
um daniel was able to get her
benefits approved very quickly
i've not allowed her to reinroll
in community college she also
learned about the town of
program and the um education
works program which gives folks
who are going to college
cash assistance to help them I
app myself at benefit from this
program and so I know how
valuable it can be and it was
wonderful that she also got to
benefit from it that means a lot
in terms of her ability to you
know keep going with her life
goals and her goals for her
daughter as well and she's kept
her housing she's pandered bills
and maybe she'll come and work
for us monday my is also still
working with us thankfully
because
um
you know she's selling so much
better as nicky mentioned about
the work she's doing she's
filling good about it she feels
efficient she feels like she's
helping somebody so her morales
weigh up her team is happier
she's got some time to get some
guidance from her supervisors
now and we want to keep it that
way we really do
you know she is now processing
twenty eight cases in a month in
multiple categories fifty one
applications she's providing
thirty six thousand four hundred
and thirteen meals and fifty
people with health insurance
that's that's a good feeling at
the end of the day which is not
going home crien anymore so
her monthly income is now four
thousand seven hundred and
eighty two because she's
promoted to a lead worker given
all of this investment that we
were able to give her
she is able to pay her bills she
doesn't have to draw down public
benefits as an employee at the
state and in mexico.
So it's good news and we we want
to keep it up and we're we need
of course everyone support to do
that so thank you so much with
that i'm going to turn to
present manner of the block
grant
I am not an expert in the
community services block ground
so we're happy to have most of
the nearest and chris role and
here who are me need to bring a
minute on because but you you
all may have questions about it
thank you so much
thank you guys
I just want to say on this you
know
we don't just do these federal
programs and the income support
division that's not what we're
all about yet they keep this
very dizzy but we're also about
building a whole network a
safety net in our state and that
records partnerships that
requires partnerships with few
banks that require partnerships
with shelters that requires
partnerships with these
community action agencies
throughout the state that really
help extend our reach
and what we need to do I think
as make a more connected network
as we go right between our state
sister agencies yesterday max
the covers of a beginning of
that but also so that when you
work walk into your local office
and you go I need help today
your county director has the
time and the knowledge at those
officers to say took to train
her staff for his staff to say
you know up the road there is a
really helpful program out why
if you go up there you can get
something you need for your kid
out and so these community
services block grounds are
really important and we're
really proud to be able to get
them out into the community
and you know I think one of the
things that we want to talk
about today is just some of the
accomplishments with the
blockground.
So.
Let me do that
block
thank you you ready to do that
great so chris relevant
any introduced yourself first
yeah good morning um mister
chair
the community services block a
great way to think about it.
I apologize yes chris rollen
community services block
a good way to look at the
community services block grant
is we take about four point two
million dollars that's a federal
pass through and with support
nonprofit organizations
throughout the state and these
are leveraged funds are these
these basically support the
better part of twenty five
million dollars and it's really
up
to these non profits that know
their communities best arm to
come up with informed plans
about how to best serve their
communities
a non exhaustive list of support
of services can include helping
assistance access to food and
nutrition utility assistance
home and vehicle repair
transportation
crisis and emergency services
and senior programs.
Um
as I said there are six non
profits that we find throughout
the received funds that they
received
are are are basically
distributed as a proportion of
poverty within these
communities.
Um.
Sorry.
Um
apologize I know I apologize
on the spot because technically
I was supposed to do this parts
though maybe we'll tag team in a
little bit and the key can also
speak to that.
It's my fault
already so essentially I know
that christian spoke to what we
do with the community and some
of the services that we provide
so we do currently as he
mentioned have six community
action agencies so I was like
twenty three you'll see what
areas and counties that each of
those community actions groups
do serve we did also want to
list i'm as you'll see and
they're the populations that are
served and this is relevant due
to and
a future slight you'll see how
much the funds are distributed
to each of those and it really
is based upon population so were
excited to say when you look at
i'm slate twenty four some of
the social impacts that we've
achieved through these programs
in fiscal year twenty three and
these are federal fiscal years
which is why we're talking about
twenty three even though we're
in our own twenty five and but
you know being able to take care
of infants and children in you
know some of their development
and readiness skills for
prescore as well as some are
education programs we do also
take care of our seniors and
disabled in individuals and how
many we've served is on there so
you two thousand disabled as
well as fifteen hundred seniors
are served through these
programs in various i'm.
Abilities through these action
or community action agencies we
also have approved or have been
able to implement to the
emergency in sustainance that
has been provided so utility is
housing transportation as chris
had mentioned so we do
manage these funds and stay on
top of what exactly is happening
how how are we utilizing them
and make sure that we do have
reports and that's what um chris
and melissa's main focuses
really following up with our
partners and making sure that
we're using them in the right
way so we do a program reviews
as well as fiscal reviews with
each of these agencies
and then i'm side twenty five
just kinda shows of those
programs that we provide where
our expenditures are as well as
each of the
the community action agencies
and how much money they're each
getting which ties back to that
slide with the map on it so you
can see while yes help new
mexico receives a significant
portion they also have the
largest portion of the state
that they're helping
so really exciting there to say
what we're able to do and why
it's so important as a mention
on how we're doing our outreach
with these agencies as well as
the impact that we're we're
finding from those and most of
our contracts are written for
for full years and so a lot of
those started on july and
they'll tell end and twenty
twenty eight
and so when we look at those
what we make sure that we're
doing is that they are
supporting multiple groups not
just uhm you're only providing
seniors that we are hitting
multiple demographics as well as
i'm maintaining certain outcomes
for individuals and families.
Um in new mexico.
And with that mr chair we will
stand for questions and comments
very good thank you so much for
the information
we're gonna start with senator
rodriguez then we'll come this
way representative chase
representative of the broadband
cover and then we'll end up with
representative of her
thank you thank you mister
chairman good morning to
nicky and all your staff thank
you for all your work for
clearing this back log i'm
impressed thank you and also for
the help with the ebt situation
that you have worked on thanks
so much for all that but I just
have a quick question um first
time i'm just a little bit while
I knew was bad but when you
mentioned that you have and I
think it's approximately where
did I see it thirteen hundred
and fifty cases.
Per case worker
and then it was during the time
when you were talking about the
snap
wow in the as a twenty percent
increase your set since two
thousand and nineteen if I see
it correctly now and you you do
have that fourteen percent
vacancy rate that you spoke
about but my question is or are
you going before the lfc to help
in in the situation or because
they vacancies are already
funded you're not requesting
more mister chairman just wanted
to get some clarification.
Mrperiod terrors than at a
rodriguez thank you for that yes
we have gone before the lfc to
request funding for the existing
case workers that we have we
need funding for fifty eight
because we're in a negative
fourteen percent funded vacancy
and our secretary has put that
forward to lfc.
I thank you and I think I I you
mentioned or I saw a hundred and
sixty eight and I keep things a
little literal here because when
we discuss it in love see at
least I know did you say one
sixteen one fifty eight mrperiod
terror senator rodriguez one
five eight all right thank you
but mr chairman if you request
it just for the existing was
there's nothing no request made
for the additional ones that you
need or is that included
mister chairs senator and
we had to balance priorities in
the hca and the request and so
we requested funding for what we
have now what we have now is
working well we're proud of what
we've done and you know we
are hopeful that with that
funding we can maintain and even
improve efficiencies that the
request does include a little
bit of funding as well for
training
and so all of that good training
that niki is able to do with her
staff we believe well maximisers
weren't or existing staff is
able to do
with these new case loads and
these new programs we are also
pulling every lever we can
around automation and
efficiencies and automation
which we we you know two
thousand and nineteen the case
load to case worker to caseload
ratio was I think it was one
thousand ninety eight if i'm not
mistaken and so now it's higher
we have fewer people and we're
doing more so
you know this is a a bit of an
art in terms of getting to that
right number or hopeful that
with sustained funding for the
department for these folks we
will be okay
thank you very much for being so
resourceful and creative that's
all I have mister chairman
thank you senator of
representative chasing
thank you mr chairman and thank
you all very much it's nice to
have good news.
Um once in a while this bright
back memories for me because
when I early on in my service
and the legislature susan lubay
write to me the idea of the
concept of education works and I
took it to our welfare reform
interim committee and they said
well because you're not on this
community you can't sponsor the
bill we don't have rules like
that anymore and i'm not sure
that was really a rule but uhm
it was it was what I was faced
with but I did introduce that
topic and I correspond through
the bill and we got it inacted
and then I found out years later
that one of my colleagues
actually participated in an
so
everyone's in a well week and a
moment of feeling good about
what we've done too so thank you
very much for this morning thank
you very much.
Representative thompson thank
you mister chair so
it's really sad to me to think
that our state workers have to
apply for benefits mean that's
unacceptable
and i'm not putting any blame
anywhere except i'm incurred and
I I don't know why this happens
that
the executive i'm assuming kind
of puts caps on how much you can
request even though
everyone knows that's not enough
so
i'm you know I know it's not
your fault but um
so just just a quick story my
son eric is on the dd waiver and
about a month ago I got a letter
that he has medicaid was dropped
and.
Before I was a legislator that
would have lead me to four blond
panic.
Um and I had friends who called
me and said what's going on
because their children adult
children had gotten the same
letter and so I just want to
when you're raising a child with
disabilities particularly autism
in my case that because that's
what I know the last thing the
family needs is a panic and
that's what it is as a panic so
i'm imploring you to and it
turned out in my son's case it
was case worker error but please
please try to avoid that I mean
that literally could be I was
suicidal when when there was
little and that could have been
the thing that put me over the
edge and I know many families
who were in that same situation
where it's like they're fighting
every day to get what their kid
needs and and they get this
letter and it's like.
Why go wine so just just up just
a warning
and then.
With no growth in dollars to you
are we setting ourselves up to
go backwards to where we were.
Yeah.
Mr terror representative
thompson thank you for that
and if I may just address your
comment a little bit on
I too I too have been in that
situation of getting that letter
and going into a panic for one
of my family members and it's
nowhere we ever want anyone to
be when we are happy about is
that whether you're
representative or um you know a
person who works in walmart when
you call our call center now
you'll get to somebody and they
can fix that problem one um for
you because it's not perfect and
we do need more training we are
proud of some of the progress
we've made in our on
institutional care waiver unit
it's a tough unit to be working
in its the most complex and
sometimes there's errors but we
have room to improve there and
we're working very I diligently
with her provider community as
well because of course they are
effected when folks don't get
their have their benefits timely
or get their benefits to solve
these problems on both with
training with technology
these are really were only as
strong as our weakest members
these are the most important
depot in terms of your question
about whether we're studying
ourselves up for failure i.
Again feel hopeful
I feel maybe that's not my
question to answer thank you.
Thank you the end thank you for
the work that you are doing and
have done.
Representative from
thank you mister chair and thank
you for your great efforts and
reaching more people but we
still have a lot of room to grow
to get to you know more um
and I think it would be
well community based snap
enrollment would be very helpful
and
i'm on a
coalition for food and hunger
security and there is a lot of
suggestions that I think you're
already addressing some of the
enrollment barriers and also the
uh administrative delays you've
been sounds like in the
comparisons doing a lot better
but we also need to fund it and
at higher levels so that we can
have the
one dollar of snap benefits
generates a dollar fifty and
local economy activity and
you know the use of federal
funds is really important to
the.
Legislation one of the
suggestions that we've had is a
requiring an annual outreach
plan and
having that where it can help us
uh.
Match and have the
administration of that funding
and then also a three hundred
and fifty thousand dollars
investment for an effect to
effective and equitable program.
And dedicated to staff but a lot
of the things are and let me ask
the barriers how can we reduce
beers like for students that
aren't working and don't qualify
or have kids how do we include
them also
snap beast on net income when
sometimes they really don't have
that disposable income to spend
on food that we expect people to
and what can we do to remove
some of those barriers
and also to make it so people
don't have to um in intervals
reapply.
And which often happens.
So with that go ahead mister
chair represented for you thank
you for that and i'll ask maybe
some of my team to step in on
some of that as well um.
You know is there so many people
throughout the state in the
mexico who help people get
connected to these programs
though the people who help
people in the outreach were all
trade whether it's your friend
your anti your cousin who knows
how to do it or somebody in a
nonprofit organization such as
was discussed up today and the
federal.
Program for snap is run by the
announced out of the usda rant
and they have some of the most
stringent died lines of any
federal program around what can
I can't be done and only merit
workers a legibility workers
trained and within our
department can get people those
benefits it costs about a
hundred thousand dollars for one
worker who can do thirteen
hundred cases a year
if we don't have those people
are the outreach in the world
can't help us and we love the
outreach the outrageous great
and we would love the outreach
plan and we think it's wonderful
but if we have to choose were
worried rate if we don't have
enough of the people who do the
actual meeting potatoes work
forgive the food analogy there
but you know to really i'm get
it done so that's one thing if
we could have more flexibility
with the federal partners
help us there we'd love that and
then i'm sorry I should have
taken better notes for your
questions but
the other question that you had
barriers and perhaps this team
can talk a little bit about that
that is again you know those
those reapts those interviews
now that we're starting in
october those are federal
requirements so the
flexibilities are not quite
there with with the snap program
the way they can be with
medicaid and it would be lovely
if those to relined rate at the
federal level sometimes they
feel like we're a little ship in
the sea between two medical
beasts of federal programming
but which we are grateful for
having the funding sorry don't
mean to sound
wainy but you know that is a
problem I think maximizing that
community based outreach and
those things as a wonderful idea
now with our technologies of
yesterday mexico you can sit
next to somebody and not be a
merit worker and walk them
through an application rate and
so looking at all the ways that
we can leverage that for
students.
For everyone else is really key
mister chair and one of the
other barriers such as having
snap retailers are more
available especially in
communities that are rural or
else where people can order food
online that maybe don't have
delivery service.
That's not unsorry mister share
represented a free yeah that's
not really something that we can
impact we do recognize the
economic benefit to those
retailers we think that you know
many recognize it and do
participate in the state and new
mexico i'm not something I can
research a little bit better and
and get back to you on around
how we might be already doing
those things that i'm not aware
of and how we could do more
potentially.
When I say something to that.
The.
We have a lot of it to you mr
chairman on representative
ferrari to your customer snap
out reach we do have a lot of
that those pieces of that plan
already operating and we look
forward to extanding when we can
with her without additional
funding thank you thank you
mister chair
thank you representative for a
representative charges
thank you mister chair so I have
a couple of questions one of
them is we talked a little bit
about your request in terms of
next year this year's budget or
next year's budget
so my question is around are
there any requests
for increases in payments to
those on general assistance
toward and then also snap.
Mister chair representative
charters no we haven't made
those requests for the tunnel
increases on we are looking at
that program we're aware that
the federal folks are looking at
how to improve that program we
know that outcomes in states
that have more cash assistance
for example or a lot more
promising there's better
participation and better
outcomes
right now what we're doing
without program is working
extremely closely with our
partners at the department of
work for solutions on who helps
us you know with the employment
piece and we've increased our
our partnership there and i'm
kind of excited about that
in terms of potential changes to
rule you mentioned i'm
representative she say about you
know ways that the programs can
grow and become more accessible
we could expand for example the
um
the the things that the
education works program will
find so a certification program
versus college those kinds of
things were looking at all those
levers to poor
right now you know the town of
blockground is on at risk of not
being funded in I believe it's
the projection is now twenty
seven twenty eight because of
the allocations to other
agencies and you know some of
the pressures on that so.
We have not put in a request for
increased funding to town it.
Oh i'm sorry mr chair
representative chavez nor to
general assistance
and then my other question is
around the
payment assistance for housing
do you have sense of of
sort of an average amount that
people are assisted with housing
payments and are those also
uh payments to prevent eviction.
Mrperiod terry representative
charters cash assistance doesn't
come with you know a valuation
of what people use at four
through the town of program I
thought such you're referring to
is that the community service is
right i'm sorry i'll let
i'll let me answer.
Mister chair representative
element shoppers
within our nonprofits ability
with their available funding
they do what they can
typical our payments in and end
these are usually too arm get
them caught up on on on back
rents and avoid foreclosure are
usually between five and fifteen
hundred dollars but this is a
very finite source of revenue.
The.
Thank you mister chair
senator courier hinter thank you
mister chair thank you for the
presentation and I am a love
hearing the stories the success
stories that you had used
programs like this to get where
you are to get educated to got a
job and to contribute to the
economy here in new mexico and I
know representative thompson
similarly really relies on the
dd waiver to support her her son
in similarly I was a single mom
I left an abuse of marriage and
used to programs like this to
get an education rate her at
western which has allowed me to
time contribute back to the
state of new mexico and work as
a school psychologist where i'm
honor to work with those most
vulnerable in our community
children with it children with
severe disabilities and their
families and help connect them
to resources to hopefully
you know help them be more
successful and live lives of
quality where they can also
contribute to their communities.
I've i'm currently working with
the family and
a rural community to connect
them to the daily waiver and I
know that we fought really hard
to fully fund the waiver and I
was curious where we are in
terms of processing of those
applications it's my
understanding that the waivers
fully funded we're not having to
wait like my son did for over a
decade to get services i'm sure
representative of thompson had a
similar really long waiting
period before we are children
could access those resources
what is that process like now mr
chair.
Mr chair senator humble I will
let our division director nicky
cause last scan through that
one.
Yeah so we have a couple of
pieces here I believe
generatory guests came to speak
with you two months ago and
talked about where we are in
processing with that so I can
speak to I know that we have
gotten everybody off of a
weeding less than now they're in
two adequate processing from the
icy waver unit processing we're
currently within a two week time
frame of processing cases
thank you mr chair and is that
two week time frame
at that point do they are they
connected with a keys manager
who then comes into the home or
what does that look like the two
week processing is actually once
the case worker has submitted
funding requests through us and
that is the two week time frame
getting to a case worker I
believe i'm from gen's
presentation we were real time
excellent thank you mister chair
and
are we fully funded then do we
have any kind of
or I guess my question is a we
had provided a lot of additional
funding but I know that one of
the things that we saw was we
weren't
reaching those families who had
been on the wheat list and they
were applying has their been
follow up with that are we
seeing more of those families
who had been on the waiting less
able to participate in the
waiver or what happened to them
a mister chair senator we will
have to get back to you on that
question in consultation with
the ddwaver group because they
have that information and i'm
sorry I don't have it here in
real time and but as or
secretary mentioned you know
bringing dd waiver from doh two
hca as we did two months ago is.
A real boom to creating better
coordination and we we have two
division directors talking in
real time now about how to
maximise service to customers
think you mister chair and thank
you for helping those most
vulnerable interstate it makes
the difference
thank you senator senators so
the olympics thank you mister
chair and thank you for ending
this session on such a positive
positive
though
note a couple of questions about
the customer experience and that
is a couple what are the
consequences to to customers if
the error is due to it's an
agency error and then they had
an overpayment and you know the
club whole clawback thing and
then
because when it's an agency sit
error just it just doesn't sit
right and then the other thing
is we heard yesterday and I
don't see senator rodriguez
about car back's own for for the
expenses clawbacks that occur
after someone dies on their
estate um in I I kind of want to
follow up on that cause that
seems so unfair
you know for someone to use
medicaid
for their you know death and
dying experience and then have
their estate get claim back it's
just a keeping people in poverty
in generational poverty so thank
you those are my questions
mister terror on senator lopez
city labels sydney i'll have
stuff answer those.
Oh i'm sorry i'm one of the
answer that is
versa be hill are senior deputy
from policy and program can
speak to that
my understanding is it's a
federal requirement but I wonder
if what the new mexican waivers
look like is what i'm
questioning
good afternoon mr chair and
senator said the young
I can speak to the snap claims
i'm not sure about the medicaid
claims but the snap claims if
it's customer if it's whether
it's customer or department cost
the claim does go to the
customer
and the customer is responsible
for paying that back and that's
a federal requirement and I
think that's why it's so
important that we focused on the
training and we have the
the supervisors have time not to
work with their case workers we
have the quality council that
we've implemented so I think all
of those pieces because I agree
with you.
But it because it's a federal
requirement.
It's just
it's just doesn't seem right and
i've gotten calls like that
about the didn't make the
mistake they provided all the
information they received
benefits for a few months and
now not only they're not
receiving benefits they're
supposed to pay back and that's
just heartbreaking
in I I guess since it's a
federal requirement that's where
we have to look to try to fix it
and the other one is the claw
back on the diet death and dying
in the class back on the estate
my understanding for the
presentation was the it can be
waived there's hardship waivers
but it depends on state law so
it seemed to me that that was
something we could do something
about what is our waiver law
what is our waiver law when
somebody dies and there's a claw
back.
Mr chairs senator I don't don't
know that policy but we can
definitely do research on that
and get you that information
think I I would like to look at
that because if there is
something we could be fixed
I I because my understanding is
federal are requires that you
have a waiver but whatever that
waiver is it's up to state law
and so we can if we can have an
expense of waiver so that people
I mean it just seems so
culturally sad to people who
have had homes or land for
generations than losing it
because they're elderly parent
was on medicaid it's just
doesn't seem right yes we can do
research on that and get that
back to you thank you I would
really appreciate it thank you
mister chair thank you center to
representative royal balcony
thinking mister chair and thank
you for the applicating report I
agree with my colleagues um
however have a few
questions.
Concerning how we can continue
to improve
one quick short question are
there any current legal
challenges to the department
concerning
violations discrimination
anything of that nature mr chair
representative royal color yet
yes we remain under on the
deborah hat and gonzales last
suit around
which is decades old
and we are that however quite
hopeful now that we're at our
timeliness we've maintained it
for a while
and our quality standards
performances are improving and
we're in you know plus
collaboration to really do what
we can do to get out I will
emphasize that our
modest requests for sustaining
what we're doing will go a long
way toward that
thank you for your answer that's
one of the measurements of
europe.
The progress of making an
improving so I follow that so
think you because a lot of my
constituents are affected.
The other comments that were
made by representative for a
recovered a lot of flip I wanted
to cover but however I want it
i'm not sure you answered this
where it was asked on page of
twenty three where you outlined
all of the community action
agencies.
Is.
Is it possible for the community
century there are very
everywhere and they have
a very long standing good
reputations.
And their very entrenched with
the communities is there a
possibility that they could do
are a lot of the front line
application.
Process
can they be many
many income support people are
or agents on behalf of the
department uh mister chair
senator up sorry representative
of a career coverage yet thank
you for that question it's so
common sense so lodge a call
however the finance on
guidelines don't allow it
and so I think what we are
sicking to do and continue to
see to do as an eyes folks
ability to assist people to do
their own to have you know
broadband access in all of our
community centers to have you
know of those agencies out there
sitting next to somebody while
they're do their online
application cause there are a
lot of benefits when they can do
an online application even
though we know a lot of our
folks out there kind of myself
included don't really enjoy
doing online applications so
having that person that he trust
help them through it who may be
get some training from us around
how to do that as it's all at
gold
name coming from a community
organizer of that ground it is
very important to have that
trust.
And and then that feeling of at
ease in doing these kinds of
difficult applications.
And however where we can
influence to change in the
regulations or standards are
laws or whatever that we can
help influence that would be
greatly uh would be greatly
needed.
Final question
you know that we have a language
access act and I want to know
how you are in transitioning
your compliance with that and if
you that's when question and
second part is do you offer any
bonuses to staff who are buying
or multilingual thank you mister
terror representative for a
volcabilian yes thank you for
those questions lol guilty
monitor visual to answer the
question on the differential for
the
bilingual.
Yes thank you mister chaired
representative coverage
we do offer I want to see it's a
ten cents differential for them
to
if they speak another language
and can work with those
customers we also do utilize
language link
I want to see its language link
it used to be language like
for those case workers or staff
members that are working with
individuals that speak other
languages they can access that
uh as a translation service.
Mr chairs and representative I
think to we can always do better
you know I to be honest I think
um a lot of this does go back
into investing you know
investing into the staff and
busting into that incredibly
valuable skill i'm making sure
that all the officers are
accessible not only with a
technology help out but you know
with people themselves who are
native speakers who can help
thank you mister charita I think
we can improve greatly under ten
cents thank you i'm gonna ask
folks to be a little quicker
were were at time and we've got
eight public comment and we
wanted to have a few minutes for
brain starting so very brief
questions and answers
so i'm i'm less oh no we're not
i'm not it's represented for
good representative
thank you mister chairman and I
just I had one question and i'll
try to make it brief.
So I appreciate senator himfield
I appreciate that that story
that you gave because it is good
to see people get you know on
their feet and headed into a
really good direction and and
you said that you had received
some of those and and I like
that.
What I was wanting to know is
out of all the folks that are on
benefits do you do you come up
with do you have data showing
the positive stories like yours
versus maybe they're not so
positive stories mister chairman
mr chair representative then
sent
we can you know look at when
people leave and come into
programs but right now we don't
have a window into did we do it
you know did we succeed it's
more anecdotal
and we are at the department
looking at you know we have a a
project under way
which would allow us to get that
better window in the outcomes
for people so we can tell those
stories with data.
Thank you mister chairman I i'd
like to see stuff like that
because he seems like our job
would be to see a new mexicans
in the success and watch them
what's the stories like this and
that's when we should be
cheering thank you mister
chairman.
Representative block
thank you mister chairman I I
will be super sort of one
question is the I think I saw
thirteen percent increase is
projected in medicated snap do
we know what we removed that to
and can you give me a little
more information about how that
will affect the needs of your
work for it
mister chair representative
block thank you for that on the
thirteen percent is a projected
increase based on the expanded
access the two hundred percent
federal property for stamp as
well as the medicaid projections
uhm for which are oh my goodness
quite complex and how they come
up with us
and how it will affect our work
force is you know they'll be
working quite hard to maintain
what they're doing right now
again I think we're really
excited about some of the
efficiencies we've seen so
hopefully that'll help i'm sorry
I was trying to be briefer no
thank you mister chair and I I
think that's that's just
consideration that think about
because they can increase my
twenty
so mister chair.
Then
let me try now is it's better
alright sorry about that are you
guys utilizing any like a I
technologies to help it
alleviate some of the
administrative cuts.
Yeah so currently mr chair thank
you for the question i'm
currently we're not utilizing
aaim due to the federal
guidelines on their concerned
about it obviously taking away
jobs from workers however what
we are doing is creating
efficiencies and our systems
that it can recognize
applications or renewals to say
nothing has changed on your
account and it'll do an
automated renewal so we are
seeing some automation benefits
but not necessarily with a I
that would you concern and take
away
jobs for for a new mexicans but
were it's a fine lane but there
are some states that are using
it that we are understanding how
that they submit their proposals
what pieces are they using in
the
the eligibility system that we
could potentially utilize as
well
for instance new york has
implemented some ai into their
work for some so mostly around
interviews so you interview with
the bot and then it goes to a
case worker to verify and so it
makes a little bit shorter time
for a case workers but most of
the work is done by the bott and
the customer so we are looking
into things like that to help us
mitigate some of the stopping
concern that we have
thank you mister chair.
Thank you representative block
representative heard in thank
you mister chair and presenter's
I engaged with many of the
clients that you are describing
that you deal with uh in your in
your presentation today you
indicated that there are six non
profits that receive your block
grants where are they listed I
mean I see them on page twenty
five but I don't know what the
aquinium stands for and are is
the is the list of these are
organizations somewhere so that
we will know how to reach them
for these items for assistance
yes madam representative you
don't have to read them to me
but if you can give them to me
yes if you will look on page
twenty three there is a a break
out of each of the agencies
and the the counties that they
serve okay thank you for lining
that would pay twenty five I
appreciate that and I would be
happy to send you their contact
information as well I would very
much like that and just set two
other quick things one there is
the person that i'm dealing with
right now who has their
electricity turned off his own
oxygen and I want to know is
there any mergency procedure
with p and not a lot heap
application that will get that
electricity turned back on.
There is
it's up to the arm individual
agencies to decide whether or
not it is with them their
capacity to provide that benefit
about half of her agencies do
and if you offline like to share
that on customers information
with me I can see if if that's a
service that's provided in that
territory and then connect them
to those services away on day
four without an electricity and
without oxygen so I will do that
right away and the final third
and final thing is you offered
for us to come and sit with you
and do an application from
beginning to end i'm going to
take up on that application so
reserve my seat at the table and
I I look forward to working with
you and thank you mister
chair
thank you representative and I
had just a couple of questions
of my own uh first I I wanted to
go back to the ten of block rent
and just plant the seed for a
future consideration we get a
black rant and starting about
but I don't know.
Fifteen or eighteen years ago we
started spending some of it on
non ten of recipients we started
spending it on child care we now
have a ten billion dollar child
care fund we don't we really
don't need to spend any of the
ten of block grant on childcare
we've got other resources for
that we started spending some of
it on
things other things some of it
just you know kind of uh
replacing state money in
programs that we now have plenty
of state money to cover.
So I I would just urge the as as
it's possible and I know it
probably can't be done overnight
but do we start using the full
compliment of the of the black
rate which is what is it now but
fifty million.
How much is it
mr chair we get a hundred and
ten million a hundred and ten
million if we could use that
whole thing for people antenna
increasing the monthly benefit
as much as possible providing
the works programs that you're
working on with the the
new mexico works
prattical are are blavor
department used to go deliver
work force work for solutions uh
trying to do everything we can
with the ten of money for ten of
recipients rather than diverting
it into other things I really
think that would go along with
and you put your finger on it
with some when you talked about
this is where you start getting
some payout down the line when
you could increase those ten of
benefits to the point where kids
don't feel like they're
marginalized when they go to
school they don't feel like
they're you know they don't have
the things that they need that
the other kids all of that helps
in the long run so we would
start seeing real benefit from
it so that's that's one of the
thing I wanted to encourage the
the
second at your training I I i'm
just fascinated with the
training because it looks
obviously like it's working
really well they used to bring
people into an academy but it
sounds more like you're doing it
now on sight with the uh.
Social media or whatever you
call internet training and in
all that is that the way it's
going to that people get hired
in silver city for example they
they don't go to an academy and
in albert is they do it on the
job and and and and learn as
they do yes thank you for the
question mister it is virtual so
they do learn in their
communities
zoom and with a personal trainer
as well as their leadership in
site
it's that's good I do want to
comment that you may become a
chef through tick talking
fifteen minutes but you'll never
beat bobby flay until you really
get much
more much more training than
that uh
housing
I know we rely on the community
service black rant to do a lot
of the are we are there ways in
which your office which which is
where the the action is europe
where the poor people are could
have a handle on housing is
rather than having to refer them
to some of the place where they
wind up at the end of the seems
to me that your client tell.
Are the ones who
we really are to be addressing
in terms they're the ones on the
merger becoming homeless if if
if they lose their their uh uh
benefits they'll be they won't
be able to pay next month's rent
little on you know for the full
cover so if we could find better
housing through your department
uh I just plant that seed I know
do you do the you don't do this
do you do the support of
housing.
The state contract for support
of housing doesn't go through
your department does it it goes
through m fa I think
that's correct mister but we are
participating in the family
resource centers
yeah which is like the one stop
shop and so there could be
housing located where we're also
located i'm so I think our focus
is to become a one stop shop and
not necessarily for us to take
that on but to be able to be in
one area to reso and III I
didn't realize you're now
there's only one or two family
resource centers so far right
last crucials and worlds
mr terror and we have one and
lost christmas one endless lunes
one and real rebar and one in
roswell could they're just
launching now and I asked he's
very happy to be I i'm delighted
no are your workers in those so
they can do the applications
right there in the family reason
mister terror yes not on a full
time basis but they are in going
into the resource centers to do
that with the school best some
of the school base health
centers we have
public assistance workers at the
school able to to complete all
the forms of i'm delighted
you're doing that so increase
mister I I want to be really
factual here in some of them we
have workers going in and some
of them because of a capacity
issues with our workforce we're
not able so it's really as an as
evil basis and it's a very good
model
if I may get excited about
something you're saying i'm
representative of them sent I
feel like if we can get a window
into as you questioned you know
what's the dostage of
programming services funding
that our folks need to get out
of poverty we're gonna get there
and the family resources centers
are really useful way to start
that as we get a better window
into what's it really in a take
and what work somewhat doesn't
and how can we tweak in real
time with continuous quality
improvement either training.
Or messaging or whatever it is
so i'll stop now thank you I I
really I really appreciate that
you're actively engaged in the
development of the family
resource centers I think cyfd in
the long run will be one of the
main beneficiary so that the the
certain the family say serve.
And the ones are having trouble
with most right now will be will
be
really well served through a
family reserve centers and the
benefits you can offer so thank
you for doing that
one last question then is the
csbg the community services
block red is that.
Is there any movement in that is
a getting bigger less flat with
societies year to year of the
federal appropriation for
community services
thank you for the question of
mister chair
if if if you look at the
recurring funding III would say
it is just below the level of
inflation
so it goes up a little but not
even as much as inflation that
is correct
I have a big focus for us is
to really leverage
the effectiveness of our
programs and and
focus on our partnerships and do
more with the same and i'm worth
making some some very good
progress with that I I assume
they're involved in the family
resource centers too right at
least one of us cruises
probably.
Not at the moment and that's
that's a discussion that we're
having one of the blessings that
we do have is that many of these
nonprofits coexist with early
childhood centers and and had
start centers so when they do
when they bring in these new
families
they they they do an assessment
of like you know what are they
receiving what what are they
lacking and they try to
steer those families and the
direction to get the surfaces
that they need
that's okay very good thank you
thank you chris thank you all
for your presentation take you
all especially for the work
you're doing um it's really
incouraging to hear that the
that you've taken.
A real leadership role in the
department and moving it in the
direction you are uh I think
we're all very encouraged by
what we've heard here today
thank you so much
so members we have some public
comment quite a bit actually.
And we're going to start with
we these are the ones I have
written down if you thought you
were down for public community
raise your in our mention your
name raise your hand please so
we're gonna start with joseph
swatters from western common up
you'll be first.
Gales standard we're going to
hear from you finally okay gale
good thank you
mike mcmillan once again we'll
hear from mike.
And mary alice scott she's is
here okay so we will hear from
from you is there anybody that
thought they were on the list
that I didn't mention your name
who are here okay we'll start
with you mister swartz
gift to turn the maker and you
get three minutes yeah I won't
take three minutes I moved here
almost three years ago moved and
started here almost three years
ago.
Due to covered my prescription
was already outdated.
Then I broke those glasses so
this is my even older
prescription
there's a handful of eye doctors
in this town
none of which take davis.
I did some research and I found
out that day this is not like to
buy a lot of the I doctors cause
they don't pay their bills or
they refuse to pay what that
doctor charges.
And when I spoke with hr they
told me it's like we don't pick
the insurance the state does so
I just wanted on the radar that
when it's up for review that we
need to move from davis to a
better ing because i'm paying
into davis and I can't even use
it and I desperate and
desperately need an eye exam.
You know I have to say and does
anybody here know what davis is
and are you a state employee
you're a university employee i'm
a university employer in the
university as contracted with
davis for your I
insurance yes sir
state employees.
Mr chair I absolutely concur
with this gentleman davis as a.
Notorious reputation are for not
serving our employees and it is
under contract so it is
something that I think the
office of well thank you for
bringing this up because
obviously something that needs
to be addressed we have uh
mountain view which is by
reputation and excellent I care
facility they will take patience
with davis that had already
established an account but they
won't take new patients they
refuse
this this is really something we
need to feed back to the state
we renegotiate those contracts.
We're trying actually to bring
the state employees into as if
it's called the I back the four
public
insurance programs that we pay
for school employees stay
employees school retirees no
public retirees and and state
retirees.
But there's that much we can do
right now but thank you for
bringing it up I just want to
read okay very good thank you
thank you
again.
Um thank you chair and thank you
committee members and
I guess I have three minutes
just at representative thompson
so I did have a couple of
recommendations although I kinda
wanted to add on the one that I
think you guys should figure out
how to pay yourself so that we
don't lose fabulous
representatives like our senator
um hamphill
umm and
we need we need you guys
desperately
so i'm
a bit of a critical disclosure
of our american health care
system I think we've done in
completely the wrong direction
it's a way to expensive workers
aren't happy we're um currently
spending seventy percent of our
gdp on health care compared to
eight percent in other developed
countries so I don't focus my
comment on on just a couple of
projects that I think um we
would be wise to support
we can't change the national
health care system or the
political will to abandon what
we've created but maybe we can
do it state by state and I feel
like that's what you guys are
here to deal I think we need to
look at the money umm where the
money is going so the car
strivers project um I think is
really important if we don't
know where the money is being
spent we don't know what's
happening and so I hope you will
support the cost driver's
project find out where the money
is in new mexico the other one I
think is really important is
senate bill fifteen which is the
health care consolidation act.
Umm it was created to to create
a it was a bill written and
twenty twenty three to create an
oversight process so it's not
trying to stop acquisitions and
mergers but is looking to
oversee them umm we're one of
only ten states that does not
have an oversight process and
you know what what happened is
companies come in um if whether
it's private equity or or not
the um figure out where that
they can buy a hospital sell a
hospital by hospital sellers
assets
make a profit give the profits
to the shareholders possibly at
bankrupt's hospitals but even on
the honor on a smaller level a
lot of times what they're really
looking at is how can we make
sure that we're not losing
services in a community by
saying where we're coming in
we're going to bring greater
services to your community but
nobody in the public knowledge
that they're actually going to
cut other services so
um I know christopher scap
brought up yesterday and and so
I thought maybe I would use to
as an example of what might have
happened with an oversight
committee i'm christmas as a
categoric organization so when
they came in they did bring in
new services and they brought
money to the community which
felt much needed and we all
understand that in our rural
communities
but I don't think the community
understood that they were going
to remove reproductive services
and so just very briefly you
know a quick description of what
happens is that a woman has a
baby there and that is her
opportunity to have our troops
tight and prevent further
ununintended pregnancies but now
she can't have that done where
she has she's got to leave wait
six weeks gonna find another um
organization another institution
or she can have that done
and now she possibly has another
unintended pregnancy during that
time.
I also don't know what their
policies would be for the four
month pregnant see what the
place and i'll abruption the mom
is bleeding she needs immediate
care what could be done so I
just think it's a really
important project that I hope
you pay attention to and creator
really robust oversight process
so that we don't deny chair even
though we're bringing and
services thank you and thank you
for all your work we really
appreciate you're coming sharing
the meal with us at the hospital
i'm sorry but the people in the
back can you please take your
conversation out.
The students don't know please
take your conversations out.
The.
Thank you mister chairman of my
chair members of the committee
might make million southwest
bone and join institute.
Has you consider a formation of
a legislation for this upcoming
session I have some
recommendations and i've forgot
some hand out that you can take
with you to consider a first as
medicaid reimbursement please
continue to increase medicaid
reimbursement for all providers
and perhaps consider an
inflationary increase annually
i'm also disappointed to rule
health care providers consider
adding an additional
reimbursement bump of four to
six percent for rural health
care providers.
Also no tear
sensementing investment is tied
to medicare reimbursement or
medicare rates
this next year medicare
scheduled the decrease two point
eight percent
and we need to ensure that our
medicaid rates don't follow that
and decrease as well.
Please ask her congressional
delegation to fix the medicare
physician payment system and
perhaps a letter from this
committee would be beneficial
next g our team
new mexico is only one of four
states that currently imposes
guilty on medical services
we simply need to just remove
that for medical services.
And if if we can't do that at
the very least require mcos to
fully reimburse providers for
grt payments at the full amount
and not a leiser amount and
do not uh include that in the
reimbursement formula.
Next on medical mail practice
they're always a subsidy helps
but it must be re occurring
in twenty twenty four hours
built two thirty four sponsored
by representative hotman vihill
is a good option to support
providers and provide an
incentive to providers to stay
in the state please consider
that because it also includes
mid levels which the osi subsidy
does not.
Next on the road health care
delivery fund.
Requirements for this fine to
qualify for the finder
problematic for independent
providers because you must
expand or have a new service.
Uh most independent providers
financial margins already to
take change requirements require
a fund of distribution
to smaller independent
providers.
And possibly use this provide
funds soon
independent providers similar to
the funding that hospitals are
currently receiving.
And then last
one of the last few things prior
authorization process is too
complicated every insurance pair
has a different prices different
system consolidate all mco
authorizations into one system.
Lastly surgery plus the nupsier
car savings should not come off
the backs of healthcare
providers and hospitals this
will further deteriorate our
health care system in new
mexico.
I want to thank you all for
coming to silver city those of
you that won't be retiring or
or going to do other things.
Thank you for your service we
appreciate you those that uh
continue on please come back to
sovereign city
thank you on the for the county
prospectors are legislative days
february third and santa fe
thank you
thank you very much for make.
Mary and scott mary aliska.
Thank you I will be very brief
from merry alice cut from the
new mexico primary care training
conservation mister chair
members of the committee I just
wanted to let you know our group
worked last night in this
morning to put together some
numbers for you about what we
think we would need for the uhm
for a permanent fan to develop
and sustain borrowed residency
programs in our state and i'm
happy to share that information
with you now or um adult a later
time when when would be
convenient for you I do have
some handouts but they do
require a little explanation so
i'm happy to tip pass those out
but just note that they will
need explanation and that is it
thank you very much.
Good thank you and and did you
have something to pass out to my
did you give it to us already.
Yeah we're we're about reader to
build out of this meeting so
anything you have for us to to
anything you want to pass out
given to us now the staff will
pass it out yeah you can just
give it to the step they'll do
it so now we go to the online
comment and we have five people
who've signed up online james
brown being the first mister
brown are you there.
And
three minutes and I really
appreciate it
has worked burking away our
breaks arm time
i'm reversing.
Committee members I do
appreciate your time and let me
eat to make public comment today
on this very.
Book.
The religion.
You were on mister brown
suddenly you're not let's try to
get.
The.
Could you guys hear me now yeah
we can hear you know
okay
committee members of mr chair
again thank you for let me speak
about public comment today on
the
the issue that was brought up by
the department of health as well
as that the union
score I am here today to add the
cake for at their p program for
philosopher and new mexico
imme pharmacist by straight i've
been trained in traditional
medicine as well as alternative
medicine and i'm here basically
that to advocate for
this movement forward in the
philosopher and therapy program
as a better and it's very
important to have options and
equality in new mexico with our
tribal are but really just and
veterans and as well as just new
mexicans we need to have access
to these type of therapies for
people who you know go through
the traditional model that are
unsuccessful as well as this is
a great option for palative care
as well as another white other
indications on that are
available
and so I just really would like
the committee to really think
about moving forward with the
bill this year and present it to
a hopefully passed that through
the legislature get that to the
governor to have it on her desk
so that she may or may not sign
that
but I would again advocate that
we move forward again with the
bill and that's why i'm here
today and I do appreciate your
time and I will keep it short
thank you again
thank you mister.
Marisa city back up.
He followed by lean metals.
Moving right long term will go
to learn to be followed by net.
The.
Hello my name is we and meadows
committee members and chairman
thank you for your public
service I must survivor of
generational trauma and was
first to recital at age nine
i've struggled most of my life
of depression anxiety and
complex post dramatic stress
disorder as well as chronic pain
I had loops going in my head on
the daily basis such as he is
going to kill me the options for
pharmaceutical management for
mental health often take a long
time to work and have many side
effects i've tried to have the
dozen medications I had so many
side effects emotional numbness
double vision sexual disfunction
that I chose not to treat my
depression and just to live in a
substandard state my progress
and therapy had plateaued last
year I began using home measure
and society and it has helped me
to make significant progress in
there be and to stop the loops
running in my head giving me a
much higher quality of life I
would like to see a bill in
january to get patience more
options for mental health
treatment I support a personal
suicide permits referred to in
the earlier presentation as the
new york model I would like to
see this plant medicine
accessible to patience
I volunteer with sold trip to
help advocate for access to a
silent in the state of new
mexico I appreciate your time
today and you're consideration
thank you so much
thank you very much
next is net dean and she'll be
followed by kenneth win.
Good afternoon mr chair mad
advice chair can you just give a
hi five auditorially that you
can hear me.
Yes yeah we can hear you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for taking
the time to hear public comment
today and for the access issue
although i'm struggling greatly
with accessibility for the
meetings
in terms of consolidated
customer service for the hca
it's excellent that now the
whole time is between one and
three minutes and I always
compliment them when i'm helping
be the bridge to a person who
has questions for them those are
always conference calls with me
and the consumer
case manager hall time however
can be up to an hour or longer
and that becomes very
problematic because after the
person gives up
there are increases to snap but
the snap benefits still that
many people are receiving may be
somewhere between forty and
fifty dollars a month so there
can be some bridges built to
actually have activated that
effect come on to the person's
card and then have greater
access to nutritional supports
a lot of people are having to
get their own
workers for the community
benefit because most of the
agencies as his nationwide are
very short staffed but if
someone does not have natural
supports or has no network you
don't really have the ability to
find someone to come in and give
them their
twelve hours sixteen hours or
twenty hours that they've been
allocated I think we need to do
some better bridge building to
how to help them then find
someone and that can provide
them the common community based
services but on the subject of
merc the medicated state
recovery program i've been
working with this for three to
five years with families and
individuals and it's very
misunderstood as with indicated
in members we held that was a
bit confused because it is
complex that whether it was
there was not an issue for snap
where the supplemental
nutritional assistance program
there are variety of mechanisms
to.
Have people avoid that murph
recapturing a funds but they can
be quite complex some of their
avenues can be quite simple
other way from changing the way
that a property is deeded which
may be a twenty five dollars
filing fee but just change in
the deed but it's very difficult
when someone's in a crisis to
navigate doing those simple
things and then it can come back
later and sort of as they say
bite them in the behind but this
is complicated the same way that
separation is complicated if
it's a third party injury and
someone has medicare or medicaid
or other insurance there can be
what terms as a clawback or
separation so there are
similarities between them but
there are also very different
and if that sounded confusing
imagine how it sells on
someone's worst day or even
their best today so i'd like to
really work with the committee
unhelping explain some of these
avenues and what they are
because they are complete but if
we simplify them so that they're
not ignoring the fine print when
they sign up of what you could
lose through a medicated state
recovery program.
I'd love to be able to help do
that and it's largely is someone
has end of life experience with
in a sniff or skilled nursing
facility so there's a lot of
misunderstandings but I think
what we can do together is hub
lived up the understanding thank
you very much for time mister
tereman advised her members of
the committee
thank you thanks for a free
help.
Or fine today
can I swin free.
But good afternoon mister
chairman and the steam members
of the committee thank you once
again for a lovely opportunity
to address the critical issue of
many of you know i'm can that
when free ceo of motor
behavioral health and agency
dedicated to providing cultural
decompetitive mental health
services we were statewide
primarily through telehealt
today I want to speak briefly
specifically about why removing
the word independent from our
tell the health law is from have
proposed is not enough to solve
the issue around my sister
master of social workers
practicing tell the help there's
a common assumption that if we
just remove their word that it
will open the doors for element
of use to never tell the health
unfortunately the problem is
more complex than that the
ambiguity in the current law
still leaves wrong for
misinterpretation according to
the regulation in life they
department with our clear
explicit language distinguishing
tell the help services provided
by element of use under
supervision from unlicensed are
called inner base services will
leave our healthcare system
vulnerable to exploitation by
entities that aren't providing
real care the risk here is too
fault first by my clearly
definitely who is eligible to
provide tell the help services
we risk elements continuing to
be excluded for me a burst even
if we strike the word
independent from the statute
back in we jeopardize the
integrity of medicaid
reimbursement medicaid dollars
or life one for many of our
clients and the less than our
explicitly outlined that
elements of use can provide
medicate reimbursement tell the
help sources of supervision
we're leaving significant
amounts to federal planning on
the table funding there could be
going directly toward expending
x expanding excess to care
particularly in rural areas that
are resolved this we need a
solution that addresses the root
of the problem we must introduce
language they clearly operate as
eliminates abuse working under
supervision.
To provide reimbursement will
tell the health circus the law
must specify the just a plastic
fully life of social workers
even if they're not
independently licensed for the
more it must exclude life
entities from offering clinical
services under the guy the
recent inventions or non
clinical models we've already
worked with you to draft more
comprehensive language to ensure
that this distinction is clear
and that elements of you can
step in where they're needed
most this is not just about
correcting a minor oversight
it's about protecting the mexico
smost vulnerable populations
securing federal medicaid
dollars and inspiring our
health care infrastructure
remains strong the ambiguity we
face now to leave many without
care and make it harder to meet
the increasing demand for middle
service that our state we need
to strengthen our laws to ensure
that those most capable of
providing care or in power to do
so
the port not only striking the
interport independent from the
statute but also adding the
necessary language to guarantee
elements of use temperate by
tell the health services under
supervision and can't be
reimbursed by medicaid I look
forward to working with you out
to assure your mexicans received
the car they deserve thank you
give for your time a dedication
to these important issues and I
have a written brief on this
matter for you all likely this
week thank you again.
Mr winter could make sure you
send with.
The language that you think is
needed that would be helpful we
thought that making clear that
license social workers could be
reimbursed for tell the health
would do it that obviously.
We're to
simplistic and are thinking but
so send that to us I would be
very helpful and with that.
We conclude our public comment
let me let me get a little feel
for from the members
are there things that came up
during this week's sessions that
you have in your mind said
that's something I really do
want to work on are there things
that came up the.
If you could think back over the
whole uh agenda for the last
week
yes I i'm I really am
uh all in on the solicitor so
the silicon
okay
that means you and senator
hickey will be working closely
on on this
represent a senator so the locus
think it thank you mister I just
wanted to mention that.
Soon to be senator a little
through here and I opened a file
on with compacts with the
various contacts and
she obviously because of her
experience I think will probably
take the lead in one of these
but and we will probably ask
representatives thompson
represent thomson and others who
are interested I mean I opened
the file basically because a
senator soon to be senator to
heal doesn't have access to it
to to do it but I wanted to make
sure everybody knew that we're
working on the contact issue the
big issue that I see now with
the physician compacts is the
fact that some states
criminalize physician provision
of reproductive services
in particularly abortion
services and we
we don't want that to happen to
new mexico doctors we need to
figure out what that means in
the in the context of a compete
and I understand there may be
some work
to make sure that that doesn't
become up as an issue but anyway
I wanted this committee to be
aware of it and hopefully we'll
be able to bring them to the
november meeting
to have some discussion of how
to do that the other thing that
struck me new today this could I
interrupt you for what should
are you opening a file for each
of the professions
so far we have seven I I just
give you another background so
currently their force base is in
my district and apparently if we
if new mexico has competes it
makes the standing of curtain
air for space higher when
they're looking at a projects
and and based closures and
everything because
of the opportunities is this
provide for military spouses
and so I committed to them to
work on this for for that reason
and and then the other thing
that struggled me today and I
wish senator rodriguez is here
this idea of the clawbacks was
news to me.
Uhm and to the extent that the
state can do anything about it I
think we should do the maximum
possible in terms of providing
waivers for people because his I
believe then
now dean um give us some
information about how to do
individual workarounds
and people don't know this and I
think it's the most vulnerable
to losing their homes or long
time land that will not take
these little
making trusts and transferring
it to other people or whatever
in time to not not get the
clawback and if there if it
allows the state to draft the
waivers maybe we can be very
generous so anyway III i'm happy
to work on that um it may be a
role making I don't know I don't
know what the solution is but it
just seems outrageous that
somebody that the errors could
lose their home with their
mother just because of the
medical services provided at end
of life.
Either october november
but the other piece was on the
prior authorization and the
amount of work that
providers have to go through to
get authorization and then that
we we also heard that sometimes
they're denied and they don't
receive payment at all so that's
another issue that I I would
like to explore
mobile cover you know thank you
mister chair I am definitely
want to
work with whomever
on the prior authorizations I
personally have been denied four
times and have been in this
process since.
Uh letter part of main june and
so I have first hand kind of
things I can add to that and
then
I would like to
um flush out with the
presentation that the
primary care training consortium
presented to us and i've already
articulated to them that i'd
like to work with them on how we
can make their recommendations
work and then finally
reference to work senator said
the
right of concerning the
clawbacks we my husband and I
have again experienced
the devastation that families
have been left in reference to
my mother in law and her
properties and what happened as
a result which meant that it
just knowledge fight so i'm
sorry okay sorry so
i'm interested in knowing
although we did pursue some at
legal avenues but
I thought it was hearing
so that that's another that's
another those three areas where
i'd like to pursue mr cher can I
jump in I worked on a prayer
authorization bill with vanessa
allen
may remember and and we started
out with pretty much across the
board and with all the push back
we ended it up with cancer drugs
auto amian drugs and behavioral
health drugs so just a warning
that it's gonna be a hard hard
hard thing to do nap but we need
to do it.
I do mister chair one of the
things before senator rodriguez
left an embrying super her
behalf is that there was a
concern that there was a hundred
and sixty one positions short in
the health care I mean in them
the healthcare authority but
they did need more money and so
how how do you do you
how do they resolve the need and
stay efficient and so that was a
little bit concerning to her and
i'm just bringing that forth and
maybe we could look into to then
see what's going on the other
thing uh mister chair is with
respect to the up the drug that
we were looking at
the seller siben i'm still very
concerned about the depression
and the suicide rate among
children and their it we didn't
it didn't really address that
and maybe there's something that
wasn't even supposed to be
looked at
the they have an each limit of
twenty one because there is
absolutely no research on any
one under twenty one so that's
not going to be a solution
if I mean
the the the synthetic seller
sibenes maybe two years from fda
approval the the mushrooms we
can approve but none of it has
been studied at all for people
under twenty one so there's no
way we can do it well I guess my
concern mr chair and manifest
here is even if we now look in
it salary then why we look at it
something else a hundred and one
kids committing so sad is a lot
and i'm just I am just bringing
that forth based upon what I
saw.
And
thank you mr chair.
I do think when last thing is
that when we talk to but we had
a lot of conversation with the
rule health care people here and
they talked about the number of
healthcare workers that they
needed but there were no
programs that I saw they were
presented to us to help to help
carry that going further and
maybe that's what was brought up
but we need to help them like
they do and then like they have
the communities to careers
program so i'll stop in what
else can we do well that I think
this would mario scott just
passed out a paper talking about
supporting the uh rural
providers graduated major
medical education program to get
more residencies that the
clinics basically and on the
theory that if you have a
resident in a rural clinic
spend three years there the
likelihood of them coming
abstain as greater so that I
think that's that's one
substantial thing that the was
brought before us to do that
okay anybody else did you have
anything that you wanted to say
up representative vincent thank
you mr chairman just you know
one thing that keeps resignate
with me as the shortage of
nurses that we have and it's
just instead of a getting better
to get worse and I would like to
look into that as well
and maybe you got some ideas
you're going to work on a I
don't have any ideas I mean I
i've been you have some concepts
that didn't come a plan in the
future I do and also
would like to work in help with
the pa's and help them with some
you know because pays are good
especially in rule you couldn't
agree more yeah that was very
promising and that's another
solution representative earned
in the positions assistant if we
could expand that
that program go online that the
western new mexico online
nurse practitioner program that
we heard I mean all of those are
very promising.
Ways of addressing the the issue
okay anybody else representative
chase you got away before we
could tepper brain we didn't
storm it so we'll we'll have to
message her just one last thing
they did talk about in the in
program that was in high school
there was four weeks long but
those kid has never went into an
internship or were able to
practice what they learned maybe
we could talk about how we could
assist in moving that program
forward so that there would be a
feed into more nurses yeah
I still remember charlie alfero
years ago talking about a
program here in silver city that
was a pipeline where kids in
high school were were introduced
to the field uh the in the
summer they get special training
they were given a chance to do
like many internships at clinics
or whatever and and it really
was it seemed like that was
really fustering interest in the
in the profession
it would be good to find out to
what extent that produce fruit
for produced nurses in doctors
and to follow up on that.
Well I I just I can't thank you
offer for the time you've put in
this week I can't thank you
enough for the time you've put
in this weekend and for working
as hard as you have this
committee I was you know
inspires me because for assumed
make the track down here then
you then you eat all that food
and and and drink drinks and and
it is just a very impressive and
I hope that
we'll see you all back in it
turns out it's not going to be
credit it'll be rearranged
the the school administration
building at the rear venture
public schools has been made
available to us for a meeting so
we will actually be able to to
taste the full rear entry
experience which were no we all
can wait to enjoy
so we'll see you and just a few
weeks in rear rancher and
in the meantime keep on tracking
with that the meeting will come
we will adjourn now we know we
