Good morning everyone welcome to
the language in term committee
turn on the volume we've been
sorry
i'm chair women linda sterato
have a representative in santa I
thank you everyone for joining
us this morning in highlands out
here in the last biggest we're
going to get started with
introductions and then we'll get
into our agenda but i'd love to
start uh at this end if we get a
representative introduce
yourself your district and yeah
it's good to start with the
representative
good morning everybody oh there
is a little bit of an echo echo
echo
my name's represent stephanie
lord and a district twenty two I
five land grants and so happy to
have them in my district this is
my absolute favorite committee
with my favorite leaders even
though charlie spicken spans not
open today
anyways i'm proud to be here
thank you
thank you I am a amp I a
district nineteen which is there
I also have landgrants right
next to overlap stephanie's
district and looking forward to
learning a lot about lane grants
thank you very much.
Hello everybody state
representative anything dollars
I am
has to shoot seventy which is
the majority of semi gallers
world's parts of torrents county
and I also live here in las
vegas a welcome to our metal
city
na I don't know if this factors
are proven fact but I think my
district may have the most
landgrounds that have all of
them
and the count all of them
because they do semi gulators I
was doing the counts and I
wanted I don't know what will do
account we mean stephanie will
do a contest here but between
semi gul and torrents county of
quite a few of my area so happy
to support i'm happy to be here
and happy to learn.
Rubber.
When is the earth delay the
representative miguel garcia
I represent house district
fourteen which is
more historic the more herserve
areas and about carican also the
unincorporated area of
renewal county like a three
school of where I live
established in nine sixteen
forties by my great grandparents
ninth power established as a
spanish language at sixteen
ninety two to by my great
graphic to the eighth power
and
I have a lot of roots here in
the summer county
my gregory grandpa wonders
what's my say established the
last week as landgrant in
eighteen thirty five on the
second try
because that's where guys was
first attempted to settle in
eighteen twenty three two years
after
the mexican revolution for
independence i've seen the
spanish rule in this area and
one day was my esa
was all kind of my ord
which is a dump adult standard
back then of mayor and
magistrate and he was all
currently my order to las vegas
landground when general
colleague came in in eighteen
forty six and it was here in the
plaza or general corny stood on
top of the house that my great
great grandparent and is still
standing right across the street
from the call over the
restaurant and it was there that
general currently declared that
no new mexico was part of the
united states and he took a
bible and he had my great great
grandpa
sorn in as the first official
alcohol in my or
of the new territory.
And that cordiality didn't last
long because after the forts
were established
the country would come into town
state the hotels and cater to
the bars and
there were a lot of abuse by the
cowardy of some of our women and
also they pick fights with the
locals so on my great
grandparent told the merchant's
was we're not going to sell any
goods to these fords and to the
county man on credit they're
gonna have to use cash well
surely after that declaration
they burnt the my great great
grandparents grist mill
which was
a mill that grounded flower into
different degrees of flower and
his grismal was here in sungry
well
which is now story leak and you
can see some other ruins after
around
they bring his chris mail my
great grampa move to the sun I
was steam which is in the area
romero ville south of here
and
also the new settlers
weren't coming to this area they
started encroaching on the
spanish language of last week of
grant the chaperiod grant other
grants in the area and there is
a huge resistance by the need of
a new mexican espanos and they
created a group called the
scorers blankets which went
about resisting some of the
encroachments by the new
settlers they cut down the bar
wire fence that were long that
were not in existence until the
white sentence came in.
And they opposed also the real
right railroad
encroachment in terms of
seasoning a lot of the commons
of the last week as grant and
the goldest blankets were uproot
the rails
and also burned down the borns
of some of these new settlers in
protest of the last of the lan
so this area is rich and culture
but it's also rich and
resistance and we still have
that same type of resistance
where some of the communities
that have become
invested with full language but
look of a division standards
that we recently passed the two
years ago.
So it's always an honor to be
here
in the answer to a land holdings
of my family and i'm with the
loans of i'm the long founding
member of this committee
established in two thousand and
three
so thank you maria chair and
thank you all.
That thank you madame chair
thank you members police for
being late all our but I was
just enjoying the drive up here
from my name is antonio masters
and the state center from
district twenty six which is on
the west side of albuquerque
opposite downtown in the north
valley
which encompasses the
west central corridor but anyway
i'll rose lead to biggest
manager all roads lead to
biggest as in car seal was
mentioning
I really low biggest i've spent
many summers here as a kid my my
folks are from biggest and their
folks in their folks all uhm so
something or count his bray dear
to my heart there up and it has
just a tremendous tremendous
history because as you know
manager las vegas is the
quinnessential western town I
mean it literally is dodged city
kansas and tums and errors on
all rolled into one
and so when we roman size about
about the past and the way we
wanted to be well so I have to.
Also after struggle with that
with the with the realities of
of our economy and and that we
must grow this economy we must
stuff you know great conditions
were our children you know stay
in biggest go to highlands and
stay or or not move too far away
so anyway just really appreciate
bringing on this committee and
and being here in vegas and
thanks for bringing us here.
Celebrities to vanix can we have
you introduce yourself as well
good morning madam chair lister
found a senate district thirty
nine parts of said migal sanity
torrents and valencia and is a
pleasure to be here several
committees are here this month l
of c r water nature resources
this one lhs next week until we
appreciate the hospitality all
the time thank you very much.
And i'm gonna go to turn it over
to encourage introduced the
staff today.
Thank you madame chair my name
is i'm a staff attorney with a
legislative counter service and
the lead staff for the landgrand
committee also joining from the
legislative council service and
staffing this committee or mark
edwards and lisa river morrison
thank you
senator lopez if you would do my
good morning even when as they
have at all those linda locust
state senator district eleven
and southwest quadrained to
bernald your county thank you.
Where where does the thinking to
move good morning i'm leohard
meo state senator district five
which includes the salamos
rearing by salary santa fe
counties and I represent true
drug of economism as a mess they
saw whose of mixed descent of
native and his spano cultures I
represent the beautiful
especially valley the low writer
capital of the world where I
like to say we're brown were
proud and would load of the
ground and have a number of lamb
grants that are in my districts
that means a lot to be a member
on this committee madam chair
thank you thank you and as I
mentioned i'm a chairman in
linda strato I would proudly
represent the south side of
santa fe i've been looking after
come to eleven I day here in a
home coming here at highlands
and I worked on landgrands for a
number of years for our federal
delegation in print a previous
life answer wonder really glad
to be on this committee and back
with you all i'm happy to turn
it over to the audience and we
have mark edwards in the back
with the microphone if you'd
like to introduce yourself my
cat work as a microphone and
maria can swallow low and i'm
the district legislative aid for
a representative.
Nicostrada and i'm a student at
university in mexico school of
mark.
Egypt a check on with filled
representative for congressman
there is a legislation this and
a covered landgrounds in my
portfolio for the compson.
A good morning and regular metal
with the new mexico department
of justice what it would be that
good treaty division.
My name is virginia more and i'm
the summer fellow for the treaty
division.
Good morning eighty time the
president will lose the healers
language welcome to c.
Good morning many percent and
social vice president woman here
highly university welcome to our
campus need a mobile las vegas
and sunday and county and
very proud to have you all your
tea.
Hello i'm tuna down a hundred my
community member from last
christmas
hello done a sierra representing
data gate
positive good morning everyone
my name is jay thinking done i'm
a near two months on bangrade
name currently one of the two
role frontier equity ombudsman
for an mdfa in the
infrastructure planning and
developing difficult.
Santo it when I say that that
the us my name is or the roche
letter I am with the new mexico
language council.
Good morning my name is
anesopaca and I work for the new
mexical and grand council
wonderful thank you everyone for
the introductions and everything
are so as we mentioned we're be
discussing our landrands and
having a good conversation on
education in our communities as
well I want to take a moment
before we get into the new
mexico highlands over you an
update if we could have a quick
vote on the minutes that you can
find in your folder could have
emotioned to approve those
minutes of the second move by
representatives and seconded by
thirteen
wonderful seen oppositions the
motion carries
one of our thank you for that to
hear the official piece of
business i'd like to now turn it
over to doctored brown has the
pro boost and vice president for
academic affairs of mexico
highlands university thank you
good morning chair person
surrounded by share her meal
synergis and representatives as
well as legislative and
committee staff and those who
have joined us in person and be
assumed this morning i'm damn
brown provision vice president
practice because there is here
at highlands on behalf of
president nilbolf and our
students faculty staff and
alumni I welcome you to new
mexico highlands university and
las vegas I hope you enjoyed
their beautiful green landscape
that welcomed you to our campus
as we pinch ourselves daily with
the blessings rainfall has
brought to our forest waterships
plains and campus in and around
some bego county at the same
time I would be remiss not to
acknowledge the tragedies and
struggles as so many and would
also and mean can county and
also in the texas hill country
who have experienced such
devastating flying in the face
of difficult conditions
for this is only my third monday
on campus I began my career in
new mexico is a faculty member
at eastern new mexico university
nearly thirty years ago I took a
side step into texas for a
number of years but could not be
happy with having joined the
highlands community at a time of
great promise and opportunity.
And hope to provide you today
with a sense of why I believe
that now is the time last vegas
is the place and highlands is
the university that will promote
community engagement economic
development and the success of
our students who are striving to
achieve dreams of college
degrees and the future
opportunities that were result
from their hard work and effort
both within and outside of our
classrooms and laboratories i'd
like to begin today by
discussing a few highlights from
our activity departments and our
commitment to grad graduating
career ready professionals and
candidates for graduate schools
we are committed to developing a
sense of career readiness among
our students and strengthening
their appreciation of the
preparedness for the rapidly
changing work force that they
will enter it is our goal that
they be ready on day one after
completing their degrees to
enter their chosen field of
study and get to work at the
same time we know that many of
our students may wish to pursue
graduate degrees and we want
them to do so with confidence
and and understanding that their
highlands degrees have prepared
them well for their academic
features one example of our
progress in academic affairs is
a new program for graduate
students in computer science and
it's called sandbox our students
will have opportunities to
complete about a year of
traditional instructions
and then they will be immersed
in the world of development of
products and companies they will
have access to mentorship and
learn how to navigate the world
of vinter capital in preparation
for their futures as
entrepreneurs
our country has the silicon
valley the silicon slopes and
the silicon hills we hope and
believe that sandbox could
contribute to a thriving
computing and technology economy
in new mexico as it has in
california you tile in texas
also in our college of business
we are launching new
undergraduate graduate
certificate programs in supply
chain management and offering
our students opportunities.
To expand the credentials they
will take with them into the
work force
to further to provide further
support to our health care
community we're launching a new
doctor of nursing practice by
spring twenty twenty six
employee preparing nurses for
advance practice and leadership
i've no doubt that their
presence in our northern new
mexico communities will promote
greater health and respond to
the needs for critical services
and speaking of community i'm
very proud that our school of
education faculty are partnering
with the university of new
mexico on a toy lending center
does it seem like much it will
open this far and support our
local families with small
children I don't believe there
is a simpler yet more impactful
program we can march that could
more clearly demonstrate our
commitment to our neighbors and
at the same time and education
were making progress toward our
second professional doctoral
degree in education
and finally let's talk about
forestry highlands is a leader
in new mexico and beyond with
respect to forestry and we have
mountains and forests
surrounding our community as our
classrooms our forestry
footprint includes the
department of forestry on campus
grant funded programs under the
umbrella of reforestation
operations and the new mexico
forest and water said
restoration institute our
students have opportunities to
participate in traditional
classroom laboratory experiences
but also applied research
projects here in the region they
also contribute to the
development of knowledge
informing future force
rehabilitation and fire recovery
operations
being regionally responsive is
very important to us and our
forestry initiatives again
demonstrate our commitment to
serving the region and
strengthening the economic
recovery of northern new mexico
most specifically
and finally i'd like to discuss
developing a culture of
opportunity at highlands where
we will infuse and
entrepreneurial spirit through
campus focused on developing
innovative responses.
To challenges today and in the
future we are committed to
developing a campus wide out for
new spiritual
a good example is the same box
in their strip that I mentioned
earlier but i'd also like to
discuss energy that is our goal
have becoming energy independent
at highlands we are committed to
promoting a healthy environment
and reducing our carbon
footprint at the same time
reducing our direct costs for
energy understanding that it is
doubtful that energy cost will
decline over time we'll provide
this with additional financial
resources to achieve our primary
goals which are students success
in academic excellence
so where do we go from here
our summer enrollment has
increased four percent over
twenty twenty four we were
welcome students to campus on
august eighteenth and are
anticipating a modest enrollment
increase for fall
in enrollment management we are
especially proud of having
dramatically improved financial
aid packaging processes the
lowest provider financial aid
aboard for earlier to our new
students than in the past our
residence halls with just under
six hundred beds are projected
to be at full capacity and over
the past year we have
established due enrollment and
early college partnerships with
several school districts and
cooperative degree pathways for
central new mexico college and
the university of new mexico as
an example of this outreach work
our team has developed six new
dull enrollment agreements over
the past two years and we look
forward to serving our schools
in spring or pinosco cuba
question santa fe and the east
mountain high school
as we enroll these students in
highlands we are also committed
to promoting and encouraging
their success we were chosen to
participate in a complete
college america accelerator
initiative with over one hundred
colleges in universities from
across the nation our goal is to
improve students success as we
close achievement gaps in access
and completion our new mexico
cohortness project includes the
university of new mexico and its
campuses in tales.
Los alamos in valentia as well
as nmsu grants and several to
your colleges I look forward to
bringing future updates to you
regarding our student success
achievements and progress in the
future
and finally and as a leader
among his spanish serving
institutions we are committed to
becoming a native american
serving nontribal college
institution this goal lies at
the heart of our mission in
northern new mexico we are
working on admission and
enrollment agreements with the
number of public of dedicated
native american recruitment
staff and if created a native
american advisory council on
campus to provide us with
guidance regarding our efforts
i'm indeed going to farming to
next month just to learn more
about our operations in
northwestern new mexico and our
service and two better serve or
donate community
we look forward to further
demonstrating our commitment to
our native american communities
and receiving
us department of education
designation as a native american
serving non tribal college
institution hopefully within
three to four years now my
family is in the process of
reloading relocating all the way
from bombard texas to las vegas
new mexico so my crystal ball is
packed somewhere in jefferson
county in southeastern texas I
can promise you this as I think
about the future of new mexico
highlands
highlands university will
continue to focus on the success
of our students in las vegas
online farmington albert key
rerento and center
we will connect with our
communities and learn from their
resilience in the face of
natural disaster recovery
we will be good stewarts are
physical in fiscal resources and
we look forward to working with
you together on future
opportunities that may present
themselves thank you so much for
being with us today here at new
mexico highlands university and
I would be happy to answer
questions or take questions back
for additional information you
might require thank you.
Thank you doctor round for that
overview that was very helpful
and excited to see what you guys
come out with i'm looking around
the committee to see there's any
additional questions at the same
senator stephonics
thank you madame chair and
welcome to the university could
you talk a little bit more about
how you might face in the
renewal energy
we're working and never have
been used and for say I can't
give you great deal details on
that yet it started with when
you look outside of my window
you can see solar panels on the
surfaces of some of our parking
structures so it's going to be a
combination of
being more conservative with our
use of energy and bringing an
alternative sources where we can
but it's a it's not an immediate
term something will accomplish
in the very near term but it's
something we're committed to
achieving
thank you very much
representative consolidates.
Garcia
thank you madame chair and thank
you doctor brown and welcome to
the university
it's a pillar of a learning here
northeastern new mexico
you mention that
you were established a doctor of
nursing program
what is that entail and what
what do you currently have
regarding the nursing program
i'm regarding the nursing
program we currently have a an
undergraduate program that takes
or instance the bsn we also have
a relatively new masters to
reperson in programming family
practice nursing our talk to the
business practitioner is a
program that's really being
fully defined as we speak today
the companies are meeting to do
that but the goal is that
through that process in the dnp
you you prepare
graduate or advance degree
nurses for careers in leadership
careers in management and
careers in advance practice so
what we see is that these
professionals around the nation
are increasingly becoming the
first point of contact for for
for care of our of our citizens
and my son's best
service ever at a pediatrician's
office was at a dnp back in some
marcos texas and so it's a lot
about quality of care it's about
the personal touch for health
care and I think they're going
to play a really significant
role in stepping in in rural
communities where it's becoming
more and more challenging to
recruit full time health
professionals to our communities
thank you for that
mancheron
you know two years ago we passed
the measure that took
eleven years on the making to do
a
a personal income tax credit.
Of
five thousand dollars
for different professions that
weren't brought into the rule of
healthcare practition attacks
credit act
that we passed in two thousand
and seven and in there we had
the registered nurses
we had social workers
we have
pharmacists
we had behavior health council
and therapists and actually
these are very significant and
i'm share of professions but yet
we weren't including them all
these years in that tax credit
of five thousand dollars and
I know that highlands has a
record a history tradition are
putting out producing social
workers and we applied to for
that
and
but their still is madame chair
the shortage
of healthcare practitioners and
rural communities in a good
example madam chair of that
dream is right here
in two thousand and three last
week had twenty six physicians
naturally some of those were
specialist or by and surgeons
etcetera etcetera today manager
we have
those
innovation there so that's a
sorry in itself and other those
doors
we have an outstanding
physician and with a forty year
history of service here not less
than this area and doctor
michael lot best
and dias a bit
resource or some of these help
initiatives that you want to
undertake and i'd suggest that
you reach out to him
and consult with them in terms
of how he can move forward these
programs that you wish to
undertake.
So thanks again and thank you
for coming on board thank you
and thank you for introducing to
that practitioner in town I do
believe it's exciting to be
somewhere where
regardless of the discipline
there is such a strong sense of
service social work me applauded
the sea for that and it's early
estates health care is following
up but I since that that's a
strong element of all that we
plan to do and hope to achieve
here at holland's university so
thank you think representative
senator my esthers
thank you matcher thank you
probable pleasure to be up just
to keep in mind on
you and a most school you know
my school may have one last m
and you and him has always had a
wonderful religion with
highlands and a great pipeline
of highland students that they
graduated from from you in a
moscow
the word the name that comes to
minutes of former tree general
hectible that assessed just done
a salt proud that relationship
not because of highlands but
because of you and i'm law I
don't believe it's it's very
strong these days when I was a
student at unanimous
practice all sets for the
students and and at least thirty
or forty highland students took
the else at each year and you
know they did whatever so when
do we keep that in mind
and i'd pre
definitely work with you on that
and maybe we talk to you when
i'm because there should be at
least four five highland
students going to in my every
year and there's not anymore you
and in law.
You know to me
they should be committed to
insuring that that underserved
communities have lawyers in the
future sometimes they there are
notions of diversity diversity
for diversity sake as opposed to
diversity for the community sake
so anyway but we'll talk more
about that we just keep that in
in the back your mind
you drawn your ten year thank
you I appreciate that comment
specifically because as we think
about career readiness we want
our students to be prepared not
only for jobs immediately after
I after community complete in
their degrees but also if they
choose to go to professional
graduate schools and and so
helping him understand the
opportunities that exist there
is something work committee to
and I I also think it's exciting
that we do have union law score
as someone who still willing to
partner with us here from
highlands that's a great place
to be
thank you and just reminded to
go through the chair that the
conversation thank you
thank you
I have a question in regard to
the
supply chain management you
talked about certification on
that I was curious as to whether
or not you are working with any
companies in new mexico to
support that and other words are
they working with you directly
to help with that curriculum or
are you do you have some current
mentorship with them to to help
with the students so that they
understand where the impact that
supply chain can happen them so
i'm just curious that I know
you're only three weeks and so
so the top question but that I
would appreciate an answer
well the first place that we've
had opportunities to interact
with others is with los alamos
national advertories who has
helped us a great deal and
developing the secondary program
and I would comment we started
with the certificate program
because we wanted to offer
another opportunity for a
student who might be currently
in a bba or nba program rather
than go to a fully launched
degree but los alamos has been
our first partner and i've no
doubt that we'll be working on
developing relationships
especially with
professionals advisory council
members who have experience and
skill and.
Those areas because
we understand that those
individuals are gonna be the
ones that can help expand our
learning take that context from
the classroom and help make it
real if that makes sense so we
look forward developing more
those relationships in the
future
thank you for that thank you on
another question mr chair
with regards to your computer
science that a I advantage as
quickly as it is how are you
incorporating a I know that
because it looks like within
another year to computer colding
is going to be done by a I and
and yet i'm concerned about that
because I think we still need
people who understand how to
cold
and can actually look at what
the ais doing and making sure
that it's doing the right things
and so I was wondering how you
incorporating a I am discomputer
science activity I must be
honest if I had had a strong
sense of what that was two weeks
ago when I began it probably
would have changed by today so I
can't give you a strong answer
to that right now but I would be
happy to get back with you your
staff and talk about more of
what we're doing in that area
thank you
thank you ducked around for the
presentation in the w really
exciting things
how come thank you and have a
wonderful visit and great
opportunity to see you
i'd like to also have a tick
moment for a similar folks are
just joined to also introduce
themselves a representative to
hear
a good morning man and share
unhilly damage here from chavis
county district fifty eight I do
here thank you representative
tourist balance.
From you
good morning almoney and stand
tourists relatives and I am from
bernie county in the north these
tights and my primary very first
and life long member was money
to see how me to see how many
ambassador who loved and loved
las vegas and we did some events
for her up here in her later
years and I appreciate all that
you have done
thank you.
Thank you i'm just before we go
into the next presentation I
want to offer you all breakfast
we have some over here still
available in coffee pop yourself
as well
senator stephanie
thank you madame chair we found
and i'm hearing it this morning
if people don't have the mike
directly in front of them we
have a bounce back in the room
thank you
good thank you for the reminder
so if you can get as close as my
hospital to the make it sound so
loud and your own ear but it's
helpful i'm gonna turn it over
to mark edwards who's a bill
drafter he's going to give a
statute who are statutory
overview of landground reservice
mark
thank you mancher memchair
members of the committee
am going to try to give a very
brief overview of how langrans
end up in our statutes but what
the structure is
my grants tend to be very
complicated somewhere and try to
give you a couple of red light
right red lines to to hang on to
as we get started there is quite
a number of new members and I
apologize to couple the new
members I did not recognize when
they walked in because I haven't
had a chance to work with
so the key concepts you all
should have a
brief outline
first was the original grant of
land when you're talking to a
community did they have a grant
blend made to an individual or
to a community
the second finger remember is
that you all the state
legislature gets to the side
what constitutes political
subdivision in the state that
federal government cannot do
that that's a state power
the third in probably the most
that's probably the most
important one
the other one is that the treaty
was appealed targo.
Set up a.
It obligated the united states
to protect the property rights
of the people that were living
here when it took over new
mexico arizona texas and the
rest of the the territories that
it got from from mexico so the
first thing to look at is the
treaty
the treaty would done
congress at a paper a pattern
process
originally people will have to
go to the surveyor general and
get a survey done by
the surveyor general for their
pattern and or for their grant
of land in that patent or that
grant within the submitted to
congress and approved
later on after the civil war
that got switched to a court of
private land claims but it was
still
another entity that was
approving yes these people own
this land before congress would
then give its approval
the
but they were looking at were
titles of land that were very
different than what the us was
used to at the time
people only land jointly as
tenants and carmen which is
exists and the us but it's
rather rare and the last
communal use of a common support
general economic well being in
health of a community was
probably the boston comments and
that ceased to be used as a
commons for life start crazing
in eighteen thirty and was
transferred into a park well the
treaty is eighteen years after
that and that was probably the
only one anybody was familiar
with what they were more
familiar with was the federal
township act of eighteen forty
four four years before the
treaty of what we pay a darker
and what that date was that.
Someone would apply for a patent
of lan out in the middle of the
frontier and say I want to build
a town site there and so they
would get a pattern for the law
union town site which exists in
daniel county as a way of giving
them some legal status for that
rand the ideas they will be and
develop it out it would sell
lots and people would move in
and then they create a town
council and apply to their local
county for
a municipality stands we have
that in our statutes under
chapter nineteen.
So that would probably was in
the back of their minds when
they were signing the treaty if
they were thinking of communal
land ownership
but they were completely silent
but the but the treaties just
says shall be protected in their
liberty and and property
without describing what
community ownership would be
what a patent of land for a
community actually met so
the app was left up to new
mexico to the side
the
up until
two thousand four
we had a series of different
language laws
they're all in chapter forty
nine
but none of them were political
subdivisions there were many of
them had specific statutes that
government in election of a
local board but it wasn't a
year they couldn't receive
federal or or steep funding
because of the anti donation
clause if you're not a political
subdivision you don't get state
funding so there was very little
way from the legislature to help
with local infrastructure to
help pay for that school pass
that broke down
etc so in two thousand for this
committee one of the very first
things it did was
update chaptered forty nine and
created a process where
or
qualification system for
language may service which is a
statutory specific to new mexico
only term
dead
refers to political subdivisions
how i've quoted it here and
lingerate their said is a grant
to plan made by the government
of spain or mexico to a
community town colony or to a
person.
For the purpose of founding or
establishing a community town or
well
and then the rest of it article
forty nine article one
tells them what they have to do
how often they have to hold
elections how many electorate
board members they have to have
to they have to be happening
meetings they have to have
accounting can be in compliance
with the other day etc etcetera
the.
They're still exist quite a lot
of langram communities that are
not in article one or article
four which is children
were sitting on the last fake as
brand
the key difference between the
last biggest grant and all the
political subdivisions is that
if I move here ins established
residency i'm suddenly allowed
to vote in their elections for
board members cause i'm a member
of the grand if your resident of
las vegas that is not the same
to me for
trisco for
min for all the political
subdivisions you have to be airs
of the original grand tea
so why does why is that
confusing because you had this
new system and professor garcia
over here at some point probably
tell you this history of how
venues came to be
up until
the
pueblo revolt in new mexico no
one had ever kicked the spanish
out of a colony
well they got checked out for
twenty five years so when they
came back the
crown said okay we are try
something different
the our process the latter
funding assistant where we say
okay colon also and so you
conquered this plan it's now
yours in everybody there
now reports to you doesn't work
the tribes don't like it and the
successfully kicked us out so
they make grants a
well when they made a brand two
current colonel sewer than so
and his followers to create.
Dad settlement may or may not
have been bioric up to a certain
level of viability but they
didn't want to go to the through
the process of becoming a town
so you had the spammish front
here
being overlooked been overlayed
by the united states frontier
but frontier communities don't
have all the rules in place
there were no laws when the
territory of new mexico was
first set up and how you became
immunity
so you have a wide range of
grants that may or may not have
had enough people to be
available community or they may
have had a community about
under our statutes a numerous
palty has to provide various
services including have a police
department so they're a couple
of town sites long young and
intaniana be one of them under
the the US law that never
decided to apply but there are
still there they they consider
themselves a township
but that has a very different
status than a supporting
so for our purposes for the
lancrate community
have developed a different three
different nomenclatures when
it's an individual grant even if
that correct
guide sold off and pieces and
people moved in and they created
a community but if they never
organized themselves house and
land
then I just put the yata yana
grant on the agenda.
The one who say lopato grant
come and present to the
committee it's basically the
original community that they
don't want elita may be immunist
sure but
one hose labato is not he
langrepher said
understate statue the second
would be where an agenda since
landground that is a language
community they have just not
gone through the process to
become corporated under article
one as a language near said
and for those of your digit are
are confused about the terminal
said it comes from the same
lapton route is mercy so if you
think of mercy of the crown
while he got to fight it in
spanish it means favor of the
crowd
and you mexico is the only place
that I know of that has been
service day tiera and langrade
or land
favors when I had first started
with this committee I found out
that in chile they have said
it's a adwant so probably like
our seeking system but it was
grants of water to various
communities the
so if you see grant but you
don't see land with it you know
you're dealing with
a community or a set of
individuals that have historical
of importance to the state and
may have some
cultural light affinity with the
lingrich community but they're
not political subdivisions you
see languages you probably have
e the established land grant
they probably did it may have
got no pattern to blame from the
federal government
more landgrant just to the north
of us is a very good example of
that but these specifically
didn't want to be part of the
statue when the statute was
amended.
Twenty twenty three so they are
no longer a language
and they seem to be happy with
when it says language may said
that is an article one or
article to poor
their all article one
exceptionally
and that means you all can then
work to get an appropriation for
infrastructure or help them out
with an education thing you can
treat them as it is a political
unit like you would a town
council or a hospital district
somewhere in between those two
in twenty twenty three the
the article one was amended and
it's important to talk about
here because this the length the
las vegas quiet back in the
early twenties through the early
forties parcel down four
different three thousand acres
sections of their land in deeded
it to a subset of the airs of
the language and so those
subsets organized themselves
with an governing board and just
treating themselves like
landgrad and had been operating
that way but the state could not
interact with them the way they
did with the language percent so
they change to the this
committee and ask can you will
become language where said is
understations
the same thing with your hand
over either in touch the big
inside represent
refers to it the mother grant
split off a portion of the grant
I believe in eighteen twenty
three three years before mexican
independence
but it had never been formalised
remember this was a a frontier
colony
of mexico at the time it never
been formalized in the in
mexican statutes.
So it took a court case the
local court ruled in nineteen
fourteen that yes it had been
split off and it was a separate
entity from the
original royal handle ground so
the irony there is the partition
of repair is a political
subdivision and the partitions
the three partitions are there
that came to the community said
we want to happen to concept
that there's no status of the
las vegas and I have them listed
on the last page
our political subdivisions but
the original grants that have a
pattern of land from the us
government are not political
and without a stand for
questions
thank you for that presentation
other questions
thank you so much mark for
presenting today i'm sure that
we will get back to you with
additional questions later on as
we continue with this interim
committee
i'm gonna go heading on to our
next item updates from the
lorgaines landgrammer said now
we understand the distinction
there i'd like to welcome until
you have been to be this the
president of the lower guideness
language.
If you don't mind there's an
ican of abandoned the front of
you can you hear me now okay we
can
marampture numbers of the
legislative word i'm here to
present on behalf of the lower
guidance language
i'd like to begin by saying that
i'm very bad up hearing that's
why I had been sitting over next
to that speaker so if I ask you
to reiterate questions please do
so so want to make sure that I
understand what you're asking or
telling me
i'd like to begin this morning
by apologize into all of you I
know that mister killer sent me
emails and staff when told me
about your presentation in how I
sudden copies and things of that
nature
we're still trying to get or
language up to speed we've been
a member of the new mexico
language council now for about
three years
I also would like to apologize
because I have not attended any
legislative meetings regarding
lan grounds or any legislation
regarding this sort of thing I
spoke with miss
a board member anthony else
orton this morning and he
expressed me
how important it is for us as
members of line grants to be
present at legislative areas and
speak to our legislature later
and thereby perhaps
influence things in your favor
so
to begin with i'm going to begin
with the brief history of our
language mister garcia road with
us that last.
This year and I I fed him
details that you're not going to
hear here i'm going to just do a
brief overview
the lower gainers land grant was
established in nineteen fifty
three when three gentlemen from
last guy in us districts
fifty three I think.
When to the last riggest
language and
I believe the district church
who was
kind of involved at that time
and asked for
a language land as for for land
so that the people from that
district would be able to a
harvest
other natural resources from the
language christmas trees things
like that
the three original members were
filling per blue
the the most prominent member
was
taken
can't remember their favor
federal or saver was was really
the head of the three port
members and I think
martinez
or two covers name they went and
they asked for this land they
were granted this property
they really gave the authority
to mister or taga he was to keep
the land for the people it was
you know kind of appointed the
main guy are excuse my language
out this is the best I can speak
so the organization started and
of course
we became I guess you could say
language money port couldn't
pick the taxes
so they started looking around
for members that would be seen
as people my father was not in
district fifty three and they
asked them to join
because.
In those days it was
not a net on a hunter
and must ask the commission to
familiar how their family house
your calls are your cousins and
it would have been meetings and
we were it was
a time passed
a dime but I wish I could go
back to
and up.
There was a nineteen fifty three
so that through the fifties and
the sixties it was very mel very
much the meetings were held they
kept records the adult
elections
we did work on the language we
asked for grants I know they
asked for grants I remember
working on fences and a.
And springs
so
as we evolved
their generation
they were gone there pretty much
all the movie now so
I was fourteen years old when my
father introduced me to the
language.
To the lower gainers language
and
I became a member at fourteen
years of aids i'm now seventy
two so i've been a member of
fifty some of years.
Um
for me
the land ground
the whole suspicious place
I grew up
on the left
so at the right police of
fourteen i'd became secretary
a learned to take minutes and
done.
I worked as a secretary for the
learning ground every year or
they would be the motion in this
youngest we need to have
elections
done a casical
tony is there let to me by I
guess
but unanimous decision became up
pushed me a year after year
so we continued that we are
we had a
gentleman that joined on
language rather late
his father was never a member
but his grandmother grandfather
was the one that asked for the
language.
During his tenure as president
we weren't to the I think I was
vice president or some some
important member at the time.
We went to the las vegas
langrand and we asked to be
autonomous from them for them to
give us
recognition as a board and that
we could run or we're gonna
station and it be
a documentary okay so they did
they gave us a document saying
you guys.
But we were still under the
district judge
took another several years to
have him give us a letter seen
okay you're autonomous now
you're your own government
governing board your
organization yet yet a yada
since shortly after that we we
were autonomous for few years
and we render meetings and like
any organization we've had up
some downs
what are the biggest issues has
been membership but we have
worked through it.
And then sure later she comes
the new mexico learn grand
council
in all of a certain things
changed for us
yeah we kept meeting with
minutes and with that you know
we've made budget but we never
have to do horribly
reports or
be a test median or do that
things although a certain thing
started to get real
formal
it is good i'm glad i'm happy
that the legislature finally did
something for the recognizing
the language new mexico because
that still only way to move
forward
so.
Since we became a member of the
the mexico landground council
I am
the president there was in
office at time served out of
time and then we held elections
and guess how many people run
for our bore.
This is like the second or third
time on president you know and
i'm happy to represent her or
knowing I am proud of our line
round unproud of what we're
doing and where we're hit it
where we have been.
As I said earlier one of our
biggest issues was membership
because before nineteen in the
seventies when I was a president
the first time it was a closed
membership
one for one
your father died your father had
to decide he had this many's
children which child is going to
be on the land ground because he
was a one for one
and so I said no this has to
change we have too many people
up here you have to many
children loosing now do you have
too many family members losing
out we have to open this we have
to open up this membership
i'll tell you what
there was about
I got it passed I got a opened
one boat
fell in my favorite one vote we
passed it by warnable
and so we open them the
membership so that now I would
father have three children my
three children can belong to the
language I don't have to pick
one of the three
so now we're at a crossroads
once again regarding membership
because I grew up organization
group exporting usually you know
children had children children
and children that's all so now
we're at a
at a crosswords as an
organization we have to decide
how we're going to go forward
regarding membership that's one
of the biggest issues.
Since becoming
a language member of the
but the mexican language council
as I said before we ran our
meetings very
they were official but very
nunch alone the
now we're making sure we don't
uh doubt our eyes and cross our
tease and that we get all our
quarterly reports and get things
and we have complied with the
requirements.
We're we're still behind on some
but were bring it him up or were
working
like I said you don't
when I could connect came in I
replaced the president
then i'm not saying that I
replace them i'm saying that I
was elected to the board as you
folks know and then the board
makes a decision as to who is
going to be a chairman your
secretary of treasure and that's
how we determine so being the
age that I am guess who they
appointed board chairman
you know so
it's not because of the sharpest
tool in the drawer i'm just the
oldest tool in the drawer
I do have
very good support stuff my
daughter served a secretary
she has since distanced herself
once the time was up
the president also so there was
three board members there was
two board members that were left
and I was elected so we ran it
for but six eight months and
then finally we had an election
and
well we were overwhelmed by that
not by the people willing to
serve we had one
so it's a difficult for us to
get people to serve to be on our
board they're afraid I I myself
if I get up here and I say
something wrong
what
i'm sorry it also don't be
afraid come home guys just do it
you know if you you have helped
at that legislature if you're
doing something that has to do
with that ask somebody they'll
help you so my intentions are to
run one more.
And before I leave I want to
leave our grant with a with the
members that are there the
president the secretary the
treasurer especially
and
knowing that they can do the job
it it's that's a circular thing
in the state I work for the
state the it's everything
doesn't hardly ever change us
once in a while you have
something that comes up but you
know every year got to do a
budget that the quarter is that
I write about that part of the
job.
So my intentions are before I
leave to leave a full combined
competent board five members by
speaking to them and encouraging
them and and telling them hey
you're not going to be left out
on the cold we're going to be
there right there if you need
anything asked us.
Um
okay so that takes care of that
part of my presentation now
to brief you on what we have
been doing lately
then I think this is really
important and I think.
As you all know we had the
devastating
chaff channel
uh the report we need fire
might speak fire
a language was burned to a
christ
I mean there are very i'd say
maybe five percent.
Maybe ten percent of our
language did not get burned
it's been uh what was the twenty
two twenty three twenty four
twenty five it's been about
three or four years we have a
lot of vegetation growing yes
and its covering up the scars on
the ground but you cannot walk
for an hour in our language
without not without coming back
with your shoes full of dirt and
your pat leagues up to your
knees full of ash and dust
that's just the way it is
a recovery efforts are were does
have been a presentation we're
having a meeting on
july the nineteenth I think it's
a saturday next saturday
and
we have committee members
there's two companies that are
working up there cleaning out
all the dead trees in debris for
private land owners so they will
be presenting to us and tell in
us you know the tour with us and
give us an estimate on how what
it what it will cost to just
knock him down just knock them
down but now most of the wood is
beyond saving so just clear it
so that it down would have been
accidents with on whatever.
We have we are also a roads are
of great concern access
to as mister garcia saw last
year a roadside pretty sad shape
I mean you can make it you can
even make it under two will pick
up drive but don't take a car up
there
so we're we're we have plans
we're working we're trying to
find people that we want to do
it correctly so it as you know
you guys are legislators things
take time and
so therefore that's one of our
things we also
plan to purchase property we
just missed out on a hundred
acres
there would have been a
beautiful place for us to put up
a needing place of meeting and
local meeting place but we're
looking for others.
It does things happen fast and
you have when it comes to
purchasing land you have to
speak up and you know put in
your beds and do whatever it
will suit wired.
Another thing that we are
planning to do and this has to
do with highlands university and
now and that's too start giving
our young sons and daughters
that are coming out of school
scholarships education
education is probably
the most important for young
people the if you don't have an
education you can make it but
it's hard to work three jobs
when if you get an educated each
and work on the bands up so that
a big thing for us is to hand
out scholarships to them to the
young children and especially
try to utilize craig university
keep him in the area and luna.
Recently
we received the settlement
from female.
And I believe the total amount
was thirty three million
dollars.
Of that thirty three million
dollars five million dollars was
taken by our lawyers case with a
left twenty nine million dollars
okay
approximately these are
approximate figures.
So then we had like I think
twenty nine million dollars left
and we food our board got
together and the first thing we
said is we're going to
recompensate
our members for their loss
because we lost everything you
can grace calls up there right
now you can but you're going to
tear things up so we're we're
dead in the water for a few
years
so we decided to give them a
compensation now we went to the
new mexico loan grand council I
didn't
am the chiporcharm in but
there's no board charming in our
in our board we're all equal
that's the way I see it unless I
need to break a boat or
something
so two members of our
committee over board went to the
new medical language of council
actually they went to the
department of just deal j what
is that deal j department of
justice is that it okay they
went to them somehow they were
involved in this and they said
we want to compensate we want to
compensate the people
and so there was a couple of
questions that are send them
first thing was
anti donation class okay
so we made it clear now this is
not a donation
this is compensation for the
loss.
So
I believe
we got called back
and I think this time the new
medical language council came in
and they said well you can give
that money out why not
as we don't have any rules we've
never had this issue before
so we said okay
you have a rules we're going to
make them
so
but we understood that you
wanted us to be physically
responsible
and i'll tell you what happened.
When he came to compensation we
had a meeting the special
meeting and
our lawyers started out with
give out eight thousand dollars
person cool
I don't know how it went from
there to the amount that we
handed up
but
it increased substantially
one of the first one of the
things that the mixed call
language council advised the
black hinter
level started the interplane
pins are being people
when you come to them and you'd
ask them whichever we compensate
to with
greedy people and really
the way we are
I am not pointing fingers
because I am that way
so when we got together for that
meeting.
Course being the boy tremendous
really
I think ordered for my daughter
because she reads that she says
no you gotta do it this way
so the way we did it as we went
to every individual person
every individual member that was
present that day and we asked
them what do you think of fair
compensation
would be.
The majority devoted for two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
After telling it all up as I
went every individual member
what do you think we should get
what do you think why do you
think what do you think so we
tell you those numbers majority
said two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars
now
after we heard all discussions
our recommendations and
everything the board discussed
the situation.
And we said
we'd like to satisfied members
but we also have to show the new
mexican learngroom council and
the new medical legislature that
we are physically responsible
reliable so
after some discussion it was
decided that we were going to
give its member one hundred and
seventy five thousand dollars.
Now when we made that decision
we announced it
there the immediate response
was.
You can't do that
you can't do that we told to the
majority said this morning
and we told the more years we
can
do to remember you guys elected
us to represent you and make
decisions that's called its
agents like this we're trying to
be
physically responsible to the
state and to you
so after giving that amount of
money we still have uh
thirteen million left
in our bank account
when our money was issued to us
we were
advised that how to best secure
our money to third in keys
something happened
we would lose just a certificate
something happened to a bank we
would only lose that certain
amount of money not the whole
thing
so our money is fairly secure
we do banking with one bank.
And that's what we intend to do
with her with their money's and
that's about that concludes my
my
report to you folks today if but
I am chairman
board members if you have any
questions I would gladly answer
him if I can if I don't have a
clear cut response for you I
will tell you I will get back to
you and I will talk with my
board because
like I said i'm not the sharpest
knife in the drawer and
they come up with some really
sharp questions sometimes thank
you very much for allowing me to
present thank you mister better
me there's think you are for the
presentation and for the
conversation and for being here
you know that the landgrounds
committee is we hope where we
can hear what you need and take
that back to the legislature so
I hope you can look at all
remember here as an ally to make
sure that you know you're
getting the support you need and
the interim process is actually
very important right this is
what a lot of legislation gets
written and it's drafted so
you're here at the exact right
time to make sure your folks are
represented and heard i'm taking
a look around to see if there's
additional questions folks in my
catch you are during the lunch
break as well to you know for
further conversations we do have
a question from representative
garcia.
Thank you madame chair and
and thank you antonio for your
presentation
and also kind of the
turmoil that you're going
through in terms of
rebuilding your land grant and
at the same time having to deal
with the settlement
situation but I just want to
emphasize and I want to
compliment you for kinda kind of
madam chair kind of a
holding the fourth
for the hint there in occurs
people depend on you up there
and I know you've got a
beautiful place error in the
lord guy nice kind of
the hermet speak to the east of
and
the month as a castle to
I mean I speak to the west and
monte summer castle to the east
and then your great neighbors
over and he less and I just want
to say that you and you're
probably aware of this made
insurer there those who he less
are
have a lot to offer to you
personally as president and also
to your board in terms of how to
proceed with some of these
questions that that you're
tackling with and and they're
very aminable very open to any
probably have been doing it in
terms of what she can advise
from them as well because
they're a good partner to have
on your eastern border and
in that fire really didn't play
favorites
eighty five percent of the lower
guy of the health as was torched
in or to toothpics mainly
because you guys have a force
that language
you you are forced at langrade
there's very little kind of a
prayer in there put on the
annual
russia
and but I do want a compliment
you for some of the concepts
that you put forward in terms of
hard.
Utilize
the settlement and I think the
man i'm chair though
the scholarship program is
really great
that's gonna go long ways in
terms of rebuilding the
educational integrity of your
language for future generations
and that matters a lot
you know especially when some
are our families have to scrap
for nickel and dames to see that
our kids get a good education
and and also the situation with
your road improvements you know
naturally you have a neighbor to
the east
as we heal as a generated a
million and eighty thousand
dollars from the legislature and
they put it for every equipment
and what some of the first
things that they did as they
kind of dealt with some of those
wrote situations on their
language especially accessing
some of the burned areas so I
take and kind of deal with the
replanting and taking down of
the of the
other part burnt pictures
so I just want a complementary
for holding all in the fort
you know because it's important
especially in these times were
you going through these
different situations that you
never encounter before that the
handset can count on you you
know and
and and near there for them and
I know we visited you last year
you know
we saw your heart and action and
how the people rally around you
and how some of us legislators
kind of really look up to you in
terms of providing that
leadership to bring some
stability especially now that
you're going through
restructuring the language based
on the statutory requirements of
a political subdivision and on
top of their having to deal with
the settlement so cap
e telling me
me a point ambient and community
linked affordable thing.
Thank you manager
thank you member garcia and
madame
thank you representative
consultants
thinking madam chair and thank
you for your presentation all of
your work that that you're doing
there so
my district is is right on the
edge of the landground but I am
your neighbor I live out there
going out of montesin so I do
want to thank you for keeping up
that that lands the area
I went at a percent fully
understanding get everything
that you're still dealing with
with the flooding and other
subsubsequential events the
cascading events that we still
have up there I just wanted to
maybe make the introduction and
then leader on if we could sit
with you interested in some of
those reimbursements if you need
assistance with possibly
I know you're just now getting
situated in so I know it's very
hard sometimes to find the
personnel to
to what do you do with now these
funds rate so if you if you want
assistance with maybe some you
know county people that they're
working with to fix some of
those roads if you need
assistance with possibly people
in town to do some of that
mitigation or some of that flood
work to keep the the further
damage um you know maybe we can
work ticked at least put you in
contact with individuals if
you're not already you know
working on some of that
mitigation work because I think
it's an opportunity
to
you have this influx of funds
um but now it is also the
responsibility to get the
landground back to a usable
condition hopefully and ideally
and so you know as represented
version had mentioned I think
that scholarship opportunity is
great
you know side conversation here
with senator hotel is maybe
possibly investing or saving it
for some of these events that
are to come in the next months
you know you're right there I am
your your your entrance your
extent from your landgrands you
know where you where you've been
really affected replanting.
Any of that work possibly
putting you in touch at the
right individuals to preserve
that so thank you for all your
work and no you have a lot a lot
more to come
thank you for member of the
solice I will
seek you out after an speak with
you regarding those issues
I I do plan this come in year to
be more involved with the
legislature as mister thorton
advised so I will you will be
seen my faith at the round house
and i'll be signing up your
officers and thinks
I really this past year I kinda
wanted to take the rails and
just learn
learn because it but in the past
you took the range in was just
the same thing but now we got
different stuff going on and so
yes I will be spending more time
at the legislature finding out
what you guys are doing what's
going on with the legislature
regarding our landgrounds and
things like that and maybe I
don't know i've never been to
lobbyist but I guess i'll become
one
madame chairman may I
I want to
I forgot to answer mister
question about working with the
loss of line grandmother kintana
is here today mister kintana and
one of their board members are
how should I say
oversaw our election the last
time so i'm thankful to mister
kintanna and the lowest we
healers language for that
assistance and I told them hey
you know when you guys are doing
something will go over there and
if you need us will be there so
we are trying to work together
mister garcia thank you manager.
Thank you mister bennett is for
the presentation and for the
conversation armed and I blink
on the last year I I just one
thing I want to mention if you
can go back and talk to the
folks that are elected and and
find out what was the final
straw for them to be part of the
leadership of the lordina
language said and get back to
our staff on that because I i'm
hoping to learn more how we can
support getting folks into those
positions so that it's not just
one person running again so you
know again I know you would need
to talk to others about that but
any insights that would be
helpful how we could support as
well thank you
if I may madam chairman.
They just made a jason king and
rural frontier quality on the
balancemen so I will be
contacting him
we did speak we've been speaking
to investment
people I had to say bankers
whatever but investment people.
We spoke with one lady in one I
believe one of the best pieces
of advise that we got as a legit
as a organization is get a
lawyer
but don't get just a new get a
good lawyer
because when you have this kind
of money people will come and
look into see if they can take
some from you so get a good
lawyer so we're looking for a
good lawyer if you have any
recommendations please let us
know thank you members thank you
so much next step we're going to
have a updates from the same ago
the bottle of landgrammer said I
will have this uh merrill and
mister
she mister the president of semi
both and mr gaggles is the
secretary on after that will be
having lunch again the audiences
are welcome to joining that as
well and then after lunch will
get right back at one pm we're
just a little bit running high
but not too bad
but at least thank you
mister it's all yours
a good morning afternoon members
of the board
my name is clearest romero and I
did send in a power point not
sure if.
It's mostly pictures don't
worry.
We're just gonna give you an
update on on what we're working
on now and and our plans for our
future plans okay is this
that's yours
that's not the one
okay our one would you took me a
favor and switched the next
slide
I think this might be the wrong
one
let's check if there is a an
another one that says that power
point july
it was it might have been in
your email.
He.
Let's see they did not go
through it looks like that was
the one that we received
I sent at this forty and if it
helps you considered afterwards
and the staff can send it out to
the committee
oh darn it I will we had our
updates on this one
I wanted to show you pictures of
our design for museum in our
museum.
And.
Is it possible to resend it
again the ok i'll just do that.
Yeah you can go to senate to he
and again sorry about that
everybody so sorry about that.
So
we have a lot of stuff going on
light of irons in the fire but
one of our biggest projects
right now is our history museum
since we are the oldest
community in some regular county
we have a lot of of mixed uh
history that we are are proud of
in that we are eager to
celebrate
since our
langrant was like the hub of
trade and the people who came
from south a fan bernalio and
courtroom team places like this
to set or some beginning
seventeen ninety four they
ultimately came out there for
trade with the comments she not
relief the kind of said it was
for they needed land and water
and what not but it was mostly
for the
the economic possibilities there
so we
just wanna celebrate that and
can go back to that of what
created us so that's what will
be
showcased in our museum it's
gonna be a you know pottery from
the local publishes that are
diminished most of them were
satellites for the pickles
they had a small homes along the
real pet goes there and we will
be getting artifacts from there
and displaying those as well as
our territorial uh time period
artifacts which are plenty in
other people out there did a lot
of
they they used sheep for
everything sheep and buffalo
until a certain point then there
was the cattle not before that
you know we we have
examples of all the instruments
that were used for survival and
they are very similar to the
the stuff used by the the
commenting people our offense
when americans went to some
together by the they would often
note that uh the people they're
all warm markets.
And that when they went out as
common generals to trade on the
planes that you couldn't tell
them apart from the comment
because we have such a deep
intertwined a history and I feel
like new mexico at our history
in general is not really talked
about especially in this claim
it right now where everybody is
kind of discussing a who is the
most recent immigrant and who is
a who is the quintest central
american
but so we feel like right now
it's
very important to display our
history and to talk about it so
we have a building that was a
gifted to us by an individual
who got property due to somebody
not being able to pay their
taxes which we will talk about
later because that's kind of a
big issue on our landgrant and
he gifted us the the property
that we are going to use for
this territorial style
building
so it's gonna have three rooms
or one is going to be to the
eighteen twenties period we've
done
a danger with a tuesday to ring
studies and the building that
particular building dates to
eighteen twenty the oldest
building there's from the
seventeen nineties but this one
are it's kind of right in the
middle rate when some may get
became a really bustling trade
center because it was already a
trade center before the santa fe
tree or pastor there the santa
fe trial people coming out of
missouri took advantage of
feedback that are trade route
that had been there since
indigenous times and me use of
it again
we have a very famous uh
tapestry that was created in the
nineteen seventies in our church
and not our lady of other lupe
and weather and we're hoping to
recreate this and bring the
seamstresses who worked on on
that tape street back.
To teach our youth to recreate
the tape street so that we might
have another example of it in
our museum
there I wouldn't talk about the
community support for the museum
people are excited they're
waiting to tell their stories
they're waiting to donate their
artifacts is it's only three
rooms so I don't think we can
house you know all the artifacts
that we have because we all have
plenty so we're planning on you
know kind of doing a rotation
having people
lend us their artifacts
you don't have certain events
dedicated to certain themes
we're gonna use this for
a little we're gonna use this
for revenue we have other plans
for revenue but this is just one
of our plans for revenue and we
know it's not going to be like
the biggest money maker but the
main purposes to to have a
location for the celebration of
our history for posterity
um
we have received a support from
the state legislature thank you
all for our museum and that is
so it's almost off the ground we
have our architects who have
designed the building and
we are just getting ready to
to break ground and actually
start on construction of the
music
darn it.
We also have
there was as some controversy
about arm having a sanity trial
marker in south we give them
bother because sir there's
there's still that that wounded
that open wound from when we had
our common lands taken by the
federal government so a lot of
people are like it out of here
you know but now
we kind of want to come memory
the you know the evolution of
our
of our people and all the things
that we've gone through and we
were heavily affected by the
santa fe trial who brought
different kinds of people to our
communities brought the
friendship and the canadians and
and all the people out of
missouri
and they did stay with us for a
while but ultimately they are
they did leave but
um
this many adventures have been
through this trial and a lot of
the
documentation we have about our
live drive comes from people
passing through the santa fe
a lot of interesting
interesting situations
embarrassing interesting all the
way around
so
we've been working with the
daughters of the american
revolution they did also give us
a grant for a marker when my
family does my family have been
stolen me since since since ages
back we've been in some other
both offer seven generations in
new mexico for fifteen
generations and of course that's
just our european half are
indigenous half time and
memorial
as you know a lot of us are
since the the commandry slave
trade the european slave trade
was a conducted out of peckles
and son began county a lot of
those are former servants where
our grandmothers that's how we
have you know come to embrace
both sides of this story um I
sighed from our merchant.
We almost we have stone slabs
for it and it's almost up we
just need a r
or just waiting on the rating
the sand blasting for the actual
marker to go out where it's
supposed to go it's going to be
right off of a state road three
right across from the sun again
church.
We thinking on both briefly just
let the committee know the
slights are up now on the screen
business that's not never mind
yeah that's still that still
that's a different a different
presentation
it's okay
darn it I wanted to
there's so many exciting
pictures here I want to show you
guys are museum designs and the
pictures of all kinds of other
stuff so we have a a portion of
our east plaza that's still open
and we want of course harkin
back to those traditional times
when we did our treating so
we've opened up a what's called
the conscious market where
people can come and vendor arts
and and foods and
second hand wears whatever they
would like
and we did get a good turn out
of you know local artists that
have a lot to offer people so
it's it's created a kind of like
a a place to communicate to
share ideas to.
I guess just to get reaquated
with each other because a lot of
us are you know on our phones
and what not and and we don't de
engage with our community as
much as we should so that's been
a big help
at least you want to go we are
working on some land databases
and and line issues i'm gonna
let mr
talk to you about that for a
little while think thank you for
you guys members of the
president
thank you president I think you
are medical chair and members of
the interest committee so yes
how so we've been pretty busy as
you want to just add to the to
the museum and so so so this is
this at this museum is actually
part of
I would say probably about a
twenty or thirty year plan that
that we have been discussing
with our historical district
which is actually part of the
year which is actually within a
survey of the national register
of historic tases so all of that
whole district all the buildings
and that within that survey are
fall with the necessary strip
start tastes and I envision I
visit us and and we've been in
negotiations with some owners of
some of the historical buildings
that are left of our original
plaza we've been in negotiations
to try to purchase some of these
buildings so we see party twenty
thirty year plan son together
bother kind of resembling last
couple of three dollars where
it's kind of like a living
history the whole of the whole
area
so I mean it's gonna be one
building at a time but it's
going to be definitely starting
with the with our museum project
and as far as television I
started reaching out to santa fe
as well people from the time of
child about two and a half years
ago started with daughters in
their american revolution I
reached out basically asking
okay well you know you guys have
a a time feature marker in some
of san which has been in
activities over next worse why
don't we have one and we were
the major stopping point you
know along these and I travel
when I when it came into into
the mexican territory so I
reached out and got her to the
american revolution kind of
point in the direction of santa
tel association and reached out.
To them got bounced around a
couple of times after a hundred
emails phone calls you know
ultimately I landed with the end
of the trails chapter out of
sanity and through through some
talks negotiations that know
about three tours that we gave
with the area ultimately they
told us about some money that
was available so we we applied
for two grants and we're all and
we're awarded a two grants for
the same picture association in
order to pay for a stone marker
for the village
so I mean they gave us about
half the money that was about
that they had after their
coffers and the language
basically put in the rest of it
so we could get it so we could
get it done we foresee this
stone getting done by the being
completed by the end of august
so we're hoping that right
around september for the fiesta
in some again they'll bother
that we could unbuild our
hours over trail of market out
at the same time I was actually
asked to join the sandwich
association board in a telstra
which I did so i'm gonna use
that as an opportunity to try to
follow resources from that into
you to our area so we can kind
of be on the map again as far as
a good shopping point of view
san francisco since we were kind
of they tried to come again in
the eighties to help us out but
we are being there they were met
with the resistance as a matter
president was expanding earlier
so then another thing to it
comes to a state state trust
land we have according to that
map up there just yellow little
the green areas are forest
service but there's some smaller
areas that are green that are
six first land within that our
historical boundary that was
originally three hundred and
fifteen thousand acres after the
eighteen ninety seven court
cases on the one version united
states we were left with about
fifty five hundred acres left a
lot of these parcels are stick
first land and blum land there
are currently processes and
methods in chase that the state
land office where an entity
could actually purchase state
them.
So autumn I mean I would like to
see some legislation in the
future
maybe protecting these parcels
with the end not only our
downgrade but all of this on the
one seven language
from sell you know for potential
sale so I mean that would be and
we have a lot of the lot of
things running go parallel with
each other I mean
to solidify non dozens
introducing the cemeteries act
which is going to help a lot of
the sound of all seven language
who last common lands which
contained cemeteries back to a
back to us to hopefully
hopefully that will work out but
if not I mean I say we have a
couple couple of of of issues
running concurrent with each
other parallel with each other
to try to recover some of these
properties
so
to talk about the comments.
I'll turn it back or twelve and
matter president
madame chairman matters about
members of the board
I know there's a few new board
members that might not know you
know where we're located we are
between pickles and most vegas
we are the oldest settlement in
some regular county so they call
out there and on chico last
vegas and all these settlements
were populated by people who are
originally from the partner
we
we been like I said before we've
been there for
seven generations so it's it's
it's been a while
but
are edit there is are all over
in on spread out throughout the
country and
we are working too
to bring them back to regnite
their interests and and their
pride and their in their
homeland
so we've been um
working with the new mexican
language council and department
of justice to address the
tragedy that happened to us in
eighteen ninety seven
this happened due to
misapplication of spanish
customer customer and american
law there are some ways they
couldn't be reconciled to do to
the differences of community
sweater which is a customary law
and american uh statute.
Excuse me
so there was when we had our
lands taken there was a some
controversy about
or a misunderstanding about who
owns the land the king or the
community and the US government
decided since they thought the
land belonged to the king that
it would now be long to the US
government but language and
common lands
in in the future system in
europe they were created to be
safe from the nobility and from
the king the king had his own
undeveloped land and the commons
were run by a whole different
set of rules and this is
pretty well spoken pretty well
discussed in spanish law but
when they are moved to take it
from us they had an individual
pull out sentence from a log
that was a comment it was in a
lob book it was a commentary as
somebody wrote a.
I believe his name is francisco
alizon though he wrote a spanish
commentary discussing how often
people follow their own customs
and compared to statutes because
spanish law had like a lot of
different
applications of the law they had
sometimes too different you know
conflicting statutes so that
lawyers and notaries could kind
of go through them and find the
best the best avenue kind of
like they wait they do for the
us lock they find loopholes for
it for everything
but anyways since this
nobody challenged his resource
nobody challenged his source for
his a little commentary that was
not legit spanish law book and
they were able to use that to
take three hundred thousand
acres from us and this
devastated our community a lot
of people had to leave go out to
do wage labor
though you know in years when
the cut the national when the
nation was suffering we were
self sufficient so we didn't
experience the same patterns of
poverty and economic distress
that the rest of the country did
but after they took our common
lands we had no way to a
just to successfully survive
are people who had private
property were able to stay out
there but people who depended on
the commons had to lead and
you know there's there's reports
of deep sadness and suicides you
know it was it was offer
and this wound it's it's kind of
still there even though we and
ignore it and and our men and
women during the military and
drove sent and celebrate and
fight for the US cause we were
never cheated as american
citizens and we still are not
that's the reason why the state
had to do all this work.
To give us some kind of lawful
recognition as the federal
government would not give it to
us
so
my aim right now is to further
endeavors that have already been
done by the land right council
and and the new mexican
legislature just to formalise
the federal the the customary la
that used to manage our
language.
Want to talk about
what we b.
Thank you matter president so so
yes we've been asked so we've
been attending some some monthly
meetings with the son about
seven at the earth at the
executive level at the attorney
general's office currently
talking much about what's really
going on in detail of just yet
but
we are collaborating with the
other with the other language
and trying to come up with a way
where we could either be where
we could either reason see that
or have the case we heard or an
act of legislation to where this
part displaned can get returned
to us
and it is kind of sad because
when they were when they were
perfecting all of the the done
claims for the landgrants I mean
us are our seven landgrounds
where excluded from from keeping
our our common lands so instead
we were we are issued hundreds
of individual perfective claims
which automated became just one
one one day language so we
really don't have any common
lands we we can't we can't go a
lot property for a cemetery for
example I mean the cemetery that
we've been using since you know
the parties and stating twenty
is upon the founding or language
is now not lands on my order
lies on
so every time we put somebody in
the ground there can be very one
of our land one of our one of
our airs whatever looked ones
were actually test passing on on
us government property.
And and that that and that and
that property has already come
to capacity so we were better
wearing definitely you know by
our need of of of some kind of a
reconciliation to where the
paper stewards of these lands
could could be um
be running them again and and
also I can't want to choose to
kind of go off a little bit on a
art our subject but I really
wanted to
express our support for or my
support when I but I think
though I think the rest of the
board and it feels the same way
that I do
for the last like biggest
language to have democratic
elections I mean there their
board has been has been
appointed by the district courts
since nineteen fourteen and
there is no path for them to
join chapter forty nine unless
they have that legislation in
place first and you know it and
they have a really good or right
now they have for a while I mean
I I can't really understand
their plight compared to ours I
mean III mean I really I mean if
if our if our language was was
reliant on the different court
for its for its board members I
mean I think we would be in in
turmoil also I mean that
democratic process is very
important
and and personally I think I
think that's that you might be
even
unconstitutional as far as the
new mexico constitution so
hopefully probably some of that
can get the get reality and we
we've already held to two her
elections while many since we
became a chapter forty nine
entity in two thousand four but
I think our last two elections
have really showed that
that the tools are available
these base you know the internet
you know social media and stuff
can really rally people towards
us a certain cause you know
whereas before I mean I think
our election and twenty twenty
sixteen we had seven people come
to vote
in our election two thousand
twenty three we had a hundred
and fifteen people complete you
know so stolen slowly of the
people are people are started to
see us.
And you know we we have a
website that's going to be
getting launched here soon we're
all over information to be there
for everybody to see we had a we
had a facebook claims but that
wasn't really reaching all the
audience that we wanted to reach
because I mean on a lot of the
elders are in council so media
and had no way of accessing the
internet or are you in the
viewing anything that we're
putting out there
so but but sounds about seven
hopefully that hopefully that
continues moving forward and and
we want to be a good part of it
and it without having to
hopefully
without having to trigger some
kind of court case that goes all
the way up to the supreme court
again because that'll take
product a decade or so you know
and and we really want to see
them we really want to see some
are movement with the return of
some lands hopefully within this
our lifetime because we do have
a lot of moment and going at the
state external level right now
and I even at that the the US
double but I think a lot of our
stuff in the US double the
federal levels down with the
with politics right now so
hopefully a hopefully they can
help us out with that you know
office.
Whether one of the thing I want
to for to add to about
all of the county maps that we
have here in something good
county I mean it is such a
problem this is how we ended up
with the darwin house our museum
in the first place because we
were looking at the maps on the
at the at the county level and
edit showed this this building
as with our property so really
under a note and a former
president we we looked at over
wind to for five meetings of the
at the coming court house and
everybody said okay yes it is
yours so so we start cutting the
bus around the building that all
set and go and behold somebody
so the pay that's not your
property this belongs to so and
so and then that's what started
the process of reaching out to
the new owner and and and get
this and get this property at
the needed to ask so but a lot
of people have been pushing the
board members saying hey we have
a discount discrepancy with with
this property is bound to be the
county maps so there's but the
service so there's you know
right and it's causing a lot of
problems
and as we've been working with
the county but I think they have
a an appointment to do person
right now at yeah becoming
assessors office not to say that
they're not with a good job but
I think I think this person was
just kind of a bit until the
next election to wear somebody
catching come in and and how a
long term of a long term to
actually deal with some of these
problems
on that note also when it comes
to when it comes to people get
not paying their taxes or we
have a lot of every little start
that are poor you know there
there are surviving off of a
limited social court you checks
and and and they don't have the
money for it for you for your
representation or or much less
than you can pay their taxes so
allow these properties are going
up for sale and we we would like
to see more effort why I guess I
would get a lot of the
from our end as well but we do
get back down with a lot of the
business other language so we
were like a little bit hard but
the at the county level to try
to get this remedy.
That we are are and everybody
can have a accurate
representation of what taxes
they're paying for right now
we've been receiving taxes for a
for a property that wasn't even
ours for for probably
four five decades parties is the
beginning of the county and we
had to pay for a serve eight
order to prove that it was an
hours or that it was ours you
know and and it turned out it
was so now that we have that
survey in case we can kind of
get that fixed at the county
level and and how the proper
people are paying for the taxes
that be for the property that
they own
and and hopefully we can we can
be the yell the first people to
be on some of these
properties that are within our
historical body or within our
package boundaries back to the
language so that we won't get
enough to a non air
and and and we can retain the
control of it.
Thank you for the presentation
we hope a few questions from our
members of representative
thinking about and share thank
you to both of you
so so for for those on the board
that may not know my my mum's
family comes from being weapon
in mexico so I am any on the
summing of the by the language
and I just want to think you
both for all of your work as
well as the rest of your board
in in your your recent years
boards that have put in a
tremendous amount of work to
trace the history to get all the
paperwork in order I know this
was a monumental task to now be
a working a working landgrand to
where you're able to break
ground on a museum to really
show case issue history of that
area so that's like first and
for most is all the accolades
and I was even taking some notes
as to the generations back but
just some questions
you mention the ground breaking
was soon and I know i've said
and on some meetings where
you've done the presentations
when are you all expected to
break round and wins the
completion deep for that museum
representative on salaries are
we hope to break round by
september within two months and
we we kind of foresee the
building going on for at least a
year and a half.
Um but we we have we want to add
more to the plans we hope to
restore our hold east eastern
west plaza we have two plazas
that were established there in
the seventeen nineties and
some people have come forward
you know like a lot of mrperiod
gage was the same to offer us
there their property and our
architects are willing to stay
on board with us
to complete you know a more.
A more lucrative project that
has more options such as signal
tours or wagon tours is what we
want to work on and maybe like a
hotel in restaurant
to bring us some revenue I know
like in county on the cutting
where they have their restaurant
bar which and there would
program which really does
wonders for them um so we want
to kind of you know a following
that example and get a steady
source of revenue so that we're
not always completely dependent
on on the state or the
landground council although I
would like to see I am a
immensely grateful to all of you
mr mr garcia for allotting us
money to buy a hundred thousand
to buy some of our common lands
back.
Um and of course that's just a
little piece of the pay but
we're willing to work little
bits at a time if it has to be
done to be consistent and
you know I just to
we have got ninety seven
thousand acres still belonging
to the.
To the federal government and
then a smaller number of
belonging to the state and to
blm and a
we consider ourselves the
quintessential storage of that
of those lapse even though now
they are
there are burning
in most cases because they're
not being properly managed.
Yeah I guess with that I said no
I I would wanted to think
mislister banks also who was
working with us to.
Get our and via community
centers the community center
that provides a lot of good
stuff for our community they
have a
they have what they call the
pantry where they give free
vegetables and groceries away to
the community and they have a
store there that people frequent
even though it's second hand
stuff my kids love to let's go
to the store
it's becoming quite quite an
endeavor there so but we have a
the board there has an issue
with some
bio hazardous stuff that is an
old building there that we do
need to get rid of.
And we are looking to be there
fiscal sponsor because this
group is a non profit private
organization.
So you know talking with carbon
modeen at dfe and um
and our language council we feel
that it can be done but we're
working on a contract I have
remember written up a
preliminary contract to be their
fiscal sponsor but other people
looked at it and said I left out
some stuff so we'll working on
rewarding it kinda just to
reflect that we can use the
community center as needed for
education we are planning a
electric series in the fall and
we kind of wanted to have it at
several different facilities
so we are with that project
that's basically where we are
were kind of just working on the
the legal back and forth of the
contract before it can be signed
and we can ah then filter that
money to the end via community
center.
Think about him chair thank you
for them responsible I can't
wait and they do and buy anyone
who would love to go join me up
and be another for a tour of the
tapistry mentioned a tour of any
of that property happy to take
you
thank you representative senders
to monitor
thank you madame chair and thank
you for coming today the lan
grent committee did meet this
land grant a few years ago and
it was a very good
tour that we had after the
meeting but I went I had a few
questions so first of all in
terms of the museum
can you sure me that it's going
to be
ada accessible and up to code
etc.
Mr finance are architects have a
designed our museum for it to be
adaces or we are working on our
parking lot that are.
It's kind of on top of an
overall so we have to scale it
up and flat in and out but
they've done all the work to to
make sure that it's accessible
to everyone
we have uh we're working on some
outdoor bathrooms that will also
be accessible that we will be
have open i'm certain times by
appointment of course but it's
it a joints with our senior
center so it's kind of a whole
complex so thank you manager and
so my next question is
i'm so happy that there is funds
for you to look at purchase
income common lands and
I would encourage you to
continue you sell several other
land grants are doing the same
thing you also this lane grant
also owns the senior center
building does that building need
any upgrades or any assistance
could you talk about that
man's to forenax that building
is it's good for the most part
but we do need a some work with
our each back um the heater
works great but the cooling part
is is an up to par for our
seniors and a lot of times they
just stay there during lunch
kind of hang out for a little
bit and leave but you know we do
go to make it more comfortable
so they can hang out for longer
periods of time they're
associated with two other senior
centers in the area the last
vegas and the pickle senior
center and those senior centers
are really bustling they always
have action going on and ours is
kind of kind of getting there
you know I see about ten or
twelve people there for lunch
but our hopes are too to get
more activities than ender to
fill it up with more seniors
manager and
presenters that senior center
has has ebbed and float we've
had a hundred hundred and fifty
people in there for events we've
had ten people in there for
lunch so whatever we can do to
encourage the las vegas senior
program.
Two do some programming there
would be great the other comment
manager I would make is
the community center in being
waiver is not unique to all the
other problems that not profits
go through and so perhaps you
could work with
the department of finance and
ministration to make sure the
language
for contractual services is
gonna meet the standards because
just recently
I received our capital outlay
spreadsheets and it was denied
this the amount we had done in
the past because he was going to
a non profit so we need to make
sure that we really lock in
whatever language will be
accepted in whether or not jason
canton it can help you or
someone else idfa
we just need to be very careful
thank you very much mister chair
and i'm finished thank you
senator representative
thank you mister chair and thank
you are
busy because
in the earth and claries you
guys have really been busy out
there I don't know he didn't you
have a chance to sleep okay
not really four hours that's
always yeah
yeah some of the bottom it's
really a story the first and
grant down there the spanish
colony east of the
real packless you know and all
these land grandson that came
afterwards they all kinda had
their base there on something on
their bar
you know last week at the same
point which I better
even motor in ireland and even
my great great grandpa
one day was my asset who
established the sum that
something else landgrant the
second go around.
Eighteen thirty five order the
degeney from same again that
well and my family tree i've got
close to a dozen great gramba
great grammars and great
grampars that were married at
the summer and their bill church
you know and that is history and
it breaks my heart
to see that there's these little
parcels throughout them they're
saying that our own by b l m and
when we were there I want to say
that the last time but the time
before that we urge the
president back then the mister
john charles
to really kind of file notice
with the b l m that does
that you're making claims to
those parcels and we got to a
point where we were trying to
kind of encourage the board to
me with blm and kinda do some
type of negotiations in terms of
bringing those little parcels
because some person thought
they're scattered all over like
you're not like self temperature
they're not congruded you're not
and so it doesn't benefit the
the philosophy of the blame to
have that type of land spread
you know but it would benefit
them they're sad because you've
got all the handset there and
and lot of that is still
agricultural base
and an irrigable lands and so
there is I think some base is
there to really pursue that the
blm and the night this committee
really wants to kind of help
make that happen and whatever
way we can through the
legislation or local say
capital outlet to do whatever
service
of those specific specific
parcels and begin kind of
addressing that but managed our
limit give you an example of how
we were able to get the state to
hand over common learns that
they owned from langrams.
Is that in two thousand and five
two thousand and six
I am to do some legislation it
was mainly
a junior funding to do certified
total abstracts and six language
and I text language where the
state had control over the
common then
were a priority was I killed
manager.
They had thirty six acres of
what the hand account in a
branch of their party and then
the late eighteen hundred and
share the landrage this
irrigable land along the real
charmer to the parish brief to
put up an orcher to put up a
garden look as they are well for
some reason there was a break
to wear the state ended up with
the property air as the game
infation that up with the
property so what we found in
that certified tile abstract
that's what we funded
and we had mister doores the
state historian actually lead
that study and collaboration
with the title companies all
manager in that study as they
were doing the research on
born we sell a break.
Where there was a quick lane
deed and and the title transfer
didn't go over waiting the
mercede because that's what
happened with a lot of our
language as you have people just
do a quick claim date filed it
the county clerk take taxes on
it survey that is on and before
you know the language doesn't
have control of it you know and
does soul the game in face saw
that they knew that they were
holding the crooked title.
And they went and the same
opinions for car transfer no
monetary exchange in it i'm
certain what i'm saying is and
gain that example because maybe
we can do a similar thing with
that brand property and lastly
madam chair
you know I break in my heart on
this under one seven
because we know what happened
that's a product poverty to
lotto our communities you know
after that
that's what that's where we're a
lot of our selves if some
sufficient farmers and ranchers
and communities and families you
know out had at the depopulated
and how to go to the bigger
centers
in a book at ken santa fe
colorado whatever mainly because
they last that self sufficiency
in terms of what that come and
then man in terms of pulling
down
number putting down pulling down
growl you know grazing fishing
in the hunting etc server and
that was a disaster for this
sound about several languages
and i'll give you an example
manager said the cruzilecanara
gmile valley all the way from
respond you're not to the
santaria
two hundred fifty thousand some
makers boom they were just left
with one twenty four hundred
acres just a little private
parcels that eighty ninety
supreme court decision was
devastating
and the motions in terms of what
it did took aggravate in paris
independency to some of these
communities.
So working the real charmer
although it from a because the
seller us forest.
Almost five hundred thousand
acres
us forest they were left
worthwhile forty five hundred
acres again there's fiber
parcels along the real charmer
you know and
can you necessarily
always on the amount of the way
up to a school boss are is what
they last
in our close to three hundred
fifty thousand four hundred
thousand actors in the and
what I did man in chairs I wrote
a letter to the reset us
attorney ryan allison and the
reason he was appointed by
president trump to be the us
attorney for the district the
new mexico and what attracted me
to him manager was that
this guy as a deputy us attorney
under their democrat underbyn
he took one this guy by an
allison he took on the single
cut or not mahon
which is a chicago prison gang
that runs them somewhat worth
prison used to
but they've been around for a
long time
in somewhere if the minister are
impacted by this yang do where
they actually have control of
the mates and the families to
were made and chair and then may
can it order the funeral of
their deceased father because
they'll kill them.
That's how intense this gang is
in the prison system ran allison
us attorney for new mexico
appointment by
president
I sent them a letter
I asked him to open up the sound
of our seven case
any said
through a sector manager he said
the surprises me again I don't
think the us is in that position
to do it but he's gonna send you
a written statement
stating why and i'm so waiting
for it
but these are things that
manager that we have to pursue
with the sound of what seven we
have to find different
strategies as to how we open up
that case and I think you guys
are on the right page in terms
of doing what you're trying to
do and searching for it for a
processes
you know that we haven't been
able to to do and this committee
or to the ages offers or through
the language on the car which is
the polition of langrands we
haven't been able to cannot hit
the neil on the head on that one
and I think once we hit the now
on the head we're going to see
a multiple fro a benefit
in our tool the language
communities that have last you
know everything you know and
down but I want to really
compliment you guys because you
guys filled in a leadership void
you know that needed to be
filled
because of the significance of
that landground in our bag you
guys are in there you guys
really have your your head
together you know and and and
you got the heart and you let
the determination and you got
good perspective you guys are
really good perspective on your
mercy in his relationship to the
past through the present to the
future and an initiative a lot
of our language can learn from
you guys.
You know you should do workshops
you know really you know in
terms of how you're doing things
and why you're doing them and
for reason of what purpose and
what out them you want to see
happened through that that's
what our line rents need they
can either not some bolts
of handle on their mercer you
know and but again you guys are
busy beasing I don't see how you
know how you have time to sleep
but again you know my heart on
my solemn my spirit are with you
on this on the lots of an issue
and on that blm issue so thank
you.
Madam chair madame if I may add
to that I think I think we have
a problem with the regulation
and licensing to department will
I I think we should try to
implement
the the the primiting process
because a lot of times when
someone would in the past when
somebody was gifted a piece of
property from our medicine
the first thing they do is go
take it over to the to the
county assessor and and and
register it and a lot of the
times they do that is because of
the fact that that the cops the
water authorities and the people
that provide services don't
recognize the lamp grant dead
and and and therefore therefore
you can't get a permit to get an
electrical service poll or or
from the permit from the
environment department with an
accepted tank there are there
will recognize our non grants
authority just yet even though
chapter forty nine does state
that we do have turning and
zoning authority over over our
non grants I think there should
be some kind of process to wear
regulation and licensing
departments can and will
recognize a deed from the
landground as a way to get
permitting for those services
thank you
representative daughter
am I okay if I speak here I
don't know
get closer.
Right there better
first of all thank you i've
heard so much about your land
grant and it's the first time I
believe that i've met you and
it's quite an honor
I have heard stories from many
of my friends and some of the
people who are advised me only
grants and
it is beautiful to see the work
that you have done
in so many aspects of
maintaining your land grant I it
sounds like your building museum
is that right and with three
rooms and I will try to make
this brief but I would really
encourage you also to consider
how you will use the work that
you're doing to maintain the
heritage language of your
landground
we have just passed the hispanic
education actor revised version
that focuses on a couple of
things that were already in our
state constitution but I guess
people didn't know that our
constitution has pieces that
intentionally protect the
spanish language and so if
there's some aspect of how you
could help protect the spanish
language of your lamb group with
the elders that are still
speaking at that would be really
found how stick and there are
some funds in the hispanic
education act for schools and
for
institutions of higher education
so you could partner with
animals you or you could partner
with public schools and I know
that doctor to let that and
I i'm sorry I
know you and I forget your name.
Okay thank you
they've been working on some
education issues and and so I
know that it might be a little
stretched to to incorporate
education but I think that's
also what you're doing in the
steps that you're taking to his
door size your landground
through our collection of
artifacts and through the
displays and curring creating
your museum so if you would and
i'd really encourage you to
consider
the language on aspect along
with the cultural aspect.
Oh madame representative we
started our common general
market to get revenue to pay for
lecture series are us a set of
lecturers because a lot of our
capital outlay only covers
infrastructure so we have to
look for different ways to fund
this so i'm really happy to hear
about
the had his batting education
act because there were going to
be focusing on.
Music language food you know the
the stuff that sets us apart
from from other humans
and that
so we hope to start that lecture
series going through the winter
september through january
we have a few historians on
board
some
political philosophy that
professors on board we have a
musicians ready to teach you
know a local stylist of music
and earn of course we just have
to finish arranging this and and
figure out a payment for them
some of them are really generous
they're going to do it for free
but you know we still don't want
to treat these important
educators like sleeve laper
so we would like to have the
funds to pay them
thank you gets wonderful thank
you.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative
so basically we have a student
from the metal state university
was currently
doing a oral history project of
some of the elders of our of our
landground so I think they can
see interviewed I should reached
out to twenty people of people
that we recommend that some of
the most mostly some of the
alters and I think she was able
to get in contact with about
fifteen of them but overall
she's all even about like I
think twelve or thirteen
interviews because two of them
are really really already where
they have really linked at the
midst of answer to maintain the
really counter
we're actually looking forward
to getting that that will
history project and so we do
have it will probably probably
go to present that at one of our
not got meetings and probably
hold to the gay like some kind
of public
so kind of public thing to where
we can have a showcase then
presented
madam chairman i'll think you
that's wonderful and you might
also consider in linguistics
department and maybe collecting
some recordings of elderly
sharing their story of their
lives but this is absolutely
beautiful manager thank you
very much your hotel
thank you madame chairman it's
going to be quick thank you
someone treat presentation and
the information that you gave so
i'd like to sit with you later
because I think I could be in
the air and my mom's side where
keen pana traves hit on and sice
when my mother was given up for
adoption and can remember going
to the public to see her
grandfather but doesn't know
much about her families I think
somehow I could be in the air
the first size came in eighteen
eighty two amount with the
travis who settled in the area
the only thing as I was going to
echo exactly what the
representative said if you work
with your local high school they
all have tv production classes
most of them do as well as alley
high school works on getting
quentious and details from.
The anti announced around the
especially valley and then they
are keeping it in the libraries
so that the those stories and
those beaches can live on
through video or digitally you
might want to consider drinking
that looks like you're doing
that with the mexico state
university but when you engage
the high school students it gets
them engaged and that wants them
to continue to stay active and
those are my only comments thank
you madame chair.
Thank you for the presentation
today we're gonna take a short
break peace will be to grab some
lunch we about twenty minutes
and tell her next presentation
at one o'clock so thank you.
