Come back and and vote to send
that letter.
So, uh, can I have a motion on
the minutes of the last meeting.
The September 23rd to 25th
meetings in Silver City.
Summer. We have a motion to
accept those minutes seconded by
Representative Herndon. Is there
any discussion or questions on
those minutes? Any, any changes?
Mhm
Any objection to accepting the
minutes as presented.
OK, we'll, we'll we'll we'll
consider those minutes have been
adopted.
And then we'll go to that
letter. This is the letter that
we were, we had instructed uh
Xander to write after the
discussion at at our meeting in
Coral,
I think.
it was in Silver City.
On the issue of the
Visit verification, you know,
when agencies that that are
doing home health care.
Have to use computers to verify
they were.
They were actually there and
how, how difficult it is and
sometimes the
The person lives in an area
there where there's no.
Connectivity and they can't
actually do it so they don't get
reimbursed and the, and the, and
the hassle that it creates,
whereas there's a separate
system available under the
federal government.
And so the letter basically is
saying, asking the Secretary of
Health.
Care authority, can't we just go
to that federal system instead?
So.
You want to make a motion on
that one, representative?
it's an I'm an advisory,
I think your advisory. OK. OK.
And, and Representative Thompson
will second Representative
Chavez's motion.
Any other discussion? Did you
have a chance to read it over? I
think Xander did a nice job of
capturing the issue. It's a good
one, Mr. Chairman. OK.
Uh, any objection to sending
that letter.
Seeing none will consider that
letter also to have been
accepted by the committee.
And we'll give people that
hadn't had a chance to introduce
themselves this morning because
there were only about 7 of us
here when we started, uh,
Representative Herndon, why
don't we start with you? We'll,
we'll just go right around and
all four of you on that side
weren't here first, so we'll
we'll start with you and then,
um,
I think representing, yeah,
several others, so go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good
afternoon, everyone. Thank you
for joining us here. I am
Representative Pamela Herndon. I
represent House District 28 in
the Northeast Heights, where we
are creating the most walkable
district in the entire state. So
we look forward to having you
join us walk through the
district. Thank you.
And that's not just during
campaign time we wouldn't be
just walking with you during
campaign, right? That is
absolutely correct. It's every
time. That's good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, it's
good afternoon. Linda Lopez,
state senator, District 11,
which is the Southwest quadrant
of Bernalio County.
And good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members sorry, good afternoon,
Mr. Chair. Members of the
committee, those on the webcast.
I am Senator Shannon Pinto. I
represent District 3, which is
the northwest corner of the
state.
Good afternoon, Chairman and
members of the committee. Uh my
name is Christina Parajon, and
I'm the representative for House
District 25, Northeast
Albuquerque, including Coronado
Mall. Really happy to be here
today. Thank you.
And your district is very
walkable too, isn't it?
Yeah, we're working on it.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Senator
Harold Poe Jr. District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque, Bernaleo
County and uh I apologize for
wearing such a conservative
color in my suit today, but I'll
do better next time.
Thank you, Senator Pope. Um,
Senator Cedil Lopez, did you
introduce yourself this morning?
I did not, um, my name is
Antoinette Cil Lopez and I
represent District 16, which is
the southeast and the northeast,
um.
Closer, the heights that are
closest to the university, um,
and it actually includes the
base as well.
Great to be here and my district
is somewhat walkable. Now we're
working on it, making it
bikeable.
Electric bike.
Well, that's a whole other
story, but yes.
Regulation Senator Tollman.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and um,
Bill Toman representing Senate
District 18 which is a.
Mid section of Northeast
Heights.
Very walkable. I would question
the walkability of.
Representative Hurdon's district
because I did some walking for
her.
Up in the most eastern part.
In the foothills, and there are
a couple of driveways that were
so steep.
I didn't go down or up because I
was afraid I was going to fall
down.
But
I
Accolades to her for trying to
make her district more walkable.
Thank you.
Rodriguez. Thank you. Good
afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee again and audience. My
name is Nancy Senator Nancy
Rodriguez. I'm from Santa Fe
District 24, the beautiful state
capital of New Mexico.
Thank you
And fairly walkable too, I was,
you know,
if you don't, if you go around
the sidewalks, yeah.
Thank you.
Well, we're we're ready then to
launch into our afternoon agenda
and Governor, come on up, uh,
Governor uh Myron Armijo, the
governor of Santa Ana, and some
of his staff and board and the
governing council.
Whoever you want, come on up.
So we're getting a a healthcare
status update from the Pueblo
Santana. Welcome, Governor.
See
I'm going to vote,
both of them,
I wrote it a bet against it. OK.
OK, we're glad to be here and
so, um, we look forward to, um,
answering any questions you
might have after our
presentation. OK. Thank you. All
right.
Again, good afternoon, Gui Hopa
and my car's language I have
with me uh Lieutenant Governor
Kevin C. Montoya, and would you
introduce yourself, please?
Sure, my name is Carrie Brauer,
and I am the senior center
program manager.
Good afternoon. My name is
Doctor Maryam Campos Marchetti
and the recently appointed
Director of Health and Human
Services.
And just a reminder, only one
microphone on at a time, so if
you're not speaking, turn it off
or we get OK,
we'll get there. OK, again thank
you so much and uh I'm speaking
from some uh uh prepared remarks
here. So, uh, bear with me and
so let's get into the meat of
it. Uh thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak today.
I'm here on behalf of the Pueblo
of Santa Ana, a proud community
of over 900 members. Our focus
is the health and well-being of
all our people.
From children to elders as a
sovereign nation, we are
committed to improving health
care outcomes and ensuring that
our members have access to
health care, education, and
resources that they need to live
healthy lives.
Today I want to share that the
social determinants of health
such as economic stability,
education, social support, and
access to health care,
significantly influenced the
well-being of native
communities, including the
Pueblo of Santa Ana.
In Indian country, historical
inequities and systemic barriers
have created challenges to
achieving health equity, leaving
many native populations
vulnerable to poor outcomes
health outcomes.
One significant factor
contributing to this uh chronic
underfunding of health programs.
Uh, designated for, uh, a Native
Americans federal
appropriations, while vital,
often fail or fall short of
meeting the actual healthcare
needs of native communities.
This lack of adequate funding
makes it difficult to provide
comprehensive services,
particularly in areas like
chronic disease management.
Mental health and elder care.
In New Mexico, the issue is
compounded by insufficient
state-level funding which fails
to close the gap left by federal
shortfalls.
Despite the clear need for more
resources, native health care
systems remain underfunded,
resulting in limited access to
quality health care.
These funding challenges hinder
our ability to deliver the
services our people required to
improve health outcomes,
creating disparities that
disproportionately affect native
populations.
At Santa Ana, we are committed
to addressing the social
determinants to ensure that all
of our community members.
Have equal opportunities to live
healthy, fulfilling lives. We
are actively working to provide
health equity by focusing on
access to comprehensive health
care services, education, and
social services.
Through our health and human
services department, we offer
culturally responsive health
care and prevention programs
while also ensuring that
transportation, nutritious
meals, and elder care are
available available to those who
need them most.
We recognize the critical role
that education and economic
opportunities play in health and
our social services programs are
designed to address these
broader determinants by
providing job training,
educational support, and housing
assistance.
By addressing the root causes of
health disparities, the Pueblo
is fostering a more equitable
community where everyone
regardless of their background
or socioeconomic status has the
resources they need to achieve
optimal health.
Our efforts to address chronic
conditions. Chronic conditions
such as type 2 diabetes. Type 2
diabetes is so rampant in a lot
of native communities and we're
trying our best at Santa Ana,
and I'm pretty sure all native
communities are are addressing
that daily. It's so.
Um, I have two,
Health members of my family who
have this and it's such a.
It's such a um chronic disease
and, and, and we'd like to try
to overcome this here in our
native communities. We have
worked hard to reduce the
prevalence of only diabetes but
also other chronic diseases,
including heart disease and
obesity. Our approach has been
comprehensive. We've introduced
an education program to promote
promote healthier living and
established regular health
screenings to identify those at
risk early.
We've seen real measurable
success.
For example,
We've managed to reduce the
incidence of diabetes
complications by 10% over the
past two years.
Our diabetes management program,
which combines medical care with
cultural education and dietary
guidance.
Has been instrumental in this
achievement.
Our community involvement,
health initiatives piece our
community as a whole is engaged
in improving health outcomes.
This includes our health and
human services department as
well as our wellness center and
the Pueblo Santa Ana's Health
and Human Services program plays
a vital role in improving the
overall health of the community
by focusing on prevention
strategies, data collection, and
epidemiology.
By tracking the prevalence of
health.
Conditions that impact our
people such as diabetes,
hypertension, and respiratory
illnesses we are able to develop
targeted interventions that
address the root causes of these
conditions.
Prevention is at the core of our
strategy, the core of our
strategy, and we implement
educational programs that
encourage healthier lifestyles
offer regular screenings to
detect potential issues early
and provide culturally relevant
healthcare guidance.
Data collection is also crucial
to our work.
By gathering and analyzing
health data.
We can monitor trends and
emerging issues within our
community, ensuring that our
responses are both timely and
effective.
Epidemiology helps us not only
to understand the patterns of
diseases affecting our people,
but also to implement public
health measures that mitigate
the spread of infectious
diseases and chronic conditions.
Additionally, additionally, the
Department of Natural Resources
at Santa Ana Pueblo in
collaboration with the
environmental health team plays
a critical role in safeguarding
the health of the community by
actively monitoring air and
water quality. These teams use a
variety of methods to track
attract environmental factors
that may pose health risks to
the pueblos.
Residents.
Regular air quality assessments
to help identify harmful
pollutants like particulate
matter and emissions from nearby
industrial activities.
Which can contribute to
respiratory issues and other
health concerns.
Water quality, water quality is
also a primary focus,
particularly within the Rio
Grande and Hamas rivers flowing
through the Pueblo. Both rivers
are regularly tested for
contaminants, including E. coli
to ensure that they meet safety
standards for human use.
E. coli measurements in
particular helped the Pueblo
identify potential sources of
waterborne illness and take
action to mitigate risks.
When elevated issues are
detected, the environmental
health team works swiftly to
investigate sources of
contamination.
Implement public health
advisories and if necessary
collaborate with regional and
federal partners to restore safe
water conditions at this point,
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to have
Lieutenant Governor Montoya,
take the rest of the.
Presentation.
Good afternoon, Vice Chair,
Madam Chair.
Uh
So we have a Doo Wellness
Center. It's our, uh, wellness
center, um, in our pueblo.
And, um, lifestyles and
interventions including exercise
programs and culturally tailored
nutrition plans have played a
key role in reducing
complications for many members.
The wellness center promotes
physical fitness and nutritional
well-being through a wide range
of interventions.
These include
Health fairs, group exercise
classes, one on one fitness
counseling.
And communitywide wellness
challenges that engage our
members in making healthy
lifestyle changes.
Program like our fitness classes
have seen an increase in
participation over the past
year.
Which has contributed to
improved health markers such as
low blood pressure and healthier
weight levels among
participants.
Um, healthcare delivery to our
community is also supported by
Indian Health Services.
Well, I just provides essential
services to
provide essential services, the
Pueblo supplements these efforts
through its own initiatives.
At Santa Ana, we have
implemented a comprehensive
range of health screenings that
go beyond services that
traditionally provided by IHS.
Particularly focusing on the
needs of our elderly population.
These screenings are designed to
detect potential health issues
early and provide timely
interventions that can prevent
complications down the road.
Our screenings include routine
checks for chronic conditions
like diabetes, hypertension, and
high cholesterol.
Which are common among our
elders.
We also provide vision, hearing
assessments to ensure that aging
individuals.
Maintain their sensory health,
which is critical for their
quality of life and
independence.
In addition to these, we offer
bone density tests to detect
osteoporosis, which can help
prevent fractures and other
complications and fall risk
assessments.
Aimed at identifying mobility
issues early and implementing
physical therapy and other
interventions to reduce the
likelihood of falls.
Furthermore,
We conduct mental health
screenings to assess the signs
of depression, anxiety, and
cognitive decline.
Which are often overlooked but
essential for maintaining
overall well-being of our
elderly population.
Our teams ensures that each
elder receives personalized
follow-up care and referrals,
ensuring that we have access to
treatments and services they
need.
By offering these comprehensive
screenings we are not only
addressing current health
concerns, but also taking
preventative measures to support
the long-term health of our
elders and the broader
community.
We are fully committed to
ensuring that no one falls
through the cracks when it comes
to our healthcare.
The
community um health care
representatives, um, program.
At the Pueblo of Santa Ana is a
cornerstone of our efforts to
improve community health
outcomes.
The significance of this program
lies in its ability to bridge
the gap between health care
services and the community by
bringing health care directly to
the people.
Our certified health
interventionalists are trusted
members of the pueblo, uniquely
positioned to provide culturally
sensitive.
Personalized health education
and support.
These clinical professionals
conduct critical works such as
health screenings, wellness
checks, and chronic disease
management.
All while offering education on
nutrition, exercise, and disease
prevention.
They are instrumental in
ensuring the community members
understand their health
conditions and the resources
available to them, thereby
empopowering the individuals to
take charge of their wellbeing.
The CHRs also provide vital
assistance with referrals and
follow-up care, ensuring no one
falls through the cracks on this
in this healthcare system.
By promoting preventative health
measures and fostering close
supportive relationships with
the community members are CHR
program is driving.
Ah, better health outcomes and
ensuring the pueblo remains
resilient health.
Help
A resilient healthy community.
One of the
most significant recent
undertakings by the pueblo has
been our mass vaccination
efforts.
We understand that public health
threats such as COVID-19 and
seasonal flu pose a real danger,
especially to our elders.
That's why we initiated a
comprehensive vaccination
campaign, ensuring every tribal
member and non-tribal member
employee has easy access to the
latest vaccines.
We've held vaccine events at our
community center and used mobile
health units to reach out to
every corner of our land.
We've also launched our own
holistic health campaigns that
address not just physical health
but mental, spiritual, and
emotional well-being.
These campaigns are rooted in
our traditional practices,
making them highly relevant and
effective for our people.
Our holistic health approach has
also made a significant impact.
Programs that combine physical
wellness with mental and
cultural health.
Such as meditation workshops.
Uh, traditional healing
practices and family wellness
events are empowering our
community to take charge of
their overall well-being.
Elder care, nutrition, and
mental health, um.
Caring for our elders is a
priority for the Pueblo of Santa
Ana. Our senior center is a key
part of this commitment. The
center provides a hub.
For programs to enhance their
health, wellbeing and social
connection of our elders,
ensuring that they receive the
care and support they need.
One of the critical services we
provide at our senior center.
Is congregate meals offered 5
days a week.
These males give our elders the
opportunity to come together,
share a nutritious meal and
engage in social interactions
which are vital for both
physical and mental well-being.
Eating together fosters a sense
of community reduces isolation.
And provides consistent source
of healthy balanced nutrition.
In addition,
To con uh congregate meals, we
also recognize the needs of
elders who are homebound or face
challenges with mobility,
particularly to those living in
more remote areas like our old
village.
For these members, we deliver
nutritious meals directly to
their homes.
The mail delivery services
ensures that elders who cannot
attend in person receive regular
healthy meals that meet their
dietary needs helping them
manage chronic conditions such
as diabetes, heart disease, and
hypertension.
The combination of congregate
and home delivered meals
reflects our commitment to serve
all elders regardless of their
circumstance.
By making sure every elder has
access to proper nutrition.
We are promoting their overall
health and longevity. Pueblo,
the Pueblo's, uh, transportation
programs offer transportation
services for our elders,
providing rides to medical
appointments.
Wellness events and social
activities throughout the
region.
Regular access to health care is
crucial for managing chronic
conditions and and our
transportation program ensures
that no elder misses out on
medical care that they see that
they need simply because they
cannot get to their appointment.
Transportation is available for
non-medical activities such as
attending wellness events and
social gatherings, which keeps
our elders mentally engaged and
physically active.
The senior center organizes a
variety of wellness events.
And social activities to support
the physical and mental health
of our elders.
By encouraging physical activity
such as fitness classes and
offering opportunities for
social interaction we help
maintain their mobility, reduce
the risk of falls and combat the
feelings of loneliness and
isolation that can negative
negatively impact mental health.
Mental health is at the
forefront of our efforts. The
pueblo has been proactive in
offering counseling services,
substance abuse treatment, and
family support through our
social services program.
One of our innovative programs
is healing to wellness court.
Which provides individuals
struggling with addiction.
A culturally sensitive pathway
to recovery.
With a focus on rehabilitation
instead of punishment.
The healing to wellness program
also helped reduced recidivism.
With many participants
successfully completing the
program and reintegrating into
the community.
The pueblos, the Pueblo of Santa
Ana's substance abuse program
administered through the Social
Services program is dedicated to
supporting individuals and
families affected by addiction.
Our approach is both
compassionate and culturally
sensitive, focusing on
rehabilitation and long-term
recovery rather than punishment.
Through counseling, treatment
services, and case management,
we help individuals address the
root cause of their substance
use while providing them with
tools and support they need to
regain the control of their
lives.
Our efforts producing
significant uh are producing
significant results.
We've seen a measurable decrease
in the number of
diabetes-related complications
and overall.
Improved community health
markers such as lower rates of
obesity and hypertension.
The work we are doing now is
just the beginning.
Looking ahead, the Pueblo of
Santa Ana is focused on
increasing mental health
outreach, particularly for our
younger members who are facing
new challenges.
We are planning to expand our
elder care services ensuring
that our elders are well cared
for and connect to resources
they need.
The future of the healthcare of
the Pueblo of Santa Ana is
bright.
But there is much more to be
done.
Finally, I want to emphasize the
importance of collaboration.
The pueblo works closely with
local, state, and federal
organizations to bring the best
possible healthcare to our
community.
These partnerships providing
funding, training, and
additional resources that allow
us to expand our programs and
ensure that our members are
receiving the highest quality
care through these
collaborations we've been able
to offer specialized care that
would otherwise not have access
to.
We have built strong alliances
with state healthcare
departments to expand mental
health services, and we
collaborate with the federal
government through programs like
federally funded special
diabetes program for Indians,
SDPI SDPI to further enhance the
health resources available to
our community.
SDPI has play played a crucial
role in reducing diabetes rates,
improving health outcomes for
Santa Ana Pueblo in recent
years.
SDPI funding has enabled the
pueblo to offer essential
services, including
Regular health screenings,
educational workshops on
diabetes self-management.
And fitness.
And nutrition programs at the
wellness center.
These programs have focused on
promoting.
Healthy lifestyle changes,
increasing physical activity and
improving access to nutritious
foods, all of which have
contributed to better diabetes
control and prevention.
Additionally, SDPI has supported
outreach efforts.
That engage community members
through personalized health
coaching and monitoring. These
efforts have resulted in greater
awareness of diabetes risk
factors and more proactive
management of disease.
By providing ongoing support
SDPI.
Has helped reduce the prevalence
of diabetes-related
complications.
Leading to improved overall
health outcomes for the Pueblo
Santa Ana community.
In closing.
I want to reiterate that.
The Pueblo of Santa Ana is
committed to building a
healthier future for all its
members.
However, to sustain and expand
these efforts, we need long term
and reliable funding.
I urge our state lawmakers to
recognize the critical role that
the state's support plays in
complementing federal resources
which are often inadequate.
Our programs cannot continue to
meet the growing demands of our
community without this support.
With sustained increased
funding, we can continue to
reduce health disparities,
improve health outcomes, and
create healthier and stronger
community for future
generations.
Thank you for your time and
attention.
I look forward to any questions
you may have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Governor and
Lieutenant Governor, did either
of you want to say anything or
you just for questions you're
available?
So as a newly Can you turn on
the mic for yeah, here we go.
Good afternoon. Thank you for
providing me with this.
opportunity as the newly
appointed director of Health and
Human Services. I began my job
six weeks ago, literally with
boots on the ground.
Uh, we were able to uh meet with
two federal agencies, one the
Department of Justice, the other
one, Bureau of Indian Affairs to
ensure that we met our
programmatic audits and I'm
happy to say we passed them.
Um, I also recently obtained an
$80,000 grant from the
Department of Health to develop
a health council in the
community again with a focus on
prevention and wellness, um, one
of our uh community health
representatives is here today uh
his name is Cameron Harrell. Uh,
he's already been charged with
that responsibility to form that
health council he's created a
program uh that we're now
seeking.
Funding for that's gonna provide
direct services to members of
the community representing every
age group, not solely uh the
elder population.
Um, it's a deep honor to be here
today and I just wanna stress
that um.
You know, historically in Indian
country, we've always gotten.
The bottom of the barrel, other
people have received support
that uh we're generally at the
very last on the list to
receive.
Our rates of type 2 diabetes
throughout the state are off the
chain, extremely high. This is
probably the most prevalent
health issue that we face at
Santa Ana.
Because of some of the
initiatives that have been
discussed today.
We are preventing individuals
from having their feet, their
legs amputated, we're preventing
blindness in the community.
There are real solid outcomes to
the work that we've done. The
state of New Mexico historically
has provided some assistance,
but we're here to ask for more,
and we're asking you if you
continue to invest in our
community and helping us to
improve the health outcomes.
This is an investment.
That will
Serve the state and the entire
nation 1000 times over. Thank
you for your time.
Good afternoon. Again, my name
is Carrie and I am also newly um
with the pueblo Santa Ana is a
program manager for this elder
senior center and with that, you
know, serving um what I often
think of as a vulnerable
population. It's my part of um
working with um the health
director in ensuring that we do
have the advocacy for our elders
in that, you know, we're meeting
the needs that they're
requiring.
In a culturally, um, appropriate
manner and also just a fostering
and um.
Keeping that, you know, respect
highly for them because in our
culture in in native
communities, you know, their
elders are our knowledge keepers
and that is where we find our
identity, the root of it, and so
it's really important to us that
we do service these individuals,
um, and the elder population
with those culturally
appropriate services and so with
a lot of the uh collaborative
work that is done, that's.
Helped us in ensuring that we
do, um, see that we are caring
for our elders and and educating
them, you know, it.
It takes, you know, some time,
but as I always say and have
learned, data doesn't lie.
That's all, you know, numbers
are really gonna tell you all
the truth. And so in working
with um those types of data and
surveys, that's what's ensuring
that we are headed in the right
direction and, and, you know,
servicing our population.
Thank you.
A piece of information, so.
Harry runs a program that serves
the elder community and I know
you heard that term elder
throughout uh the speech today,
our elders make up one third of
the community. This, this is why
we play such a strong emphasis
on the elders, uh, Carrie's
program, uh, receives about
$80,000 a year from the state.
Right now we're spending about
$8000 a month, uh, just to feed
our elders that doesn't.
Include additional uh.
Job opportunities or roles that
we have, we want to bring on
board a full-time activities
coordinator, we need a driver.
We need additional cooks in the
kitchen, $80,000 is a drop in
the bucket. We're deeply
thankful for it, but um.
I just want to share that with
you. We also have uh an adult
day program that we're getting
started that program also
receives from the state from
long-term aging somewhere,
somewhere between 700 and
$80,000 and again we're thankful
and and we're gracious with
this, um, but I think that um
the needs that we have far
outweigh uh the the support and
assistance we've received to
date. Thank you.
Well, thank you so much. Did you
have a wrap up statement,
Governor?
Yes, Mr. Chairman, um, Vice
Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for having
us here this afternoon. Uh,
we're deeply appreciative and on
behalf of the tribal council, we
invite all of you to the pueblo
during our feast day July 26th.
If you can put that in your
calendars, but we deeply
appreciate this opportunity
here. Thank you so much.
OK
Thank you very much and we have
questions from uh Representative
Martinez, uh, OK, well, well,
why don't we start with you,
Representative Martinez, and
we'll go around and we'll give
you 2 minutes 2 minutes.
Everybody has 2 minutes to ask
and get their question answered.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
um.
Appreciate the information. I'm,
I'm very curious about the CHR
program.
Um, how is that funded and do
they report.
To like a primary care
physician.
Is the is that available on the
tribe or are you referring
those?
Maybe the rust or or UNM
Sandoval.
I'd like to bring up uh Kim
Kimtoa.
She's our program manager, uh,
for our CHR program.
Here, here, I'll move over here.
Good afternoon everyone. I, um,
my name is Kimberly Toya and um
I've been with the community
health representative program
for 5.5 years, so yes, we, we
work with, we get grant funding
from um IHS Indian Health
Services. And so, um, but a lot
of that funding is, uh, as
Marian said too, great, we're
thankful for it, but it's not
enough, so, um, uh, we have to
rely on the tribe to uh help
cover um
The program's initiatives, but
we do when we do work with IHS
it is working, um, and speaking
on behalf of tribal members
advocating for them and you know
uh helping in the referral
process, but yes, the referrals
would go to Presbyterian Rest,
uh, UNM Sandoval,
UN the main, um, those are the
main places we get referrals,
uh, for tribal members and we
try to have MOUs with um both
facilities right now. We have
one with uh.
Um, UNM Sandoval so that way if
tribal members, uh, get admitted
to through ER or you get
admitted to the hospital we get
notified so that way we can, uh,
close that gap, you know, and,
and, uh, continue wraparound
services for that tribal member.
Does that answer your question?
Yeah, thank you very much. One
Last quick question. How many
representatives do you have for
the tribe?
How many community
representatives uh we have 3.
Uh, the other two are here as
well.
So we have 3 OK thank you very
much, um, and Governor.
We're, we're neighbors, so my
district ends at 550, but I'd
like to continue the
conversation about.
How best to support the, the,
especially the CHRs.
And the interaction between the
hospitals and the district.
Um, see if we can make that
handoff a little bit easier.
I would greatly appreciate it.
Sorry, Governor, I would greatly
appreciate that. Alright, thank
you, Kim. Um.
Representative Martinez, uh,
thank you so much for that
question, um, yeah, the CHR
program is a very important uh
arm outreach arm, if you will,
to our community, um, over the
course of time with um the virus
that came in, um,
took, uh, uh, several of our
elders and uh.
It was quite um
Quite um
hurtful that we lost those
individuals because our
representative, those people
that we lost, the elders were
repositories of information of
our culture, our traditions, and
uh we should not have lost them
however it happened.
So we're there so it's a very
important piece of our health
care outreach and they go out in
the community they uh visit our
elders to ensure that they're
fine. Is there anything that
they need and so uh I, I, I
can't, I can't express enough
that um whatever amounts of
money that the legislature can
provide for us in this program,
in our whole program, that would
be great, but we're
representative, we're happy to
um continue this conversation at
your, at your time on your
schedule and our.
Our schedule as well
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Governor staff. I
appreciate it. Yes, sir.
Uh, represented Senator
Rodriguez. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Good afternoon.
To the governor, lieutenant, and
your staff, thanks for your
work. um I am impressed by the
broad range of services that you
provide or you're making a great
effort to provide just a test to
the great needs that you have,
um, let me just quickly because
I know we're limited in time
here, but you mentioned um
Governor, the uh diabetes. We
have an epidemic not only at
Santa Ana but throughout the
state. It's, it's just a taking
over and um I'm happy that
you're really focused.
on that and also on monitoring
what's called the A1C, what
happens many times as we see is
that we check our glucose levels
to see if we do have or do not
have diabetes, but doctors many
times do not uh prescribe uh the
test called the A1C, which is
the real predictor that's the
marker for diabetes, but anyway,
uh, and the lieutenant governor
also mentioned several pieces,
um, uh, indicating what you're
focused on Lieutenant, you
mentioned not only diabetes
along with the governor, but
hypertension.
Cholesterol, um, in bone density
testing and imaging, how
important that is. I'm so happy
you're doing that. And of course
the uh the comprehensive
personalized care and follow up.
I like that because what happens
is that we start providing care
but then we drop it and if we
don't continue that follow up
doesn't go anywhere, but I know
I'm running short of time. I'll
ask one question before I run
out of time here that is on the
rehab for substance abuse and
misuse and so on. Um, I, I like
the fact that.
You're offering and you're
you're seeing the comprehensive
um the need for comprehensive
care and not a punishing kind of
care for this becomes a disease,
as we know, and so we need to
treat it as such and and provide
the holistic support that people
need, and I was very happy to
see that that's where you're uh
that that's where you are just
quickly, do you have a substance
abuse rehabilitation center
there uh at the Pueblo or or do
you go somewhere else for it.
OK. OK.
We, we do have a comprehensive
uh substance abuse program.
It is within our social services
department. I see. OK, and it is
on site at the Pueblo. OK, thank
you very much for that and Madam
Chair, I know I'm running out of
time, so I'm done. Thank you,
Mr.
Mr. Chair, if I could add, um to
Um, uh, uh, Senator Rodriguez's
comments. Um, yes, the, the
group does an excellent job as
well. Um, we had, um, over the
course of time we've had
several, um, of our community
members, uh, come to us for, um,
help and that help was provided
to them and consequently, um, at
least two of the people that
came to us at that time, uh, are
recovered alcoholics.
And that's in my mind that's too
at least that's 2 and so um
we're, we're thankful for
everything that the, the
department does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Chasey, do you
have a question?
No, Mr. Chairman, I just want to
say thank you to the governor
for being here. I got to tell
him I had to miss it because I
was on a Zoom call in my car,
but thank you for everything.
Good to see you.
Senator Tollman, we'll go to
you.
Any questions?
No, but thanks for asking. Thank
you.
Senators of the this, thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Governor.
Oh
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Governor Armijo um before
and the staff for this excellent
presentation, um, I, one of the
things you mentioned was
respiratory diseases, and I
remember meeting with um I
believe it was your
environmental department or
someone within your natural
resources department a few years
ago to talk about how impressive
your uh your department was, you
know, really focusing on
brownfields and um.
It uh waste and air quality and
Um, and I remember, uh.
The there was also environmental
devastation because it served as
a practice site for World War II
bombing and so my my question
is, have you connected um your
environmental department with
your public health department to
find ways of strengthening um
the connections because of
course, you know, air quality is
connected to respiratory
diseases uh and also cancer and
there there are all these
connections.
And um have you, have you done
that? Because that would really
be impressive as well.
So I am 6 weeks on the job that
is at the top of my uh goal
list, uh, to, to, to bridge
those connections. I know that
in the past, uh, with our
community wellness program,
there have been some, some
initiatives there, um, but we're
making it first and foremost. We
also have a high prevalence of
various types of cancer in the
community and so this is gonna
be a big focus uh.
I and I and I wrote your name
down, so once that initiative is
drafted, you will be the first
person to receive it.
Good, thank you. Anything that I
can do to be supportive, um,
governor, it's, it's just I'm so
impressed, um, like I said, I
visited probably about 4 years
ago now, and it was, it was a
wonderful visit and appreciate
you coming here. Anything we can
do to support. Senator, thank
you for your comments and we are
aware, Lieutenant Governor I of
the area up on the mesa that was
uh used as a bombing range, but
we've mitigated that piece. I
believe it's all.
Taken out of there, uh, it was a
source of concern for us.
However, through negotiation and
talks with everybody that needed
to be in the meetings, uh, we've
got it completed and so I just
wanna say about our our
Department of Natural Resources,
they are an excellent group of,
of ladies and gentlemen, just
like the rest of our departments
and so uh thank you for your
comments. It's interesting how
New Mexico played such a role.
were awarded to of supporting
that effort in so many ways.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Chaves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so my
question is kind of related to
what the senator just asked
about and you talked about um
industrial activities and so I
was uh interested in terms of
what currently is going on in
terms of um impact to the people
of the Pueblo Santa Ana in terms
of like air pollution and, and,
and, um, any other kind of water
pollution and the second part of
that is, are those industries
being held accountable in terms
Of stopping what they're doing
to pollute the air and water.
Representative, thank you for
that, uh, question on the, uh,
Rio Grande, we have, uh, the
Pueblo has a um uh uh an
agreement with the EPA and so we
have regulations that guide us
in that area. So any time we see
any kind of um uh high levels of
uh whatever uh contaminant is in
the river, we address that issue
through our Department of
Natural Resources on the um real
he is we have um a lot of
incidences of E. coli. Now, um.
We're trying to get our hands
around that, is it, is it from,
uh, uh, um.
The wildlife out there, is it
the uh cattle, um, is it, um,
what is, what is the source of
that, uh, E. coli and.
Um, I'll just leave it right
there. We're we're, we're
working on that and uh but as
soon as um our Department of
Natural Resources um does its uh
testing every month, uh, as long
as soon as we hear about that,
uh, message is sent out to, um,
the, um, uh, community and to
make sure that um uh when we do
have, um.
We do have um.
Uh, cultural and traditional
activities and as.
I'm thinking all of you may know
is that when we do have those
activities, water is needed.
Water is water is needed for
those activities and when we do
have that E. coli in the Rio
Hemes where our our old
villages.
We can't use that water.
And, and that's a uh um a scary
notion for um for us as tribal
leaders, we don't want to impact
our um uh internal traditional
leaders and so.
Your question. I hope that
answers your question,
Representative.
Representative Ferrari. Mr.
Chair and thank you, um.
Out the panel. I, I couldn't
remember everybody's names, but,
um, as you were talking about um
A1C or you know, um.
Diabetes, um.
And your efforts to, you know,
mitigate that, um, do you have
um access to drugs that have
been have become rare or, you
know, harder to get like Ombic
and some of the others that help
reduce, um, you know.
Someone's uh A1C and then also
obesity and things like that.
Have you had difficulty getting
that from your wellness, for
your wellness center.
Um,
Seeing a shortage uh nationally
of some of those newer drugs
like the Ozempic, uh, it's
primarily because, uh, people in
the population now use them for
weight loss and throughout the
state, uh, New Mexico has had a
shortage of of those various
drugs. I can't speak for the
pharmacy or the pharmacist at
IHS, but I know just in speaking
with community members in
general that um many of them are
still
the metformin and some of the
earlier old line interventions.
Um
That would be interesting to
know, you know, if they are
having difficulty, you know.
Which it sounds like they do,
but you know how much of a
hardship is that to find? And
then also, Mr. Chair, um, I was
wondering, um, you mentioned
about healing to wellness and
um.
In your substance use disorder
um in the recidivism, do you
know what your recidivism rate
is or how, what percentage of
the population is having
substance use disorder problems.
I think it
Was your lieutenant that I was
talking about.
Yes, I spoke with uh uh James
Cooper. He is the substance
abuse counselor recently.
And he told me that uh
currently.
He has about 30 active cases,
uh, some of these are are
individuals who've been, uh,
dealing with substance abuse for
many years. Um, there's also a
concern with opioid misuse. Uh,
we're starting to see fentanyl
throughout the state, not just
affecting our community, but
that is a concern of his as
well, uh, and of course, uh,
alcoholism, but I don't know the
actual percentage. I can get
that information.
To you. OK, thank you, and
that's what I was mostly
thinking of was the um alcohol
use disorder and also they um
have naltrexone that would help
to reduce the consumption and
how um we're trying to get more
funding into the alcohol harms
alleviation, especially to our
um indigenous groups that, um,
can use that um.
To help mitigate the harms.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mister Chair, um.
Just a couple of things I want
to say bravo for the vaccines.
I, I love it. I mean, we are
have almost eradicated diseases
and some.
Non-science, I'll just say
politely is trying to take that
away from us, so thank you.
Over and over again for making
that a priority um and then also
thank you for um for setting up
a health council. I've been a
champion for the health councils
for a long time. We're still
begging for money, but we'll
probably always be begging for
money, but you are gonna be our
voices for Santa Ana, um, and we
need to hear those voices to, to
make sure that we, we are doing
the best that we can do do
do um Mr. Governor and
Lieutenant Governor, thank you.
Thank you, thank you for all you
do. Do you have a clinic?
In Santa Ana IHS clinic, OK, and
then this is the question. What,
what is the education and or
training required for your CHRs.
So for the trainings we we go
through the uh CH uh W modules,
so to get certified through the
state, um, and then, uh, with
the hoping to to do the third
party billing that's coming up,
you know, well, that's gotten
improved, so to be able to go
through that, so that's what we
we do and then we're trying to
start initiative too for CHR
Academy, you know, to be more um
um placed with uh like cultural.
Components of the work that we
do, um, but this would cover all
of, um, uh, other Pablo CHR
programs.
Mr. Chair, thank you. So there's
no other there's no requirements
coming in. You just go through
the the modules, yeah, and then
our own like requirements like
I, there's so many
certifications that I have, you
know, like, and, but whatever
fits the needs of the community.
You're welcome. I would like to
add that uh Kim is a graduate of
the University of New Mexico in
population health.
Uh, we also have Ashley Claw,
who's our public health CHR she
uh is currently pursuing her
master's in public health
through the University of
Arizona, uh, Cameron Harrell,
uh, also has, uh, I believe in
uh
masters in uh human performance
and an undergraduate, I believe
in exercise physiology,
kinesiology, so our CHRs are
highly qual
fight.
Senator Pope, do you have any
questions?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Do you
not?
Representative Parahon.
OK
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee should not Dani,
thank you for your presentation
and the work you do.
And I think wines are more
comments in the sense of, you
know, being out there,
especially for our senior
centers because we don't get all
the amenities, most of it is
just feeding the our, our
elders, and if anything trying
to get our elders to go off the
reservation or out of their home
is I, I don't even try.
So it is essential that we have
those services in there, but to
expand them, especially in our
rural areas because we don't get
all the wraparound services.
They're not open 24 hours. Some
of the homes don't have um the
heating. It's all by firewood,
and if the, you know, if they're
not able to be there in a very
cold nights, it's not like
there's a hotel to check into or
go down the road because some of
them don't even drive anymore
and even the roads in that sense
too are not possible.
So it's critical for that
funding to be there, especially
for our tribal communities um
all across New Mexico and the
transportation, um.
Aspect of also taking the food
out there and even having our
elders able to socialize in that
sense, and most of the
facilities are just one room
like this with the kitchen.
There's not extra rooms in, in
some of them unless you really
have the commitment for funding
to have um even just a pool
table or couches um for them to
after they're done eating to
socialize that.
So being out there and seeing
all that, it's um.
I mean, it, it's hard to keep
them open too.
Because of OEH, um, regulations
that are.
It's, you know, one thing breaks
down the refrigerator breaks
down. That's it, you're closed.
You can't, you can't stay open
until you get a new refrigerator
and the funding cycle that is
here does not.
Hoping that right away so there
there's a lot of uphill battles,
but I appreciate you guys coming
here and I think it is critical
to open that door and let others
see how we're really trying to
make sure our elders are sought
after because they are
invaluable, but thank you and
I'm sure there's more work to
do, but yeah.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Senator Lopez.
There's one more
Um, one more question. The
tribal liaison.
With the aging and long-term
Services division. Have you had
contact with them?
Yes, we have, and uh we're now
also in the process of building
a new relationship because uh
Carrie has been here as a senior
manager for all of 3 weeks and
I'm all of 6 weeks, but yes,
thank you, and I think that's
our 3rd or 2nd tribal liaison in
this, in that division as far as
I know, yeah, since I've been in
3rd, OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Governor, Lieutenant
Governor and and team I
appreciate what you've shared
with us. I just had one
question, um, you mentioned the
the amount of money of $80,000.
Uh, and where is that money
coming from that you mentioned?
So that is coming from the
Department of uh aging and long
term services, um, I may have.
That is the correct formal name,
yes, from the state of New
Mexico. OK, thank you, Mrs. I
just wanted to see where that
trail of where the money's
coming from. Thank you.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And my question is for uh the
for Governor Armijo and
Governor, when you begin your
presentation, you talked about
two rivers and about the the
necessity for testing them, so
is the focus of the majority of
the water that's a that the uh
members of the pueblo yous come
from those two rivers?
Uh, mainly from the Rio Grande.
Groundwater wells that we pull
water from, uh, uh, um, he is,
uh, we're up there during the,
um, um, different times of the
year. We have a, as most of you
probably know we have a
traditional calendar from
January to December and so we're
up there during parts of the
time, but most of the, most of
the time we're living in the
community just to the north uh
east of here, um, Santa Ana
Pueblo, we call it Riba um um
high step.
In our language, we call it Hate
that encompasses three little
villages, Chicali, Ranchitos,
and Riba.
And so that's where most of our
water is, is used in coming from
the RG area.
Yes. So thank you and
and Mr. Governor Amijo, I guess
I'm just wondering what the real
Grande being low now.
I
Uh, are you, is there a shortage
of water on the Pueblo and what
else can we do to help in that
regard?
Uh, not necessarily a shortage
representative,
um, what we're doing right now
and Lieutenant governor here has
been sitting in um
Um, Middle Valley Water rights
negotiations we're not quite
there from Cochiti to Aleta.
There's 6 pueblos, and he's been
uh in those meetings were not
quite to the negotiation piece.
We're still doing some
preliminary meetings on how
things are going um weigh out,
but um that's um
There's no shortage really to
answer your question, there's
really no shortage at this time.
Go ahead, Lieutenant.
Um, representative, um.
The we use a groundwater for
drinking water, so we have
multiple wells in Santa Ana
Pueblo for our ground water that
support both our business
district as well as uh for our
residences, um, the waters that,
uh, through the river that we
monitor, um, we have a
traditional uses for them that
also may um partake in uh.
Consumption
Or um just use of it, um.
And uh so we monitor those. So
it's mostly a cultural activity
that's done with the rivers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much.
Anybody else, I want to thank
you governor for, for the
presentation and all of you for
the work you're doing with your
communities and uh we look
forward to, to, uh, hearing from
you in the future. My one
question was for you, uh, Doctor
Compass
is that an MD? Are you an MD or
what, what's your doctor?
Epidemiology and did you get it
at UNM or University of the
Cumberlands. Cumberland.
Well, it's great to have you,
uh, here before us, and I'm sure
it's great to have you in the
community as well. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Chairman and Vice Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you again for having us here
this afternoon and uh we look
forward to working with you in
Santafi in the upcoming 2025
legislative session. So we look
forward to collaborating with
you, working with you, and so we
look forward to that time. Thank
you again. Thank you.
OK, members will go now to the
2nd item on the afternoon, An A
Aid Institute, the Blueprint
project and we have with us
Doctor Catherine Ortega
Courtney, the co-director of the
NH Aid Institute and Veronica
Krupnik, the leadership analyst
with the Office of House
Majority Floor leader.
to.
So
Thank you
And you have some others too,
good.
OK, thank you.
Thanks.
Nice to see you.
No worries.
Thank you, Governor. It's great,
Lieutenant governor, good to see
you. Thank you.
Thank you for coming. Thank you.
Yeah, my hands are too dry and
they're kind of weird.
OK
OK.
Oh
s
she moves around.
OK
All right, well, we'll get
started right away of Ortega
Courtney,
I'm sure we're,
you'll give us a chance to meet
the other people who've come up
with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's my
honor today to be joined by an
incredible panel of experts with
me today, so I'm gonna let them
introduce themselves and then
we'll jump into our
presentation.
I
Just one your time
yeah
There you go. OK.
You want to go.
My name is Doctor Melissa Moyer,
and I'm working with the
Institute is the project manager
for the blueprint, um, some of
the other roles I have is I'm a
social work educator, a clinical
social worker, and I also come
with over 10 years of child
welfare experience in the state.
And
Remind the committee that we
heard from Dr. Moyer in
Portales. She's the head of the
social work program, the new MSW
program at Portalo Eastern New
Mexico.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. My
name is Veronica Krupnik. Uh,
it's nice to see you all. I am
the leadership analyst to
Majority floor leader Gay
Chasey, and for the blueprint, I
serve as a facilitator and a
member of the core team for the
Blueprint project.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is uh Diego Lopez, uh,
executive director of uh small
nonprofit called Hands Across
Cultures. They're in the
Espanola Valley.
And also uh the president of the
Rio Riba Community Health
Council.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kristen Trujil. I'm the
executive director of the San
Martin de Pare Soup kitchen
located in Espanola and I also
serve as um the food action team
lead for Rio Ruba Community
Health Council. Thank you.
And also, if I might add, uh,
Kristen just got recognized as
um one of the 40 under 40
business professionals, uh,
they're in in Santa Fe in
northern New Mexico, so I just
wanted to give you a big
congratulations.
Thank you. And we have some team
members that couldn't be with us
today that are actually crucial
to this project, so I just want
to acknowledge the team at
Chapin Hall, who are some
renowned child welfare um
researchers who are working with
us on this project as well as
the deputy director for the um
Anna H 8 Institute, Maranelli
Trujillo and Alisa Lauer, chief
of staff for the House Majority
floor leader, um, who are all
key parts of this team as well.
So as an introduction, um, this
project came to
us with the idea that we've been
trying to make for 10 years when
the book Anna, age 8 came out,
um, based on our work and child
welfare, which is the idea that
child welfare is not just CYFD.
If we want to create a system
that truly supports our families
and kids. We need a system way
beyond what CYFD provides and
the goal of this project is very
similar to the goal of the Anna
A Ade Institute and the 100% New
Mexico initiative, which is
ensuring that when
100% of families have access to
the vital services that they
need. So with that in mind, our
goal here is to really get
community voice. We know that we
cannot do this work without
listening to the needs of the
communities and the people who
actually tried to get these
services and maybe couldn't
access them or have successfully
connected with these services,
so we are doing a two-year
project, um, which we are
calling the child welfare
Blueprint. The first
is really consisting of getting
lived experience voices first.
So we are going all around the
state, um, doing focus groups
and town hall meetings to hear
the voices of people who both
utilize these services as well
as the providers who provide
these services so that we can
come up with some very clear
recommendations and then form a
task force based around those
recommendations. So that's what
we're going to be talking about
today, and I'm gonna hand it to
Doctor Moyer, who's going to
talk a little bit.
More about why this is needed
and what our plan is.
Yes, Mr.
Yes, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, uh, as Doctor
Ortega Courtney shared child
welfare is much, much larger
than CYFD's efforts as a state,
we know this, and so the idea is
that we have over 2000 kids in
care right now in the state of
New Mexico, and we all know just
through, um, the work of this
committee, through the work of
our many dedicated, uh,
individuals in New Mexico
bringing this to our attention
that we have a need for foster
homes and adequate care for
these kids. But the real
question that
Blueprint asks is why? Why do we
have this steady number of
children entering into care. Why
do we have such a great level of
families in need?
And so the blueprint takes as
Doctor Courtney was sharing.
The voices of people that live
these experiences as well as the
community providers that are
there providing the needed
services and in addition to
that, community members who are
living in this environment and
want to provide an additional
level of support and help to
strengthen their communities.
So we believe that.
The blueprint and we did share
with you a one page on this if
it kind of helps you follow
along, but really the blueprint
is based on the idea that if we
can deliver trauma informed
community-based services for
children and families we can
impact the number of families
that need formal child welfare
support services intervention.
and so our goal is to create
stronger communities in
New Mexico, um, by assisting
state agencies have a closer
connection with the communities
they're serving. Um, as Doctor
Ortega Courtney shared, we are
going throughout communities in
the state and it was important
to us to get representation from
each of the regions as well as
tribal partners. So we've listed
the counties down here, we, uh,
very recently we're blessed to
just finish our first community
event in Rio Ariba, and that's
why we asked them to come here
today to.
Speak, um, next we will be
visiting the Taos Pueblo and
Tao's community.
And then we're going to Chavez,
Dona Anna Valencia, and finally
McKinley County in late spring.
And after we've gathered that
data and have all of that um
information we will be forming
that task force to begin in the
2nd year phase of this project.
All right, so for my portion of
this presentation, I'm actually
gonna walk you through, um, a
little bit of the results that
we found from Rio Riba County,
um, both in our focus groups
with the individuals currently
navigating um services and then
as well as the larger town hall
with our service providers,
community members, and the lived
experience, uh, individuals who
decided to stay.
Um, so I'm gonna, uh, walk you
through the backside of the
sheet that says informing a New
Mexico child and family services
system blueprint, um, so on
August 27th we conducted our
first focus group in town hall
for the focus group we had 21
participants, um, with living or
lived experience, lived
experience navigating one of the
services that you see on the
back of the.
That sheet, um, our town hall
had 49 participants. Like I
said, it was a mix of who um was
able to join us.
So I wanna start by saying we
asked um pretty open ended
questions on people's
experiences both positive and
negative and everywhere in
between when it came to
accessing food services,
transportation, housing, child
care, and medical and dental,
um, health care as well as
mental health.
So starting with the food
services, um, our participants
experience barriers to health
fresh and healthy foods as well
as having to navigate a complex,
uh, benefit system where they're
often confused by eligibility
restrictions, um, insufficient
food assistance, um, and also,
um, the cost of produce um was
limited limited families access
to to the food, um, we also
discovered a common
theme amongst our participants
was that many of the families
faced a stigma around seeking
aid in this area, um, and also
experienced, uh, difficulties
accessing food due to uh limited
service hours, uh,
transportation barriers,
particularly um this being a
rural area.
On the provider side of things,
um, many of our providers were
dealing with operational
challenges such as short uh
staff shortages, um, resources
being limited and essentially
being unable to meet the growing
demand.
Um, but they did, especially for
this county, we did want to
highlight that despite the
challenges when it came to food
services and resources in this
area, um, this community did
have many souages and food
pantries in existence that um
we're kind of praised for their
positive impact and
contributions, but definitely
was highlighted by those
providers they need more
support.
Um, when it came to
transportation, our
participants, um
Shared with us that there was a
a limited awareness of the
transportation options available
for them again, being a rural
area, um, there is financial
barriers, safety concerns of the
services that were provided, um,
and then on the provider side we
saw there is challenges with
shortage in drivers, limited
funding, um, and again just kind
of that uncoordinated
coordinated system of services,
um.
OK
I think we all know that housing
is definitely a big factor in
the preventative and child
welfare um experience, so this
was very important for us to get
to, um, our participants really
felt like there was a lack of
access to housing that they were
eligible for, um, they might
have had a voucher themselves,
but the programs weren't there
to actually use the voucher. Um,
there is also a common theme of
landlords, um.
A shortage of landlords willing
to accept said vouchers, um,
they also experience long wait
wait list, extending waiting
periods and again facing that
strict eligibility requirements,
um, and it was cited a few times
that um criminal record
limitations um were of concern.
Another piece was, um, many of
our participants said that even
when housing was secured, um,
that oftentimes the housing
options that they were provided
with were plagued by poor living
conditions, so this can range
from infestations to neglected
repairs, um, and there was very
limited to no accountability for
maintaining those spaces that
they were provided and our
participants um did express
frustration with that la.
Of oversight and follow up in
the housing system.
On the provider side of things,
um, they shared with us that
they they identified the need
for adequate transitional
services for young people aging
out of the foster care system,
um, who they felt were often
left without support.
Uh, and then there was a, um,
that they're currently
undergoing efforts to build
those new affordable housing,
uh, facilities but are often met
with some community pushback,
um, due to increasing property
values, infrastructure strain
and loss of land for potential
charter schools coming up in
that area, um.
Um, when it came to.
Child care, um, that was our
next area of questions for our
participants and our
participants expressed um that
access to affordable child care
was a major issue, but this was
also compounded by trust
concerns, so many of our
participants did know of
somewhere that they could take
their children but felt like the
interpersonal relationship with
those folks, um, might not be
the most trusting, so there's
some room.
To work there, um, they also
cited administrative or
operational delays of child
care, high costs, um, and then
limitations for after school
programs or after school care
for older children, um, families
also faced um complex
assistance uh programs and what
they cited as bureaucratic
hurdles, um, which often left
many of these families without
reliable child care.
On the provider side of things,
um, the providers that were in
attendance, um, shared with us
that it really came down to
frequent staff turnover,
transportations to actually get
the children to the facilities,
um,
the providers also said, um,
there is a need for support and
offering flexible, affordable
childcare options, especially
for working parents and in that
rural area.
Um, another thing that the
providers were up against was
that resources, especially
financials, um, were limited and
that there was a great need for
programs to provide training and
certification to actually have a
licensed child care, um, that
would help to fill that capacity
for the child care in this
specific county.
Um, the next area that we asked
them about was their access to
mental or medical and dental
care, um.
Like many of the other areas we
had transportation,
affordability, and insurance,
um, again, there was a shortage
of specialists and health care
providers, which often um.
Led to long delays in their
care, um, I think one of the
biggest examples we got was with
dental care in Rio Riba County,
um, where they essentially the
participants essentially felt
like there was a turnaround
often met with referrals and out
of city and treatment delays,
um, so that often led to worse
health conditions, um, the next
was the recruitment and
retention for those positions.
In this area, um, due to both a
lack of affordable housing and
low salaries, um.
And then the last issue that we
asked them about was their
access to mental health care.
Uh,
so this was really folks sharing
with us that they, um, again
felt that there was this was a
high cost for their health care
needs, um, this was another area
where cultural stigma, um, was
discouraging was discouraging
our participants from actually
um reaching out to the care, um,
and again that shortage of
providers and provider turnover,
um, definitely led to a lot of
frustration in this.
Yeah.
Um, so.
After our day long, um, both
focus groups and town halls in
Rio Riba County we handed over
all of this information and data
to our research arm of this
project, which is Chain Hall,
um, and our research partner
really synthesized and analyzed
the information that we were
provided them, um, and they
really blocked it out into the
5.
Themes that are on the front
side of that same flyer, um, and
so this was those common themes
where um the fragmentation of
services. So this is often
people feeling that they are
navigating a very disconnected
system of services and would
like us to move towards more of
an integrated care system, um.
The next was like physical
access to services like it might
not be within their um ability
to actually get to the service,
uh, and this seems to be no
matter what essential service
people were seeking. There seems
to be the biggest, um,
commonality.
Um, the other that I thought was
very um frequent in these, uh,
especially in our focus groups
was um the overwhelmed support
system. So these are our folks
like our grandparents raising
grandchildren, um, not only does
that put a strain on their
financial and emotional
well-being and health, um, but
we also learned from hearing
from our participants that a lot
of times our grandparents
raising grandchildren.
Um, are on the short end of the
stick cause we, we heard from
many that um the children's
benefits such as Snap and Tanni,
um, are often tied to the
parents regardless of who's
actually caretaking for the
child, so that leaves our
grandparents who are raising
their grandchildren um without
those benefits, even though
they're the ones who need that
to provide for the child.
Um, the next, um, 4th theme that
came up a lot was the impacts of
substance abuse and alcoholism,
especially, um, families facing
intergenerational trauma, um,
and I just wanted to share this
quote that's also on your um
handouts here, um, that came
from one of the county residents
that shared with us, um, and
they stated parents with
addiction are looking for help.
They can't do it on their own.
I'm going through this
Right now and it's getting hard
and it's getting to a point
where I just don't care anymore,
and the thing is, it hurts more
for them and me, but where's
that door that's supposed to be
open to get some help? They just
keep shutting that door all the
time.
Um, and I feel like in the focus
groups that was definitely a
common feeling of um families
wanting help for their family
members, but not knowing where
to turn and not um having people
reach out to build that
awareness, um, so I think that
that's something that we heard
in both our focus groups and the
greater town hall.
Um, and then that 5th theme, I
don't think is any surprise, but
the financial cost of um either
accessing these services
physically or things like
co-pays, um.
And and things like that we're
we're putting financial strains
on these families, um, that
ultimately, um.
We're a burden to services or
were the factor that made
families discontinue services,
um, so.
That was very
like broad outline of everything
that we heard, um, we spent, you
know, multiple hours, um, with
the focus groups and the town
halls, so there's a lot of
information to process, um, but
as we shared our ultimate goal
is to do this type of format 5
more times in various parts of
the the state to be able to come
back, see if there's some
commonalities and give kind of
that final report of
Recommendations of where those
gaps are and hopefully give um
you all some tangible steps on
where the disconnects are
happening, um, so yeah, thank
you.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee, um, as you
heard, you know, we had
An incredible amount of
information just come from this
one day, and I want to give a
huge thank you to Diego and his
team for making this happen when
we entered the building, getting
ready for the focus group, we
had no idea what to expect, and
we were overwhelmed. We had so
many people show up and want to
share their voice that we ended
up having to do 2 and 2 separate
rooms, so we're at full capacity
with people with truly lived
experience, um, I think we had a
couple of focus group
participants who are actively
homeless
At the time of the focus group,
um, actively using and looking
for treatment help. It was
incredible. So I want to give a
huge thank you to um the Rio
Ariba team here and I want to
give them an opportunity to
share what this um day meant for
them.
Thank you
Um, thank you, doctor, so for us
this is uh I I just wanna say we
support this, uh, in our
community and other communities
because it's a tremendous tool,
um, from what we're doing on the
regular every day to day basis
we're, you know, with the 100%
reban community Health Council,
and we're straight up boots on
the ground working um in several
different, uh, you know, sectors
in the community trying to make
a difference and what this day
uh actually gave us was
perspectives from those
individuals who need the
services most, uh, a lot of
times we assess our community
and assess our community to
death and and sometimes there's
no action, uh, but we are
following the 100% model and so
we've, uh, we have our 10
action, well, we have our action
teams, um, not quite 10 yet,
we're trying to fulfill the 10,
but we're straight up boots on
the ground trying to make an
impact, um, in the community so
this day actually gave us a
clear picture from those who
need services.
Most and it was really powerful.
I was actually able to sit in on
the focus groups, uh, myself and
to hear some of the stories and
uh traumatic things that are
happening to our brothers and
sisters. I mean it was
breathtaking and really eye
opening and sometimes it's
things that you don't think
about, um, not things that you
see just uh looking at a needs
assessment report to actually
hear the the voices and the
stories of these people was
deeply impacting and uh for us
to be able to util
The evaluation we also utilize
the strategic prevention
framework as well as one of our
models so um you know we, we
assess build capacity, uh, we do
planning, we also do
implementation and evaluation
with um sustainability all in
the in the in the center right
as a part of that model and it's
this is a really big a part of
our assessment and evaluations,
so to be able to have the
evaluation that you all provided
us gives us a clear picture on.
The direction that we're going
with our action teams because
sometimes you think you're going
in the right direction, but
oftentimes you may not be
hitting the head or or we're
actually hearing from the people
what they need so uh I wanna
turn over to Kristen to talk a
little bit about the direction
of um the food action team and
and how this has helped us make
some decisions with what you're
doing.
Mr. Chair and members of the of
the committee, um, as he was
mentioning, um, or as I
mentioned earlier, I am the, the
action team lead for our Rio
Aruba community food action
team and um this town hall
meeting in this assessment was
extremely helpful for what we
are currently doing our, our
mission and our vision of what
our food action team along with
our other four action teams do
is ensuring that 100% of our
residents have the access and
resources they need um to
ensuring that they they get to
the services they need, um, for
instance, for our food action
team currently we have over 18
um organizations working with us
um in over 35 members and um we
are all working to we're all
collaborating and working that
we're filling in those gaps in
our community and one of the
gaps that we have noticed, um,
which was, um, also on this.
Assessment is access to
transportation to many of our
services, um, for food being one
of them, um.
A lot of our residents from the
rural areas have difficulty in
transportation of getting to our
food services or behavioral
health services, um.
One of the projects that our
food action team has been
working on uh we received some
project funds and we have been
doing quarterly food
distributions in the rural
areas, uh, we, this is a fairly
new project that started this
year. Um, our food action team,
uh, just began it's been a whole
year now, uh, we began in
October of last year, um, we
received project funds and we
did our first rural distribution
in March. We did it in the rural
community of Ojoarco.
Distributed over 100 food boxes
there and then we had our next
distribution in Cordova, which
is another rural area and um the
outcome or the experiences that
we've
Had by doing this, um,
It's just an outpour of thank
you from the community members.
Many of them have been in tears,
um, when we have been there
doing these food distributions
in Cordova, they don't have a
community center, um, and they
just came to us and said thank
you so much for thinking of us.
Thank you for, for bringing us
these food boxes, um.
Um,
so we're just very grateful for
this initiative and um just very
appreciative about it.
Thank you.
Thank you and as you can see,
um, this is the amazing work
that's happening on the ground
in 100% New Mexico every day,
and I think every county we work
with has these amazing people
who don't get the opportunity to
come here and tell you about all
the great things they're doing,
but things like delivering food
boxes to communities that
historically are left out is
just something that fills my
heart with joy. So thank you all
for your work and um I wanna
call your attention to one more
handout that we have. This is
um.
A compilation of all of our
survey results that we have done
in the 5 years since the AAA
Institute started, um, our first
step in the 100% New Mexico
initiative is to do a survey of
our community members asking
them if they've needed the
services if they were able to
access them and what the
barriers are. So basically our
goal for the blueprint is to
kind of fill in these gaps to
figure out how can we create a
blueprint to address these
barriers and close these gaps so
that everyone can have access to
what they need and
So, um, this is just a report
that we're very proud of and I
honestly think that if we could
figure out how to eliminate all
of these barriers we could fix
so many of the problems that we
face in New Mexico, so I just
wanted to share that with you
and with that I think we are
happy to take any of your
questions.
Let's start with Representative
Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
all of you very much. um, Mr.
Chair, do you remember when we
were meeting at the UNM Cancer
Center and we spent like 3 days
on CYFD. I don't remember if
that was 2023 or 2022.
Right
23
But I think it was
Representative Vincent, who
commented, CYFD has too much to
do.
And I've been having this
conversation with Angie Vasho,
who was the founder of PB and J
Family Services, and we used to
have more therapeutic preschool
programs in the state and we
started saying separate from
CYFD, what needs to be done and
so I'm it's really grateful to
the governor because she helped
us get this funded, um, over on
the Senate side. I'm sorry that
vice chair of Senate Finance had
to step out. She's getting
To chair LFC tomorrow,
but
we
We didn't get the money in on
the house side because it kept
getting confused with CYFD and
I, we kept saying this is not
about CYFD. This is about what
do we need to do statewide.
To
Really reduce the burden on
CYFD. How do we make every
single person in the state
responsible for child
well-being. And it's not just
some government agency. So I'm,
I'm so grateful to um Anna HA
for the work they're doing to
Veronica Kropnick, who's
actually been through the system
and we've heard from her in that
regard, but, um, thank you all
so much and I'm really excited
about the prospect and although
I won't
Be here. I, I was going to be
checking on how it's going.
Thanks a lot, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel for being here.
For your interesting um
presentation, so.
Accolades to uh Representative
Chassey for
Taking initiative to
To, uh, have this uh study done,
so what was
What was the impetus?
Uh, for, uh, Representative
Chasey to have this done.
Maybe it's obvious, but I
Missed it
It's anybody
A number of Le Chasey's team. I
might be the best to answer
that, um, I think we've had a
lot of, um,
conversations around this folk
hyperfocus on CYFD without
taking into account the larger
picture, um, that when families
have access, full access to
these essential services. The
likelihood of children entering
into child welfare comes down
quite a bit, um, so this was
kind of that we
Looking so far upstream at these
essential services that we're
trying to interrupt those
cycles um that lead children and
families to to CYFD. So we're
trying to get ahead of it
upstream.
Didn't you tell me? Yes, thank
you for the answer. That's 6
years ago, Bill Souls gave me.
A copy of your book, uh.
Anna, age 8.
Which I read and my wife.
Found it interesting as a former
social worker.
Although she never works.
In New Mexico
So
Since that book is was
published, if things gotten
worse, better or remained about
the same.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Senator, I think
things have gotten better in
terms of the conversations we're
having, I think we have um seen.
A different way of talking about
childhood trauma and
understanding that families do
need support, um, I think some
of our systems have gotten
worse, um, just based on the
numbers that I've seen as far as
like Dr. Moyer pointed out the
number of kids in foster care
has gotten much higher than when
we both worked for CYFD almost a
decade ago. Um, but I do think
that, you know, we've also had
some factors like COVID that
have had a huge impact on
Our kids and families, and I
think if anything we are all
more traumatized than ever, and
so this work is even more vital
than ever, especially the
prevention side, because if we
continue to let things, you
know, play out, we're just gonna
see things get worse and I think
when, um, you know, kids in need
of services and families in need
of services go without those we
see things like more
homelessness and we see things
like more crime and we see
things like more kids in foster
care who grow up.
to be further involved in the
adult systems. So, um, you know,
to answer your question, I think
it's complex. I think the answer
is yes, things have gotten
better and also some things have
gotten worse.
Well thank you for the answer
and thank you, Mr. Cello.
I assume you were you one of the
two authors of the book?
Mr. Senator, yes, I was.
And so you're a co-director of
the Institute. Correct.
So I found it interesting that
you have 7 recommendations
listed in the beginning and the
end of the report.
They don't want anybody to miss
it.
Exactly, so what, what's so
what's the next steps, your time
is up.
Sorry.
So maybe somebody else can ask
the same question.
OK, I guess I'm done. Yeah, I
just wanted to
to chime in on on that as well,
um, I think for us working on
the ground, boots on the ground
in Rio Riva, it has really
helped, um, giving us a
direction in terms of the model
and how we're using it and, and
taking action and letting our
community members be a part of
that action. I think we've seen
a tremendous increase in collab.
especially at the grassroots
level, um, you know, with our
nonprofit providers and that
we're still working on working
with our uh elected officials in
the city and the county, uh, the
county has supported some more
of our cultural efforts, uh, we
would like to see more
involvement there, but in terms
of of what the work that we're
doing actually, uh, we're trying
to leverage our resources, and
this is giving us a model to
leverage our resources so
putting together our resources
together, uh, in, in one kind of
vision and and.
And this study is gonna help us
to actually provide us direction
for each of our action teams and
say, hey, this is what we're
working on. These are the goals,
objectives, and activities that
are gonna actually impact this
and we're gonna prioritize that
and see what's achievable, what
we can achieve with our
resources and maybe stuff that
we can achieve we could at least
uh try to influence, you know,
those who are in more of a
position of power to do that,
but for us on the grassroots
level, it's giving us direction.
Well, thank you for that answer.
I guess that's all I have, uh.
Mr. Chair,
I ran out of time.
Senator
Savio Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
I've, I also got the book N A8
from uh from uh Doctor Souls or
uh Senator So six years ago when
I joined the joined the Senate.
Um, I read it and was inspired
by it. I think that year I even
gave Capital Outlay money. I was
so inspired by it, um, so I'm
just looking at one of the
findings of your survey mental
and behavioral health.
And um we're hearing this all
the time that aren't there
aren't sufficient services.
There aren't sufficient
services, but I was interesting
when you talked about the top
challenges that came out in your
survey, it said, um.
Difficulty finding quality
services and supported
providers, they indicate
specific shortages for opioid
substance use treatment. Um, the
reason I found that interesting
is uh double the number of
people in New Mexico died of
alcohol, um, misuse or
alcohol-related disorders
where the survey participants,
were they not seeking that or
were there sufficient services?
I mean, because we're pushing
hard to increase those services
as well and it was interesting.
I didn't see it uh rise up in
this survey. Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Madam Senator, that's an
excellent point and I think that
speaks to the importance of
doing this these focus groups,
these targeted groups, because
the need for alcohol treatment
was loud and clear in the focus
groups, more than anything and
um they really talked about the
difficulty accessing the alcohol
treatment they need, they talked
about needing medical detox for
alcohol.
And that those services
specifically were not available
for them, much more than the
opiates. I, I haven't read the
whole thing, so is it in here?
It would be in, in this one and
in our final report, which will
be coming out sometime in 2025.
I, I look for it and um anything
we can do to support that and to
support increasing services I
think will help us move the
needle in this state. And since
I seem to have time, uh, uh,
Senator Tolman, you wanted to
know, uh.
What was that you wanted to
know?
Um
What was your question? I have
time so I can ask it for you.
what's next? Next steps was the
question.
What are your next steps? Next
steps. So our next steps are
outlined on one of your
handouts, that one, yeah, so we
are going to um several more
communities in the next few
months to do more events just
like this, um, from that we're
going to compile the results
into a comprehensive kind of
statewide report with what we
learned by doing this, um, we
will then based on that identify
the role of the task force. So
what I am hoping is that we will
get some very clear
recommendations.
And convene a task force who
knows how to implement things. I
think that's where things fall
apart a lot of the time, so we
need experts on how to get money
from the state or other sources
directly to the people on the
ground, the boots on the ground
that are providing those
services and making sure they
meet the needs of the local
community, so that's kind of the
overall plan for this specific
project. And just to clarify,
this report is based on the work
of Anna, age 8. This came out in
April of last year, um, so this
is kind of.
Complimentary, but sort of a
separate distinct uh project
from what we're talking about
and thank you. That was really
interesting about how focus
groups, things emerge and
surveys are limited to what you
ask about surveys are a great
first step, but you gotta kind
of go deeper. Absolutely. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Oh my goodness we go OK there
you go. OK, thank you very much,
um, all right, let's quickly
because I know the timing is
short, um, funding, let's talk a
little bit about funding and I
know you have uh you got
approximately 500,000 in the
budget from the legislature. The
question that I have is,
although you have these other
things that I can see here in
the overview that still need to
be completed before your
blueprint, um, is, is completely
done. I think it's a good idea
to give us as soon as you can a
number.
Of what funding the amount of
funding that you need, even if
you have that one in place
because you don't want to find
yourself having to complete some
of these running out of money or
even becoming short to continue
for the next fiscal year and
something came to my mind, Madam
Chairman, that perhaps we can
work on, um, and I'm going to
stop because of time, but um in
order for you not to lose the
funding, for example, if you
have something and fund balance
at the end, you may want to
consider um trying to work on
this.
With this grow program that we
have and the grow program is
like a program that is a 3 year
at a time, um, funding and um
it's for departments and for new
programs and pilot programs and
other programs like that, so
you're able to keep the funding
um at the end of the year and
continue to get more funding as
you show progress and in this
case there's no question you
made a lot of progress, so I
just wanted to mention that,
Madam Chairman, um, and so if
you can get us a number as to
what you need.
would be great thank you.
Yeah
Thank you, Senator
Representative Chavez.
Thank you Mr. Chair. um, so I'm
looking at the.
2 page 1 pager thing that you
guys did and then I was also
looking at um page one in your
introduction and one of the
things that I noticed is that um
people that you surveyed or in
your focus groups also talked
about financial strain, right?
And one of the issues that they
raised was insufficient public
assistance. Um, but I don't see
anything on the 2nd page or on
page one sort of addressing that
issue, um, I was in a
um.
Sent a memorial 5 task force
meeting.
Friday.
Um, and one of the things that
we had a presentation from the
um Children's code task force
and they made a recommendation
in terms of guaranteed basic
income, universal basic income,
it has lots of names, right? Um,
and so I was interested in um
what I wanted to do was kind of
ask what um have you thought
about that in terms of that kind
of a recommendation in terms of
relieving the financial strain
that that some of your um focus
group.
Participants had expressed.
Mr. Chair, madam,
Representative, um, I know there
is research that shows that
there is evidence that this
helps, especially with families
at risk for child welfare. This
um particular recommendation has
not come up in any of our focus
groups or town halls yet, I
think, um, what we heard in the
focus group was more specific to
the difficulty in getting help,
even getting in the door of
those systems. They talked a lot
about um.
Kind of like a switch over to a
system, I think it was in TAF,
um, and in Snap, and they were
unable to access some of those
resources over the months. They
got disenrolled. They had to
provide paperwork some of those
just um bureaucratic things
where they had to provide
documentation. They sent it in.
There was turnover within the
agency, the person they were
working with was no longer
there, so they had to start
over. So what should have been,
you know, an easy process turned
into a month long process. So,
you know.
The frustration was so concrete
and tangible about their recent
experiences, um, you know, their
recommendation was just like get
the stuff that's already
existing to work versus coming
up with new ideas to.
Um, do new things. That's what
we heard, OK, so then would it
be correct to say that maybe
they don't know about universal
basic income, and that's why
they're not making that
recommendation.
I'm not, I don't know that they
would know about it, um.
Yeah, I, I think that's probably
a correct assumption. I would
imagine if you ask them if if
getting some temporary income or
some basic income, they would
say yes, please, but you know, I
don't, I didn't come up, yeah, I
know I know. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I get her 2 seconds.
you really
um, Christina, I was, um, Mr.
Hill. I was wondering with um
your work on the food policy
aspect, are you working with the
food farm and policy, um, this
all the different agencies that
come together and you know, uh,
as agricultural providers or,
you know, food banks and all the
different groups. Have you
talked to them about some of the
barriers?
Uh, yes, uh, Mrs. Ferrari
uh, yes, we work with several,
um,
Some of our agencies that are
included in our food action team
are the Food Depot in Santa Fe,
um, we do have some other just
recently from one of our food
action team meetings, um.
An agency from Tewa Women
United, they were going to
include um a local farmers,
they, they have to help um with
our next food distribution, um,
but the barrier still, um, even
I run the soup kitchen in
espanola and um it, as it's
mentioned, the barrier to access
these accessing these resources
is still very difficult for many
of our clients, so that's why
we're trying to get out there to
the rural areas and and get them
the resources they need.
Um, but I don't know if I
answered your question exactly
well, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Yo, I
think um having you involved,
uh, I know Ta Women United has
been part of that group, but
they might not bring up some of
the difficulties that, you know,
um like times of, you know,
distribution and how people can
get to those, you know, points,
um, but I also, um, so I'll see
if we can connect you with the
next meeting and um.
Be able to voice that, but also,
um, I was looking at community
schools and um I think there's a
lot broader, um.
Uh
Use that they could bring like
more of the wraparound services
then um just the mental and
behavioral health um services,
um, but they can, you know,
refer people as we try to build,
um, you know, having more peer
support, um, and incorporated in
different parts of our
communities where people can,
you know, um.
And and normalize behavioral
health, making it part of an
easier access, but I think
community schools can be also
for food distribution for, you
know, I know some community
schools, but we, I think we need
community schools in every
single school and the different
services and I think that would
help us also do it sounds like
you agree. I, I believe if
correct me if I'm wrong, but,
uh, Espinal public schools they
currently.
They offer this, um, they have.
Um, I believe 15, it's a large
district, um, and there's a
pantry.
There there's 15 school sites or
14 and there's a pantry almost
every location and they provide
services and they um recommend
or they refer um families in
need. We all work together in
our, so we're just the food
action team, but with the food
action team, there are 4 other
action teams within our health
council. We have behavioral
health housing, transportation.
In early childhood, so we all
collaborate and work together
and refer each other's clients,
um.
To get them the assistance that
they need and also the college.
And we also work with the
Northern Mexico College also
great.
I'm glad to hear that and that
everyone has the understanding
that community schools not only
for food, um, security, it can
also be for.
Just about everything mental
health, yeah, thank you so much.
You went to answer, um, yes,
Representative Ferrari, um, yes,
we are supportive of that idea
and yes, um, in 100% New Mexico,
we like to talk about the idea
of schools as hubs. So putting
as many services as are needed
in the schools with either
navigators or actual resources
and um we're seeing some really
exciting innovations come out of
our 100% local teams, um, Otero
County put washing machines in
their schools because they saw a
need for that and so.
Just, you know, meeting the
needs of families in the one
place that they go anyway is the
idea we're very supportive of.
Thank you very much for all of
your work.
So we we we'll go to you,
Representative Herndon, and come
back around this week.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters, my question goes
back to the, to the section on
mental health also in the
community identified challenges
for services and I'm
specifically looking at the
third sentence that talked about
insurance barriers and fee for
service models further
complicate access. And the
reason I ask about that is under
the Affordable Care Act, even
under Medicaid, there should be
5 access uh
Models for the, for individuals
to have access to behavioral
health care. So tell me what you
are seeing when you are saying
in uh insurance barriers.
Representative, um, what we
heard in the focus groups was
the barriers are, um.
Not just with insurance but with
providers not taking certain
insurances or the providers they
want not taking specific
insurance or, um, I think there
we heard also themes of people
weren't aware of what services
were available, um, in the town
hall, it was interesting because
we heard a lot about um various
resource directories and things
that um some of the providers
didn't even know about and then
the people in the focus groups
definitely didn't know about, so
there's definitely a disconnect.
Between people knowing what
services are available or what
they may be eligible for and um
being able to access those
services and what is actually
available in the community, um,
as far as the financial barriers
specifically, we did hear in the
focus groups, um, a lot of
comments about copays and things
like that, um, so I'm not sure,
you know, exactly what the
disconnect is between what you
just said and what the reality
is on the ground, but we
definitely did hear that.
So thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. It would be
great to delve into that a
little more because each one of
the insurance providers under
Medicaid should be providing
behavioral health care up to 5
visits, and there should not be
any co-payment for that. So, uh,
Madam Chair and the presenters,
I look forward to working with
you on that to find out why that
is not being available to the
group.
Senator Pinto, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation. On
the map view shows um
Well, there's a map in there,
but on your appendix A1 back on
the bottom when it says
Respondents. There's only 134
Native Americans.
So I guess.
You know, it says that the
survey at the time of
publication of the survey that
there has not been a survey of
the Northwest corner of the
state, so how's your
relationship um with the Navajo
Nation in particular.
Thank you for that question. We
are absolutely working um on
that. We currently have a survey
going on in McKinley County
right now, um, that we just
started, we're working on
getting that, getting that
translated, making sure it's
accessible and all of those
things, um, we also are working
with San Juan County and they
are working on that as well. We
really rely heavily on the
relationships in the local
community. Our surveys are
conducted by our community
partners. They go out, they make
sure they are.
Reaching people where they are,
they know where people go in the
community and are able to do the
surveys and it looks very
different in every single
county, and McKinley, um,
they're really focusing on
community events and instead of
just having, you know, stacks of
paper or QR codes like we do in
a lot of other counties. They're
actually having people kind of
be able to conduct the survey in
person and meet with those
people and talk to them and
things like that. So we are, we
are working on that with our
partners in the um in those
counties.
right now and um I think we will
hopefully see these numbers
improve in the next version of
this report.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, so the survey does it
actually distinguish between the
tribes, nations, and pueblos
when we know they're
geographically there's a
jurisdictional issue, um, versus
just saying are you Native
American?
Yes, we ask which community they
are from depending on the county
we customize the lists of
options for where they which
part of the county they are
residents of.
So in your report after this, it
will distinguish not just that
they're Native American, but
what tribe of nation they belong
to the numbers allow that, yeah,
because we do have to keep, you
know, it, it has to be over a
certain number to be able to
report those numbers, if that
makes sense, so we, if we only
have 2 people from a certain
community, we won't break those
out just for confidentiality
reasons, but if we have enough,
we will, you know, break it out
that way. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, if I could add
one thing, um, I just wanted to
backtrack a little bit cause I
know we gave you 3.
Documents, um, but the pamphlet
that people are looking at the
handbook, um, that came from uh
Doctor Courtney's role at Anna
age 8, but is actually separate
from the blueprint project. It's
more a complimentary to what
we're doing.
Um, but I wanna go I wanna
answer your question, um,
actually on Monday we had to uh
towns Pueblo where we'll be
facilitating our next meeting,
um, Rio Riba Ria Riba wasn't uh
accidental and McKinley was an
accidental cause we knew it was
um kind of that blend of the
multicultures that we have here,
um, and those seemed like hubs
where many of our tribal
communities um or near or
located so.
I think with the Blueprint 3 out
of 6 identified locations have a
very strong um indigenous
presence, um, and so for the
blueprint itself we wanted to
make sure that at every phase of
the project that our our tribal
communities were included in
intentionally included.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee because I think it's
important. I mean, you say
community members in the local
area are going to conduct this,
but if you don't really have a
strong relationship with our
sovereign nations to actually
get the OK in that sense, um,
it's gonna be frowned upon, um.
You
Make sure you're meeting that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I want to just say um thank you
for that and that is absolutely
correct point and um we
experienced that and we, that is
why we are taking a full year to
do this work because we cannot
just go into a county and be
like, here we are, come join our
focus group. We have to build
those relationships, build that
trust with the community
members, including the tribal
partners and um we've been doing
a lot of work on that in
McKinley and we are excited
to be partnering with some of
those tribal members in that
county.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, thank you all
so much for this presentation.
This is the first time that I've
heard about this program and
it's really, I mean, um, a huge
shout out to leader Gail Chasey
and our governor funding this.
um, I wanted to ask a question
on the first, um, page, which I
think, you know, all this really
shows the amount of work and
care that that's going into this
project. Uh, the 75% of child
welfare cases that are related
to physical neglect.
So is that that's 75% of
children who are being removed
from their homes because of uh
because of a caregiver's
inability to meet basic incomes.
So the general approximation is
the number of
child welfare investigations,
families that come into contact
with the agency. And so when we
talk about just to clarify, like
you said, basic income, it's
basic needs for the children and
I do want to um take the
committee back just a moment to
the focus group was very focused
on 5 areas. So going back to
Representative Chavez's question
about did they ask for, for that
um guaranteed income. We didn't.
Go into financial income because
when we look at the social
determinants of health. There's
5 we list that are for survival
and 5 we list that really help a
family thrive and those are
outlined in the introduction of
that pamphlet that was given.
So 75% of child welfare families
experience difficulty accessing
the 5 services that we covered
in the focus groups in the
county. Got it. OK, thank you.
And then, um, do you know what
percent of that 75%, like what's
the racial, uh, demographic
breakdown of those?
So offhand, I do not, however,
CYFD publishes a 360 report. It
used to be quarterly, um, I
understand they've moved a
little.
Closer to annually, um, but it's
certainly something that's on
the web that would be available
and they do have a racial as
well as a breakdown for the for
the areas of the state, all
kinds of interesting
demographics. Thank you.
And so underscoring what Senator
Pinto said, um, in the, in the
report I'm looking at here, it
looks like that's 45% are
American Indian of the of that
75% and another almost 30% are
black, so what, what I wanted to
underscore with Senator Pinto
because
I experienced this when I was
doing surveying of our
homelessness population, which
for those who don't know, in
2019, 19% of folks on the
streets in Albuquerque, um,
were, uh, sorry, 45% of the
folks on our streets in
Albuquerque were Native
Americans experiencing
homelessness, but then when you
looked at the sheltering system,
there's only 20%, so there was a
huge disparity in access to
resources. So, um, as this, um,
survey that's complementary is
going into it would be.
Really great if we could get um
higher numbers, especially for
to understand the needs of the
populations that aren't able to
access these resources for
whatever reason, but, um, huge,
huge, um, shout out about this
area because I think looking at
that race component and looking
at those distributions is really
incredible that you've included
it in this report, so thank you.
And this is just coming from one
of our action teams as well, um,
for our housing action team.
But because of the um the focus
group, you know, uh, that's been
one of the things that we've,
we're lacking was, um, data on
our on house population and
that's something that we're
trying to uh collect so I can't
speak for every community, uh,
that the focus group will take
place in, but that's something
that we're trying to do with our
local evaluator and so, you
know, we've we've come up um
just with uh different tool so
that we could actually uh
collect uh.
some of that information as well
and see if if we could get some
of that for our county.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and I'm
gonna get on my soapbox a little
bit so when I worked as a
developmental specialist for the
Pueblola Laguna back in the good
old days for a child to be at
risk, there just had to be too,
you know, either me and then the
physician or the um CYFD system
or the, the whatever, 22
different people had to declare
that this child was at risk and
then we could provide as many
services as we want to and
What a great way to keep kids
from getting in the system by
working with their parents and
they've cut that back to, I
mean, you could hardly qualify
for at-risk. I mean, and it was
things like domestic violence,
substance use, um, poor housing,
you know, young, young parents,
um, and now it's uh I'm not even
sure there is such a category,
but if it is, it's maybe one
hour a month of all services, so
it's basically worthless and so
I'm just throwing it out into
the universe that we could save
money in the long haul, save
families, save work, and make
our state look better if we
brought back that at-risk
category and let the people who
are working with the families
decide if if the family, I mean
all families could use more
support, but particularly kids
who are at risk for developing
developmental um or intellectual
disabilities to so I this, this
really is just a little off, but
um I wanted to say.
That and then my hope is that
you see as ECECD gets up and
running and more kids are in
preschool more kids are getting,
you know, child care that.
Some of these problems we won't
see as many. I, I, you know, I'm
not sure that that's really
gonna happen because it seems
like we're being just as stingy
with our $9 billion as we were
when we had, you know, $9
so it, it frustrates me no end
that we're sitting on this pile
of money and it's for, you know,
when the house is on fire. Well,
the house has been on fire for
decades and so uh um we talked
this morning about the fit
programs not having to rescind a
raise that they got.
And I'm just really upset that
that we kids with disabilities
are.
The tough to live with tough to
raise, expensive, all those
things and rather than um
expanding their uh capabilities
were kind of narrowing it in and
you oh well all kids need to get
home visiting or or um early
childhood, yes, they do, but
these are the kids that really
do and rather than expanding
that program, we're narrowing it
and I'm frustrated and and
please help me get the word out
that if we just dealt with kids
when they're
B to 3 or even prenatally if you
know that mom has a substance
use disorder if you could start
teaching, helping her to become
a better parent, we're gonna.
Miss, I mean, a lot of these
kids are not gonna need the
services later on and I just get
frustrated. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Well,
thank you. I, I just had a
couple of follow-ups to some
earlier presentations this
summer that we've heard when we
were in Portales, we had a
presentation. Oh God, now I
can't think I just blocked his
name, but the fellow from
Carlsbad that's doing the.
Dan Jennings.
Yes
And, and it's very impressive
what's going on there. Then when
we were in Las Vegas last
summer, we heard about what's
going on there and the mural and
the whole all the English. So
all over the state, things are
moving.
What I thought they were moving
toward was the creation of
family service centers. Have you
moved away from that or, or is
that not part of the blueprint
any longer, Mr. Chair, not at
all. We are 100% 100% family
centers, um, Chavez County
received some of the family
resource center funding from
CYFD to begin that process.
They're using that to kind of
grow what was already existing
in their Casa Kid building, um,
and
We have some funding in Donia
Ana County that is being used to
start building. Um, we have some
exciting things going on as far
as that, and it's another
emphasis for this year. What
we're really trying to figure
out is how do we help our
counties that we're working
with.
Build those relationships with
their legislators or their
county commissioners or their
city councilors so that they can
get funding directly to their
own communities so that they can
have sustainable family centers
that are homegrown and meet the
needs of their local
communities.
So you're, you're more looking
for local money for the family
services center or would it
state, a state fund to create
them be.
Part of your plan. It would be
wonderful, um, but we would just
need to figure out how to make
sure that money gets to where it
needs to go. We've had, um,
honestly some difficulties
getting money even from the Anna
H8 Institute to our county
partners just because of, you
know, bureaucracy and and the
way things work, so we need to
figure out just the best way to
do that.
Well, I, I'm sure the committee
will want to pick up on that and
maybe make that an issue for the
thing. It just, it just seems to
me I, I, I, I share your concern
both Doctor Moyers and your
concern expressed over the
increase in the number of kids
in foster care, and to me that
simply says that when the
department is under pressure and
it's feeling like.
They have not protected kids
adequately that they they make
the opposite mistake and they
pull too many kids from their
families and then we don't have
the foster home and they still
have kids sleeping in offices so
it it really is, uh, you know, a
total system failure, not just
that particular worker making uh
an ill-advised decision, it's
that he he or she had nowhere to
go. They, they didn't have
resources to keep the kid and
the family.
sure the child's safety there,
which would be the ideal one of
the big things is money.
If they could just pay for
another month's rent and a nicer
place to live, at least one
without black mold or one
without uh uh neighbors, you
know, shooting up the place uh.
Shooting up themselves or
shooting up the place either
way,
um, it could save a lot of in
the long run it would be.
$800 for another apartment would
be a much better investment than
a year of foster care for that
child at $500 a month plus the
trauma that that causes, so
yeah, we just, what I would hope
that you could give us in the
future would be.
Real
Policy changes that could help.
Like
Giving the CYFD workers access
to a fund that they could tap
for food or transportation or
shelter clothing or for families
that aren't necessarily in the
state's custody. They can do all
of that if the child is in
foster care.
But before the child gets to
foster care, they can't, they
can't spend a dime on them
because.
Restrictions. So if we take down
those restrictions, we might
save ourselves a lot of money
plus do more good for the kids
in the long run. But any other
recommendations you would have
for
Simple or solid policy changes
that would be really helpful to
us, Representative Chasey, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I do um I do
think we have to keep in mind
this isn't about CYFD, but if
they, if there were a way for
communities or the state through
the communities to support
families so that they get what
they need and they don't need to
end up in the system. That's
what we're looking for. And one
of the responses to Senator.
comments question, you know, my
experience as a court appointed
attorney in the neglect, child
neglect and sometimes abuse
cases is that we have a bunch of
silos in the state and quite
frankly we don't pay attention
to integrating the systems and
I, I'm really glad that Ruben
Estival is here because of her
experience of LFC and the other
LFC support staff that you have
because as this project
continue.
and there are, there are focus
groups set up now all over the
state between now and early
January, um.
That
The funding mechanism might be
something to figure out what
it's we don't necessarily want
to put a burden on the local
communities with what they
currently have, but.
As, as the vice chair was saying
if we spend money here on
prevention, we're not going to
be spending as much on
intervention, so what will be
the best mechanism for funding.
The speaker had said to me, What
do you think this is going to
cost ultimately and I said I, I
honestly think we've got to get
this blueprint work done before
we can say that, but I think we
need to look at it as an
investment.
And, and not and just
expenditure. Thank you.
Well thank you very much for the
work you're doing, but also for
sharing it with us today. It's
very helpful. Uh, we'll be
making recommendations around
legislation in November,
so if you wanna uh feed anything
to us, we, we are always eager
to hear ways in which we can
help not just CYFD is is
Representative Chasey pointed
out, but the families of the
state and through local
mechanisms when at all possible.
Thanks so much. Thank you for
your work. Keep up the good
work. Thanks. Thank you.
Thank you, and it was very
amazing to uh be able to present
in front of you all today uh
today I we presented um with
some of our teens last November
and you know some of their work
was uh with a mental health
videos that came out, so just
wanted to say thank you again
for taking the time with us
today were you part of moving
arts when they worked on some of
that stuff, yeah, OK, great,
that's Roger.
All right, so we'll move on then
to the next.
Item on the agenda.
Which is
The
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico, partners for re-entry
opportunities and workforce
development.
So we have uh Nina Chavez.
From Goodwill Industries, the
director of government
relations. We have Session Lee,
the Chief Services officer at
Goodwill.
Ralph Martinez.
Formerly in you know formerly in
you don't have Ralph here.
OK, uh, and Roger Gonzalez,
president and chief executive
officer.
Thank you.
Of the Gonzalez Strategic Group.
Can you, can you do this.
Whenever you're ready, go ahead.
Good afternoon, Chairman
Ortizipino Vice Chair Thompson,
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
present to you today. My name is
Nina Chavez. I'm the director of
government relations for
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico with me today on the
panel is Sashali, Chief Services
officer for Goodwill Industries
of New Mexico and Roger
Gonzalez, president and CEO of
the Gonzalez Strategy Group also
in the audience with us today is
Shawna Cassell, Goodwill's
president and CEO.
We stand here as part of a
coalition of service providers
and justice involved individuals
all working together to address
the complex challenges of
reentry in New Mexico. This
summer, New Mexico Corrections
Department and legislative
finance committee cited that
1800 individuals are released
annually statewide with the vast
majority released into the
metro.
Just as crime is affected by
various social and economic
conditions, so is successful
reintegration. As the LFC stated
in their August evaluation
report on crime in New Mexico
and Bernallio County, one of the
most significant challenges
faced today is to ensure that
justice involved individuals are
prepared to re-enter the
community with the tools and
treatment they need to be
successful and to avoid
reoffending.
In fact, the 1st 45 days after
being released are crucial to
achieving coordinated access and
use of tools and treatment.
Again, the legislative Finance
Committee's evaluation rightly
underscores the importance of
providing justice involved
individuals with the behavioral
health tools, treatments, and we
believe a holistic approach to
these needed services, which
incorporate and coordinate with
additional life and vocational
supports. At Goodwill, we
believe in the concept a hand
up, not a handout. to help our
clients succeed.
Mental health, trauma and
substance abuse are central to
the reentry challenge. Many of
the individuals we serve are
struggling with
post-incarceration syndrome.
Past trauma and long histories
of substance abuse. LFC cited
the same in that same evaluation
that 65% of individuals
reintegrating have a substance
abuse disorder.
Without coordinated access to
services, likelihood of
reoffending skyrockets, costing
the state far more in the long
run. So I'm sure you've heard
this time and time again because
of the exhaustive work that you
all have done on this. Our
collective work and holistic
approach as providers to serve
our clients is essential to
being a partner with you.
Today we're asking for your
feedback and support in
expanding the work of this
coalition. We're calling for an
increase of funding to scale the
programs, integrate behavioral
health more deeply into our
service models and create
sustainable solutions that
reduce recidivism and strengthen
our communities. Before we get
too far in this presentation, I
would like to state that we've
been in discussions and received
feedback and insight from the
Healthcare Authority, Workforce
Solutions department,
corrections department, and
Department of Health, and we
greatly appreciate those
partnerships.
Materials for you today are
organized in the packet provided
to you and they look like this.
So starting on page one, I'm
going to start with a provider
level to share how Goodwill's
program for re-entry workforce
works. It's called Next Steps,
um, again, we are just one piece
of the puzzle. So looking at
page one.
Goodwill's entry program Next
Steps was launched in July 2022,
developed by Sasha Lee, our
chief services officer. It is,
um, self-funded and its mission
is to improve employment
outcomes and reduce recidivism
at the prison level.
On a side note, um, Goodwill is
a 501c3 on the mission to
providing workforce development,
job readiness, and training and
access to social services, as
well as um ties in wraparound
services and resource
navigation. So you'll hear that
from all of the programs that
Sasha and her team oversee.
Next Steps is driven by the
sequential intercept model
targeting critical points where
behavioral health and workforce
development interventions can
have the most significant
impact. This is exemplified in
Goodwill's intake form for the
program as well as the
enrollment pathways, and Sesha
we'll discuss some of that in
detail.
As you can see on the map on
page one, the outcomes of the
Next Steps program's first
cohort, that data represents
clients enrolled from July 2022
to December of 2023, um,
operates across 5 correctional
facilities, Central New Mexico,
penitentiary event of New Mexico
PNM. Roswell Correctional
Center, Lee County Correctional
Facility, Western New Mexico
Correctional Facility, both the
men's and the women's.
Again, through a current model
of being self-funded, um, and
addressing behavioral health and
other wraparound services.
You can make a huge difference.
Since its launch. Next Steps has
seen 84% of participants not
reoffend. That's 5 out of 6
individuals who enroll have not
reoffended. 69% have achieved
job placement and of that 60%
have retained employment six
months later and Sasha and her
team are working to push that
out to another data point of 12
months later, um, test
evaluating employment retention.
Sasha and her teammate I'm
speaking for her right now
because I want to have her share
um the hopes and really what the
program does for individuals on
the technical side of it,
um, there you see um many key
elements that attribute to the
successes of these outcomes
responding to individuals'
unique combinations of needs, so
it's tailored to the individual,
a safety net for employment and
job training through Goodwill.
That is exemplified in the
guarantee of an interview, um,
but that's only one of the many
safety nets. Consistent
community resource navigation
and referrals.
programmatic relationships with
New Mexico Corrections
Department facility staff,
re-entry division and pro
probation division, consistent
and trusting relationships with
the case manager throughout the
program from enrollment to um a
full year of, um, case
management.
Co-enrollment and other Goodwill
programs for specific
populations such as veterans
facing homelessness or at risk
of it, and seniors seeking
navigation support in the
workforce. Coal enrollment and
other community programs that
these individuals are eligible
for Partnerships, again,
especially with government and
partner employers and partner
providers and no one is
discriminated against from being
considered for enrollment in
next steps. Um, I also want to
state, um, another thing that
Sasha and her team have done in
the last, um, last quarter is
they, um, goodwill
Self-funded, remodeled our
largest workforce training
center in Albuquerque on San
Mateo, um, and they rebranded it
to be an opportunity center and
it became kind of a one-stop
shop where we have also housed
other providers um to also
engage in providing services to
clients and sometimes they do
overlap in services. So an
example is Roadrunner Food Bank
is a partner at the Opportunity
Center now and they're able to
support clients with Snap
applications, um, but there are
other providers up to 6 right
now we have space for many more
and we can
to pursue those partnerships.
I'll pass it on to Sasha for a
few minutes to dive deeper into
the analysis of that first
cohort of clients and next steps
and just the hope and resilience
and how that really makes a
difference.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
your time and for a few minutes
to speak with you today. The
next steps program is an
employment and case management
program built on a foundation of
providing hope and opportunity.
Individuals returning from
incarceration, as we all know,
face many, many challenges and
barriers and while our focus,
our core focus with Goodwill is
employment outcomes and training
opportunities, uh, we see the
whole person. We assess for all
the wraparound services
necessary because we find that a
holistic approach is going to be
what's most crucial to success.
So if an individual is not able
to get to a job, it doesn't
really matter if they have one,
etc. So we developed an intake.
Assessment that we do with our
participants when we start
working with them pre-release
that assesses for not only
employment-based strengths,
opportunities and skills, but
also barriers such as mental
health, substance use, um,
employment history, physical
limitations, disability,
transportation, do you have
interview clothes? We really try
to think of everything, so that
we can be one step ahead of the
challenges that they're going to
face post release. The idea is
to build a rapport with them 90
days pre-release and know that
they have
The same case manager once
they're released on the outside.
The rapport is incredibly
important because we are not a
mandated program and since we do
intake pre-release, we don't get
any contact information on them,
um, so it's very important that
by the time they're preparing to
return to the community that
they are able to reach out to us
and they know that we'll be
there for them. So we develop
service plans based on the needs
that we find that they're going
to encounter and um
What we have found in our data
was actually very parallel to
the research we did that
informed the program in the
first place, so we're still
seeing
A huge need for assistance with
enrollment in Medicaid at 87% of
our participants uh 0
participants had um ability to
communicate either mobile phone
or email post release, so that
has been part of the services
we're trying to connect them
with.
Um, 90% required assistance with
SNAP benefits.
And
The most anticipated challenges
um upon enrollment was lack of
employment history, conviction
history, um, worry about stigma,
um, no reliable transportation,
substance abuse issues and more,
but those, those were the most
common ones. So it's important
if we want them to be successful
in finding employment and
reaching their goals and uh
maintaining long-term stability
that we assist them with getting
all of these other pieces in
place, which is what we rely on
our community.
partners for and our referral uh
systems that we have developed
throughout our many years of
serving the community and our
many, many community partners.
Um, so.
It's important to have somebody
walk you through these systems
because they're they exist in
multiple access points you
access Medicaid and SNAP in a
different place than you want to
sign up for when you're then
when you're actually looking for
a behavioral health provider
that does specific treatment,
uh, transportation is gonna be
through another avenue, so it
can be really overwhelming and
frustrating for our participants
to not only adhere to the
requirements of their parole and
probation plan, but also stick
to their goals as well. And if
we
We can provide an opportunity
where they have somebody to
navigate them, show them, help
them, um, in whatever way
possible, then that reduces the
opportunity for them to fall
into crisis and ultimately
perhaps reoffend.
Currently there's 3 pathways,
um, into the next steps. It
originally started only with
pre-release or sorry yeah
pre-release services where
somebody at the corrections
facility had to refer the
individual. It had to be 90 days
to the door and they had to be
willing and able to work.
Um, currently we are expanding
that to try to provide as much
impact and support to the to the
population as we possibly can,
we partner with um a piloted
federal treatment court program
right now in the metro area and
we have also since August
started receiving referrals for
individuals who are post-release
on probation, um, as long as
there are 45 days post release
and within the critical time
intervention when
in which they might need the
highest level of supports.
Um,
So I will turn it back to Nina
now.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sasha. So looking at
page 2, putting that all into
what an expansion for a program
like ours can uh would look
like,
um.
Pre and post release, um, we are
proposing goodwill to expand
next steps to all correctional
facilities, public and private,
and that has been in
conversation with New Mexico
Corrections Department and
aligned with their goals to
provide more services pre and
post-release. Additional
referral enrollment pathways
beyond the three just discussed,
um, and to tie in a pathway for
next steps and enrollees to
engage in Goodwill's brand new
clean energy technician program.
It's a train to hire model. It's
a 4-week model, um, that we can
um talk about further after this
presentation.
Um, that clean tech, the solar
technician program is the first
one that will start in 2025. And
then two additional clean energy
trained to hire programs are
planned to open in subsequent
years. So we see that as another
path through the whole pipeline
of reentry, um, support and
stability that Sasha and her
team have designed.
So moving to the next page.
I'd like to take a moment and
pause, move my pages.
Um, the graph represents an
opportunity impact, um, and so
our our partners in the
coalition will also be able to
show you an expand opportunity
impact as well as the capacity
on their own scale and what they
do with um with their um their
services.
So it's just a way to show you
that we are able um to
to meet some of the large goals
that we're talking about because
we're talking about a coalition
that's trying to respond to 1800
individuals released annually.
What could that look like and
what would that take?
So our uh moving to the next, oh
sorry, our coalition includes
providers like Youth Development
Inc. YDI, Help New Mexico,
Southwest Key programs, Chicanos
Perla casa at CLPC CPLC excuse
me, and others by working
together we're proposing a
scalable solution that can serve
up to 1800 participants
annually, like I stated before.
On page 4, you will see a
non-exhaustive visual
representing that combination of
needs and barriers that an
individual reintegrating can
face and again how much um
They may need to be navigating
in those 1st 45 days to
stabilize. So the case manager
is is with them identifying all
that and helping to navigate.
Moving to page 5 from our
coalition's meeting, just a few
weeks ago, we analyzed the
national and state research and
discussed the proportion of the
re-entry population facing
particular barriers and their
needs. These are still
estimates, but based on research
and discussion that the
providers shared in, um, from
their own programmatic
experiences at the coalition
meeting and that as you see in
the three bottom rows in gray,
we also began to statistically
estimate combinations of needs
and barriers, just to put it all
in perspective.
From the coalition meeting, you
can see the attendees and uh
other individuals invited, who
have also expressed interest in
continuing conversations on page
6.
On page 7, you can see
highlights and feedback from the
coalition that influenced
refining the budget
recommendation. There is also a
short list of topics we plan to
add to our coalition discussions
moving forward with our next
coalition meeting.
Including current capacity and
infrastructure needs to expand
to serve the county jails in
pretrial justice involved
population. Um, further
coordination with, um, state
agencies around behavioral
health and what other providers
um we should be seeking to join
the coalition in discussion.
Um, but there's many more listed
on that page as well from the
discussion we had. Page 8 is,
uh, I wanna take a moment to
also thank all the coalition
partners that did start with us.
We're very excited about the
conversations and working
together to refine this ask for
you. So, um, we're very excited
to move forward with them.
On page 8 is a logic model, just
putting it all together, the
ebbs and flows of our
recommendation that we're going
to wrap up to show you on page
10, as well as a few other
funding sources, Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico, and um
the Gonzalez teacher group have
been working on to help with um
the clean energy train to hire
program that was mentioned
earlier.
Page 9 is a draft budget,
breaking down recommendations 1
and 2.
I need to note I'm still working
with the coalition to
incorporate a line item for peer
mentoring funding so there will
be an updated budget and I'll
make sure to update the proposal
as soon as possible and provide
that to the committee.
So what you're seeing in the
budget is lines 3 through 27 is
the budget draft that culminates
to the portion uh to the vast
proportion of recommendation one
that I'll speak to in just a
moment. Line items 3033 are the
estimated cost per participant,
whether they choose to
participate in a workforce
credentialed program from row 3,
or if they choose not to.
And then rows 34 to 35 to 45
break down row 4, which is the
supportive services, including
housing, single apartment,
housing group apartment, legal
fees, um, er, um, funding we
call fresh home, phones,
transportation, clothing, and
job supplies. And again, that's
all informed by a variety of
things, including what Sasha
shared with you, what our
clients are facing.
So on page 10, our three
recommendations at this time
that the coalition has discussed
and we're looking to continue to
do so moving forward as we
prepare for legislative session.
So, um, read those out, so those
are.
funding, recurring funding for
re-entry workforce development
service programs with wraparound
services, recurring funding to
the New Mexico Healthcare
Authority's reset program to
address housing support needs up
to 6 months. We're finding that
many members in our coalition
are utilizing that for their
housing supports. They're
providing this population and a
re-entry task force, including
reentry providers and community
members who are individuals with
personal experience in the
correctional system to develop
further recommendations for the
legislature.
In conclusion, um, this is an
ask on behalf of a growing
coalition of dedicated
organizations, community members
and providers who share a common
mission, and that is to provide
comprehensive coordinated care
that addresses the behavior,
health, and re-entry needs of
justicevolve individuals. We
believe that by working together
we can not only reduce
recidivism but also foster
safer, healthier communities.
We urge your support, feedback,
and look forward to answering
your questions. Thank you for
your time and we'll take any
questions you have.
Very good. Did you want to add
anything, uh, Mr. Chair, I
believe I'm here more as a
technical expert around the
budget. OK, good.
All right, so, uh, let's start
with you, Representative
Herndon. Do you have questions
or comments? Mr. Chair.
So thank you, Mr. Chan. Thank
you presenter. So what I would
like to know if there was an
inquiry from those who are being
released about their ability to
vote. I didn't see this in here
and how is that fitting into
your program?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, if you look at the
budget recommendation when it
comes to legal supports that
would help them determine
whether or not they're their
criminal situation would allow
them to vote, so that would,
that would be legal services
that would help them identify
their eligibility to vote.
OK, and thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you. And then with respect
to the individuals that you're
helping, I'm wondering, are you
also helping those who are
juveniles coming out of the
justice system. Is that a part
of this program?
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you for the question. Uh, not
currently at this time, but it
is something that we'd be
willing to look at in the
future. Right now we're working
specifically with individuals
released from the corrections
department with a look to expand
potentially county jails.
And thank you and then, oh yes,
Representative Herndon, if I can
also add um we've had other
discussions with other um levels
of government such as municipal
and we have found other interest
in that common question. So some
of those questions have already
started to to come into the
scope of work that Sasha and her
team are exploring.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and presenters,
because there's a group called
New Mexico Jazz that wants to
bring music to the lives of
people who are coming out of
incarceration, and I think it
would be really great for you to
interact and to work with them
to help people move their lives
along and thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chasey will go to
you and then come back this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
don't have any questions. I just
note that we're in desperate
need in this state of support
for people leaving prison so
that not only can we get them
out but can help them stabilize
in society, so I appreciate
goodwill.
Thank you Representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you very much, uh.
I think Sasha, you're doing
incredible job.
Um, and I
I thank you for that.
Um,
I did have I think this is like
the 3rd or 4th time that I.
I get to ask you questions.
Um, but one question just popped
into my mind.
Are you using peer support?
For the guys that are coming out
cause I know.
Uh, you have some that have
already worked through the
system.
Are they coming back as peer
support help mentors, just kind
of walk alongside somebody, uh,
let them know that there's light
at the end of the tunnel.
Are you, are you using that type
of
A program
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, thank you. That's a
very good question, and it has
come up before. Uh, we do not
provide peer support directly at
this time we refer to um the
peer educators of Project Echo
mostly, uh, but it has come up
in conversations with the
coalition and does look like
something that is valuable to
add to programming and in
multiple ways.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
In one of the programs that we
set up when I was with Veteran
Services was the veterans court
in the 2nd judicial.
And one of the things that I
think that made that.
Extremely successful.
Was the fact that we were
rotating people.
As they would come out, they'd
become a peer support.
Specialist for somebody else
coming through the system
because being able to relate to
somebody who.
Just kind of walk that path.
Kind of gives that person a
little bit more confidence that
you know what, I'm not alone.
This isn't my situation is not
unique.
I'm gonna make it.
Um,
So it might be something that
you know as as the program gets.
Uh
Catches more steam, you might
want to think about that.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Martinez, thank you for the
conversation we um definitely
agree with you and continue to
Sasha continues to lead that
planning for goodwill. Um, I
would say that recently actually
in conversations sharing what we
do with the legislative Finance
Committee. We learned from some
of our case managers, some of
the clients that go through next
steps have shared their interest
in becoming peer, um, mentors
for these support groups and are
starting to go through that
training. Um, some have been
very adamant about it even
during their pre-release, um,
time.
So we're very um excited that
we're able to see exactly what
you're seeing that they want to
be the support for other
individuals in the same
situations being um preparing to
reintegrate, um, and, uh, we'll
make sure in the nexttion of the
budget, um, the coalition will
share some insight into costs
for peer mentor so we can create
a line item for that.
Mr. Chair and once again I
appreciate the work that you
guys do every day, um, it
impacts real people.
Every day
Um,
And you, you should be commended
for that.
One time all day I made it all
the way to the buzzer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Tollman.
Uh, thank you.
Um
Not talking long enough?
Oh, I'm sorry.
You think so again thank you for
being here.
So page 5, not counting the uh
cover page.
Pages aren't numbered.
Um, you say there's 1800
individuals coming out of the.
Prisons every year.
And
So how many hundreds of
People do you work with every
year?
It's hard to tell from this
chart.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for the question. Uh, the
program our program Next Steps
piloted in July of 2022 and
through July of 2022 to December
of 2023 we served 110
individuals with one on one case
management services.
And currently year to date for
2023 we're at about 130 or 2024
sorry.
So
Mr. Chair, I might be able to
talk to that, Senator. So when
you look at the $1800 1800
dollars individual, uh, base
assumption that's based on the
LFC report of the number of
individuals that go through the
doors of a state run or um owned
facility and so the the ask is
only specifically around those
1800 individuals that they see
annually.
And so when you look at the
specifically that that chart
we're trying to assess based on
a national average, how many of
those individuals would be
specific supports within the
supportive services line items.
You're on, you're on page 5,
page 5, correct.
So of the 1800 individuals that,
um.
We believe will be released
annually around 12,260 to 1440
of them desire to work, so we're
trying to really um streamline
the asks that we're we're not
asking for excess resources.
So on page one, you say 69%
success rate in placement.
So you said you worked with 100
and how many?
A year, Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
the 69% success rate is for the
110 individuals that cohort one
saw as a self-funded project
roughly 7075.
folks that you were able to
successfully place.
OK.
So I know there's a critical
critical shortage shortage of
tractor trailer drivers.
Roadrunner Food Bank has 17
semis and they've worked with
some organization to
Help
Uh, folks get there, what's the
LCD CDL.
Thank you, Ma. I need an
assistant. He's been very good.
Help them get their CDL license,
so do you have you worked with
uh Roadrunner Food Bank for
placement,
uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
when, when we look at this
population, I think it's very
important for us to really
understand what work ready
means.
And so yes, we work very closely
with your workforce development
boards and this ask does allow
an additional 227
credential-based opportunities,
which would be CDLs, uh, heavy
equipment operators, some, some
nursing, maybe some uh culinary
arts programming that's all
developed by the client and the
system in terms of needs and
wants and what's gonna probably
make the highest likelihood of
sustained employment. Um, so
really what we're trying to get
the ecosystem to understand, Mr.
Chairman.
Members of the committee is work
ready and so when you look at
that 60% figure on page one.
imagine the 40% who aren't work
ready and probably because their
basic needs aren't being met and
so we're really trying to expand
from the coalition's
perspective, what that may look
like. I want to be very clear
the legislature does currently
fund this population if you are
on probation, parole, or a
combination of where we're
trying to get to is this is the
base number for those people who
do not meet those specific
criteria because upon
Release they almost released
with any with nothing and so
when you look at page.
And page 4 of the presentation.
Those are the basic needs we see
and so yes, the corrections
department does all they can to
ensure that individuals leave
with that minimum a driver's
license, a birth certificate,
and other identification.
However, we're hearing from,
from practitioners that if your
release is
Less than 90 days out that may
not necessarily be guaranteed,
right? So when you look at basic
needs for services, identity,
residency, etc. some of the
basic things that we take for
granted are almost um the
biggest barrier for some of this
population.
Well, thank you, thank you for
that answer. Thank you, uh.
I guess I'm, I'm done. I don't
have to tell you I'm done.
OK.
Toward the end of the day she
gets a little peevish
well.
I have to commend you for
running a tight ship. I won't
tell you where I was, but I was
in a meeting last week where.
Lunch was supposed to be at 12.
It didn't get till 1 because
they didn't limit anybody. Thank
you.
I will tell you in this
committee before we have had, we
have gone till 10 o'clock at
night.
And I don't want that. I don't
think anybody wants it,
no there was no limit she
changed that's why I took over.
The, the leadership was much
more popular in those days,
Senator Cedila Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
And
I don't know what you did to the
logic model, but you'll remember
last time I saw it, I got
confused and now I understood it
perfectly, so, so maybe it was
just a familiarity and you know
it's impressive, um, the goal of
1,542 individuals per year. Um,
I was curious about how you're
going to measure the outcome of
reduced recidivism rates, um.
a survey individuals or follow
them or?
You know, because actually all
of those I would recall all of
the outcomes would require
following them. Mr. Chair,
Senator, the coalition, our next
planned conversation is a is
really identifying a
comprehensive evaluation system.
Now we know specifically for
those individuals around
employment will very similarly
use DOL standards that we'd use
for Wiowa, but as we look at
quantitative and qualitative
measures for housing and the
other supports that will be
determined on a per line item
situation so we can figure out.
Um, the most comprehensive
scoreboard for lack of a better
word to see success on the
project.
Thank you, and I did notice the
legal fees in the budget, and I,
I heard that you're one of the
things would be to get them, you
know, figure out their
eligibility. They should be
eligible because we made it
easier in the last session, so
they should be eligible.
If if they're released, um, but
also, um, what else are the
kinds of legal fees? Would it be
landlord tenant or what are the
kinds of things that you
anticipate legal fees would be
Mr.
Chairman, Senator, what we're
hearing on the ground from
practitioners is a lot of of
this population does not
understand their rights and
responsibilities, even as far as
expungement. He a legislature
made the process in theory
easier, but in practice it's not
because of the silos and so
we're we're seeing that a lot of
individuals who are trying to
seek.
are also being um navigated in
different directions that are
not really successful outcomes.
So this would be more of the
understand your rights,
expungement, um, legal fees
would be, um, there may be some
situations of discrimination
with residency if that be the
case, especially if the uh
property is uh maybe a a light
tech, a long income tax credit
project or others that got
subsidized funding we're we're
finding out that some of the set
aside units that were required
to be for this population are
being uh recategorized.
Because of market conditions and
therefore we gave
Cheap capital to developers and
now they're using that as market
rent and keeping populations
out, so making sure that all
those organizations that are
LLAs are meeting the needs.
Excellent. I, I commend you for
including that. Um would you
contract with legal services
provider, or would you hire your
own attorneys to have that done?
Just curious.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, my
assumption is if we're
successful in the appropriation
and the respective department
issues the RFP that will be
determined as the RFP process is
articulated for us
community-based programs to
apply and become a service
provider.
Excellent. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I, I'm always
impressed. I was impressed last
time, still impressed.
Representative Chavis, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so I have a couple of
questions. One of them is I see
Southwest Keys as a coalition
partner. Are they the same ones
that come out of Texas that were
housing unaccompanied minors and
kids that had been separated at
the border, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, yes.
I didn't know they were in New
Mexico.
And Mr. Chairman Representative,
what we're also looking at as a
coalition is um um social
enterprises and some of the
large coalition partners are
actually talking about
potentially being the developers
for this population because of
general developing population is
not wanting to have these
opportunities, so we're actually
looking at potentially being um
developers of units because we
need the units here in New
Mexico. Yeah, they're out of
Texas, yeah.
Um, I've had some personal
experience.
Um, so I have a, uh, the other,
my other question is in terms of
your um.
Um,
Women versus men. How many women
are you all?
Seeing
And or serving and then um in
terms of the um work
opportunities.
Are women afforded the same work
opportunities as the men.
Um, Mr. Chair, representative,
uh, currently we have a
representation of about 10 to
11% female population on our
caseload, which is reflective of
the proportion of incarcerated
population from New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, um, and,
uh, as far as work opportunities
go, yes, we're definitely um
seeking individualized work
opportunities but also the
skills training programs that we
are developing have an emphasis
on diversity and inclusion and
Incorporating women more into um
the clean tech and trades
fields.
So a follow up to that then
would be in terms of the trades.
Are you all working with the
union to have a paid
apprenticeships in terms of
placing or getting training for
some of these folks.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, once the individual's
credentialized if the funding is
allowed, then we would dovetail
with the opportunities with
apprenticeships with the unions,
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question was about the reset
program.
And um
The 13.8 million, how many, um.
People do you, um, normally in a
year.
Um, help provide services.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
let me kind of give you some
history seem to understand the
reset program very, very good.
So 2 years ago, the legislature
appropriated $2.5 million. We
know from uh.
The healthcare authority that
that money was spent in 5 months
and they basically offered
services for up to 10 months or
$10,000 this current fiscal
year, there was no special
appropriation, so internally
they identified $1,000,000 and
they're trying to figure out how
to deploy that most equitably,
what the figure in this budget
presentation recommends is is a
$6500 or 6 months for the entire
1800 individuals, but remember
that there will be a refinement
once we get the.
The number of those individuals
who are parole, probation, or
combination because you
currently fund that within the
correctional department.
So you'll see a reduction of
that number once we know if 60%
of the people leaving are
parole, probation, or
combination of.
And I'm sorry, what was the
number you said? Uh, in terms of
1800.
1800 minus the reduction once we
get that number from corrections
department.
It's costing
Um, that's costing in, in the,
uh, so if you look at, so what
we've done on lines 38 and 39 of
the budget is we're seeing two
different combinations of um
housing situations, either a
transitional housing which is
around $200 a week or a single
studio apartment and so once we
get those numbers, we'll we'll
adjust accordingly, but right
now this is calculated for the
whole 1800 individuals who would
need, who would get up to 6
months or $6500 worth of
services.
That was about 13 mic off, yeah,
I was scared that was about 13.8
million, is that what was
mentioned for reset? OK, that's
all I need to know the 1800,
that's a, that's a lot of
people, so thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for your presentation,
Um, so looking at your research
page, it says only 60% have
behavioral health needs. That
seems really I mean I would
think that being in prison
would make you have behavioral
health needs. If you didn't go
in, I mean, and then with all
the substance use and all of
that, so is that self reporting?
How are you figuring out it's
only 60%.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair
Thompson, um, that may be a typo
on my part. I'm using this the
sighting from the LFC report
from this summer and they
actually said 65% have a
substance abuse, so I might be
interchanging those words
incorrectly, but they're citing
65% being released to have
substance abuse.
So your chart says behavioral
health needs, so I would think
the 65% was substance use
disorders, as well as the folks
who don't have substance use
disorders but have
Um, behavioral health needs that
I, I, I mean it almost seems
like it should be 100% of just
um just to point out and then uh
here we go again with our, with
our mat in prisons, um, you know
what the state has been, we have
been trying to get medication
assisted treatment in the
prisons
for, it seems like forever, but
um, so can you talk just a
little bit about what a
difference that would make for
these people if they could
actually get.
Treatment like we told the
corrections department that they
need.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Vice Chair,
um, we understand the
frustration. We've actually
learned about some new resources
that legislature actually
appropriate money so that
individuals leaving uh uh the
system could immediately get
services upon the re-entry into
society through the local uh
health offices when, um, we, we
really can't speak in depth
about um the MAT services within
the the prisons, we can tell you
that we want to make sure that
all providers and all members of
the coalition understand the
current opportunities.
You all have provided to make
sure there's no gaps in the MAT
treatments.
Thank you for that and once
again I'm throwing it out in the
universe if we treated people
when they were in prison, they
do better when they get out,
period. It doesn't take rocket
science to tell us that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, and
it also doesn't take rocket
scientists to see the connection
between our current problems
with crime.
And the fact that sending people
to prison.
For several years when they come
out if they're not prepared to
live in, they're just going to
be right back on again. I mean,
the best thing we could do is to
fight crime in this state, it
seems to me, is to make sure
that anybody who's been in
prison has has a successful exit
and never goes back again.
And, and uh.
This is so elementary that you
would think that that should be
the focus of a special session,
not the stuff that we wound up
spending our time on, but
nevertheless, let me have a ask
a few questions of your
proposal. Who would the money,
would this be an appropriation
to the corrections department
for a contract with you?
Mr. Chairman, we're currently
working with the executive to
find the appropriate fiscal
agent, but yes, they are one of
the potential awardees.
Um, and, and the partnerships
that you quote all seem to be
Albuquerque centric because are
you, are you have partners in
other parts of the state that,
that could carry on some of the
same activities in Las Cruces or
Roswell or other parts. Mr.
Chairman, although their
headquarters, Albuquerque
centric, most of their most of
their services are rural, right?
So you look at, for example,
help New Mexico and YDI, they're
huge Head Start provider in
Southern and northern New Mexico
respectively. We're we're trying
to make.
that that the initial coalition
members had the fiscal capacity
to basically front the money if
an RFP was released, right now
we're starting to work with
smaller organizations and so if
you know of any organizations
specifically that do this work,
they want to be part of the
coalition. It's an open door
open invitation. We want to make
sure every practitioner has an
opportunity because the need is
so great that not one
organization closer to the loan
I think you know you'd be on
really firm footing to reach out
to the
Um, health councils in those
rural, like, for example, the
one in Las Vegas is incredible.
They, they brought together a
whole network of people, the one
in Las Cruces, Jamie Michael's
group has brought together.
All the providers really in that
community, if they buy in,
you've got a ready-made
partnership.
It could do any of these things
that are needed, so I just, I, I
think you're on the right track.
You're certainly gonna uh, uh.
If you can get you funded, you,
you will be providing something
that has the potential to really
turn around our crime problem in
the state and to bring families
back together again. I mean, one
of the big problems with our
current system is
Send somebody to prison for 3
years and by the time they get
out their family's broken up,
their kids don't know who they
are, uh, the kids suffer, the
family, uh, it becomes a burden
on society and we just
exacerbate our problems. We
think we're punishing them and
breaking, you know, stopping
crime,
um, but all we're doing is.
Kicking it down the road and so
I, I think you're on the right
track. I hope you, you have good
success. I would think that.
Here's my experience with
corrections. I'll just be frank,
they promised the moon and never
deliver a darn thing.
You know, getting anything out
of that department has proven to
be extremely difficult. Um, they
got $1000 in opioid settlement
money last.
2 years ago and they hadn't
spent any of it.
Not one, no, no, I think they
had a federal grant of $250,000
and at the end of that federal
grant they had served two
inmates in grants.
Nobody else, I mean it makes no
sense the way they run things,
but I wish you good luck. You,
you're, you're offering
precisely what's needed in this
state at this time.
Any other comments from anybody?
Yes, Representative Chasey Mr.
Chair, I think my chief of
staff, Alisa Lauer, who's um not
here today.
Ain to me that she thought the
proper.
Source for the funding is
corrections. Now, the problem is
this committee knows, is getting
spend it right. The other issue
is that the culture there is
they don't want to change
anything.
Um, so.
That's something I'm, I think
maybe the LFC staff could advise
us about that. Also, um, I mean,
would you want to put it
somewhere where it actually is
being spent for proper purposes
and I know quite some time that
the the governor had said to me
that she needed more support for
people getting out of prison.
I used to have clients who were
serving um they were there.
They were ready to get out, but
they were doing in-house parole.
So I mean, you know, that's
costing us more money than doing
it out here, so.
Very
Um, I just got something about
Southwest Key programs being
investigated by the Justice
Department?
I just wanna throw that out
there.
Just for you to
Be aware
Thank you Mr. Chair. We were.
Thank you.
He
Yes, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to
ask one question regarding the
housing and apartment and single
uh living there, are those
subject to rent control, they
will stay at that price no
matter what, or, or tell me how
you're coming in with that
amount.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, this is the
current market amount right now,
of course I'm, I'm assuming that
we did a more extensive, uh,
market analysis would be like
that rent's really cheap. Where
did you, where did you find
that? But this is what our
providers are telling us
currently, they were using as
either a fresh start or a reset
provider.
I see. So there's no one person
where you go to for purposes of
the I see. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
I should turn my mic on. Thank
you very much for your
presentation. Good luck. And if
we can, we can, uh, help with
specific requests that you have.
We still have our November
meeting when we're going to
decide on legislation if this
comes through as a separate
bill. It might be something we
would consider.
Good. Thank you. Members, we
still have public comment. We're
trying to track down. There is
apparently none in person.
But online that deep. Nadine
didn't sounds like we're going,
yep, so we'll go. All right, go
ahead.
Yeah, net. Net Dean is our
public comment person, Matt, are
you there?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, can you make
a statement so that I can tell
if you can hear me. We can hear
you just fine then.
Thank you. Uh,
I just noted in the video that
we lost the majority of the
committee. So, but we don't need
a quorum to be able to make
public comments. So thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, uh, is it 3 minutes?
Yes.
Thank you very much. Um,
I, uh,
We'll go fast.
Um,
There is a case that has been
ongoing for some time. It's been
going on for over 18 months,
there were reports to uh A&E
about A&E to
uh
To APS Adult Protective
Services, not Albuquerque Public
Schools, over the course of many
times over 18 months, those
reports have not made a
difference for that individual.
The individuals in their 30s,
and they were in the fit program
verse 3, they then moved to DD
waiver temporarily back to mea,
back to DD waiver, back to
media. It's a very tough
situation. Now the primary
employee with the individual
Maybe as the
Employer of record is the
program participants family
member, who is the primary
perpetrator, and that is very,
very difficult, and I needed to
leave that case that was
referred to me from APS and
other entities because the
perpetrator may threatening
remarks about me toward me in
the background of a call with
the program participant, which
then placed me at, now I am at
risk.
And it is so difficult because
in this situation, there becomes
no witnesses because the very
person who's relying on their
family member is not going to
take their family member down if
that's their only resource. So
that's, these are tough
situations, and I've spoken with
Every entity, including
Out of due respect, Miss
Rodriguez, and
That's, that's tough.
Those are tough scenarios. So on
another subject not go fast. I
have individuals referred to me
who's with assurance. That's the
phone system. The only option
they have now is texting because
to do a pre-purchased card, they
must purchase that card to pay
an insurance fee only at a
Family Dollar, uh sorry, general
dollar, family dollar, or a
Speedway gas station, and if
they don't purchase that card at
any of those three places, it
cannot be accepted.
As a card to make payment.
And this the complexities of
navigating this is now they only
have text and with text every
entity is saying you must make a
phone call or you must use the
internet, and without the
affordable connectivity program,
they're not going to have
internet, and they're not gonna
be able to make voice calls.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Excuse me, Madam Vice
Chair, Mr. Chair, I so much
appreciate the opportunity to
bring these concerns forward. My
passion is, the more we
recognize the challenges.
The more we can create bridges
to reduce the challenges. Thank
you very much for your time.
That, uh, and of course we have
3 more days here so you can
bring up other issues later in
the week, and we have a second
online but I will not be
available to Winfrey, good to
hear from you again, Mr.
Winfrey.
Hello, and good to speak with
you all again. I wanted to just
show up and bring to y'all's
attention and keep on the radar,
our ongoing need to revisit our
language for telehealth for
LMSWs and uh I've also submitted
that policy brief and if you all
haven't received it, I'll be
glad to send it again.
We are still facing a lack of
clarity and language for LMSWs
to provide telehealth in New
Mexico due due to the outdated
2007 Telehealth Act, and we also
need to go a little bit further
than just updating the list of
professionals, thereby removing
independent license here we need
to also address supervision
online and to give our boards
and our regulation and licensing
departments, some guidance to
support appropriate employment
and appropriate supervision for
our life.
This master, social workers who
are filling an important role in
New Mexico and supporting our
precarious behavioral health
situation. Thanks so much for
y'all's time, chairperson and
all the others.
Thank you. Thank you.
Members with that we have
reached the end of the agenda.
And we meet again in the morning
right here. Can we leave our
stuff here? You can leave your,
your folders here if you want,
um, we meet again in the morning
at 9:15 and um tomorrow night
there will be a dinner.
Reception and dinner from 5 to 7
at
And can the child children's
advocacy Network for kids aging
out of foster care.
And they've invited the
committee to attend that. I
think you all got, got
invitation about that.
Anything else, any other?
Announcements or
OK, with that,
we'll call the meeting actually,
no, go ahead with that, we'll
