members, thank you for adding me
onto your agenda. I know you are
running short on time, so I'll
keep my comments brief and then
uh take questions, uh, that you
or the committee members may
have, uh, so I have been, uh,
over the last few weeks, uh, had
some conversations with Mr.
Senna from the village, uh, and
Mr. Linder as well. Thank you
for the referral, Senator Munoz.
uh, we've talked a couple of
times over the last couple of
weeks,
MFA does not have any specific.
Funds to address the disaster
aside from uh about $2.5 million
that we did receive from HUD
about a year or so ago to
address the the fires that had
occurred here in the Ridoso area
and up north, uh, we've awarded
500,000 of those funds and have
about 2.5 million available.
There's a notice of funding
availability on our website that
I'll make sure that all of you
have, uh, and that, uh, that is.
Her money, so it comes with some
strings attached as you might
imagine, but things that can be
overcome such as environmental
reviews.
Aside from that pot of money we
have our traditional programs
off the shelf programs if you
will. Uh we have a low interest
rate loans for folks that uh
would qualify and eligible or
interested in purchasing a home
or interest rates are currently
about 6%, and we have down
payment assistance up to $10,000
in another 4% of the sales price
which could add up to about uh,
you know, $22,000 here in for a
$300,000
And I, I know that homes here
are Naridoso are uh maybe uh
somewhat higher than that uh in
this area.
So we have those type of
programs uh for first time home
buyers and also for non-f time
home buyers, which maybe a lot
of these uh folks would be in
this area.
We also have, uh, and thanks to
you as a legislature, we have
some New Mexico housing trust
fund money is available for, uh,
not only that, provide that down
payment assistance that I
mentioned, but those funds are
also available to provide
development so development
loans, whether they'd be lines
of credit or gap financing and
those interest rates, I heard
some interest rate numbers
earlier about 7-8%. We can get
our interest rates down between
2 and 3% on those construction
or development loans.
which would be very helpful, and
that would be for either single
or multifamily development.
Um, I think the approach here in
Ridoso with the fires all had to
be a multiprong, you know,
there's folks that may qualify
and eligible to and interested
in rebuilding or purchasing a
new home, so our first time home
buyer, our next home program
would work for them.
The, there's obviously the
inventory is, is not here, so
there's going to be a need to
develop some new homes, and I
think our development programs
with the low interest rates of 2
to 3% would be very helpful
there, so we can do that and
then there's going to be
Some individuals that may not be
uh
uh.
Interested or eligible to
purchase a home or may have
trouble even renting a home, so
uh that would be the more
difficult population to help
with providing rental vouchers.
We don't have rental vouchers at
MFA, but I know the public
housing authorities and in this
case Eastern Regional out of
Roswell manages the vouchers
Section 8 vouchers for this
area. It's uh, you know, I'll
give Mr. Herbert a call after
this and see if they have any
vacancies there, and I'm
assuming that the leadership
here in the city has already or
the village has already
contacted.
But I'll touch base with him as
well. Um, with that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I'll take any
questions that you may have, and
I know I probably didn't address
all of the comments that came up
earlier, but uh definitely
willing to take your questions
at this point?
I'm not gonna let you off easy,
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you presenter for coming today.
So,
On let's just talk about our
loan. So if somebody needed to
get a.
2% loan.
And we had a 2% loan for
300,000, which would put them
somewhere in the $1000 range per
month.
How would that look and is that,
would that work to get people
that want to rebuild, providing
they can get insurance.
And get them in an affordable
house.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Vincent MFA does not currently
have a program that could get
the interest rates down that
low. The way that we make our
programs available is we issue
bonds and those bonds need to be
repaid in interest rates right
now are not down to the 2% level
that would have to be another
funding source that we'd have to
seek out potentially from the
legislature we could definitely
develop a program with those
loans would have to be very
likely portfolio loans, not
loans that would sell.
In the secondary market like we
currently do with all of our
other mortgages, but uh if uh
there was funding available that
uh had the uh requirements that
they be loans at that amount we
could develop a program, have
the lenders originate those
mortgages and we could portfolio
those loans and maybe the
repayments on that, the program
income that would come back in
could be earmarked or set aside
for future disasters as well,
but something that we could do,
but not with our current funding
programs.
Thank you for that answer, and
I, I know this was kind of a
pipe dream and I'm just gonna
throw it out there cause it's,
it's kind of dreamy, but if, if
a person could get in the house
and since we've had, um, even
some of our, our higher end
houses that burnt in the Alto
area.
I wouldn't want to take anybody
out of the equation, but up to
300,000 if there was a way that
we could get them into that
300,000.
Zone
At a 2% interest, even if it was
a $1000 house, they could still
get a a small interest loan.
that I'm just gonna stick with
2% of.
That's what I have in my head,
um.
Whatever the difference is, they
could go get a, you know, a loan
at the bank for like 8%.
But for those people that um
need some assistance, at least
getting, you know, coming back
home and getting their houses
rebuilt at an affordable rate.
That's what I was after seeing
if we had this big.
Pot of money that we could
Get people to.
Buy these houses at a 2% to
where.
They could come up with 1000
bucks a month and then, you
know, say a 30 year type loan.
But you're saying that that,
that probably wouldn't be
doable.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Vincent, that is, we don't
currently have a funding source
to take interest rates down that
low, but could we?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Vincent, uh, I'll
give you a hypothetical here the
state legislature came and said,
uh, you know, MFA, we'd like to
uh put together, you know, $150
million set aside to help uh 500
families at $300,000 each with a
2% interest rate 30-year
mortgage, if that funding source
was available, we could
definitely develop that program
and get our lenders to
originate, uh, and we could
service those loans that is
something we could definitely
do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So he said
there was a chance.
As you'll have to turn off your
mic uh when otherwise we'll get
back feed. There's a chance like
in horseshoes and hand grenades.
Uh, let me ask you, is there a
tax incentives to the developers
to come in and develop this
market.
Mr. Chairman, we do currently
have uh so there's a
Two different programs that I'm
thinking of. One of them is a
federal program. It's a 9% and
4% low income housing tax
credits, which is structured
specifically for multi-family or
rental development, and there's
actually one that was recently
awarded here in Ridoso Elk
Meadows, I believe, 72 units
that should be starting
construction here pretty quick.
So that is one program under the
9% tax credits that funds about
90 or I'm sorry, 70% of the
equity in the development. I
will say that those are very
competitive.
We have one round a year, uh,
and there's not sufficient tax
credits to go around. Uh, the,
uh, the second program that I'm
thinking of is one that you as a
state legislature passed many
years back as the estate tax
credit program.
Where of a developer uh comes in
and they want to develop, but
and they want to donate part of
uh their cost towards the
affordable housing they get a
5050 cents on the dollar a state
tax credit on their state tax
liability, so that is something
that is uh uh.
Frequently used by some
nonprofit developers in the
Habitats for Humanity as they
get a lot of donations, but
something that could definitely
be eligible at a much larger
scale. Uh, those are the two
that I am aware of at this
point.
If they're nonprofit, how could
they get a state tax credit?
I'm, I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman,
so, uh, as an example, habitat
for Humanity, they get donors to
donate to build a house, and so
the donor of the funds to the
Habitat for Humanity, uh, let's
say somebody that is, is wealthy
and wants to donate $10,000
towards building that house,
they could get $5000 in state
tax credits, so it's, that's the
mechanism uh or one example of
how it can be used.
So they, yeah, they can sell
those tax credits like on the
market. Represent Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, uh, Mr. Hernandez. I had a
question, uh, following up on
Representative Vincent's, um,
Comments and inquiries about
buying down interest rates for
mortgages.
Um, last year in the budget, um,
There was an additional $50
million given to MFA, um.
Would it not be possible to use
some of that to develop a
program?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dixon, uh.
Uh, yes, it would be possible to
develop a program with that, uh,
interest rate buy downs are
pretty expensive and uh buying
down an interest rate from,
let's say 7% down to 2%. Uh, I'd
have to do the math on that and
can definitely get back to the
committee here. uh, so we could
use a portion of those funds to
do something like that. I will
tell you that uh our board has
allocated those funds to various
activities, some of them being
down payment assistance, uh,
and, uh, a few other activities
that
That we do there at MFA like
rehab and uh of homes and rental
development, uh, preservation,
so not all of the $50 million is
available, a very small
percentage of that would be uh
for something like this. Thank
you, Mr. Cha. Thank you, Mr.
Hernandez. Um, so it sounds like
a good chunk of that money has
already been allocated. Um, is
MFA also looking at setting up
some new and innovative
programs, uh, given the influx
of funding. Mr. Chairman and our
representative Dixon.
And uh uh thank you to the
legislature. We actually have
set up a few new programs,
innovative programs, uh, I'll
just give you a couple of quick
examples. One of them is uh
restoring our communities or the
ROC program.
Where uh uh individuals or uh
nonprofits uh would uh purchase
abandoned or foreclosed homes,
fix them up and put them for
sale, that's a new program. Uh,
we've also done a created a
preservation program, uh, to
help preserve affordable housing
that otherwise would go to
market rate, uh, so that's
number 2 and then the third one
is actually called the
innovations program. We have a
about 40 different programs at
MFA but not all of the needs out
there fit into one of those
buckets or innovation.
Program is, if there's a need in
the community that isn't
addressed by those 40 programs,
they can submit an application,
we would review it and we've
actually made some awards under
that innovation program, so.
Those are just three examples of
probably a couple of others that
I missed.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Is he, how much does
it cost to buy down a point
right now? Do you know in the
market?
Mr. Chairman, I will find out
and I'll, uh, before the end of
the meeting here I I'll, uh, I
have an email here. I don't
remember, um, off the top of my
head, but I know I have an email
that gives me a little bit of an
indication on that that I'll,
I'll get to you.
OK, thank you. Any other
questions?
Sure
Senator Rodriguez, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, uh, for the sake
of time, I'm just gonna
basically make a comment more
than a question, but, uh, as you
may recall this last session,
the legislature passed. I
sponsored a bill that actually
amends the public project
revolving fund, which is the
fund that we use at very low
interest rates for other
infrastructure development, and
that usually has quite a bit of
money in it through the NMFA,
not the MFA, and um it had
plenty
Of good provisions in it, but it
was missing the word housing in
it so it was, had not been able
to be used in the past for
housing developments, affordable
housing, and so we amended at
this last session to add the
Affordable housing aspect and
also amanda to include
nonprofits. And so affordable
housing through nonprofit
developers, so now they will be
able to apply for this um
housing or the many housing
initiatives that we need.
At a very low interest rate up
to 2%, sometimes can be even
lower depending, and then I also
uh passed a bill to um actually
I think it's within the same
bill, but it's got to do with
the local government planning
fund and that is a fund that we
established many years ago uh
that allowed also for grants.
This one is outright grants, not
loans, and it is to help
municipalities uh with their
planning, their plans and and
planning to be able to donate
land or
buildings if they don't need
them or whatever for affordable
housing and exempt them from the
anti-donation clause. Well, the
change that I made in this bill
includes um the, the housing
aspect of it also because um in
the past, local governments
would be able to qualify for
some grants for plants, but
nothing to do with housing.
There was no provision in there
to allow them to use it for
housing. And so now they can if
a municipal
like Riodoso needs to do a plan,
for example, they can apply for
this grant and for their housing
initiatives that they now need
completed soon, like yesterday,
then now they're able to do
that. So I just wanted to bring
that up and I know I could go
on, so, um, Mr. Chairman, I'll
stop for the sake of time, but
yeah, you bet, yeah.
General,
Senator Padilla.
Uh thank you, uh, Chair. Just uh
Did a little bit of quick math
on the buy down and Izzy, you
might correct me, but the
average home price I think in
New Mexico is now set around or
in Albuquerque, at least central
New Mexico, 370,000. So 1% is,
it's a point is 1% of the loan,
so that's about $3700 on that.
So if you wanted to bring it
down from even 7% just down to
4%, you're looking at 44,000
just to bring down your rate to
4% based on what the current uh
buy down rate is, but my
question, Mr. Chair, to Izzy is
Can the dollars that we're
talking about here because of
the amount that they are, you
know, 44,000 instead of buying
the rate down you could bring
the mortgage down is by, by
doing the down payment
assistance. Are you, are you
able to use any of this money
for that because that, I think
that money went out the door
before you even got it up on
your website. I think I heard,
is that true?
Mr. Chairman and Senator Padilla
that
we do have, we are using uh some
of the housing trust fund money
for down payment assistance, not
at the $44,000 home rate but
that uh 10,000 home rate and
I'll tell you the production
even with just that low amount
has gone up tremendously. There
are funds still available to do
that at that that amount, you
may be referring to a program
where we were offering 25,000 of
our down payment assistance last
year and that money went.
Out the door. It was an 8
million I believe, and it went
out in a matter of a month, 1.5.
Yeah, so, uh, you know, the, the
cost to benefit ratio, Mr.
Chairman, I mean on the buy down
versus the down payment
assistance, I mean, what would
that, what would be more
meaningful, I guess, to get
somebody in a home quicker and
the savings rate, um, for them
over the long haul the 30-year
period.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, generally it depends on
the amount of the interest rate
buy down or the down payment
assistance, you'd probably get
more bang for your buck with the
down payment assistance and
lowering that loan amount in the
principal balance. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, because that
rate's going to be there for the
30 year period for that slice of
the pie that you assisted with,
so why not just bring that down.
Um, that's, that's why I'm
suggesting. I hope you look at
all those options because you've
been doing a wonderful job, a
great job, you and your team,
but, um, I just think we need
some
Some quick action here before
things get even worse. So thank
you.
Senator Woods.
I'm gonna ask a question here,
Mr. Chairman, that probably
completely off subject. So, uh,
I have several people constantly
asking me about reverse
mortgages and I know that this
is probably not the place, not
the time, but, uh, sometime if
you get a minute, explain that
to me, not today. Thank you.
All right, I don't see any
further questions, Izzy, thank
you for doing this for us. I
appreciate your time and coming
down and getting in the mix and
Because it's gonna be an ongoing
conversation. I don't remember
what the governor's housing bill
did last year, but it pretty
much took out MFA, um, but we'll
watch and see what happens, uh.
But just plan on the
subcommittee. I don't know if
you're here, we'll probably pull
you into that in some way,
shape, or form to figure out.
All the, we won't call it the
three-legged stool, but maybe
the eight-legged stool that
we're gonna have to figure out
as we move forward, so thank
you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and I
just want to close by thanking
you for having me here and then
also to uh encourage uh the
leadership here at the at the
village, uh, in the county to
reach out to us. We do have
funds available. I know we'll
continue conversations with Mr.
Linder and with Mr. Senna to
close out some applications so
we can get some funding here for
what we do have available at
this point. Thank you.
Thank you.
Sonny, your crew's up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
keep this brief. We are on tab
C. I know you talked a lot about
fire this morning and I'm gonna
ask you to pivot to education,
uh, you heard in June a
discussion about from LESC and
LFC on what we should be doing
to improve the quality of
instruction and one of the
suggested recommendations was to
look at innovative public
staffing models and I have with
me today two experts on this who
are currently involved.
in the work. We have Brent
Madden, the executive director
of Nex Education Workforce and
we also have Brian Hassel from
Public Impact, and I will go
ahead and turn it over to them
since we're short on time uh to
talk a little bit more what this
actually looks like.
Mr. Chairman, committee, thank
you so much for having us. Thank
you for service as a New Mexico
resident myself, uh, I'm
incredibly excited to be here to
share with you, uh, what we've
been working on over the course
of the last 56 years, um,
There are slides that we have
printed for you. Any of your
eyes are as bad as mine, uh,
apologies, you can get the
slides online.
Um,
Really, I want to talk to you
about changing the operating
system.
In the way that we staff
schools.
Almost every single classroom.
is staffed in the same way.
One person
In a box
Either all day as an elementary
school teacher or until some
bell rings.
Right, as a high school teacher,
um, and
I think that this actually is,
uh, a challenge both for
educators and for our young
learners.
As a New Mexican, I am
incredibly excited about the
investments that we have made in
education. I think that we have
made some serious strides in
terms of attendance rates in
terms of graduation rates in
terms of uh certainly teacher
pay and what I'm here to talk to
you about, and I think what my
colleague Brian Hassel are here
to talk to you about is, uh,
delivering on the return on that
investment.
And that we think that we can do
this by changing the fundamental
way.
The we staff schools. So, uh,
the work that we do at the next
education workforce initiative,
uh falls under the banner of
something that we like to call
strategic school staffing or
innovative staffing.
This is an idea that has been
catching a lot of attention in
the last 4 or 5 years. And in
fact, Brian and I both belong to
something called the Coalition
to reimagine the teaching role,
uh, and that we are
collaborating.
To build a movement of schools
and school systems across the
country that are interested in
changing the way that we staff
our schools. Um, the work that I
lead, we have been up to this
again for 5 or 6 years, and, uh,
we have impacted about 20,000
learners so far working in about
150 schools,
uh, across 50 districts in about
15 states. We're not doing any
work here yet in New Mexico, but
I would invite you to come and
see the work.
Next door in Arizona, uh, happy
to host you. Um, if you were
there, what you would see.
I think would be.
Joyous teachers and joyous kids,
um, you'd walk into a classroom
and you might see multiple
adults.
Wrapping around a shared common
roster of students. Again, this
is very different than the 1 to
25 ratio that we're used to.
And so what we, what we do is we
work with school systems to
Start by putting students at the
center and asking a fundamental
question.
Who is the team of educators?
I'm using that word very
intentionally, that we need to
build around this roster of kids
in order to help them succeed.
And the answer
is almost never.
1 single person.
We do this with our own kids, we
do it with our grandkids, we
build teams around them. And so
what we are proposing is that we
do this in the way that we staff
and structure our schools. The
results that we are finding so
far in the models are, are
pretty profound, both for
educators.
And for young learners. From the
educator perspective, imagine
what it's like to not be alone.
All day.
Right? This is an oddly ironic
thing about teaching.
Right? That you are surrounded
by people, yet the job is
remarkably isolating.
Um, you're expected to do all
things for all kids at all
times. And the, this is really
weird. The first day on the job
looks remarkably similar to the
3,000th day on the job.
And we've built a system and
structure.
That actually
Promotes this sort of behavior.
The first day entering as a
brand new teacher in New Mexico
has made some tremendous
investments in the residency
models really great way to enter
the profession. But as soon as
that residency is over, you're
by yourself.
And so when we talk about
achieving a return on our
investments whether they're in
curriculum or they're staffing,
um, we think that there's a
better way to do it. And by
building educator teams around
shared common rosters of kids.
You stand to improve the
likelihood that I've got a kid,
he's 12 years old. I tell you
what, Blake.
Some teachers don't like him,
and he doesn't like some
teachers, right? But if you
build a team around them.
What you do is you increase the
likelihood that the student and
the educators are going to
click.
That as a uh as a teacher, you
don't have to be great at all
aspects of the job.
And that you can lean into your
strengths and lean on your
coworkers. Um, this means that
people are leaving the
profession, uh, they're sticking
around longer. The retention
that we're seeing for first year
teachers is up 13 points.
Over teachers that are not
working in these team-based
models. For our uh more
experienced teachers, it creates
a path to leadership, and Brian
will talk a lot about, I'm sure,
um, this idea of kind of a
career ladder or a new uh new
way of creating leadership
positions without having to
leave the classroom. You can
make more money as a teacher,
have more influence, and ensure
that not just the 25 kids who
are lucky enough to be with you.
But all of the kids get access
to the talent of our best
teachers. And so,
Uh, we, we find it with uh uh.
Our 3rd graders in the critical
year of pivoting from learning
to read, to reading to learn,
that we're seeing about a month
and a half's worth of increased
reading achievement, uh, algebra
and pass rates are up 5 to 7%
points. We're still waiting on
the, the most recent clutch of
data around attendance rates,
but what we see anecdotally is
very encouraging news because
At the end of the day, teaching
is about relationships. And what
we find is that the ability to
have strong relationships,
tracks to the way that we staff
our schools. And we think that
there is a better way to do it,
and the work that we do
specifically and Brian can talk
about the way that they do it,
is that we work, uh, over the
course of a full first year to
work with the school system and
the individual school leaders
and the teacher leaders to build
teams that make sense in their
Context. If you've got a ton of
rookie teachers, you might build
a different model than if you've
got a uh a host of seasoned
veterans. If you've got a large
number of multilingual learners,
you would build a different team
than if you don't, right? And so
what we try to do is create a
model that is flexible enough to
be responsive to the needs of
our community, the model that
you build in Albuquerque will
look very different than the
model that you will build in
Taos. And so, um, what we're
finding is that if you
You spend a year designing.
And then you have to provide
teachers the time.
To team together. And this is
one of the costs of this. Um,
what we find in one of the
sheets in front of you does a
side by side comparison of a
standard one teacher, one
classroom model.
And something that is a far more
interesting version of the way
that we can bring adults around
kids. You can see that Netnet,
the cost is about the same.
There is a couple of hidden
costs. One of them is the
startup cost to actually build
this sort of new operating
system in our schools. The
second is ensuring that our
educators have the time to
collaborate with one another.
Because if you don't have that
time, this will turn to dust,
will rubber bend back.
to 25 teachers or 25 kids with
one teacher in a room with a
closed door. Um, so as we're
thinking about this, what would
it cost to say, uh, work with 10
school systems, say 30 schools,
somewhere in the order of $4.2
million over three years. 3-year
investment. Um, of course, that
could scale up. We like the idea
of schools opting into this work
and that if there was a
suggestion that I could leave,
uh,
committee with would be, let's
think about this from a
statewide perspective about how
we can create opportunities for
school systems to double down on
the investments that they've
already made in terms of
staffing and curriculum, uh,
community schools, residencies,
and instead of watching people
leave the profession too early,
let's create the conditions that
people want to stay in this job
and that we acknowledge the fact
that our workforce doesn't look
like it did 30 years ago where
people stay in jobs.
For 30 or 40 years. Let's build
a workforce that makes sense for
the times. Some of our teachers
are gonna stick around that
long. Thank goodness. But let's
not build an entire system
architected on faulty
assumptions.
I'm really excited. Take your
questions. That's my 10 minutes.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, thank you also for
having me. Brent, thanks for
that great set of remarks to get
us started because this is such
an important time for this
conversation. We've got a twin
crisis in, in the United States,
including New Mexico, where
students haven't learned as much
as they need to, and teachers
are leaving the profession and
not joining the profession at a
rate that's really alarming and
both of these crises we believe
in Brent's set this up so well
it can be addressed by changing
that one teacher, one classroom
model to something different. So
what I want to do is talk about
One model of this kind of change
called the opportunity culture
model. This is a model that's in
use in Carlsbad, New Mexico.
Some of you have visited there
and seen this in action and
heard from the educators there.
I'll briefly describe this. I
want to give you a little bit of
information about the results of
this model, both for kids and
teachers, and then talk a little
bit about cost as as Brent did.
Uh, so the model itself,
Opportunity culture really has
three main components to it. One
is multi-classroom leadership,
so teams of teachers are form
And a great teacher, someone
that's knocked out of the park
as a teacher themselves becomes
their leader. They become the
leader of the 3rd grade or the
leader of the science department
in the high school or a leader
of the math department in the
middle school, and they take
responsibility for all the
students served by that team and
all the educators that are part
of that team. So they continue
to teach, they're not out of the
classroom. They teach in their
own classrooms. They teach in
the classrooms of the other
teachers. They also spend a lot
of time outside of the
classroom, meeting as a team,
planning.
Together looking at data
together and working as a team
as Brent described, to give the
kids all exactly what they need.
So that's the multi-classroom
leader role, and they make a
supplement that on average
across the country is 20% of
average pay, so they're earning
a substantial pay increase in
order to take on that
responsibility. Therefore, it's
a career path for a teacher who
wants to keep working with kids,
keep working with other
teachers, but they want to
advance in their career and earn
more, while
Continuing to do that work they
love so much. So that's
multi-classroom leadership. The
second component is the tutoring
culture. Once there's a
multi-classroom leader team in
place, and they've reorganized
the schedule so that the team is
working with the kids in the
most optimal way. A big part of
that is vastly increasing the
amount of small group
instruction that goes on so that
each child can get personalized
learning. There's abundant
research showing the value of
that and so that's a critical
part.
And then the third component is
what we call team reach, where
instead of filling every vacancy
which teach schools have lots of
over the years. Instead, they
use these team structures. They
add teacher residents, they add
paraprofessionals to meet the
needs of all the students
without filling those vacancies
often with a long-term sub or
some other less effective
teacher. So it's a way of
getting better teaching to every
kid through the influence of
this multi-classroom leader
through tutoring and through
those team structures.
The results of this model have
been significant for kids. Third
party studies have shown that
when teachers join these teams,
their kids learn an extra half
year in reading and math every
year. So there's a substantial
extra learning boost from the
work and third party studies
have shown that.
It's also shown to be really
beneficial to teachers,
teachers, 99% of these teacher
leaders want the the model to
continue in their schools the
following year. 91% of all staff
involved in the models want them
to continue the following year.
Teachers in these models also
express uh willingness to
recommend teaching as a career
at 2 to 3 times the rate of
teachers across the country. So
they're much more enthusiastic
about their profession, and
they're also staying longer with
retention rates going up in the
10.
15% range when their schools
adopt these models, so teachers
are saying we love this as well.
So that twin crisis I mentioned
of students not learning enough
teachers being dissatisfied if
you rethink the way these
schools work in this way, it
affects both of those. Students
learn more. Teachers are
happier, and then there's
economic benefit. We know that
when students learn more they
earn more state's economy can
benefit to the tune of billions
of dollars if these kinds of
extra half year learning gains
were available.
across, across the state. So
that's a brief description of
the model, some of the results.
I want to briefly touch on
costs. Uh, there are two main
costs that we think about in
these models. One is the cost of
paying teachers more for doing
this work and adding more
teacher residents and
paraprofessionals to the
schools. Those costs are largely
coverable by existing budgets
and we work hard with the
schools and Brent showed a
diagram about this. We work hard
with the schools to fund within
existing.
Budgets by reallocating from
less valuable expenses to these
expenses that are very valuable.
If a state wanted to supplement
that, that could be an
interesting policy. I would urge
them to supplement schools
already making their own
reallocations. I'd urge you to
tilt it towards high needs
schools where they could get an
edge over other schools in
recruitment and retention, but
that's one of the costs that can
be covered locally, could be
enhanced by state policy
potentially.
The other costs that Brynn also
touched on is the cost of
transition. So this is a
completely different way of
organizing schools. Schools
typically engage in an
organization like ours or like
rent's organization to help them
get from point A to point B over
a design year and then into some
implementation support. And so
that cost can can vary from
place to place, but the, the
staff, Sonny and his team and
the legislative educated Study
Committee put together a report
that they present.
And to you all in June that lays
out one model of how this cost
could roll out. And what it
shows, and it's there's a slide
in your.
In your deck that
has some of the numbers here and
that's the 2nd to last slide.
What it shows is that if you
have a more intensive model,
where you had half the districts
in the state moving in this
direction over the course of 3
years, you can see the cost of
that in the 30 million range and
then there could be a lower cost
version with less intense
support, more of an online do it
yourself component with some
coaching on top of that, that
could be less expensive and
there could be everything.
In between there, but for a
relatively straightforward
investment, many, many schools
could be working in a different
way, in a in a in a matter of a
few years, many, many educators
could be living in a new kind of
work environment and, and, and
thousands of students, tens of
thousands could be benefiting
from the student learning growth
that comes from this kind of new
model. I'll just close by saying
this committee has a reputation
for making smart investments and
thinking about the future,
saving money now during good
times to
Invest in the future. And this
is the kind of investment that
has that same characteristic
because if you change schools
now for years to come, their
teachers will benefit, their
students will benefit, and the
economy will benefit. So, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for having
me and I'm gonna throw it back
to Sonny and see if there's
others comments from him and
then we can have any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We stand
open for questions. Excellent.
Thank you all very much. We're
going to go first to
Representative Sarena.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, there's a few of us teachers
on this committee of high school
math teacher, um.
Level 3 National Board
certified. So we have a lot of
really strong teachers out
there. Um, we did see this
presentation in Carlsbad. I mean
it was great looking at kids
learning math elementary
learning math was the what they
what they were doing it was
wonderful.
Um, but
There's a whole bunch of things
I want to talk about.
One of our problems isn't it is
getting teachers, but it's
getting kids to school. So how
does your program do that?
The key, one of the keys we've
learned to getting kids to
school is that relationship.
That they have, uh, with, with
people in the school that uh
know them, know their know them
as people, know their
challenges, know their family's
challenges
and can then, uh, yeah, yeah, go
ahead, please.
And so
To the extent that that's on the
shoulders of one teacher working
by themselves, that's, that's
presents a giant challenge,
especially given everything else
that teachers have to undertake.
But if you imagine these highly
organized teams of teachers led
by a teacher who has expertise
at connecting with students,
including in this way, you've
got a much better chance at
first of all, forging those
relationships in the first place
with students and forging them
effectively. And you've got a
better chance that there's going
to be a connection between that.
Student and one or more teachers
or other educators at the school
who are then going to be the one
that makes it happen for them to
come, come back to school if
they're having attendance
challenges. So that's one way in
which this can make a
difference.
Brent, what did you have,
I would double down on the idea
of relationships, we're finding
that students report, uh,
To the question, do you have an
adult that has your back at
school?
Far more likely to respond, yes,
when they're in these team-based
models. Um, the second thing
that I would say, and this is
what we're finding is that these
team-based models unlock the
innovative spirit of educators,
of building and sight level
leaders. And so we've got a few
schools right now that are uh
almost channeling your question
around attendance, and they've
created a new role that they
call attendance champion, and
this is, um,
It might be a member of the
community that they've hired on
a part-time basis. Um, that,
that is literally helping to
ensure, in addition to the
team-based models that kids are
getting to school, right? And
again, it's really hard to be,
you know, teaching calculus
whilst also figuring out where
your kids are. And this is the
thing that we ask teachers to do
all the time, right? It's like
we can't just keep adding more
and more things to people's
plates. So what we're finding is
that the moment that you start
thinking differently about the
way that you staff your.
Schools, you also start, uh,
revving up your innovative
engine, and you start thinking
about problem solving in a new
and different way.
Thank you for that. Um, couple
of things you initially said,
the residency program. We have
22 of the bill sponsors here.
Um, you said after the first
year they don't get any support,
but after the first year they
continue to get support. So
that's a big deal. So just that
one,
and when you said there's no
workforce.
Uh
People aren't coming to to jobs
that or for the last 30 years
things have changed, but that's
in every occupation. Kids are
different.
Employees are different, um.
You know, so I, I don't know, I,
I wasn't sure on that. Um, so in
Carlsbad,
How, how did
How did they pay for this?
Carlsbad is uh has paid for the
ongoing costs, the stipends for
teachers, the extra roles that
are added to the schools by by
reallocating their school
budgets and so one way that
often works is they have
flexible funding, for instance,
from Title One or from some
other program, and they decide,
you know, the best investment of
those Title I funds is going to
be in paying these teachers more
to take on this role. So rather
than for instance hiring an
outside professional development
vendor to help their teachers.
Get better. Let's invest that in
our own teachers. So that's one
example of a reallocation and
we, we encourage schools to have
school design teams made up
mostly of teachers to be the
ones that sit around a table and
figure out what is the best
reallocation for us? What's the
best one for our school, uh, to
get the, the results. So that's,
that's how they've handled that.
I believe the way they paid for
the services that we provide is
by using Eser funds, so they had
COVID relief funds temporarily,
and one of the ways they spent
that was to engage our
Organization to come lead a
design process, support their
implementation, conduct
professional development for
their educators to learn how to
play these new roles. And so
that was a good temporary source
for them. It's not of course
available now for the rest of
the state to use for that kind
of transition, but they were,
they were in a good position to
do that.
And Mr. Chair and Representative
Sarnia, I would add that their
oil and gas local revenue also
grew substantially in recent
years, so that might be another
operational source they've been
using.
Thank, thank you, Sunny, and
that's what we were told when we
were there and, and later on in
committee that it was, there was
a substantial amount coming from
a different organization that in
Albuquerque, I don't know that
we would have, so, but did you
want to speak to that?
We're finding that uh school
systems where we're working in
say these 15 states, uh,
To pay for the, the sort of
startup costs that Brian was
mentioning, um, those are often
coming sometimes out of
different allocations of title
funds or uh M&O funds. Sometimes
it's happening at the level of
combining both system level and
school level, uh, savings and
some of it is, is car shavings
in the, the way that Brian
described, right? Making uh
decisions to uh shift some
monies around that normally
would have been spent maybe on a
different sort of external
vendor.
Um, we also are seeing that
there's
I would say you shouldn't do
this to save money, full stop,
and that there can sometimes be
uh cost savings that are enjoyed
by thinking differently about
the staffing models. So we've
got some examples where, uh,
schools, um, uh, go to their
educators and they say, hey,
would you be, we know that we're
having a hard time finding
substitutes. Um, would you, now
that you have a team of
educators supporting this common
roster of students. Would you
like a
And sometimes the educators say,
yes, please, and we'll deploy
them in a particular way, or no,
that's a small-ish savings, but
in large districts with whom we
work, sometimes the savings
could be quite substantial.
Other times they're finding that
they're, uh, for example, they
have far fewer behavioral issues
because the number of educators
wrapping around that that common
roster of kids allows them to
deal with more of the behavioral
concerns within the learning
environment as opposed to
sending kids to other places.
And so,
Assistant principals now, uh, in
some cases are finding
themselves back in the classroom
in these uh teacher leadership
positions, which is really
powerful. Um, quick little note
on the residency piece. I just
want to applaud New Mexico. I
feel like New Mexico has the
gold standard in the residency
programs, uh, among people
across the United States, uh,
the amount of support that
residents are receiving in other
states, far less robust than
what's happening here in New
Mexico, so want to say that. And
then in
In terms of the shape of the
workforce changing, um, I do
think that this is happening in
subtle and less subtle ways,
like the idea as a professional,
to be able to have a doctor's
appointment and to be able to go
to a doctor's appointment, uh,
without, uh, your entire world
that I was a formal national
board certified secondary
science teacher. The biggest
drain on me was always to take a
day off to go to the National
Science Teachers conference or
to go to my own doctor's
appointment. It's very hard. And
in some of these teams.
Models, what we're finding is
that this is the power of
working together is that they're
able to shift and cover and uh
and deploy kids and educators in
different ways. And so what
we're finding is that educators
are enjoying more professional
freedom and autonomy, things
that people are looking for in
jobs, and that there are all
sorts of people in our
communities who I think have
talent to bring and give.
If we create the right roles.
I'm not saying that these people
should be capital T teachers,
but I think that there are other
roles as we start to think
about, uh, especially in our
rural communities, what are the
opportunities uh for people to
make a difference in young kids'
lives, not as little league
coaches or running a soccer or
Girl Scouts, but as actual
people contributing within the
school day.
Thank you. I, I, I think this is
a great model. I don't know that
we could afford it because it is
quite, quite uncostly. Um, I
think it would be great for kids
to have two people in the in the
um classroom. I was a math
teacher, um.
But I still go back to, you
know.
Getty, how do we get the kids
there? And, and, and you
answered that, but um that's
our, that's our biggest.
Um,
block now.
And uh so, but thanks for the
presentation and I appreciate
it.
Thank you so sorry, uh, Garret,
please.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, let's see, Doctor Hassel and
is it Doctor Madden?
Two doctors, thank you for being
here, um, Debbie and me are both
teachers. I just finished after
COVID, and I'm a product of Ting
teaching. I think it's really
important what's best teaching
comes around, so I was a product
of Long Beach Unified School
District, Barry incredibly
creative district. I had 4 high
school teachers for my um
11th grade language arts and
social studies and two full-time
student teachers that were there
the whole year. So I know as a
student, that it's an effective
person because you can't relate
to everybody as a middle school
teacher, which is my special
thing.
We had teams. It was a very
powerful model for middle school
to have two teachers and an
inclusion teacher working with
the same group of 60 kids. And
um,
So it's totally accurate what
you're saying, um, with our
residency program, we're getting
two teachers in the classroom,
um, community schools are being
innovative with bringing people.
So, um, I simply think it's a
model that works. We're doing a
study now on middle school. We
have a task force made up of
teachers, educators, kids,
parents, and, um.
Again, uh, in Clovis, it takes a
lot of time and for those of you
who remember House Bill 130.
This is one reason why we want
an embedded, uh, professional
development because as our
presenter said, it takes
tremendous amounts of planning
time both within the school day
and outside the school day. Uh,
so thank you and I know as a
member of the legislative
Education Study Committee, I
know we're looking at this. I
feel like there's a menu of
options.
And you both have presented
stuff. I know the teachers in um
Carlsbad were very excited.
And they didn't do it, I think
with the whole school they, you
know.
When you talk about funding,
budgeting, and planning, they
didn't just slap it on
everybody.
And, um, I think that's a point
you made is you have to be
creative, you have to be
intentional, and you have to
tailor it. Uh, we have school
districts with 70 people versus
Albuquerque Public School that
has 80,000 people. So I, I just
wanna thank you, um.
I think it's definitely
something that more of our
schools in New Mexico are
looking at and whether it's a
precise program, uh, like, what
is it? I want to say impacted,
but that's not it.
What is it?
Opportunity culture
culture from uh public impact.
And so, and uh, I believe, um,
Doctor Hess, I think you and
your wife actually started it
from your own recognition of
what kids needed, and I thank
you for really putting the
emphasis on what kids need.
And what kids respond to.
Um, because it's true as you
talk to representative Sarana if
they're, if they feel engaged
and cared about, that's one
driver to get them. So I, I just
wanna thank you and I know we're
going to be talking about this
stuff a lot.
Um,
Uh, across the state and in our
own committee meetings, so I, I
really value what you presented
and from personal experience, I
know it works and from what I've
observed, it works.
That's it.
Thank you very much, uh, Rob
Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That
I really appreciate the model.
I'm over here. Sorry. Um, this
is something that I've looked at
as well and I've gone to some
conferences and, and it's very
much uh talked about. In fact, I
mean, I think, I think I talked
to um Sonny about this a couple
of years ago, but um we have, as
you know, we have great
educators that that are our
leaders and we look to um for a
lot of our policies. So thank, I
want to thank them for all their
work and everything they're
doing at LESC, um, but my
question is, um,
With opportunity culture, are
you integrating um part of what
we're doing in my district,
which is, which is in Santa Fe,
is we are providing um childcare
for our um educators for our
staff. Is that anywhere in your
plan, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
that is not part of the
opportunity culture model. It's
certainly would be a great
enhancement for teachers if
their schools could provide that
for them and so I endorse
endorse the thought. It's not
part of the staffing model that
we help schools create though
very interesting idea. I think
that's something that we really,
really need to look at as we
know that that is one of the
biggest economic development
challenges we have across all
sectors is childcare. Um, and I
would.
encourage you to look at Santa
Fe School District and the
innovation of what we're doing
there with the childcare
services that we're providing. I
think that's been one of the
most, uh,
one of the most talked about um
examples of supporting our staff
and what they need, especially
when housing and affordability
is um part of the equation. So
thank you, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate the time. Thank you
very much, Representative Lujan.
um.
Sonny, is there, uh, I, I don't
think there's any other
questions. Thank you all for the
presentation, uh, as we think
about perhaps at a pilot level
or or.
Expanding this option for
districts that may be
particularly interested, is that
something that we expect to come
forward from uh LESC is
representative Garrett
mentioned, is that something
that's being that you're sort of
interested in from the LFC side,
uh, Mr. Liu and I guess, do we
know if the executive is looking
at this or not to
a very big potential change, but
A smaller scale as an option,
how, how it might be advanced.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question.
In all my conversations with.
Individuals around this
innovative pilot.
They've rarely emphasized the
need to start slow.
I think about the level 3
teacher license where you sort
of almost envision this.
In 2003.
Where you had tears of
responsibility, and teachers
would essentially get a higher
pay level to do more, but its
senses sort of like evolved into
a pay advancement system as
opposed to a systematic approach
to creating teacher leaders. And
so I think rather than trying to
slam this into the system.
Very quickly and do sort of a
large scale system reform, uh,
back to what the presenters
discussed, you really need that
sort of coalition of the
willing, who are willing to come
to the table and have
intentional design around what
this could look like in their
individual school settings and
then scale it up over time. And
so I think both LESC and LFC
staff are looking at this. I
think it's a very um.
Interesting way to approach the
question of better, as you've
also heard.
Schools complain about not doing
more but better. This is that
better piece. How do we get
improvements in the actual
practice and collaboration
between educators. Uh, but I, I
will caution once again that if
you are if if this is something
that the committee is interested
in, I would recommend starting
pretty small, pretty slow, very
intentional, and building it up
over time. And, and we are
engaging the department on this,
but um so far it's only been
within
And legislative staff.
Got it. Thank you very much.
Thank you to both the presenters
and thank you, Mr. Liu for that
summary and also that sort of um
guide for for how we continue to
move forward.
Thank you all very much, Mr.
Chair, back to you.
So we're under tab D, this is a
budget guidelines and then.
We're all gonna get a few
minutes to go change.
Hit the road.
She, do you need to go to the
bathroom or something?
Great, Charles. OK, Mr.
Chairman.
You have two versions of the
budget guidelines. One is a
clean version, that's the one
you see right after tab D.
And then if you want to get into
the weeds on the marked up
version it's in the back.
The yellow highlighted piece is
not really part of the
guidelines themselves. These are
just provide context for the
revenue estimates. Those come
out tomorrow and then we'll
incorporate that. Hold on, oh,
which tab D. OK, we don't have,
we don't have the budget
guidelines in tab. I don't know.
This is your book and I, I took
mine out. I, I don't have
anything under my TED.
We, we'll get additional copies.
These were also in the share
file and reflect what you had
last meeting as well. So if you
had looked at him before.
Anybody else need copies?
OK.
Um, go ahead and start I would
turn your attention to page 2.
Right below the graph.
Uh, that education and health
and human services remained the
highest priority and the biggest
budget challenge and that other
committee priorities as drafted
include investments we've been
talking about this, uh, that
will increase educational
attainment and boost earned per
capita income, expand access to
high quality health care and
improve quality of life for New
Mexicans. That can be everything
from clean drinking water to
nice recreation facilities to
safe neighborhoods as an
example.
Um, overall, the approach is to
consider um adjustments to
agency budgets, but in light of
the huge increases that they've
been receiving, uh, that are, we
can't sustain those kinds of
increases and need to start
looking at uh being more
strategic and having a more
moderated spending growth.
On page 3.
Uh, you'll see a blank on the
general fund reserve target that
needs to be a decision point of
yours today. Um, as staff, we've
been analyzing this uh along
with the consensus revenue
estimating group and if you
continue to uh populate the
corpus of the grow, which is not
part of your reserves, but acts
as a backup to the operating
reserve than 25% uh seems like a
target, um, that, uh, the
committee should consider.
The other change that I want to
bring your attention to is on
page 3, the under agency
hearings we're gonna try uh
propose to take a new approach
for the 34 smallest agencies
that make up hardly any general
funder that are non-general
fund, um, still present budget
recommendations to you, but as
staff reports rather than
holding 3 days of subcommittees,
um, for all these agencies that
would allow you to spend more
time on
Agencies like the Healthcare
Authority, which has $12 billion
in it.
Uh, and
Normally they get slotted for
like an hour and a half. So, uh,
we're proposing to kind of mix
this up and give you more time
to go and dig deeper into where
the big money is, um, and your
priority areas.
Performance, uh, accountability,
the budget guidelines themselves
on page 4 to 5.
And into 6 are all pretty
standard.
The same thing for uh the budget
guidelines for non-recurring.
I will say that we've come to an
agreement with DFA.
That for, if you recall during
the debate on the grow uh fund
and all the accountability
components that were attached to
that that ended up getting
stripped out of the final bill.
We've agreed with DFA and we've
already incorporated that for
any expansion request, not just
for an agency requesting money
from the grove, but any
expansion request will have to
be justified using those 7
elements that were built into
that original grow bill that's
been built into the budget
system.
And that will be the
justification criteria that
we'll be looking at, uh, what's
the program supposed to do?
What's, what do we know about
the evidence of its potential
success from research? Do you
have an implementation plan? How
are we going to monitor success
and how are we going to evaluate
whether or not we're getting a
good bang for the buck at the
end of the day. We still have
some work to do with DFA on
coming back to you with
legislation uh for the
accountability for the growth
funds after they get funded. Um,
but that was a big step forward
for all expansion request, um,
that's, that's going into, into
place.
Um,
Tax expenditures, you're
entering a mode where uh you
may, if you're gonna do anything
in, in tax policy, it may need
to be on a, a revenue neutral
basis. You've taken quite a bit
of, of revenue growth, um, out
of the tax base, um, and put it
back into our economy, um.
And so when I I go forward basis
that would be something to
consider. And then starting on
page 8 through the end of the
document, it just has some
discussion of major issues and
some, uh, the bigger sectors of
government, uh, state government
financing, including public
schools, higher ed, behavioral
health.
Medicaid
Uh, transportation.
Uh, workforce development,
things like focusing on if we're
going to fund uh innovative new
things and workforce
development, making sure that
it's helping bring people into
the workforce and uh improve our
labor force participation rate.
And then it's also got some
language on the very last page
on budget adjustments, uh,
making sure that any
recommendations for budget
adjustment authority not undo
the budgets that you're and the
intent of what you're trying to
fund in the first place. With
that, Mr. Chairman, I
be happy to answer any
questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Sheer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. As a
As Mr. Slice knows, I
I don't know, 2 hours.
And, and actually some of the
things that we talked about are
in there, so thank you. I do
have uh just a couple of
questions or points. One of the
things that we talked about was
agencies.
Not doing what we said, we gave
him the money, said do X, they
decided that they didn't want to
do X, they did Y.
If we're going to appropriate
money for X, how do we make sure
that X gets done.
We will be engaging with the
state auditor's office on a more
frequent level, uh, to make sure
that they are looking at
compliance with House Bill 2
provisions on how agencies are
spending that and if they're not
shining a light on it and having
uh financial statement audit
findings included in the
financial audits or doing more
special audits.
So
Um
Mr. Chair, there was, um,
In in the previous one,
so LFC does not undermine the
intent of the committee's
funding requirements. That's the
language that we talked about,
and that's what I'm talking
about here too, same thing. Um,
I, I believe it was Senator Ivey
Soto, but it may have been
Senator Cervantes don't
remember, but, uh, any, any law
that does not have consequences
is just a suggestion.
And it seems to me like House
Bill 2 is just a suggestion.
Unless we can somehow enforce
what we want to do. And so,
How do we make it stronger than
just say, hey, we shined a light
on you and they go, yay, we
don't care.
Mr. Chairman, using your
appropriations power to maybe
not funding their next
initiative that they come ask
you for funding if they can't
spend it the way that you've
written it in House Bill 2 is
one option. Uh, 2, it's more
direction and working with staff
to figure out if we can be more
directive and prescriptive with
with language, um, would be to
uh initial suggestions, Mr.
Chairman.
And then along that same line is
the bar authority, um, I didn't
see what you put on here. I know
we talked about it, but we
talked about.
Trying to tighten up the bar
authority some uh part of what
we saw last, uh, meeting was
Where they waited until the last
day of the year and then they
did everything, so it wasn't
anything you could do about it.
You couldn't even talk about it
because it was too late. By the
time you knew it, it happened.
Do we have any language or ideas
on how to tighten that up so
that we have a little bit better
control.
The first is, um, examining, I
mean,
One, if you didn't have any bar
authority and House Bill 2, they
couldn't move any money around
or bring any new revenue that
they got, um, in their agency
accounts in, so you, you already
like.
Without writing anything in
House Bill 2, don't allow
agencies to transfer money
between programs, so CYFD can't
take money out of child
protective services and put it
over into juvenile justice as an
example. You haven't given them
that authority. Um, so using
that power and taking it a step
further that maybe this agency
doesn't need uh authority to do
a bar at the beginning of a
fiscal year. Uh, maybe you wait
to see if they need an
adjustment to their budget
during the middle of the fiscal
year when you're in.
as an example, um, and then
being more prescriptive, we had
guidelines that we had, uh,
suggested the Senate Finance
Committee on things like don't
provide unlimited bar authority
for an agency to bring in
revenue, but cap how much they
can bring in, maybe up to right
now it's 5% of their other state
funds, but some agencies can
bring in an extra couple
100,000. Be specific like that,
uh, as an example of, of trying
to corral them and limit it
while providing
Some flexibility for unforeseen
circumstances that uh the other
thing would be uh maybe an
agency that uh is implementing
the things according to law and
House Bill 2 gets more favorable
treatment for bars than an
agency who's continually
flouting um your legislative
intent. Uh, those would be some
other ideas, Mr. Chairman.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, in, in here
in every year, we talk about
economic diversity and then we
don't.
Is there anything in in the
budget process that could
actually try to drive that
because what what stops that is
everything else. Oh no, we don't
want to do that. We don't want
to be in the in the timber
industry anymore.
Period, because it might
interfere with the spotted owl.
Is there anything in the budget
process that we can do to say,
yes, we really want to do
something different because,
yes, I love oil and gas. You may
have noticed.
But I also agree that there
should be something else.
And I'm not particularly what
the something else is,
but for as long as I've been
here, it's been the same thing.
We need economic diversity.
It's in the budget guidelines.
Nothing ever changes. Is there
anything we can do realistically
to push that forward and say we
are really dedicated to doing
something different.
That Mr. Chairman is where we've
been researching and having
hearings with you all on, um,
alternatives to what I call
smokestack chasing, which are
paying companies to bring jobs,
but have a broader investment
strategy and making sure that
we've got a much higher
educated, um, population, um,
and tying that to the states um
strategic advantages that exist
in certain areas for economic
growth. And so you'll
and we can probably work on
this, uh, thematically to show
where we're making investments
to upskill our workforce and uh
tie that into building on what
we're already good at, which is
research and development as as
one example, uh, and we've had
hearings on that for the, the
past couple of years.
And then, uh, Mr. Chair, there's
22 kind of broad issues here,
crime, uh, and education, where
we seem to be failing miserably
on both, and yet what we've done
in the past is we simply put
more money into it, so we put
more money into education, a lot
more money into in into
education recently and
Well,
We, we've gone backwards.
Um, is there anything that we
can do
To say, do something different.
It's not more money. It's not
money, it's not, not the issue.
Is there anything we can do in
House Bill 2 to say,
Try something else besides what
we've been trying, um, and it's
the same with crime.
So we put money into crime, but,
but what we know is that it's
not money. There's a, there's a
lot of other things that are
going on out there. The catch
and release is going on there.
The fact that people aren't
being punished for things, and
it's the certainty of the
punishment, according to Senator
Travantis that reduces crime,
not the not the amount of
punishment. You can put people
in jail for 1 year or 5 years.
It doesn't matter as much as did
you put him in jail at all?
Then that has an effect.
Um,
When we took away uh the
qualified immunity from from
police officers. Police officers
don't want to do anything
anymore. They're afraid. And in
Albuquerque, they're extra
afraid because if they put hands
on anybody, they're taken off
the street.
So they wanna, they don't want.
No.
So there are other things
besides just paying officers
more.
In both of those, I'm not asking
for a specific, but is there
anything that we can do to put
in House Bill 2 that says do
something different.
Not just money, but do something
else.
Mr. Chairman, you can do a lot
in House Bill 2, but there are
limits. Uh, one of the things
that we can't do in House Bill 2
is actually implement uh how the
money is going to be spent or
how the law is going to be
followed. That's where your
oversight role comes into play.
Uh, that can be frustrating, but
I will say that there's a number
of things that, that go into
these guidelines that
Say let's ensure that the LFC
wreck is being good stewards of
taxpayer dollars, uh, and
That, you know, these are well
researched, uh.
Pots of money that we're
recommending to invest or if
it's not, we've got a good
research plan to show whether or
not it's working, it's going to
be implemented well. The growth
strategy allows you to take some
of this big surplus that you've
got and spread it out over
multiple years and not let
Um, recurring appropriations
into an agency's base budget
before they can prove that
they're gonna work for uh the
people of New Mexico, and so by
setting it aside in that pilot
test phase, uh, you've taken a
pretty dramatic step towards
ensuring you're not going to
just fund something and then let
it sit in the the base budget to
never get reallocated again.
As one that's one strategy that
you've tried to, to work on
through uh both legislation and
the budget. And so, uh, Mr.
Chair, the last one is, uh,
transportation. So I was talking
to the associated contractors
and they were talking about the
desire for a five-year rolling
budget and it wasn't because
we're not being consistent. It's
because if they're going to buy
expensive equipment.
The bank wants to know.
For sure, the bank doesn't want
to rely on us funding it again
even though we have been pretty
consistent.
Uh, so I would just recommend we
throw out there at least that
the idea that we, that we look
at that.
Uh just to give the contractors,
the contractor's lenders, uh,
peace of mind that if they lend
them $100 million for a piece of
equipment, there's a good chance
that they're going to pay back
that $100 in that 5 year uh
budgeting does that. So I just
throw that out there. Thank you
for the things that you did
include.
And now I'll shut up.
We're gonna put a spotted owl
jar up.
Center would
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This, uh, let's go to page 3.
Where we was talking about uh
general fund reserves.
And there's been some talk
around the table to take that to
25%.
That would be a $4 billion
increase.
And spending
Let me, let me spell words 1% is
roughly 100,000, 80 million, but
100 million, so that would be uh
uh $500 million increase in
spending if we spend it.
Your, your general fund.
Your, your revenue prediction.
Shows
That in
I wish I could find it.
We'll have the revenue
predictions tomorrow.
Well,
Evidently it's out today.
Well, why don't you share it
shows in the next few years if
Oil goes to $4.40.
Up to $40.
We could be a negative revenue.
Budget spending of $111 billion.
Now think about that guys.
We want to increase spending.
You say it's not 4 billion that
we're gonna
With the new money.
And going to 25, it won't be 4
billion.
Mr. Mr. Chairman,
Currently
Your reserves coming out of the
special session we're sitting at
about 32%.
500 million of that is not
really part of your reserves.
It's really in the grow, which
is moving out of your reserves
in FY 26.
That will act as a backup to the
operating reserve. If that ever
gets depleted because revenues
decline.
The grow will fill it back up.
That's why I'm saying that you
can afford to do 25% uh reserves
rather than 30%. The other is
that you've got, um, kind of a
statutory guidance that you put
into place that 25% is the
reserve target for deciding
whether to put money into our
trust funds or put it into the
rainy day fund.
And so as a, as a body you've
set that kind of threshold out
there, um, already in law.
I can't support a 25% reserve.
I still think there is, as much
money as we have coming back.
Every year out of these agencies
we can't put the money into them
and make them spend it.
But it and whatever's in excess
just drives inflation.
So
I, in particular, and I think I
might have some backing.
I would like to see these
reserves at 30%.
Is it
Is it a time to make a motion to
that?
We'll go through questions and I
think you can make a motion.
I'm, I'm just gonna tell you
something in ancient history in
Taos in 2019, I think I made the
reserves went to 30% because I
made a motion and they agreed to
it. I actually made the motion
at 35% before we, we really had
any money and everybody told me,
oh, that's too high a reserve,
right? So we settled on 30 and
that's kind of where we've been
for the last couple of years,
but.
Every bucket that we had got
emptied in 2019, 2016, 2018,
2019, right? Now all those
buckets, barrels are full of
money, right? And you have
triggers in motion not to hit
general fund before you hit
reserves.
And so as you trigger those, if
something happens in the
economy, those triggers hit
before they come to your 25%
reserve. And so if you're
calculating in in bond rating
and, and you mix a scenario is I
have all this, these walls in
front of me before they can hit
my general fund reserve. And I
think Charles, what is their
roughly 3 to 4 billion before
they can get to the 25% reserve
level.
So you, we placed all these
barriers in front before we have
to get to the general fund and
start cutting, right? Well,
we'll probably start cutting at
the same time if something
happens so that we don't draw
down everything over there and
we make cuts to hold everything
in front of the reserves, and so
is
We have more money, you hold
less reserves.
And we, we built barriers to
them hitting the general fund
reserve before they, the
operating money before you hit
that.
Before Mr. Chair, all I'm saying
is before we
Set a reserve level of 25%.
I want to see where that money
is supposed to go, that extra
money, and you're welcome to
prove to me it's not $4 billion.
But
I want to, before I set that in
these guidelines.
I would much rather say 30%.
And proved to me that we need to
spend that other money.
Well, we don't know what we're
gonna do with the other 25%
because it, it really doesn't
exist right now, right? Charles,
well, it exists, but it's in our
general fund reserves were
actually at 25% because of the
growth. So you take the 500
million out of the grow, you're
at 25%.
Currently, because the grow
money is budgeted for over 2
years.
And so this is the first year
they grow and that's 500 million
that went out of her, I can't
remember. It's 500 million
sitting in the reserves today.
That will move out next year and
that's about 5% reduction in
your reserve target just right
there alone. So it's not being
spent. It's not freeing up money
to be spent on something else
that's still held in abeyance in
the, in the expendable trust.
It's just outside the reserves
as a backup to the operating
reserve. That's why we're saying
you don't.
Really need
Uh, to be at 30% anymore.
OK, tell me this.
With the new money included.
Over the old budget.
Which, which also includes the
reversions.
How much growth is it in a
budget in the, in the budgeting
process. I don't care if you
call it expendable or whatever.
How much growth is it?
In the budget.
When we take the reserves to 25%
knowing the new money is coming
in.
Mr. Chairman, you'll get those
revenue estimates in the
morning, but as we've been
reporting, um, and predicting
since last year that we had
massive increases in our
revenues and then they're
flattening out.
And that's what you'll see
tomorrow morning. So no more big
increases year over year in
projected revenue that we were
seeing over the past couple of
years. They're flattening out.
And they'll be discussion about
how that new money calculation
is kind of outdated with our
current financial position and
the economists will walk you
through how they're looking at
uh what's available because
you've been spending that money
just in a, a non-recurring items
uh through the budget.
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So last
year,
We counted the grow money in the
reserves. If we would not have
counted the grow money in the
reserves. The reserves would
have been 27.1%.
So we did some
Maneuvering
Counted it so that we could get
it 32.2%.
Now, it's gonna be going out. I
think we're premature to make
this decision before we see the
revenue estimates, in my
opinion, first of all, second of
all,
I have never seen.
A pilot project.
Not refunded. So we are funding
pilot projects with what we're
calling reserves.
But creating recurring funding.
And so I'm concerned about the
25% because of these pilot
projects work, Mr. Chairman,
and, and Charles, then we're
gonna put them in the budget. So
we're growing our budget, we,
we're growing recurring
spending.
But we're not
We're not saving as much money
and the growth fund will
eventually go away unless we put
more funding in it.
And so, uh, my concern is the
same as Senator Woods. I want to
see it at 30%. I don't want to
count the grow funding as
reserves because it is spent
money.
It if it's not spent right now,
it's going to be spent money.
Some of those other funds that
we have, we spend the interest
or we spend a percentage or we
it's, it's more of an interest
type thing, but
The grow fund is there to spend.
And we're creating recurring
spending.
and so I'm concerned about 25%,
I think, um, if the revenues are
saying are doing what you're
saying, Charles, that they're
flattening out, all the more
reason to keep it at 30.
And in my opinion.
Um, I, I also
know that we have grown budgets
massively, as is stated in this,
in this, and we also know that
there's a few agencies that are
creating fines.
That they're using in their
operating budget.
And so
I, there's a lot of problems
that we have moving forward.
Um, fees is one thing, but fines
is another.
And so my concern, uh, I'm, I
will not vote for a budget
that's less than 30% reserves or
guidelines. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. So let me explain
something about the grow. You
have to park that $5000
somewhere and account for it
somewhere in your system, right?
And you know you're gonna expend
it, but you're not expanding to
the next year, so this is an
accounting method that we used
to, to hold grow in flexibility,
right?
And if you keep your reserves
higher.
And your spending is at this
level.
Then everything should balance
out, right?
But as we move forward, we're
gonna start seeing a slowing of
growth.
Right, so as we see that slowing
of growth, we put so much money
in those buckets funds, the
triggers in in Senator
Gonzalez's bill, right over the
ten-year period, uh representing
small, had a bill last year,
right? That puts more money in
there. We built up such a
fortress, right?
That
And new money comes in at.
6%, right?
If it comes in at 6%.
You need to account for that in
some way and you can't spend the
whole 6% as you move forward,
but you have these.
Enormous barriers to the general
fund and reserves and in the
early childhood, the early
childhood fund's gonna hit 8 or
10 billion this year.
Over the next couple of years,
10 billion, if not a little bit
more, if something turns down in
the economy, that is the first
fund that gets hit before you
draw from your general fund
reserves. So they'll
automatically pull from that if,
if something happened in the
economy today and he said we had
to pull 300 million from our
reserves and, and, and our
actual numbers at 25%, we'd be
at 22 or whatever the number is,
but we'd actually pull that
money from that fund to backfill
the reserves.
And so as you, as you backfill
those numbers, you, you need a
lower number. Uh, Mr. Chairman,
I, I understand that, but I, I
do believe in the, and I, I
think Senator B Padilla is in
the room. I believe in that, uh,
that early childhood education
fund. There's language in that
bill to where it is the very
last thing that can be touched.
Is that correct, Senator
Padilla, or Charles, whoever
knows Mr. Chairman, the corpus,
that's correct. But the revenue
inflow if oil drops somehow to
$40 a barrel.
And it sustains that for a
period of time.
Then the
Money went dry up, that would be
otherwise going to the Early
Childhood Trust Fund first or
the severance tax permanent
fund.
We've, you've insulated the
general fund from a lot of the
shocks of direct uh energy
revenues.
Uh, and that's what I think the
chairman was mentioning as that
installation allows you a lot
more certainty and less
volatility. The volatility is
why we wanted to have high
reserves in the past because it
was hard to predict what was
gonna happen with those direct
energy revenues.
Thank you for that. I, I just
remember my freshman year, and I
will never forget my freshman
year.
Where we were sweeping from
every single nook and cranny.
To to fund.
The state budget. We had no
capital outlay.
And I know what's happened
before.
Uh, before I was there, and I, I
am a firm believer in, in
saving.
Um,
We can see how much we've grown
our budget.
In the past 78 years.
You know, when I came in, it
was, you know, 60% growth.
Uh, in our budget and uh when I
came in, I think it was 4
billion.
Was our budget now it's over 10.
So I'm just concerned and I
understand and I want to put
money and I want to spend money
in the places that we need to,
but I, I do not and refuse to be
wasteful. So, and, and some of
these agencies can't even spend
the money we're giving them, and
they're gonna come back, I
guarantee you and ask for more.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Small, thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Uh, great
discussion. Um, I have a few
questions. Um, so, uh, Mr. Sli,
we're in this sort of uh the 5%
change, roughly $500 million.
That's what it works out to,
uh, before I actually I ask a
few questions around that, I
think just, um, we should take
pride in the fact this previous
year was this past year the
lowest percentage budget.
Growth
Uh, in the last say 3 or 4
years.
Yes, sir, Mr. Jim, recurring,
um, also this past year, so, so
we as a committee and as a, you
know, committees and as a body,
we kept our recurring growth
down even as there was far more
recurring money coming in,
something I think we could be
in, Mr. Chair, Mistress Lee,
grow as part of that, right?
There's also just our
understanding that we have to
keep our recurring spending.
Well below this sort of mesa and
these peaks of recurring revenue
that are coming in in order to
really balance things moving
forward.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sale, um, this
past year, we also created and
is proud to partner with uh with
Chelti or with Cheerente, um,
for the first time created and
began to fund.
A little bit a new fund for
capital outlay that doesn't just
depend upon the annual severance
tax bonds, is that correct, Mr.
Slee? Yes, that's correct. And
we also, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sali, we capped what we can
spend on we, we said we're not
gonna bond. We're gonna
um constrain ourselves from
bonding the full amount of STB.
Capacity because we know that
that's a limited number. We, we
legally constrained ourselves
this past session on that front
too, right, Mr. Slee? Yes, sir,
Mr. Chair. Great. And, and these
are, Mr. Chair, Mr. Lee, I know
we all know this, but it's, I
think these are all really
hallmarks of good smart policy,
uh, and frankly very um
constrained and a moderate
approach to a really big revenue
increase. Now, Mr.
Your chair, Mr. Slee, I want to
go through a couple of places
that potentially the uh some
money could be put that aren't
recurring spending because I
think we all know and
acknowledge that we have to
constrain that. So Mr. Sali, we
could put some of the funding
into that capital outlay
permanent fund. Is that correct?
So we could take some portion.
Not of revenue put it into the
capital outlay fund that was
created last year as we begin to
over time build that fund up,
uh, and support that fund so
that we have other ways to fund
capital creation and
particularly maintenance. That
would be a possibility. I think
the the main point that I see is
that you've filled up so many
different funds in the treasury,
like at levels we've never seen
before.
That those are always going to
be in our fiscal solvency
playbook to hit those things
before you hit reserves or the
general fund.
Great. And
thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sali,
that saves me from trying like
going through all these
different iterations, and get,
you said it clearly, we saw it
earlier in the year. There are
many billions of dollars that
are available now in sort of
break the glass emergencies. Um,
and there are uh, you know, this
past year with our approach on
the grow.
Which further constrains
recurring funding, not all of
that will become recurring. We
certainly hope some of it works
and is worthy, but if it doesn't
work, then it shouldn't become
recurring. So I, I think trials
Mr. Slee, you summed it up.
There all of our buckets are
overflowing. We have the chance
to continue to be very moderate
and constrained to potentially
fill out new buckets for key
purposes that further insulate
us.
Um,
to do some non-recurring work
potentially.
And you know that that that this
recognizes sort of our new
reality, so I think it's worthy
of support. I think they're very
good questions. uh, but I think
it is very much worthy of
support reflects where we are
and will not see partic new big
growth in recurring spending
cause we know we shouldn't do
that, that we can't do that and
support the teacher salary
increases we've made or the
myriad other the things that
we've done.
We can't grow recurring spending
too much, but we can balance
things. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Charles, I just
have a few comments that I think
I, I may have to make these in
motion. I, I would like to see
us look at DOT as a general fund
agency and appropriate money
directly to them for road
projects and what they're
required to do.
And then the other thing is uh
you, we have a problem in Cher.
The way that LFC can look at
stuff and way that DFA can look
at stuff, does not match up at
the point in time and share.
And so I, I think the AFA had
already stopped talk last year
and I think did we put money in
the budget to start replacing
share or updating that share
system.
We started those conversations.
I need to go back to see if we
actually funded the beginning of
the planning. We, we can see the
same things in Cher, uh, between
agencies. It's just that spat
that came up last week was they
were looking at different
appropriations and what we were
looking at, um, and we figured
that out over the weekend
through some good work by Mr.
Simon, while the executive came
back and said last week, right,
that we weren't truthful in what
we looked at and our numbers
weren't accurate
It and, and so it it was that
that's not a shared problem
according to what you've found
out, that is a problem is
they're adding things from, I
think you mentioned to me 2017
forward in
in matching that up and claiming
that the legislature um wasn't
looking at things accurately and
didn't do that. I mean, what do
you want to compare apples to
oranges and years to years, I
mean, I wanna make sure that
share system is accurate. So
when we pull our information
that we're pulling DFA's
information at the same time.
And if the executive doesn't
want to share what information
they're pulling and says that
the legislature didn't fund this
or didn't do that, and we, we
got to have that comparison and
the executive should show the
respect to to do that and share
the same.
Line items that we can compare
to them and and when courts and
corrections asked you to do
that, you pulled certain numbers
that they asked you to and then,
then they pull different numbers
and and tried to explain it
away. Uh, that's one of the
things. So if you don't think
there's a problem with share,
but share still needs to be
updated at some point.
Correct?
Yes, sir, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
that's something that will work
with TFA to figure out a process
on it if they need money in the
next budget for that.
And then
Um, to Senator Sheer's point a
little bit is, you know, we've
all seen the stories in in CYFD
and I don't know if everybody's
caught on to the $200 million
that they, they're using. That
was a $20 million that was at.
Do, no HSD correct?
Who is supposed to work
together, who's now the
healthcare authority that we
transferred to CYFD for
behavioral health and mental
health issues now that they're
spending it on this housing that
the federal government won't
reimburse, and they came up 13
or 17 million in short in their
year-end budgeting.
And see what in the foster news
program. Yeah, the, the foster
care revenue shortfall we're
still working at looking at to
see what that shook out to be,
but, um, and during the spring,
they thought it was gonna be a
sizable amount, more than
10,000, but it may not be that
large as the dust settles and
yes, the uh the $20 million for
behavioral health and child
welfare interventions, um, it's
our understanding at looking at
the data that they're using some
of that for uh.
Congregate care facility that
used to be a juvenile justice
facility for youth transitioning
out of, out of care and know the
federal government will not pay
for that type of congregate care
based on the information we
have.
So, so let me ask you this
because I've kicked this around
for a couple of years and
everybody doesn't like change.
Sometimes they say they like
change, but they don't. If the
legislature put in its
guidelines that we want to
completely separate bill for
language where the governor
completely changes the way that
the legislature appropriates
money.
Could that be something you
could look at in the guidelines
and say you have House Bill 2.
That's all money and agencies
and.
Whatever I'll call a House Bill
3, that is a language bill that,
that the exec has to go through
separately. How would that tie
into the
To each other at the end and
then I mean that that's been our
issue with the execs, no matter
who it was, right? What can they
line 9 and veto what they can't
line down and veto? What's our
legislative intent, right? And
then they changed by striking
the word shaw or may or right,
and some of that's coordination
with us. And and so how do we,
how do we capture that in the
guidelines, so the exact can't
change the amount of money we
appropriate, how we appropriate
it and what it's for.
Can we do that in two separate
bills and then.
Mr. Chairman, I think that would
be hard because your language is
describing how to spend the
appropriation or even in the
budget adjustment section,
that's really uh a different
type of appropriation authority
that you're granting an agency.
So,
It would be hard to send that up
even before the appropriations
bill because it's again, it's
describing.
How the tables and the money is
supposed to be um spin, but it's
something we can continue to to
research on if there's other uh
kind of statutory provisions
that you'd want to put into
place for guardrails around your
appropriations.
But statutory provisions have to
pass and and be signed by an
executive.
They would, and I, I think a
language only appropriations
bill would still be an
appropriations bill and wouldn't
allow you to get around the
partial veto.
Well, I, I mean, hard and can't
do it, there's two different
things, but I, I mean, I've been
here long enough to know, right?
To, to sometimes they change the
complete structure of of what
the legislative intent was just
like this CYFD and behavioral
healthcare money, right? I mean,
no it was for children for
behavioral health issues, and
now they've changed the funding
stream to be for operationals
for that building.
That wasn't the legislators
intent.
I, I don't know whether she did
that. Did she strike language in
House Bill 2 to do that, or they
just did it on their own. No,
you reauthorize that
appropriation and broke it up
into two appropriations for this
fiscal year, 10 million going to
CYFD and 10 million for the
healthcare authority. Um, and I
think they used it for
non-recurring items to fix up
the facility to.
Make it not as much of a
juvenile detention facility. So
how, how would the legislature
make the exec accountable to
that appropriation.
Through your hearings, your
decisions on future funding
through coordinating with the
auditor's office, um, and your
program evaluation shot.
OK.
I, I, I don't, I, I think it's
something that we should look at
no matter who's in the
legislature 1020 years from now.
Senator Rodriguez probably seen
this 1000 times.
Where some exec just line items
what they want and changes a
complete stream of or intent of
what should happen in in the
legislature has one choice,
right? Either go for a veto
override or if it's illegal, go
back, go to court and challenge
it.
And and that becomes the problem
is.
You know, depends on the dollar
amount and and where they're at,
but I think at some point you
got the legislature's got to
say, listen, we're gonna start.
Exercising some muscle and and
and figure that out, so, uh, I
guess we'll go to motions on
adopting uh.
On adopting the guidelines for
2026.
We'll have a roll call vote, Mr.
Chair.
Senate representative Small. I
move approval of the budget
guidelines and insert 25% for
reserves.
So, uh, I know that, am I
correct that you wanted to make
a motion, Senator Sheer, Senator
Senator, sorry, go ahead for
others. I just want to make
sure.
Did you want to make that motion
or you just want to go?
You can make any motion you
want. I mean, it,
it may not, I would like to make
a motion to amend theend the
motion to adopt two.
A 30% reserve.
Instead of the 25 to 50 I'd even
go to 30 to 50. I, I, I'd give
that much to you, you have to
pick a number. You can't pick a
range.
So
You want to pick a number, you
want to make a motion that so we
can.
Yeah, I would like to put the
number of 30% in there that was
struck out here a motion by
Senator Woods, second by Senator
Armstrong, I guess I'll call the
roll and I'm not gonna go into
any orders Rodriguez. No.
Sir Padilla.
No.
Senator Burt is not here,
Scendo, no.
In our woods.
And there she center compost.
Uh,
Vice Chairman Small
representing Dixon.
Represent Garcia.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Armstrong. Yes.
Is on. No.
Representing Baca is not here.
Representative Lente.
I hope you're tracking the
numbers cause I just wrote.
My.
Fails 9 to 9 to 4,
correct? OK.
Charles, do we need a motion to
put DOT in the guidelines or can
we just do that?
I mean,
As a general fund agency.
Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, as
your motion to make the reserve
target 25, you may also include
that uh
Analysts should examine making
DOT at General Flynn agency.
OK, so I'll make the motion that
resent reserve funds should be
set at 25 with the guidelines
with additional adding LLC to
look at making DOT a general
fund agency.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, so one of the
things I talked about was the 5
year budget. We're talking now,
we are these counter
Are they mutually exclusive?
They're not, they're not
I don't believe they're
countering each other.
All right, thank you, thank you.
Sure.
Did you understand?
Did you get a second? I haven't,
I haven't second question real
quick.
Do you have a 2 by Senator
Padilla will call the roll, and
this is for the adoption of the
25% guideline in adding DOT to
be looked at as a general fund
agency.
Uh.
Senator Rodriguez. Yes, yes.
Senator Gonzal Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Burt not here. Senator
Scino, yes.
In her woods. No
Senator Sheer, no, compos
Vice Chair small.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Represented the uh Martinez.
Representative Armstrong.
No, for the reasons I stated
earlier,
in Seona.
Represent B is not here
representative Linte.
Yes.
9 to 4, 10 to 4, sorry.
I got to vote
OK, we've adopted the
guidelines, uh, any other
questions, the vans are gonna be
out front, Charles, right? What
time is it? I don't even know
what time it is. 3:23 were 7
minutes ahead of schedule.
Right,
uh, Mr. Chair, I know a few
folks will need to change shoes
and
Um, yeah, so I'm gonna go change
shoes too and, and shirts, so if
when you get there, you get
there, but just get it there as
quick as you can. We're not
gonna get out, but maybe once or
twice, so we can keep moving.
So make sure our tour guides
know that, that we get out, it
takes us half an hour to get
back in. So let's, let's pick
two points that you want us to
get out on, look at visually,
uh, and see and then we'll be
back in what, 2 hours?
An hour and a half. All right.
I'm not gonna get a ticket, are
we?
