Good to see all of you here.
Good afternoon. A good afternoon
it's a good money too.
Go ahead. Good afternoon. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Paula Garcia, and I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexicote Association, and
here to my right is the esteemed
Mary Mascarena's chairwoman of
the New Mexico Execu Commission,
and we will be presenting to you
today on our joint legislative
parties and we will then be open
for.
Questions. So thank you for the
opportunity to be here. It's
good to see all of you and we
appreciate all the hard work you
do for our time grant and the
Seca communities across the
state.
I just like to say, yeah, I'm
glad to be here and again, like
she says, I'm married to
Mascarias, and I come from the
little picturesque town of
Villano de San Juan, New Mexico.
You know San Juanno in Taos
County.
Christina um.
Area.
And uh
I met several of you at other
times for other reasons, so I'm
just happy to see you again. Uh,
about the New Mexico CIA
commission. We just like to
mention because some of you are
new, some of you.
Maybe are tired of hearing it,
but, uh, the New Mexicocia
commission was established in
1993 in statute.
Uh
And it is part of the DFA local
government division.
It should advise the governor
and the legislature on policy
matters of interest to the
assegas and also
communicate with the state water
engineer and uh advice also the
state water engineer and
different things.
Um
It was really established in
1987 as an advisory body and
formalized in statute in 1993 by
the legislature as an
eleven-member commission serving
four-year terms or when for
whatever term the governor, the
governor assigns or names.
So yes, another thing we should
advise and assist not only the
governor, the legislature,
The Office of State Engineer, I
see ISC and USACE.
And uh Ise infrastructures are
our priorities, and the matters
affecting us I guess is what we
deal with.
A sickest and state and federal
agencies are are much important
to us and they communicate with
us.
On a monthly basis.
For our meeting, we have
somebody present giving a
report.
And we communicate through our
staff.
And uh so uh we, we help to, uh,
the, uh
Some of the laws that have gone
into effect, so we, we need to
do that and be involved with the
New Mexico City Association.
Together we work better. We do
more things because we're
working for the same thing and
that's I said guessing water.
Arianes de
Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Uh,
as you can see, we're, we're
really blessed to have um
Chairwoman Mascarenas in
leadership, um, she is our, our
stateswoman of the Aseass and
has really facilitated some good
collaboration between our two
respective entities. Um, I'm
here representing the New Mexico
Ase Association, and I wanted to
call to your attention that we
have um a good delegation here
representing both of our
entities from the 2 commission.
as well as the association. Uh,
we have members of the
commission here, and maybe, uh,
Mary.
Introduce yourself forever.
If I can ask that you come up to
a microphone, so that way we get
your name on record.
I'm Judy Torres. I'm the vice
chair of the New Mexico SAA
Commission, and I'm from Taos
County.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
company. My name is Alfredo
Montoya.
And the only stand up once, but
I'm not a member of the
commission and also a member of
the Consilio the Mexicose
Association.
Thank you
Mr. Montoya is also a former
Riorriba County commissioner.
And I have a son in a county
commissioner to Tas County, so
I'm very proud of that.
I'm a Harold Trujillo. I'm
president of the New Mexicose
Association and uh Mayasecas are
in Ledus and Mora. Uh, thank you
very much.
And I think we have to say that
we are proud that our
commissioners are parentes that
means that they work with the CS
and waters, they just don't come
to represent because
Uh, they know somebody or
whatever, so that is important.
We know about Maodomoses a
circostapanques and all that
stuff.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you again for
the opportunity to present to
you today. I'm really pleased to
be here with, um, with
Chairwoman Mascarenas and
members of our leadership. We
also have some staff here in the
room and, and with they have
expertise and in their
respective areas that we may
call upon if there's a question
that they can answer better than
either Mary or myself.
I'm with this, let me, I'm
sorry, I didn't introduce our
staff, Robert.
Yes.
And Enrique Romero.
I guess that's all. So that's
part of our staff. So I'm sorry,
I, I meant to.
Thank you.
And we also have today our um
staff attorney at Ronalpando and
uh Vidal Gonzalez, our community
planner and governance
specialists are both here.
And um we're gonna go ahead and
proceed and I'll tell you a
little bit about the New
Mexicose Association, uh, we're
a statewide organization of
Asecas, and it's a grassroots
membership-based organization
since 1989, we've been working
to protect Aseass through
community organizing education
and policy advocacy.
I want to call your attention to
page 7 of your packet, and that
gives you a snapshot of the
representation of a secas across
the state. There are
Over 700 assecas in New Mexico.
And those asea serve anywhere
from 3 to 600 families. It
really depends on the geographic
location. Um, we've assisted
over 550 of those assekis with
bylaws and governance matters,
and we have a track record of
advocacy here at the
legislature, and some of the
more notable policy
accomplishments have been the
2003 Ase water transfer, um,
statute which gives a
has the power to approve or deny
water transfers, and others in
between, but in 2019, we also
were able to successfully
advocate for the second
community ditch infrastructure
fund that was created in statute
and a codified some recurring
funding for uh Seki across the
state.
And we have several programs and
services that I'd like to
highlight. Uh, one of them is
the Aseca Governance Project,
and through that project we
assist an average of 350 to 400
sekis per year, and this project
also includes our water transfer
tracker.
We also have infrastructure and
disaster recovery. We, we assist
an average of 50 seconds with
infrastructure planning
applications, and um since 2022,
we've assisted 150 Aseys with
disaster recovery.
But when the Legal Services
project, which is a partnership
with New Mexico Legal Aid, and
we focus on assisting us kids
with water transfers. And the
farmer ranch Outreach Project
Loredores farmer training
project in our youth leadership
Institute.
At this point, I want to share
with you some of the areas of
collaboration between the
commission and the Association.
One of the major areas of
collaboration recently has been
around monitoring water
transfers. And as I presented to
this commission before to this
committee before, um, this is
one of the major policy issues
that we concentrate on because
it presents a um a a threat, a
risk to a sick because of the um
the potential of losing water
rights out of the Aseca and
affecting the viability of the
ass. So, um, we, uh,
monitor transfers through the uh
monthly water transfer tracker,
and uh the, the commission has
been very helpful along with
their attorney from the
Department of Justice in working
with um the state engineer to
clarify their policies and make
sure that they're in compliance
with the statute. Uh, we've also
been working to address
streamlining of audit
procedures, um, so that, uh, the
tiered reporting system is not
so burdensome for a se yes. We
also have a project in which
we're doing research with some
uh student, uh, graduate
students and attorneys on real
estate disclosure requirements.
So there are several of those
other collaboration efforts on
page 9 of our packet.
I like to do is focus mainly on
our outline for budget
priorities, and this is on page
10.
We have developed these budget
priorities collaboratively with
the Association and the
Commission. These are items that
are of of priority to us that
across the state.
And the first one on our list,
and this is again on page 10 of
your packet.
It's a second community ditch
fund.
And we put this first because
there are many a sicks that are
impacted by this fund, and it's
been in place since the late 80s
and incrementally, we've added
to it as the need has, has
grown. This is the fund that
supports the sick kids that are
going through adjudication and,
and working to negotiate um with
the, the pueblos and tribes, uh,
on Indian water rights
settlements. Uh this is a very
important fund to have um
The coordinated effort among the
Seass, and we are, um, together,
our recommendation is to
increase the base level from
800,000 to $2 million to the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
The second community ditch
infrastructure fund.
This fund is what was uh created
at the Interstate remission in
2019. Up until that year, there
was year to year funding that
went to ISC and you had a
presentation from Jonathan
earlier during the interim, uh,
Jonathan Martinez is the bureau
chief for the bureau at the
Interstate Stream Commission.
That's the new bureau. And that
was also part of our advocacy
efforts. We actually introduced
a bill to have an executive
bureau and there was a com
from the agency to create the
Bureau administratively and they
did. So we consider that a big
success story. They've also more
than doubled their staff in
recent years since this, this
law was passed.
Um, so the, the program is
growing and um it's operating in
a, in a very positive manner,
uh, for a second.
So we're, we're proposing now to
increase that recurring
appropriation from 2.5 million
to 5 million. It started with
2.5 because that was a historic
amount, um, but after 34 years
of being in operation, we can
see now that they are able to
manage more money. They've
received special appropriations
and in the last two years, they
have been um allocating between
5 and $6 million per fiscal year
because of special
appropriations. So this is a
major priority for us.
It's a good compliment to
capital outlay.
And many of you, especially
those of you who have a lot of
secus in your district can
appreciate that capital outlay
might not be able to meet all
the needs in your in your
district for a second
infrastructure. So this program
actually has um a two-phase
funding approach where they can
apply for engineering design
first, and after they get the
engineering design, they can
come back and ask for
construction funding. One of the
positive things about this fund
at ISC is that when we wrote
that when we
um, advocated for the statute.
The commission and the
association were written into
the statute as being able to
give advice on the guidelines
for that program. Uh, so we were
very invested in that program.
We, we work toward its success.
Um, we're also proposing a $10
million special appropriation,
and this is based on, again, our
analysis of looking at past
funding and an assessment of
unmet need?
Um, another area is to increase
funding for uh the commission
right now the asseki commission
does not have staff and does not
have an office, and they have a
very important statutory role to
play as an advisory body, and
they've recently been built in
capacity administratively and
with uh policies and procedures,
um, and they're ripe for some
staffing.
Uh, they've been working very
hard to to get to this point.
There's also a program at DFA
local government division that,
that it's called the second
community ditch education
program, and that's the program
that uh DFA uses to contract out
and are nonprofit, um, uses that
contract to provide the services
that I was describing earlier.
Uh, 5th on our list and uh it's,
it's very important to many of
our communities. This is the
Indian Water Rights Settlement
Funding, and the um
State engineer's office is doing
presentations now in the interim
to explain.
fully what is involved with
those settlements and uh
My understanding is that after
talking to them, they're going
to be asking for 40 million in
their agency request. Uh, the
need is much greater than that,
but that's the recommendation
this year, and I want to point
out that these, these
settlements are very important
for
Of course, settling the, the
oldest prior Paramount water
rights in the state, which are
the pueblos, but they also
settle aseki water rights and
the Asey portion of these
settlements is is smaller than
the federal, uh, but the state
portion is what covers the Azeka
casher, um, towards the
settlement. So, uh,
We're very, um,
Invested in seeing this funding
go through, um,
There are several
Settlements that have already
been approved by Congress, but
there are others that are
pending and uh those will be
something that the state
engineer will be keeping your
apprised of.
6th on our list is the Office of
the state auditor.
And the state auditor has, has
been developing the way that
they deal with a secas and small
political subdivisions since
2010, they started to implement
the tiered reporting system,
which I'm sure you've heard a
lot about, um, even though it's
tiered and it's meant to be
easier than a full audit, uh, it
can still be very difficult for
a small political subdivision to
do that on their own. The cost,
the difficulty of procurement.
And so a few years ago, the
state auditor's office got an
appropriation and, and a lot of
that came as a result of this
committee. So you're always on
the cutting edge of standing up
for small political subdivisions
because of the land grants in
the segas, um, but that
appropriation went to a grant
fund and the Sea political
subdivisions land grants to
apply to the fund and get money
to hire an APA contracted an
IPA. The new state auditor has
taken
a step further.
And now the state auditor's
office will use that
appropriation to procure the
auditors. So the, the political
subdivision doesn't have to do
the procurement anymore.
So it's just another degree
easier, but what the feedback
we're hearing is that it's still
difficult. Um, it's not enough
funding.
And um we're supporting the the
auditor and their request for an
additional $500,000 for that
program. Um, the rest of our
sites get into a lot more detail
about each of these you want to
say anything at this time?
Uh, I think about the funding.
Madam chair, um, members of the
committee, um, good afternoon,
Robert Apola. I think you know,
uh, most of you, the, um, the
request for the, uh, New
Mexicosia Commission, um,
For the we've submit a request
to the Department of Finance
Administration, uh, to go to
$169,000 for the execu
commission. Right now, the
commission has a budget of
88,100, and currently there's uh
myself and actually Arians who's
one of the part-time technical.
I'm a technical consultant.
She's a technical assistant
assistant that kind of helps.
Um, to facilitate the meetings
we do, uh, some of the work with
the different agencies and
whatnot to help coordinate the
efforts of the NMAC and NMAA.
Sorry.
Yeah, um,
As the I've been working with
the commission for probably the
last 6 years and as we've, um,
you know, through enemy and
enemy see have seen there's more
and more issues that are coming
up regarding aseca's water
issues, water rights, and so on
and so forth. This, um, the
increase would allow for the
commission to have a permanent
staffer on site that would be
kind of do a deeper dive on a
lot of these issues, for
example, with the, um, during
the legislative session, there's
a number of
ours that are, you know, sent on
behalf of affecting water issues
or seconds or whatnot, which
makes it difficult, you know,
kind of on a part-time basis for
Ashley and myself to do it. So
this would allow more a deeper
dive on some of those
legislative issues and, you
know, the regional planning
efforts and so on and so forth,
so.
That's what the increase for
that um 16 or of it's 89.
1000 I believe. Um, it's about
$89,000 increase from our
current budget from 88,100.
And at this time I'd like to
mention also that the statute
calls for the New Mexicoica
commission to meet.
Uh, once a month.
But uh you know,
As in the past, we've always had
meetings, but we've always taken
care of it ourselves.
And I think it's only fair with
the commission asks is that we
are able to
Also be reimbursed for mileage
and per diem when we have to
travel to other places or other
meetings as as today. And um we
meet with other agencies and
it's always been on our own
topic.
Uh, we come to the meetings and
that is uh taken care of for the
for the monthly meeting, but
it's only fair, I think, uh, to
have.
Equality for every commission
and every state um.
Agency to, you know, to realize
it, everything costs money and
if, if you want people, working
people to be involved, they have
to be helped.
Thank you.
Thank you, Robert. Mr. Chairman,
I'll just wrap up with a couple
of other items and then we'll uh
turn it back to you, Mr.
Chairman, with your permission.
Um,
Those, those are the budget
parties and, and as you could
see there's some good
conversations happening between
our two entities about what
those priorities should be. Uh,
we also have legislative
priorities in addition to those,
and one of them is going to be
to support amendments to the
community governance Attorney
Act, and we would like to
support what the land grant
Council is recommending
around um, um, addressing the
cost share issue and also
Um, let me look at that again.
Um, ensuring that
The Department of Justice and
land grant serving in the 2nd
serving nonprofits can be the
qualifying employer for those um
law school graduates when they
go and take those first steps
into their careers, and we're
very excited about that program.
We appreciate the work of the
committee to advance that and
get it across the finish line,
and it, it's uh so far a success
story, um.
We're hoping that this program
can be expanded?
And that there would be more
attorneys available and that our
nonprofits that are serving the
communities on the front line
can qualify for those attorneys.
So that's, that's our, our first
priority. Uh, our second
priority is, um, amending the
second community ditch
infrastructure fund.
Again, this is the fund that was
enacted in 2019.
And that fund, um, is
administered by the Interstate
Stream Commission, um, we are
going to propose that that fund
be increased from 2.5 million to
5 million recurring revenue.
Currently, it's funded by the
Irrigation Works Construction
Fund.
And we're very open to seeing if
there's other ways to fund that,
because the irrigation works
construction fund
is also funding uh the OSC and
ISC operations. So, um,
Being able to tap that for more
irrigation projects has been
challenging through the budget
process, but we feel that this
is very justifiable, and we have
documented unmet needs that
justify this increase.
The the $2.5 million is only
meeting about half of the
The requests that are coming
through the program right now.
Um, the other uh program that we
are looking at at um
Pursuing legislation for is the
second community education
program. And I mentioned this
previously. This is the funding
that that is the primary source
of psych technical assistance in
New Mexico. Um, there's really,
there's no other entity that is
doing the governance work, the
infrastructure assistance and
especially now the disaster
recovery. Um, the fund is also
supporting youth education.
So, uh, there's, there's a youth
leadership institute.
classroom presentations and
curriculum development that's
happening through this program.
It's a line item in the DFA
local government division
budget, and that was made a
recurring line item, um.
And it's probably in 2007, if I
remember correctly. So it's been
there for a long time. It's,
it's institutionalized, uh, DFA
local government division has a
very efficient procurement
process for it. Um, we're
interested in codifying that
program. Um, and the funding's
already there and codifying the
program with um ensure that it's
there for years to come.
Um, how it's administered could
change uh in the future, but the
important thing is that the
resources remain their available
to to meet a second needs well
into the future.
Um, I'm gonna conclude with uh
two information items, um,
they're at the very back of your
packet. One of them is the
status of disaster recovery and
um some other policy updates.
And I, I want to share with you
the, the challenges facing us
with regard to the sick disaster
recovery. Um, we have had
unprecedented disasters since
2022. In 22, we had the two
largest wildfires in New Mexico
history, Hermits.
and Blackfire, um, altogether,
those are over 100 aseass
between those two disasters. And
our, our nonprofit has been the
primary technical assistance
provider in, in doing the
outreach, the initial outreach
and the initial applications for
disaster assistance from FEMA,
from DHSEM, and from USDA.
So we've developed within our
team the expertise to navigate
aseki through those programs.
Um, more recently, we've been
working with the that has
impacted by the salt and the
South Fork fire and the real
charm of flooding, which is also
burn scar flooding from the
hemes. So what we're seeing with
this burn scar flooding is that
the, the floodwaters become so
overwhelming that they virtually
erase the sick from the
landscape. Um, there's some
pictures here that show you what
uh flooded a secular looks like,
you can't see where the waterway
was. The um diversion dams.
Become dislodged and
disconnected from the river as
the river changed its course,
and it's very expensive to
rebuild these Asekis, and yet we
have to rebuild them. They are
their water rights at stake,
people's livelihoods are at
stake, and yet it take, it can
take years to do this, this
repairs. Um, the challenges that
we're finding is that this has
strained our capacity as a
nonprofit. Uh, we contract with
with experts to help us with
this process, and
We've reached our capacity or
exceeded our capacity.
The big problem for a for a
second, and this is true for any
local government.
Is that these programs require a
25% cost share.
And this is, this is a problem
for counties or towns, for
everybody, certainly for a
second because we don't have a
tax base.
And unless we figure this out as
a state.
There are going to be
communities that are going to be
left behind.
Because they can't meet that
cost share.
The debris removal process is
uncertain.
It seems like every time we have
a disaster, we're reinventing
the film.
And for the hermit's peak Caf
Canyon, I think our state did
some really innovative things,
the mobilized DOT DOT worked
their magic, did some very fast
procurement and got some
contractors, but then FEMA takes
long to reimburse and that that
program has slowed down quite a
bit.
But
This thing of reinventing the
wheel for every disaster. It's,
it's not good for our state. We
have to institutionalize this
debris removal process so that
it's fast and that there's
certainty that the entities and
not just the secs, but all local
governments. So you have a very
methodical way to request this
help, and it's not, it's not
institutionalized in the way
that makes it easy to
operationalize in in real time.
The delays are astonishing.
In Mayaseki, we're on our 3rd
year, um,
We finally got a design to
rebuild, to rebuild some
structures, uh, but it won't be
for another year.
And so we're on our 3rd year
without water, um, so in my
second, we probably won't have
water till 2026.
And that's an emergent, you
know, this is emergency pace,
and yet, it's not emergency
pace.
Um, and, and collaboration and
transparency. I think we've made
a lot of strides in the
interagency collaboration.
There's an interagency task
force, and yet it is still
really hard to get data in real
time.
And, and it's hard for a
stakeholders to give feedback to
try to improve the processes,
because it can be difficult to
get uh data from the different
partners.
Um, I'm gonna end the, the
presentation with two other
policy updates. I'll just touch
on them, but if you want more
information, you can ask
questions or we can talk it
offline. One of them is water
leasing.
In past years, we've presented
to you on the issue of water
leasing, and I wanted to let you
know that in uh our last meeting
with the state engineer's
office, they informed us that
they are not granting um
preliminary approval and water
leases anymore because of the
attorney general opinion, uh,
that was issued in January of
2023.
Uh, so we are monitoring that
closely to see if that's going
to continue. Uh, there's a new
state engineer we met with the
new state engineer and um our
understanding is that they're
going to try to do a rulemaking,
um, and we're going to have
input into that, but we've made
it very clear that it's our
opinion that they can't do
something in rulemaking that
isn't enabled in statute. So
we'll be monitoring that
closely.
Uh, another major policy
initiative we're involved with
the surface water permitting
with the New Mexico Environment
Department, um, we, we have
representation on the surface
water advisory panel. Um, Vidal
Gonzalez, uh, our, our community
planner is a member of that
panel, and we are advising enemy
on developing this permitting
system in in a way that protects
clean water, but also recognizes
um a certain agricultural
exemptions, which
have been in the Federal Clean
Water Act that we want to
continue in some way in the in
the state framework. Uh, so, um,
those are some policy issues
we're working on and, and um
I'll turn it back to, to
Chairwoman Mascainz in case she
has any closing remarks, but
these are, are, are, this is our
list of recommendations and
we're, again, happy to be here
and have to have the opportunity
to share with you. And thank you
for your service to New Mexico.
Thank you, Paula. And I'd like
to also uh have her
president uh say something about
real estate, uh, business all
over the state, but in Taos
County, uh, this has happened
and so I'd like her to address
that. So you'll know and see
what you can do.
Uh, we've uh noticed since, uh,
COVID that we've had a real
increase in uh people moving
into our
Into our um towns and uh into
our real communities, and they
don't understand us I guess uh
with that a few years ago we
developed a brochure to uh
inform everybody that are new
coming in to understand us I is
better, but we really need um
help and that's why, uh, we're,
we're doing the uh policy we're
doing a research and developing
policy recommendations for real
estate disclosures. Uh, it's
really important that we have.
All of these, uh, title
companies and real estate agents
better informed about uh Asekis
and maybe making it something
that they need to do to have the
real estate licenses, um, get a
better understanding of water
rights within uh New Mexico
because we're very low on water,
as everybody knows, and uh we're
with climate change, we don't
have enough water to share, so
that's something that's
important to us. I'd like to say
that Taos County has been
meeting. I know that they had a
meeting.
Because my son was part of it
with the real estate or in
houses and whatever they're
talking about, I don't know yet.
I haven't talked to them, but I
know this is an important issue
for you to note and to take care
of for the whole of the state of
New Mexico.
And uh he said, so thank you for
having us here for hearing our
concerns and for helping us
because I know we will get help.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
ladies for your presentation.
Senator Stephan, thank you very,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and thank you, uh, ladies for
your presentation. It's great to
see you both. Um, you just
brought up something about water
rights, and I think that many
people
When they moved to rural areas.
They don't know what they are
getting into, number one.
In terms of wells, in terms of
mutual domestics in terms of
Asakus, in terms of septic, etc.
So I do think that there's some
idea here that we should maybe
germinate for real estate
education. Uh, but my two
questions, uh, go along
different lines.
So I was just reading and
conversing this morning with
Secretary Kenny.
From environment and the EPA in
April said that all water
associations, water districts,
etc. need to test for PFAS, and
they need to remediate within 5
years.
Has this been any discussion
among the asseas or the source
of water for the Asacius.
Mr. Chairman, and um,
Senators to Panic.
We were, we had a meeting in La
Cienega, couple of.
Months ago, and that is one of
the, the areas that's most
immediately affected by PFOS in
the groundwater, and my
understanding was that um they
needed more resources to do
testing, to monitor those
um but I'm not asking about
that I represent La Cienega. I'm
going to their meetings. I'm
asking about ass all over the
state and whether or not this
has been a discussion for the
Asakias are the source of water
into the esa.
Yes.
Um, yeah, Mr. Chairman and, and
Senator Stephenix, that's the
only place that I've heard that
discussion, but now that you
mention it, it's something we
should be talking about in other
places, I'm sure. OK, so I just
wanna put that on the table
because
Uh, Secretary Kenney and I were
talking about whether there
needs to be a special fund for
clean up for these different
systems and he reminded me that
the governor vetoed something a
couple of years ago that we
should probably probably bring
back.
My second topic, Mr. Chair, has
to do with cannabis and water
permits. I have a county.
That is asking me to do, uh,
have a bill.
For temporary moratoriums uh for
cannabis growth permits and
water permits, if uh that
individual county.
Um, applies to regulation and
licensing for such a thing. I
know that the say is, when we
passed our cannabis laws.
had a a great interest in the
water issue. Could you comment
about that?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stephanics.
We, we were very involved with
language that was developed for
the cannabis Regulation Act. We
worked with the, the sponsor,
Senator Lopez, and our, our
concern was that the rural
communities would get flooded
with with new cannabis
operations and
We're concerned about the
pattern of illegal use by
medical cannabis producers that
if that was going to happen with
recreational producers that it
would overwhelm our communities.
And so the, the, the language
that was added to the cannabis
regulation Act requires that any
new um applicant for a cannabis
license has to demonstrate that
they have valid water rights, or
that they have, um, that they're
in compliance with their water
provider.
Um, with, with water providers
rules, and that, that second
part was, was
Developed uh with input from the
from the New Mexico Rural Waters
Rural Water Association, which
represents mutual domestics,
they're kind of our counterpart,
and we were informed by them
that cannabis producers were
getting residential hookups and
then using the residential water
to supply commercial greenhouses
on a large scale, and, and
depleting a, a large share of
their water. Um, so the, the
idea of those water protections
uh wasn't too.
stop cannabis, it was just to
ensure that whoever was going to
be growing cannabis was doing so
on the up and up, um, that there
wouldn't be any illicit water
use, and that those uh that
there would be some
accountability. So before they
get the license, they would show
that they had um the appropriate
water rights and and access to
water. It's, it's a unique
industry. It's not like other
agriculture, um, it's, it's a
type of of industry that's using
a
com b ination of water transfers
from agriculture to groundwater
and using commercial um
residential water supplies or
municipal water supplies to grow
a crop, and in that sense, it's
uh it's very unique from any
other kind of agriculture. Uh,
we would, um, it's our position
that those re those protections
should remain in the statute.
So, Mr. Chair, um, there's a
couple of counties, uh, one in
the middle part of the state
that's in my district, and one
in the southern part of the
state, uh, where the farmers and
ranchers really believed that
cannabis grow operations have
affected their water supply. And
so they counties are discussing
this at great length, farmers
and ranchers are coming to
county commission meetings to
talk about it. So I do think
that it might not affect the
entire
state, but we're trying to look
for solutions. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I've brought up two
of my concerns.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Maas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Ms. Garcia. Thank you,
gentle lady that appreciate the
presentation, um.
And the reminder of of the work
that's been done last, you know,
20 years in the work that still
needs to remain the um.
The fun, the fun that, that,
that you're uh recommending, Mr.
Chairman, Ms. Garcia to go from
2.5 million to 5.
Looking at the statute.
You provided.
And so the money is actually
appropriated to a different
fund.
Um
Shucks, I lost it. And then, and
then the 2.5 goes from that fund
to the second fund.
Oh, I'm looking at page 11, here
we go, here we wait.
Mhm.
Age 18.
Page 18. So, so in other words,
Not only do we need, OK, so I'm
looking at the bottom of page
18, uh, Mr. Chairman, on the
left hand side.
So the money we appropriate into
the New Mexico irrigation works
construction funds. We got to
make sure there's money in
there.
But we would also have to change
the statute.
From 2.
$2,500,000 to a greater amount,
right?
Mr. Chairman and Senator May
says that's OK. And then also
I'm just, just curious, um, I, I
recently went to the
conservation districts.
Annual meeting or whatnot and
learned, learned a little bit, a
little bit more about what
they're up to. What's, what's
the range between the
association and the.
And the local conservation
districts in terms of.
Um
Facilitating water passage
amongst the yass, and Mr.
Chairman and Senator, my, uh,
it's a very close working
relationship. Um.
In our respective communities,
each on the water district has
an elected body. There's a lot
of overlap between a secul
leadership and the so and Water
District boards, and depending
on their capacity, the swim and
Water District boards will
actually support Asekis with
engineering, design, sometimes
with infrastructure funding or
cost share for their
infrastructure projects, the,
the two that come to mind that
do the most of that or howilwa
District in eastern Ria Riba,
they have the highest
concentration.
of a sea's, um, other, other
districts are building capacity
to do that, and I think they can
achieve that potential as well.
And the, the solar water
districts are, are really a very
good resource for us, um, in, in
terms of infrastructure and also
the salt water districts are a
hub for farm bill funding. So
farmville or federal farm bill
funding, and there's, there's
some um farm bill money that's
coming into the state to the New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts. Uh,
we're a partner, they're the,
the lead applicant for farm bill
money that goes from NRCS to.
MACD and it's called the
Resource Conservation
Partnership Program, and so
they've put a partnership
together that includes, uh,
well, them as the lead, uh,
we're a supporting partner as
well as the interstate stream
Commission, and they get a
grant, uh, where they then have
a special funding arrangement
within ourCS and then they can
re-grant that to Asecas, and
then the Interstate stream
commission matches the RCPP
federal money with ISC money
from the ACDIF.
So the, the, the role that the
soil and water districts play is
is being the local contact for a
se if they want to apply for
RCPP. That's the, that's the
point of contact for them. So
it's, it's very positive and,
you know, we're very supportive
of each other. That's good to
know. Thank you, Chairman Ms.
Garcia, because the, uh, even in
Albuquerque where there's a
conservation district, see that
and the voters actually recently
passed.
Uh, passed a law to tax
themselves essentially uh
because the conservation
districts do have acting
authority which hopefully can
Um
Go to a 2.
You know, construction and stuff
like that. Is it fair to say
that um
Nearly 100% of the water in
these acias is surface water is
water from snow and rain.
Yes, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Maestas, yes, it's, it's
fair to say that the the water
that flows into a secas comes
from runoff from the mountains.
And then, um, Mr. Chairman,
general, the, uh,
These projects, the, the money
that goes into the the capital
project, so to speak, the
The physical, you know, the
clearing of the debris, the
essentially the, the, the work
of the marizona, you're just
making the the second work
functional correctly. Is that
money go to modern
Water infrastructure or or
maintaining the integrity of the
old Aseass or a little bit of
both.
When I say all the se, I mean
visually the, the way you would
picture in a second, you know,
100 years ago.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and and
Senator says it's, it's both,
but most of the time when it is
get capital funding from any
program, whether it be capital
Oly, ACTIF, or farm bill money,
most of the time they're
replacing all the
infrastructure. Um,
Most of the time, the main and
most expensive element of
infrastructure is the diversion
structure from the river into
the ditch. Those are the most
expensive and those those do
generally need to be replaced
with something more efficient,
um, I'll give you an example on
Maaseia for, for hundreds of,
well, since the mid 1800s
areseca had um rocks and logs.
That they would build up and I
would bring water into the ditch
and in the 1930s, they got a the
WPA program, they built a rock
head gate, but they still use
the the rock and log structure
to lift up the water to get it
into the gate, and in the the
2010s, uh, we signed up for a
Farmville program the NRCS and
got a design and construction,
and we did the 50/50 federal
state match to build a new
structure. This was in the mid
2000s.
And at the time it was about
160,000. That same structure
today would be close to $50
million to do the same concrete
structure, um, but they're very
important to update because the
gate, you need, you need a, a, a
wheel to open the gate that
that's workable that one person
can operate the Mardomo can open
and close it, and you don't need
to uh take 20 men out there to
to build up the the ark, so it's
a really good investment.
Um, to ensure that these are
sick kids can continue into the
future, and NRCS has done very
good designs, um, through the
Interstate Street commission,
you know, they have a list of
engineers who are experienced
that a sick is can procure to do
their designs for them.
Awesome. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm sure.
Thank you, Senator. Are there
any other questions before I ask
my good representative.
Uh, thank you, Paula.
Thank you, Mary.
Um, for all your service.
For those of you who don't know
Mary, she's kind of a legend in
the north, um.
She's uh if anything good
happens, uh, north of the uh
Penasco and Tamer is probably
part of it. I'm just, uh, I'm
just gonna say that. And so
Paula, uh, is, uh, how is the
executive branch um going along
with your recommendations right
now.
Uh, me a chair and a
representative Verera.
In, in some instances we're
we're, um, aligning our
recommendations with what we
know is in the executive already
and in other cases, uh,
We don't know what the executive
commitment would be, but I'll
give you some examples for ACDF,
um, the executive recommendation
is to increase that fund from
800,000 to 1.5 million. That's
in the NMDA executive
recommendation.
Um
The, um, but for the executive
commission, um, I'm not aware
that executive has has uh
Um, approved that one.
Um, nor any increases to the
second community education
program.
And the ACTIF.
Uh, increasing from 2.5 to 5
million, um, we have not gotten
support to increase that at this
time.
From the OK, and who's handling
these issues, uh, in, in the
governor's office for you?
We haven't had communication
with governors and nobody's told
you.
It's a secret, um, um, Madam Cha
Mr. Chair, um, so how many bills
are you going to present and
what's the total ask here?
They'd have to do the math, uh,
Madam Chair and, and
Representative.
Um, Representative Verrera.
It's like about 50 million, 60
million.
Let me, let me, um, go through
this real quick. So the, the
ACDF increased to 2 million, um,
that will be
A request to increase that on a
recurring basis. 2.5. And then
the 2.5 to 5 is
It's pretty straightforward, uh,
special appropriation of 10
million.
So we're looking, you know,
between all that, that's like 15
million. The Indian Water
settlement funding that state
engineer is going to be um
making that one of their top
priorities, OK, so that won't
come under that's you're
supporting, we're supporting it
that it, it is't and it's not
your bill. That's correct. OK,
got it. That's correct. Um.
Madam Chaser the um DFA money.
Uh, it's on page 3, the
presentation outline, um,
Increasing the commission of
260K, uh, that's, that's an
additional 89 million for the,
for the uh commission. We're
asking that we increase the
education program for 500 to
750,000, um, and then the
auditor, uh, the auditor has
500.
Um, OK, in their executive
recommendation. So, uh, they're
already advocating for the
auditors. That's correct. So of,
of this list of 64 of them are
ours.
And two of them are.
Other agencies that we're
supporting, and I don't have a
total number, but I estimate
it's
It's 2 to 20 million.
It's a good number and I wanna
add this Mr. Chairman and
Representative Era that, um,
We, we did, uh,
A very rough um review.
Of infrastructure requests by
seki in the last 2 years, and
these are only a seconds that
are taking the initiative to
come and ask for money. It's not
a rigorous assessment.
And looking at ICIPs.
An unfunded capital outlay.
And an incomplete list of a
sickests who are gonna need cost
share.
Uh, are preliminary number is
$68 million. 5868.
68 million.
And, and it's, it's, it's not a
perfect list, it's incomplete,
but we were looking at a
ballpark figure.
To think what's what's gonna be
the need looking forward into
the future, and
You know, we've been
Um, the Interstate remission.
Prior to the ACDIF being
codified in institutionalized.
They were getting 1.9 million a
year since the late 80s.
Um, it wasn't until 2019, you
know, some 30 some years later
that we finally increased it to
2.5.
It's, it's not, and, and yet,
the need has increased the cost
of projects has increased
dramatically. And so,
Um, we don't, we don't have.
Um, complete data on all the
infrastructure needs across the
state, but, but
With that snapshot.
You know, I'm confident in
saying that the need is in the
tens of millions every year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and uh
Well, I guess, I guess I'd like
to say we served on a panel
together. We're talking about
produced water and the cost to
produce water and as you know,
I've kind of changed my position
on that, and I, I think there is
a place for some counties to do
produce water who desperately
need it like Leon Eddie and
maybe Armington and
Uh, you know, and they're not
shy about asking for 100 million
or 200 million.
And, and when I look at other
infrastructure problems in the
state like the Asequias in
mutual domestics, you know, um,
Very cautious and going in for
like 10 million.
20 million maybe knowing.
That the need is really
Probably in the hundreds of
millions, not 100s of millions,
but up there, probably 100
million at least.
And I just think as a
legislature, we need to kind of
consider that.
You know, we're, we're very
Almost too careful. Yeah.
I'm just gonna say industry
isn't real always too careful.
You know, and I, I, I think, I
think we need to look certainly
in rural counties.
In this country, we have not had
the infrastructure and our whole
water systems depend on
volunteers, and I keep saying
this. I mean, I cannot capital
outlay my way out of water
problems and infrastructure in
Rio Riva Sandoval house and um
Santa Fe counties, which I
represent.
And I, I, I'm, this isn't a
question, I realized, Mr. Chair,
that it is a statement, and I
think it's an important
statement that we really
I mean, I've told my volunteers
if you want to shut down the
state, everybody can go on
strike in the north.
Not do water systems for, for a
year, see what happens. I'm not
recommending that. I'm just
saying this state depends on
volunteers who have 5 other
jobs, kids in schools, deacons
of the church, run the mutual
domestic, you know, I
They, they just do the run the
land grants.
They all have 5 jobs, and that's
kind of what we've depended on
and that population is aging.
And we don't have the young
people coming in to replace
that, and it is a huge
infrastructure problem in this
state.
Rural counties and you know, we
had former chairs of
appropriations create the um
Tribal infrastructure fund in
Las Colonia funds.
But we don't have anything
comfortable.
Or rural districts.
That aren't 150 miles from the
Mexico border or part of a
tribal community.
And, and that's where we need to
concentrate and I maybe like
maybe bringing legislation forth
to look at that issue. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Ortiz,
Mr. Chair, and I'd like to echo
many of Representative Herrera's
comments, um, sort of like a
sleeping giant.
We, um
There's so much food that's
grown in the north, and of
course the traditions.
And the oldest form of
government in New Mexico, you
know, is through and we need to
invest in that.
Um, and increase those
investments, um, very quickly, I
think, um.
I have a question for you, all
around the, the match, you know,
we were able to, I guess, 2
years ago.
23, right? Um, reduce that to
take away the match requirement
in disaster prone areas. Which
of these funds, you know, some
of them have like a 10% match
right, like the 9010 through
ISC, the ISC funds, but do the
rest of these funds require the
25%.
Or is it, does it fluctuate?
Yeah. Uh thank you for the
question, uh, Mr. Chairman and,
and Representative Ortez, the um
The
The legislature was very
supportive and responsive when
we asked that a, a specific type
of cost share be removed.
And that was um it was a his
historical institutional um.
Rule that was put in place by
the Interstate Stream
commission, it was never in
statute.
And when um in the 1980s, when
they first started funding a
sick infrastructure, they had an
80/20 program.
And in about 2015, we changed it
from 8020 to 9010.
And when the ACDIF was passed in
2019, um, the, the
ISC kept the 9010 cashier
administratively. The statute
never mentioned 9010. So in
order to get rid of that cost
share, we came back to the
legislature and said, can you
put in statute that no cost
share is required for ACTF. So
we were very grateful that with
Senate Bill 176 and it passed in
23.
That's a a a one specific
kosher, the casher that's,
that's um eating us alive right
now is disasters.
It's FEMA, DHSEM and NRCSEWP.
And
Interestingly,
Um, this problem was identified
very early on in the Hermit's
Peak Ca Canyon disaster, and it
took an act of Congress to
eliminate that cost share. So,
um, we have one region of the
state that does not have cost
share or FEMA because of that
Act of Congress because it was
the Forest Service's fault, but
the rest of the state, and I,
and I've seen the pain of people
trying to do this, um,
Blackfireerropelado. Now the
salt and
And, uh, and also real trauma,
those communities are expected
to come up with 25% cost share
for FEMA. So that's, that's the,
um, so the federal government
has it within their power to
waive it or to do something,
but.
But until that happens, it's up
to the state to to meet that.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Paula. So,
I guess I was looking for ways
that we could fix it on our end,
but we, we can't do much here
except for provide the funding
for the cost share, not change
the actual allocation of that
cost share, the the requirement.
Um, 11 last thing, and I'm, I'm
so glad that Judy Torres brought
up the, the need to educate, um,
realtors, um.
Across the across the state
about the rights of uh asequiros
and Parentes. I think we've seen
it a lot in Taos. I'm sure we've
seen it in other counties as
well that, you know, people who
come to New Mexico don't
understand the, you know, rights
of way in particular, um,
persons have had guns pulled on
them when they're doing the, the
really important work of ditch
cleaning, and that just, that's
something that we, we need to
do, we either provide some
funding.
or just more education around
um.
New, um
You know, new people who come to
communities and who don't
understand the traditions, and
I, and I was one of those new
people as well. I mean, I never,
you know, didn't allow somebody
on the ditch, but it's, it's
something that's really
important, and I think it it it
fosters good neighbors and good
relations, so whatever we can do
on this end to support that,
please, please let us know. I
think it's, you know, perhaps
it's, you know, a title company
issue, right?
So, thank you for everything
that you've done. Thank you for
all of your work.
appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garcia.
That is the uh chairman uh
Justice Pala Gracia Senora
Mascares.
For the.
Um
Oh God, do you have a
Uh, have you done a survey on
the sins that the association.
I is
In terms of the source.
The water of the Aseca.
Because we have, we have the
offer.
Uh, we've got the Rios.
And we've got the reservoirs,
but
Do you know if you've done a
survey of
The source of water of those
500, I said yes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Repres
Garcia.
We haven't done a survey on that
specific question. Um, we could
We, we have a
that have been adjudicated, and
we, we can, uh, determine from
those exactly what their water
source is, and most of them are
are surface water, seasonal,
based on snowpack.
Um, there's a very small
minority of them that have
access to reservoirs.
Um
For example, Santa Cruz Lake,
which is owned by those seque
Murphy Lake, um, Cabresto, so
there's they're they're they're
unusual, they're a minority, but
there are some and then there
there are a few that are fed by
Ojos, um, exclusively Ojos or
heos that that that uh
Um, sustain a flow enough for,
for agriculture, and it's a
little bit nuanced because the a
lot of these are sass,
especially in the smaller
tributaries, um,
The idea of a no is
Um, understood really broadly in
terms of you might have a
stretch of an intermittent
stream that's gaining, and
that's kind of a fed, but it's
surface water too, so it's a
little bit nuanced, but we
haven't done a survey and I
think that would be very helpful
to know.
OK. Um,
You know, uh, Ms. Mascarenes, I
think it was mentioned that um.
That the commission and the
merits of Perm.
Is there language in the statute
regarding the commission that
allows or does not allow for
that? Well, it, it, what I
understand is it says that uh we
should meet once a month.
And that's all. We don't have
anything else and that's why we
wanted to clarify it so that we
would be complying with the law,
whatever it was. So then if
there is no language in the
statute to allow for per diem,
and that would be a remedy.
to pursue legislation
to address I thought I'd bring
it up now because that's been a
problem.
A per diem, yeah, we have per
diem, but I mean, meeting once a
month and we go to differently.
That's another commission of our
center. I, I'm sorry I hadn't
seen you. Yeah, so our, our, our
ask was that
For other meetings that we go
with that.
I understand so that's, that's
my ask so that we wouldn't be
breaking any law. OK. And, and,
uh, Mr. Chairman, you know, on
this issue, uh, this educational
issue with um
Uh, New York residents are they
coming into our.
Traditional land-based Chicano
communities.
Um, and that being fully aware
of
The rules of laws, customs,
traditions of the Asea system.
You know, there's a remedy for
that.
And I don't know if it's a
statute.
But real estate agents, raisers
go through continuing education.
And
I think there's a way to
structure those classes. Mhm.
Uh, to allow these particular
issues.
To be addressed.
So that would take, Mr. Chair, I
would think.
A proposal to the real estate
board.
A proposal to the board of
appraisers.
In terms of, of addressing that
in their continuing education.
system or process.
And uh I think that would kind
of really um
institutionalize the issue to
where it's just not a one shot
thing.
But it's part of the educational
process in becoming a real
estate agent or renewing your
license, etc. etc. for the
appraisers.
He, um
And lastly, uh, chairman, um.
You know, on this preliminary
approval water leases, um.
Uh, I was a legislator that
requested the opinion of the AG.
And
23 and the AG gave a very
profound decision.
That the water leases.
Uh, violates, uh, due process.
So, Mr. Chair, my, my question
is that I think we as a
legislative body,
And I have to abide.
Um
By the law
And if the
And if the uh state engineer
wishes to pursue.
What I feel is unlawful.
In terms of a rulemaking
process.
Then I think we should stand up
to that.
And fully oppose it.
If it does ever come to the
farm.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Representative Manoa.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
am a realtor by trade. And um
I
I think you can, we can get
something that would be
memorialized.
Uh, that can be taught, but
Unfortunately, what's going to
be taught by folks who don't
know.
We may be able to memorialize it
in statute, which at least to
point out that Esea exists, land
grants exist, those type of
things.
But the reality is I think we
would have a better
So we've got water districts in
my community.
Um, not in the city of
Farmington, but in the county.
My knowledge of that really is
not been through
Anything that I've been that
I've learned through my
continuing education as a
realtor.
It's happened because of
frankly, I've learned more
because I'm a legislator and I
have to deal with them because
they come.
Looking for
Um, help.
Uh, capital outlay dollars and
things like that.
It might be easier if, if we
were to put something in
statute, not that it be taught.
In a classroom because frankly,
we learn about
Uh, all kinds of things, kids
and and other things that
Community by community.
Some things exist and some
things do not. It might be
easier if we did something for
real estate, and this is a
suggestion to uh to the chair or
anybody who might be thinking
about introducing legislation.
would be to have maybe a portion
of our continuing education be
county-specific.
Things. So if you have an
assechia,
That maybe training in a, in a
certain community would have
specific training for asseias.
Or if you live in a
The city of Albuquerque, maybe
you have something that deals
more with
Um
Kids and other things like that
where are very specific to that
community, because really, if
I'm, if I'm
Practicing
Uh, real estate in one
community.
I get a training once in a
while. It's not gonna be fully
They're never going to really
understand.
They may just know.
There are aseass, and generally
a real estate agent.
In Taos.
Uh, in, in, uh, Rio Riba County,
they're gonna know they exist,
but that doesn't mean they they
know anything about them. So I,
I would suggest if we're gonna
pursue something, let's not just
throw it into the overall
statewide training.
Because
It'll be overlooked. It'll be
one of those details.
That most, most of the realtors
are just going to learn so they
can pass the test, and as soon
as they leave, they forget it.
So I am part of a
Um, local real estate.
board.
And so
I think we did some things like
that where we asked the local
boards to address things like
that, cause they have to have
meetings annually or whatever. I
think that would be a better way
to actually be able to address
your situation rather than just
putting into the state law.
And, and their license be
dependent upon it because
they'll, they'll pass it and
then forget it.
And, and it would never be as an
in-depth.
As the complex nature of
Asos.
It would be
They would be they would be
learning it to pass the test,
and I, I think that would be an
unfortunate.
Um
And you're gonna be unfortunate.
That that is true, Mr. Chairman,
and I, I think you
representativeative Monte.
Uh,
um, I was gonna say, you know,
there's people and we're talking
at the real estate people that
sell the land, but not only
that, but we have people buying
land.
Uh, in Rio Lucia the other day,
and if you know where Rio
Lucillo is, uh, this, um,
retired teacher wanted to go
irrigate his land, and a new
owner.
Got a rifle and said you can't
come in, you're trespassing and
see there's a lot of issues that
affecting the Patentes in our
area. And so we want to, to have
things that would lessen the
danger of Paian de and
irrigation water rights, and I
know there's a lot of difference
in one area of the state to the
other, so I think you have a
good thing there that says um
that
That identifies to your area.
That would help.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you and seeing no other
questions, I just have a few
comments. Maybe every year New
Mexican needs to watch the
Millaro bean fielded more
as a pre-rec before you become a
resident of New Mexico. But in
all seriousness, Mary, I want to
thank you for your leadership,
seeing you with your historic
knowledge and what you bring to
the table is amazing to me. And
to see every one of your board
on their knowledge and what they
bring gives me hope and I'm
thankful for all of your work
that you do. And I'm with you on
per diem because
every single one of us sitting
behind this semicircular desk
are also volunteers, and we rely
on per diem to help us get from
place to place to ensure that we
can do the job for New Mexicans
as elected officials. And so I'm
with you and understanding why
that's important. And Paula, I
want to thank you for all that
you do, for your leadership, for
your strength, because we lean
on you so many times, and I'm
one of them who can call you at
any time of the day or the
night, and you always respond to
me with.
Grace and with an answer, and so
there's something that's been
unfortunate that I just want
everyone to know is Paula taught
me this, if your county does not
declare an emergency during a
disaster, in most cases, you're
not eligible for that state
funding that's there.
We have ditches in San Pedro the
Garcia ditch, who saw that the
rain that came down in northern
New Mexico, the ground of the
earth was too dry to absorb that
water. And so what happened is
we saw so much water channel
through those seas, and it was
too much that it could handle.
And so we saw devastation and
the Garcia ditch, we couldn't
apply for any funding because Ri
Riba County didn't declare a
disaster emergency. And so that
was a lesson learned, but I'll
be working with the county.
commission when we see something
coming, we've got a partner with
us Seas, understand when there's
some major needs and see what we
need to declare that emergency
and so on the record, most
people have heard me say this,
but I want to say it on the
record and for those of you who
haven't heard this, the reason
why I take care of a Seas and
care so much about it, Mary, is
because Laorona is my tia and I
need to make sure that the water
keeps flowing because we're
still searching for my primitos
every single year.
And so with that, I just want to
thank everyone for the amount of
time and energy that you bring,
uh, RS Vila and everything that
you do ensures that the water
flows where Wesalencia is alive
and well because of people just
like you. You ladies are strong
leaders and we're very fortunate
to have you in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you. Thank you all
very much. Thank you for your
time, your attention, your
service.
you said this and I can't wait
to see you again.
We're gonna move to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance, the Rural Fire
Initiative, and with that, I'm
gonna call up Miss Melissa
Robertson.
think.
For those of you on webcast,
we're just waiting to connect
the presentation, so we'll be,
we'll be back in just a couple
of minutes.
And we're back.
Thank you so much for joining
us. And if both of you can state
your name for the record and for
those watching from home.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
Committee. My name is Melissa
Robertson. I'm the property and
casualty bureau chief for the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance. Good afternoon,
chair. Marilla Quintana,
customer assistance bureau
supervisor. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I am here today to speak
on the rural fire initiative.
This is an issue that has hit
our state very hard in the last
2 years.
In that time.
We have created a coalition,
which I'll go into a little bit
more, but essentially, we came
in after.
The new year and explained we
have a real fire issue in the
state and after the Ca Canyon,
Hermit's Peak fire, we knew it
could potentially only get
worse, and there was only so
much we could do to control it
and to be able to assist
consumers and constituents in
being able to obtain or keep
their current insurance.
Next slide.
I'm gonna touch on a couple of
different points and this will
touch on also what we're doing
and asking legislatively. Um,
I'm gonna show you some of the
challenges that the insurance
market is going into, and
different ways that we can help
mitigate.
Um
What is happening in our
insurance market right now.
Next slide.
So as I mentioned, we started a
coalition in January, um, this
was driven by constituents
calling and saying we're being
dropped, we can't get insurance,
and not only is this affecting.
Uh, the constituent, it's uh
affecting real estate, it's
affecting mortgages. It does
have the trickle down effect.
So with this coalition, we
included Mner, so the state
forester Laura McCarthy.
New Mexico RLD we are working
with the construction industries
with Martin, the New Mexico
State Fire Marshal, both Randy
and Anthony.
And FEMA and then DHSEM as well.
Um, and I apologize Marilla's
boss Lou, is that an NAIC
meeting right now in regards to
wildfire. Um, she is my partner
in this coalition. We have
literally traveled from one side
of the United States to the
other this year to learn the
science behind wildfire and also
see the challenges other states
are having, right? So a lot of
change in the insurance market
initially what drove rates was
home characteristics.
we're talking about the age of
home, the construction of home,
the type of roof, how old the
plumbing is.
That was followed shortly during
COVID by inflation.
That raised rates, as we know
the cost of construction
materials had doubled during
that time, and what we were
seeing was a very diverse market
of
But you could build a home for
versus what you could sell a
home for.
Fast forward 2 to 3 years. Now
they're looking at mitigation.
New Mexico does have a number of
high catastrophic areas. And
when I mention that, it's not
just wildfire, it is wind and
hail on the eastern side of the
state.
But with what we're doing in the
initiatives that we're making
right now, wildfire is the
concern as it is most.
So initially in this again,
times have changed, um, this is
actually a slide we put together
several years ago of how to
protect your home from wildfire,
um, and some simple basic rules,
you know, preparing your home,
cleaning your gutters and roofs,
creating defensible space, uh,
if you guys have received
letters from your insurance
company and you're in a heavily
wooded area, you are hearing
about cutting down trees. Um, we
used to, you know, talk about
protecting your finances.
is doing a home inventory, um,
and evacuation plan.
And again
are catastrophic losses are
changing, um, as we saw in the
Ruidoso fire.
It mimicked very much the
Paradise fire at one point where
there was one way in and one way
out.
And that affected both the
firefighting efforts and the
ability to get constituents out.
The next slide.
These are the challenges that
our insurance companies are up
against.
And this is why we are talking
mitigation. We are looking at a
complete wood home.
In a heavily forested area, as
you can see, there is a pile of
wood very close to the home.
Um
And the lack of mitigation
should a fire move through this
area.
This home would be in jeopardy.
As we know from fire science,
embers can travel up to 2.5
miles from the actual file fire.
slide.
When we talk about mitigation.
This is a home in the middle of
Riodoso. As you can see, they
have, for the most part, cleared
the 5 ft around it. It does have
a metal roof.
However, it has a tree built
into the deck.
So mitigation is not just.
You know, looking at it from a
satellite view or looking at it
at an eye level.
Um, we have several constituents
call in and they say I'm getting
dropped.
I have mitigated my property. We
have tools within OSI that we
can look at some aerial views,
and we have taken out to
Groundview.
And people failed to see the
canopies of the trees above the
home.
Or where there is a chimney.
Next slide.
So, with our initiative, we are
working with a company called
IBHS. It's the uh Institute of
Business and Home Safety. They
are a group that is funded by
the insurance.
Um
Essentially by the insurance
companies and what they do is
they do the science behind fire,
they look at how to retrofit
homes, how to mitigate homes and
new construction of how to build
homes.
To minimize the loss.
Um, these are the standards they
have two different programs.
There is the fortified home and
the home plus.
And these are the standards that
must be built.
Um, Class A roof defensible
space, which is what we call the
zero zone, or 0 to 5 ft away
from the house, that's no
greenery, no shrubs, nothing
flammable.
Which also includes the coyote
and Wood privacy fences that we
see a lot in northern New
Mexico.
Um, again, maintaining trees,
trimming them back from their
house. We are looking at 30 ft
for that, and no outbuildings
near homes and enclosed under
decks.
By following these steps, they
have shown that it does minimize
risk to a home by over 60%.
And we get a lot of questions
saying, well, how much is this
going to cost if we start to
retrofit here in New Mexico.
Retrofitting is what is going to
be the largest cost we are
asking and exploring different
grant programs or even possibly
tax credits for homeowners that
do the uh retrofitting.
And when it comes to new
construction, we are talking
about pennies on the dollar to
build to these standards.
Again, we are working with CID
and they are looking at putting
rules into place. We know we
can't change things overnight.
But putting rules into place to
help start following these steps
in regards to Class A roofs and
correct venting of a.
Which brings me into the New
Mexico fair plan. New Mexico is
very blessed to have a fair
plan. We've had it since 1969,
and it has survived.
By maintaining premiums that
existing homeowners are
currently paying that are in the
plan.
Right now as it sits, it is a.
Option of last resort, which
means they do not offer
replacement cost, it is actual
cash value, and there are only 7
named perils. It is not an open
peril policy like you would find
in your everyday insurance
market.
It also right now has limited
coverage. It's only up to
350,000 for a dwelling or a
home.
And up to a million for a
commercial policy.
Right now again, New Mexico has
been blessed that we are the
4th cheapest state in the nation
in regards to our premiums with
the fair plan.
But
Times are changing at $350,000
house five years ago.
Does not cost that now we are
looking upwards of a million.
So, OSI is currently working
with the fair plan as there are
certain changes we can make
within our bylaws and
guidelines, and then there are
additional changes that will
take legislation.
Right now we are trying to roll
out a pilot program for Lincoln
County.
With this pilot program, it will
allow homes to be insured up to
a million dollars.
And commercial buildings up to 2
million with a cap.
5 million.
What the cap of 5 million would
do is it would protect, we see
many businesses, condo
associations that ensure each
building for a million, and
there is no limit right now.
So a cap of 5 million would help
protect the solvency of the fair
plan.
With that we are asking for $50
million in legislation.
This would then once the pilot
program rolls out.
Be able to take the statewide.
Including in the fair plan and
in the pilot program, we would
be requiring homeowners that
would go into the plan within
Lincoln County.
To have to comply with IBHS
standards in retrofitting.
And for new construction at IBHS
standards. This goes from the
parcel level and it does move
into the community level to help
protect should any other
catastrophic event moved
through.
Next slide.
Um, just some final tips and
takeaways and then.
Insurance always generates a lot
of questions.
Um, something, and this is where
Marilla's group does come in and
we do highly suggest because
people do not understand why
they're being dropped. They do
not understand why the cost of
insurance is going up.
To meet with your agent yearly.
Your agent is going to be your
first contact to your insurance
company.
Protect your home again,
mitigation.
Don't only look at it at an eye
view level, don't, you know,
look at it from a bird's view.
Look at the entire property.
Um, be prepared.
Normally what we're seeing is
most evacuations you have
anywhere from 10 to 45 minutes
to leave your property.
And have an evacuation plan.
Um, do go ahead and take videos
of all your belongings as we
have been in Riodoso since.
Uh, they let people back in.
Trying to get an inventory form
has been virtually impossible.
Have a go kit. When I say have a
go kit, as you've seen from our
emergency orders.
Prescriptions, insurance papers,
anything that you may need
additional credit cards, um,
I had a lady, she didn't carry
her credit cards with her and
she actually took copies front
and back, so when she had to
notify the companies that they
were gone, she still had the
information.
Um, help protect your community.
This is a great time to get to
know your neighbor.
Talk to them if they have a tree
that borders your property line
and overhangs your home.
And lastly, if there is a
constituent or if you do have
questions or concerns in regards
to insurance, we do have an 800
number. It does go directly to
Marilla and Lou, and they will
be able to assist by you
contacting them and filling out
a form, it does allow them to
contact the companies directly
and get more information on your
behalf.
And on the next slide,
We do offer the consumer
assistance phone number, it does
also have a local number, but we
see more traffic through at this
point, it does conclude my
presentation and open for
questions.
Thank you. Any comments or
questions from the committee?
I have, OK, representative.
Oh, thank you very much for this
presentation, um.
I've been discussing this issue
for a long time. Um,
I'm, I'm worried about the 50
million.
Yeah, you know, so if you have
And, you know, I think the whole
state needs is not just Lincoln
County. I'm just gonna say that.
Um
And certainly our our hearts go
out to Lincoln County. I mean,
that's not to.
That's not too uh ignore the
immediacy of that problem.
Um
that 50 million, so if you had
50 houses, ask for a million,
that deplete the plan, right,
Mr. Chair Representative
Herrera.
Yes, however, the fair plan
already does have a small
reserve and we would actually be
charging with the pilot program,
the premiums would go up to
actually sound premiums. So as
we take on the additional
exposure, the premiums are
coming in, and if we took on
Because they're not all gonna be
million dollar houses that we
take on day one.
A majority right now of homes
that are in the fair plan or in
the eastern side of the state,
and the average home insured on
the eastern side of the state is
275,000.
275, yes, yes. So we're not
going to take on $50 million
homes day one.
And so what we have looked at
with actu sound premiums and the
chance of catastrophic loss
statewide if we were to take on
500 policies, this 50 million
would go as a backstop.
To the fair plan.
To allow what happens is.
If there's not enough reserves
or capital, they can assess the
industry.
And what happens when they
assess the industry as it rolls
down to consumers in the open
market again generating a larger
rate increase. So this 50
million would create the capital
and backstop.
To bring these additional
policies in and with actual
sound premiums, we would be
able, be able to bring in an
additional 500 policies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, let me, and, um,
let me make sure I have this
straight, so
anybody wanting insurance which
first go to a private insurer.
Right?
If that private insurance can
insure him anymore, then they go
to you, right? But they have,
they have to get, um, let me
see, denied by a private
insurer.
How many insurance companies are
now giving insurance in rural
areas forested areas in the
state, because I'd be very
curious to know that.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herrera.
I can't give an exact number,
however, we.
Did put out an emergency rule.
It said if you were going to
withdraw from a product, you had
to give us notification.
The products that we are seeing
withdrawn is not homeowners.
What we are seeing is companies
spread the risk and spread it.
All the way across the state. So
essentially if you have a
primary insurance, for example,
I will use Allstate, and they
have 5 homes in a $50 million or
million dollar area. They're
going to look at those homes and
see which ones could subs
sustain a loss moving through
that area.
They will then hold those homes
and they will drop the others,
however,
There might be a company that
does not have any homes on that
road and they're willing to pick
it up. So we are seeing a lot of
spreading the risk amongst
companies, we are not seeing a
company just directly not right
in the area.
Even within Lincoln County, we
have found 2 or 3 companies that
are still doing business there,
but they are basing it very much
on the home at the parcel level.
You know, uh, Mr. Chair, and my
insurance went up $300 a month a
year ago.
I live in a a rural area, you
know, we have volunteer fire
departments, which is most of
the north, but even in Santa Fe,
I've heard of homes that for
over a million dollars I cannot
get insurance, cannot get
insurance now.
And um I'm just curious, what is
the, what is the insurance
industry, have they helped you
put this program together and
what, what are their
recommendations.
Mr. Chair Representative
Ferrera, yes, on this coalition,
we do have an insurance
representative. She does
actually represent the five
largest companies. Um, she also
sits on the call they are
building a fair plan in
Colorado. She does sit on the
board. Um, she is very well
versed. Her states are in New
Mexico, Colorado, Arizona,
Texas, Oklahoma.
And she does a lot of work with
California. So what we have done
with her assistance is we have
looked at multiple states who
run the IBHS standards and to
back up a little bit, Boulder
County in Colorado had a very
large fire move through
insurance companies did pull out
of the area and actually it was
the community that adopted the
IBHS standards rebuilt to those
standards retrofitted homes, and
it did bring the insurance, the
open insurance market back.
And they are extremely
competitive in that area.
And that's why we are looking at
Lincoln County as a pilot
program to bring in the IBHS
standards so we can take one
area that is a very large
concern, be able to put these
standards in place, they will
still be able to get insurance
because right now we are seeing
that people cannot rebuild
because they cannot obtain
insurance, they cannot obtain
mortgages. At that rate, we are
looking to move very quickly on
a state plan.
Because we do understand in
Santa Fe.
Our uh
Superintendent gets calls every
day on this in this area. So we
know it is a, a very high
concern. I am in a high wildfire
area here in Santa Fe County,
and my policies, I was going to
be dropped. They did come out,
they looked at the parcel level.
And I was able to keep my
policy.
Um, Mr. Chair, the same thing
happened to me, uh, you know, I,
so I cut all the tree, you know,
if I had any close, I cut them
all down and cut a couple trees
down, I trimmed back all the
others, and they came out and
inspected it, said it was OK,
but still, it, it's, you know,
I, I, I said a couple years ago
I thought we were gonna have to
start self-insuring in New
Mexico, and this isn't a New
Mexico problem. Oh, you can't
get insurance in California and
Hawaii, and, you know, it's all
over the country.
And I, you know, I just, I just,
um, I, can you comment on the
national perspective and what
people are doing, um,
nationally.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrera, yes, we have actually
sat in on 3 or 4 now different
uh commissioner, um, meetings
for the western side of the
United States, surprisingly now,
New York is on fire, but this
was based on the western side,
and we are now by putting this
coalition into place, making it
very holistic, moving to the
IBHS standards. Again, I'll
remind you that IDHS is fully
funded by the
the insurance industry, so the
science that they are creating
is backed by the industry and
used by the industry to stay
within a market.
Um, by us creating this
coalition, we are actually being
watched and mimicked by many
other states, so California had
brought in parts of IBHS um into
different areas and they are
starting pilot programs,
Colorado again the Boulder uh
project was based on IBHS
standards which brought the
market back and very
competitively. Utah is starting
as uh as well as Washington and
Oregon.
But they are very.
They have our eyes on us with
this coalition because we didn't
just take it piece by piece. We
created a holistic where we have
New Mexico forestry, who can
create fire lines on the state
land. You have the state fire
marshal that can do the IBHS
training through their fire
academy. We have the
construction industries, which
will play a major role in
changing construction
requirements.
Um, Mr. Chair, and uh sorry to
ask a few questions, but I, I'm,
I'm very curious about this, you
know, climate change is the
source of all this. I, we can
just predict in this new
administration, funding's gonna
go away for those things. That's
what I'm worried about. That's
one of the things I'm worried
about. Um,
So, so, you know, when we have
A rainstorm or a a downpour.
Uh, in the north, that drops 8
inches of rain in 1 hour,
totally wipes out, changes the
course of a river, wipes out a
sec, and then, you know, just
destroys the watersheds that we
have there.
Um, that, that can be followed
by a forest fire, so when, when
I, I represent asea and land
grants, so has has any, has any
thought gone into how we protect
Vast ranges of private forest
land.
That just goes down in a a major
Forest fire
And, you know, that won't come
back.
Maybe never.
I, I mean, I have you, have you
had any discussions about that
and how we help those
communities, uh, in, in, you
know, and that was part of the
problem in Riodoso. You had
forces that were
hadn't been thinned, hadn't been
properly cared for and we're out
of control. Many of them.
Rowlands
That overlap into private lands,
I mean is, you know, we're all
in this together, but you know,
a forest doesn't know
boundaries. A fire doesn't know
boundaries.
Mr. Chair and representative for
that, yes, this has, we've had
multiple conversations and
that's where I have visited many
hours with our state forester
Laurie Laura McCarthy. We have
talked about, and I believe
she's also asking for funding
and
I stepped back because I think
It can be done multiple
approaches, but I looked
At what Los Amos National Labs
did.
And essentially the fires that
were moving into the labs were
starting on National Forest
Service land, and the and Lana
was losing land and so I went to
uh Laura, and I said, OK, I
said, can we create the kind of
fire breaks on state land where
she has the ability to do it.
That they've created up Atlanta
to protect these communities, to
protect the water sources.
If they are based on state land.
And she said, you know, this.
It could be a good idea, and I
believe she is asking for
funding for that. So we can
create fire lines around these
high catastrophic areas where
forestry can step in.
Mr. Chair, um, uh.
Madam, uh
My son's a a fireman up in Los
Alamos, so you know, in the
last, I'm forgetting all the
names. What was the last spire
Leo in uh Los Animals.
Yes, what happened is that that
fire was only a canyon away from
the city.
And what happened was, and
because my son was a captain up
there, they could not
There is, you know, they have
those small trucks that drive up
into the mountains on the fire
breaks and they can um they can
go up in there and they can kind
of put out the hotspots and fire
spots, they couldn't go up in
that canyon because so many
trees were left over from
previous fires, that there is no
way to get up into that canyon,
and that's true for much of the
north, when they've had a fire,
those old dogs still haven't
been cleared out because it
costs so much money to do that,
and it's so much money to mail
those logs, and it's so much.
Manpower to get them out of
there, so I, you know, it, it
sounds good.
But it really doesn't happen,
and that was in Los Alamos,
where they have money to spend
on that stuff. I, I just would
like to know your response to
that. It's a, it's a mammoth
amount of money.
It is Mr. Chair a lot more than
50 million. It is this 50
million would back the fair
plan. Um, I do not have access
to the state funds for tree
removal, that would be through
forest, uh, New Mexico forestry.
From my understanding, my dad
was also on that fire. He's,
he's done wildland fire.
That was for service landing,
you're correct. It was not
mitigated. The recent fire that
was 3 weeks ago and uh Lincoln
County again, started in a past
burn scar, but it was able to
take off because it was 2 ft
high dead grass and dead fallen.
wood that was never taken out.
So I do understand and, you
know, I think the force needs to
be managed a lot better, but I
think state forestry only has so
much ability before it does go
into
Um, National Forest Service and
even wilderness, and there's
only so much that we have
control in my final question,
Mr. Chair, is, uh, so is the
executive branch in line with
you on this legislation.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative
Perrera, yes, they are.
Um, we have had a lot of backing
again because we are coming at
it from a holistic approach. We
are doing the pilot program, but
we are also looking to make
changes statewide that would
help preserve these areas that
are in catastrophic.
Potential.
Well, thank you. um, thank you,
Miss Robertson. I appreciate
your work, certainly. It's not
an easy job you were given, and
uh I'll stop there. Thank you.
no other questions, I just have
one comment so representative
and I and I both represent
Metanaales, and when the Rio
shifted, uh, we're seeing all
the silt that's coming down. And
we're seeing that a lot with
those side by sides that are
changing the terrain in our area
that it's diverting water in
ways that aren't natural into
the bringing in the silt. And so
when he talked about wildfire,
wind and hail with insurance.
I'm sure flooding is becoming
another issue as well, because
we're seeing the
it's so dry that the earth can't
absorb the water, we're seeing
so much flooding in Ri Riba
County that we would have never
thought we'd see before. And so
I wanna thank you for the job
that you do. It's not an easy
one. And so I might just call
the 1-800 number just to say
hello and thank those women who
answer for the work that they're
doing. Thank you so much for
joining us. We appreciate you
being here. And if you ever need
us, let us know. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. I thought we go to
the next order of business on.
the agenda, which is proposed
legislation in our very own Mark
Edwards, our bill drafter from
Legislative council will be
presenting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I might make a comment on the
previous presentation.
I'm always required to build
drafter to point out
The restrictions of the
anti-donation clause.
I have heard there is a, there's
a rumor that uh one of the
interim committees might be
proposing
amendment to it to allow for
Natural dis, I don't know, but
uh.
That 50 million they talked
about would go to private
entities.
homes, so I'm not sure if that
would be challengedable under
the current anti-donation clause
or not.
I just want to flag that.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, you have uh 5
different pieces of legislation
in front of you. The uh
The first one
228821
is very straightforward.
You all saw the um
House Bill 268 last year or two
years ago that uh listed each of
the land grants by name.
And that we're going to be
political subdivisions on the
very last page, on page 8.
Uh, line 16, it adds a new
subsection which adds to Santa
Cruz de la Cannada land grant
and uh
Enrique Romero just pointed out
to me that there is a mistake
line 18.
Since, you know, the land grant
is situated in Ria Riba County,
it should say Ria Riva and Santa
Cruz,
or yeah, Santa Fe counties. So
um if you decide to move forward
with this, you should amend that
and just tell me, he amended.
Please make that amendment.
I mean, the committee should and
the opposition to that
amendment.
Mr. Chen moved to adopt the.
Legislation for endorsement
as amended.
Thank you.
endorsed as amended any
opposition to that?
Seeing that we have an amended
bill.
OK.
Second one,
When award Mr. Chara.
Mark, do you always go into the
sponsorship on the, on the bill
or, yes, thank you Mr. Chair. uh
Representative Garcia.
Traditionally, the uh when a
bill has been endorsed by the
committee, the committee will
assign a sponsor in the lead
sponsor and then if it's a
senator, they'll, uh committee
will sign a co-sponsor in the
House and vice versa if it's a
House member. So I
I assume I think this was your
bill, so I assume that you want
to be the sponsor for the bill.
That is correct. And then uh is
there a co-sponsor that?
In the Senate or in the House?
In the House, so that's someone
the representative that shares
the district, and she would like
to be the co-sponsor in the
house. OK, so that's meal.
In Hara.
Thank you. OK. Thank you, Garcia
for catching that.
So the next one in your packet
should be 228935.
Uh, legal services, many
sections of the community
governance attorney Act, uh, we
had to committee had a
presentation from
Uh, Adrian Oglesby from the law
school, who is the chair of the
community governance uh
commission that runs this
program and from Peter Kovna,
the general counsel of HED and
it's October meeting.
And it also had a presentation
from Arturo, from the land grant
Council, all recommending
different changes to this bill.
But most of it is um
The lining things up so the
right agency does the right
things.
The HED was finding some.
Not necessarily being the right
agency to publicize uh the
program to law students, so they
suggested the law school do
that.
The uh
who should do the program rules.
To participate in the program,
the um
People the recommendation was
the commission should do the
rules and the commission is made
up of the clientele of these
attorneys.
And then who should approve the
contracts. They've changed the
recommendation on page 5.
Line 19 is that instead of it
being the department that does
the contracts that should be
university, i.e. the law school
does these contracts with the
approval of the commission.
From a drafting standpoint, the
only question I have is whether
that
would be an extension of the
univer of the law school's
mission.
Because they would be a miniing
contracts for legal services or
other people.
Yeah, I tried to reach Adrian,
uh, to get his comments on this,
but he's been out of town. He
just sent me an email saying he
was gone, uh.
So I think the committee's going
to have to just make that
decision, and if the law school
puts up a big fight about it.
You know, that could be amended
during the session.
What's the will of the
committee?
Mr. Cherry moved to um
Um
adopt the legislation uh.
endorsed the motion to endorse.
Very good. Any opposition?
I have a question though. So,
uh, Mark, um,
You basically encapsulated all
the concerns that
That were addressed, uh, at the
uh Langret meeting in um.
Antonio Las Huertas in this one
piece.
Mr. Chair, represented I believe
so. I was working off of
documents, red line strikeouts
that both sets of presenters
gave me. OK.
I'm familiar with the
government's community
governance.
Attorney Act, I was co-sponsor
of the house.
When we passed it in 20.
Uh, 20, so I'm willing to start
in the house.
That's a great idea.
Is there a Senate co-sponsor?
I, I can take that one.
Thank you.
OK, so,
Next thing in the packet should
be 228936. This is a simple
bill. It's uh
This is on behalf of the Lang
grant Council, uh,
They raised the issue that land
grants.
currently have, if they
subdivide their lands, uh,
Like Chiba Lee has to put up a
little housing, uh, subdivision.
I think it's 9 mobile homes.
They have to go to the county to
get approval, and it has to go
through all of the county, uh,
approvals on that. Their
argument is that as a political
subdivision that they should be
able to do that under their own
bylaws.
And so what this bill would do
on page 5.
At the bottom of the page line
24 and extending over to page 6
is simply removes division of
land by land grants. Land grants
Mercedes.
As subdivisions under the county
subdivision Act.
What's the will of the
committee?
Mr. Charley moved to uh
A doctor, uh, legislation as an
endorsed by the committee.
Second endorsement.
Any opposition to the bill?
Saying none
OK, and I there is one question
from representative editor.
Um, Mark, uh, where to see New
Mexico Association of County
stand on this.
I don't believe they've seen
this yet.
Mr. Chair.
OK, thank you.
So, uh, do you want to sign a
sponsor and a co-sponsor. Does
anyone want to volunteer on the
interim committee to take on the
bill.
I believe he's looking
representative editor and, you
know, um, and I'm, I'm going to
offer my services on the
La Grant, um, their
infrastructure one so.
Otherwise that
Step up.
But it'd be good if you could
step up on this one.
is there a set of co-sponsor.
Maybe we can give it to send or
Tino. I'm just kidding.
We can work on a co-spoor, I
think, uh, I think that Senator
Lopez might step up on this one.
OK. Let's list her for now.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair, that is quite often
the
And then Senator Maestta said he
can be the co-sponsor. OK.
This chair I was gonna say that
the chair or the uh
The committee is sometimes
informed someone who has left
early, that they are suddenly
the sponsor or co-sponsor. I'd
be sometimes they reject that,
but quite often they'll do it.
He
I will leave that blank if you
want to do that.
OK. Um,
So the 4th 1 in the packet is
228935.2 relating to legal
services, amending sections, no,
I think we already did that.
I went to 6, I think. Yeah, OK,
2291261 SA.
Who's doing the
935.2.
That was the, um, myself and uh
Leo. Yeah.
Thank you.
OK, so 229126.1 essay is
Relating the land grants,
mending the land grant.
Mayor said assistance fund.
Principally, this is to make the
uh fund a non-reverting fund so
that if they're funds left over
from the annual distribution,
they go back into the same pot
for distribution the next year.
Mr. Chair, I'm uh move that we
adopt the legislation has
endorsed by the committee.
Second for endorsement.
Any opposition?
And Mr. Chair, I want to
nominate uh resident McQueen.
to carry this legislation,
seeing that he carried the
master bill.
You know, 2 years ago, 3 years
ago.
Yeah, I can check with herent
McQueen and see if he's willing
to do that, Mr. Chair. Uh, is
there a volunteer to be a
sentence sponsor.
Maybe we should check with
Senator Stephanic and turned the
Queen's district overlap.
OK.
OK, so the last one is 228884,
which is what you heard about
this morning. I apologize for
not having it ready at that
time.
This bill is
Drafted almost, I almost copied
and pasted the tribal
infrastructure fund and just
took out tribal and put in and
Grant there said and put in
Langren council wherever it says
the tiff board.
There are a few quirks, uh, that
they were able to get away with
in 2004 with regard to uh the
state giving money to tribes.
And since land grants are a
political subdivisions. I had
to, that was.
All the changes that I was
making during the the morning.
Basically, what it would do.
And let me find this real
quickly. Yes, on page 4.
Line 5.
The goal is to get about $18
million a year into the project
fund for land grants.
So what this does is it
It takes a
1.1% of the severance tax bond
on in capacity in dedicates to
this fund.
So every year, 1.1%.
That would be almost 20 million,
uh, is the projection, more or
less, the uh
Instead of making it 20 million
straight because there's an
appropriation at the bottom, on
page.
On the final page.
On page 11.
of 20 million, there needs to be
a little bit of money left over
from that initial appropriation
to keep the fun going and to
make sure that there's no one.
Knows that
Bits and pieces that get left
out.
The bill does provide 50,000 a
year to the uh
to the council to uh
Administer applications and
The uh
And administration of the fund.
That would have to come out of
appropriated dollars so that
there has to be more in the fund
that's appropriated to then that
are coming out of the SIM funds.
See if there's
Other than that, there is one
thing that I am not sure of.
There is a cryptic note from.
From the proofers that there may
be another section that needs to
be amended, says, OK.
For the tribal infrastructure
fund and the water
infrastructure Fund and colonia
Fund, those come off the top of
the severance tax bonding
capacity.
And
I couldn't find that section
this morning, but I may need to
work with whoever.
in a sponsoring this to add that
in in the first committee. If
you, you may not want it, you
may want to say, OK, we're just
gonna take whatever pot of money
is left over after.
The 3 buns are already there and
Leave and take it, take the
money out of what's left over,
because it should be a huge
amount
represented.
Um, I, uh, Mr. Chair, you might
want to check with Marquita
Russell who handles all these
funds. I'm sure she'd know the
answer and, and how that should
be amended. I, I think this is
going to be a tough one to pass,
um.
I've tried to do it, uh, for
Rural water and uh you know.
They guard that severance tax
fund, like it's uh we'll see.
I'm just saying that's all.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Mr. chair members of the
committee, um, remember the
discussion this morning I was
listening to it.
And it didn't sound like they
went before the Indian Affairs
Committee.
When you're talking about the
tribal infrastructure fund. I
think they have to be in the
conversation on it, even the
tribes stations and pueblos, and
this version of, um, you're
saying you pulled it from that
like when it was created. Yeah,
I took the statue that created
the tiff and then, and then I
duplicated it for land grants,
uh,
Except that the tiff I think
gets 3% out of the sib buns or
And, and I'm not a doctor, and I
don't do what you guys do. I
just want to make sure that
there probably was not any
amendments to the
tip. No, no, no, this is a
separate statue. I just
completely borrowed the language
from the other statute when the
fund was established.
If there was kinks in it during
that time if there were
amendments to that fund, that we
make sure so we don't, if this
was just the established the
original language establishing
the fund, but if there were
kinks in it, then maybe we got
to make sure that we don't run
into the same kinks if they
amended that.
Original legislation, but I
don't know how you guys works,
um, but thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
they're probably are kinks in
that statute.
I borrowed it from the.
Most recently amended one, which
is the red books that we work
on, but I do think there are
some kinks that are still there.
Somehow the agency has made it
work, so no one has wanted to go
back and amend the kinks because
that just opens a can of worms.
In my opinion.
I think that's one of the
things.
Under the vibes was that there
was some issues with the process
and I didn't know if they
actually meant that the issues
that we needed to amend it or
that they, it was just their
process that they had to fix,
but I understand there's been
some changes that they were
trying to do in the Indian
Affairs department with the tIF
fund.
Or the capital outlas something
like that, but thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator my. Oh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Edwards, Senator
Pinto, no great catch, great
catch. Um, yeah, it wouldn't
affect the travel infrastructure
fund at all, but you're right.
He cut and pasted the statute,
but we should maybe find out how
we can improve on existing
statute, uh, with your
leadership, Senator. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia,
Mr. Chair and, uh, Mark, um,
Uh, you did a good job in terms
of the bill before us, uh.
The, the, the difference that I
see is that the, the tranquil
infrastructure fund.
That kind of a two-step process
in terms of
Of the application process.
That it went before a review
committee.
That then made a recommendation
to the board.
The tip forward and then the tip
board made the determination
that yes, we're going with this
project, we're gonna fund this
project. Now, how does that
differ with what we have here
with the land grant council. I
Mr. Cher representative, there
isn't a uh review board.
Like the process that Mr.
Thompson was referring to in
statute, I believe that the
board created that so that they
would have you answer my
question, yeah, so I would
imagine the council would do the
same thing, I move that we.
Adopt the legislation of.
For endorsement.
Second endorsement.
Do I see any opposition?
And I like to kind of carry the
legislation started in the
House.
We'd be honored to have you do
that.
And then Senator Maestas and I
would like to carry it after in
the Senate.
So like I do
Sponsorship on the senate.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we, let's talk
before now on Christmas.
Where to place it, but not two
bills, 11, yeah, one bill and
you'll start it on the house we
know where the sticking points
are gonna be, so let's.
Strategize.
Who started it in the house with
Representative Garcia.
And then, uh, who do we have in
the Senate? Both Senator Maestas
and I. OK, OK, that's what
you, you can all sign the bill
as co-sponsors. It's having two
parallel bills that create, you
can't have endorsements on both.
We'll do one bill starting in
the house. Good. OK, I, I
believe we're done, uh, at least
with my.
Very good. Thanks for your hard
work on getting those bills
drafted. We appreciate you,
Mark, and we appreciate everyone
out there who assisted in
identifying which bills needed
to be written up and how we can
best support land grants through
legislation. I'm going to move
on to the next item on the
agenda, which is public comment.
Now he did have several people
sign up. Um, you needed to sign
up and I'll read your name out.
You have 3 minutes when you come
up, make sure that you state
your first and last name for the
record, even though I'm gonna
call you out by name. Jason
Quintana.
And DFA.
Absent
Andrea Paviaonajo and Toma
Laren.
Come on up, you're the next
contestant on the land grant is
right.
Maybe I can win something, a
washer and dryer, a washer and
dryer, that sounds good.
Uh, chair members Andrea Padilla
with the town of Toma land grant
and with a consejo de las
Mercedes.
And there's a few things I
wanted to say, but number one, I
wanted to start with thanking
all of you members of this
committee that have done so much
for land grants in the seconds,
we appreciate everything you do.
Um, I'm
Very happy that you guys come to
the meetings. I'm a little upset
of those that haven't come to
the meetings. I hope that's not
an indication that they're not
interested anymore. I'm just
hopeful that they're busy.
Uh, the second thing I'd like to
do is you all got a card from
me, a letter with some good with
a goodie, uh, that's our capital
outlay request, and I know it
sounds like it's kind of big,
but that'll probably be our last
big request that we will make,
once we get all these
properties.
will be able to do some big
plans that we've got, and those
plans will require some
infrastructure money, but we
might be able to take care of
that, especially if we get the
amount that we've asked for.
So I want to thank you for that
and let you know that that's
what we're looking for, the last
thing I want to say is we do
support the expansion of the
land grant Council's budget.
Um, it would be really nice if
they could get one person that
could help the consejo.
A little bit more, uh, as I'm
getting older, it's a little
harder to do all the work, so it
would be nice if they could
dedicate someone from that
office to assist us a little bit
more in doing the things that we
do for you all and for land
grants as a whole.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
And before you leave, I have a
question. Did the, did your
Airbnb start up already the
Historic house that you were
planning on renting out, is that
the jail site we haven't yet.
We, we still need to get someone
to actually do it and see how it
works.
Once we've done that, then we're
gonna start opening up. The
other property that we just
purchased, we purchased another
property that has a house. We're
going to restore that, and
that's going to be a
full-fledged Airbnb.
Let me know when the gel's
ready, cause I want to go stay
in it.
OK, you want the jail, jail or
the casita, the jail, OK, we can
arrange it.
Thank you,
just don't throw away the chemo.
Monica Rodriguez, NMAA. Any
comments from you?
If you can come up to the
microphone.
echo what Miss Padilla said in
that we want to thank each and
every one of you for the work
that you do. We know you're
volunteers, we are too, and we
get it. It's, it's hard work,
but it's necessary work and the
people of New Mexico appreciate
every one of you. So thank you
again.
Thank you, Monica.
Sure. My name is Monica
Rodriguez. I'm a staffer for the
New Mexicose Association. I also
sit on the New Mexico Land Grant
Council and the New Mexico
Consejo.
And Monica's dad and my dad were
best friends in high school, so
we grew up, um, we've known each
other our entire lives, even
before then. And
so it's good to see you.
We're very proud of Leo. Thank
you.
Mary Trujillo Mascarena has left
the building, and we heard from
her. And with that, there's no
other comments, but I want to
thank the staff for all of your
hard work this interim committee
and we couldn't have done this
without you.
See.
We appreciate everything that
you do and so know that.
You're appreciated even if we
don't send messages to you often
and even though you have to
hound us if we're coming to a
meeting, we appreciate every
single thing that you've done.
And so with that, the interim
committee session is done for
our land grants. We look forward
to a 60-day session where we'll
introduce this legislation, and
we'll fight hard for land grants
because we're each committed to
this. And I want to lastly thank
again Representative Garcia
because it was his mastermind
that ensured that this committee
started. And it was because of
his leadership that land grants
are.
Protected with a group of
like-minded individuals who
understand the importance of
Meds wins understands not only
the history that they bring to
New Mexico, but where we are
today and where we'll be in the
future and to representative of
your leadership, I am so
indebted to and so thankful for.
Thank you for that. And with
