I believe that we are back up
and live again everyone, so we
can get everyone into their
seats, those watching at home
with nothing better to do,
welcome back. I hope we didn't
lose you during 15 minute little
break while we were rebooting
the, the presentations and
things of that sort, so John,
sorry for the interrupted
interruption, please continue.
I'm only slightly offended, Mr.
Chair, that only people with
nothing better to do would be
listening to me, but, uh, you
know.
I can tell you I tried to talk
to my wife about this stuff, and
she doesn't care. So I, I get
it. It's fine.
Um, we're going to pick up on
page 9 where we left off. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna just touch on
11 thing for each of these areas
just so that we can get through
the presentation in case you've
got some questions. Again, there
will be a lot of overlap. So,
uh, between this and the next
one, so you, you may hear some
of your answers in the other one
as well. Again, the first piece
just that, what does quality
look like both in the EPP,
you'll see here, and I don't
want anybody to freak out, a
bullet that says teacher
evaluations.
And, and that's not because we
we have this big feeling that we
need to go back to the way we
were doing it.
But I do think that we, there is
this a growing consensus that
we're just not sure what's
happening in classrooms to the
extent that we knew before,
right? And that doesn't mean
teachers are doing a terrible
job. It just means they might
need support, and we need to
make sure principles can support
them well, and so we might, we,
we might sort of iterate on that
idea a little bit, just to
ensure quality across the
system.
In academic design, uh, you'll
hear next month, uh, some more,
some more work around literacy,
you all have funded and school
districts and teachers have been
trained like a lot of work has
been done here. But there are
some key pieces in order to
create a sort of comprehensive
and cohesive system around
literacy that goes beyond just
training teachers with letters.
And so we're going to be looking
at that a little bit more. And
then in that same box, I did
want to talk about
Bilingual education.
Um, you'll, you'll hear a
presentation. I'll talk a little
bit more about it in the work
plan about
How do we actually do bilingual
education well.
Right? We've been funding
disparate kinds of bilingual
education programs across the
state for decades.
I was the product of one of
those programs, and you don't
want to hear me speak Spanish.
It's, we, we need, if we're
going to pay for programs.
You probably want to make sure
that they're actually resulting
in some level of either uh
language fluency, by literacy,
you know, it's the reason that
we have our bilingual seal, so
we want to look a little bit
more closely at that and then
give you some more information
about how to do that well.
And John, similar, you know,
kind of just break in when
interesting piece comes up, uh,
do a little bit of a break we
were talking about our New
Mexico constitution requires
teachers to be taking or working
towards Spanish.
You know, what about adding as
part of the teacher preparation
programs of one semester course
in
Spanish sports for in across the
culture or across the curriculum
or Spanish for teachers, not a
Spanish 101 where you start off
with ola one Comota uh but, but
Spanish the teachers use in the
classroom both in meeting with
parents and things of that sort
as an idea of trying to meet
what's required in the
Constitution, but also ensure
our, our teachers are better
prepared to, to work with the
cultures that we have in New
Mexico. Yeah, absolutely.
And I think part of this is
intentionality.
Right, we have some really high
quality programs across the
state when it comes to dual
language.
Are those, are we fun, do we
provide enough funding for more
people to do that, we provide
the infrastructure and support
for people to actually offer
high quality dual language
programs. Again, we'll talk more
about that. I, I should probably
keep going.
Uh, you know, in, uh, whole
child supports, uh, you'll see a
number of things there, but the
one I'll I'll focus on is this
improved services for students
with disabilities, you all have,
have, um, studied that for a few
years now. One thing that we
haven't done, and I'll talk more
about is look at actual services
in schools, and what does it
mean that if I'm categorized as
a level B student with a uh
reading disability. Am I getting
the same services that the, that
another
student with the same
categorization is getting in
another school. What's the
variation in those services, and
how do we do a better job of
supporting districts to make
sure they're high quality and
consistent.
And then the last thing under
overarching systems, and I only
pulled this out because there's
every year it's perennial that
we hear some legislation around
governance and who should run
education, um, and so I'll just
say stable, local and state
leadership uh is still an issue,
and I would pull school boards
into that as well, because they
also are part of that
governance, uh, system, so we'll
continue to do some more work
there. Again, this slide is a
reminder that for all the things
you've already done,
There are some important pieces
that we need to continue to work
out.
And then lastly, uh, on page 10,
I'll just say very quickly that
the whole point of the roadmap
is that it guides our work as
staff, but it could also do some
other things, if, if you all are
interested.
One is to vet proposals.
Education-related proposals that
come from us.
That come from the department.
That come from external
stakeholders or other
legislators who are not
necessarily sitting on your
committee or are not tuned in to
all the the work that you do on
a regular basis.
Um
Some of those folks may be
hearing from really smart people
who have really great ideas.
And some of them may be
listening to a constituent who
has a real concern, but isn't
quite sure how to address that.
The road map in some of this
framework could help you, um,
and maybe if we got a little bit
more specific around some uh
some metrics, if you will, to
say, does this fit in with the
work that the legislature should
be doing as a system, or is this
something that is a, a one-time
problem that needs to be handled
over here.
Right? And so the the roadmap
could help with that.
It can continue hopefully to be
a guidepost for the entire
legislature as it responds to
the lawsuit.
And then ideally because um if
I'm lucky I get to keep doing
this job, uh, even when we get a
new governor, and maybe even a
governor after that.
That
This roadmap provides you all
with a level of consistency in
policy and budget, despite
political changes.
So, again, that's uh primarily
consistency for you all as you
think through this.
Last, last page, and maybe if
it's OK with you, Mr. Chair, um,
when it comes to the feedback,
I'm gonna go through the,
through our work plan.
And that way if there's
something missing from either
the road map.
Or that you didn't, that you
don't hear in the work plan,
we'll take that feedback as
staff and, and figure out how we
can incorporate that into the
work that we've already planned
to do.
Is that OK?
Great.
So, uh, with that, we'll just,
unless you want to have any
comments or questions about the
roadmap itself.
Questions, comments from
anybody, the shot clock is
reset, so.
OK, please, oh.
Representative, please go.
Thank you.
Thank you for the presentation
and you have that um
This year
More to explain things that it's
really clear for me. Thank you
so much. Um, I have a question
and you may have mentioned it.
Um, you mentioned, you talked
about the pretitious preparation
program to, to, to look at those
programs. I also want to hear
about um
Ongoing PD for teachers. As a
teacher, I know one of the
things that make the difference
in my classroom was some of the
pity that I received throughout
the years, um, and you always
see this that I hear when I was
um becoming a teacher and I keep
saying it to the teachers that I
train is um do you wanna be a 30
year teacher with 30 years of
experience or a teacher with one
year doing it 30 times our
students change our commu the
society changed, so, and I think
it's important to keep up with.
With, with students Mr. Chair
Representative, absolutely, and,
and I didn't touch on it
specifically, but we do have
high quality professional
development as part of the, the
focuses and the road ahead, um,
and to your point, I think it
is, um, any one of us who's
worked in a school and has had
to be subject to uh that
professional development knows
that a lot of the training that
we get are so called training
that we get isn't great. There
are good trainings out there,
and I think part of it is
How do you scale some of those
trainings, how do you
communicate with districts to
take advantage of some good
training, and then, you know,
whether it's creating incentives
or time or structures for
teachers to take advantage of
those that training, uh, is also
going to be important. So we, we
definitely have that as part of
the
Future work.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Royval Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. I
have and uh I just want to take
a moment to thank you for
acknowledging that our children,
um, our assets, and in multiple
ways, so I just wanted to.
start with that. I have a
question, um, relevant to page
8.
So you've, you said a couple of
times that um,
You know, because we're
investing so much money, it's
important for us to understand,
um, the outcomes and how
successful that investment has
been. So I looked at the
required specific school board
training, uh relevant to SB 137,
and the question came up.
How do we assess and measure
effectiveness, for example, in
this, this one particular, um,
arena.
That's a really great question,
and it's actually a conversation
Jessica and we're having this
week.
Um, requiring training is great.
It's a great first step, uh, the
department's actually done a
really good job of trying to
work with the school boards
association to categorize some
of the training they get to make
sure that they're meeting those
requirements. Um, and I hope
this doesn't come across as
overly critical, but we know
that, you know, because of a
lack of expertise potentially,
or other reasons, we're not
always seeing the best, the best
decisions made at the at the
local level. And so, um
Something we've been thinking
about very initially. This is
not a, and it would be something
we would wanna present to you
all. Is, is there an objective
way to look at it that school
board performance, for instance.
And right now we kind of rely
on, did their members get their
training or not?
And I think there may be some
other ideas that we could think
about in terms of
What are some objective
consistent measures in terms of
Um
Training, budget development.
Leadership turnover in a
particular district and, and,
you know, the, the, the
circumstances around some of
those things. If nothing else as
a transparency tool so
communities have a better
understanding of
The kinds of decisions their
school boards are making, and
why they're making them, because
in the end, they're um
The answer to their voters.
Right. And, and then of course,
in the case of maybe more
egregious behavior. Are there,
are there ways that the
department or the state can look
at performance or behavior in
and identifying places where
they might have to step in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
capacity building along all
lines, um, is critically
important and maybe the school
board association could also
offer some uh feedback in terms
of how best to do that. And
finally, on page 9, the same
thing applies on the lower right
hand um little box, uh,
monitoring intentional use.
Of at-risk funding. I think it's
not just monitoring, but.
What, uh, what do we have in
place to evaluate, um, the
success, or perhaps just
evaluate as it relates to goals
and outcomes, so I would, I
would look carefully at that
because of the obvious reasons
we've made investments, um,
there's a lot of criticism about
the investments we've made, but
if we can show and demonstrate
that these investments have a
great return, and these are the
method, this is the methodology
we have in place.
to determine every year the um
effectiveness and, and how it is
uh associated with the outcomes
would be helpful. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Other questions?
Senator Picadoa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. There are
a couple things I'm gonna ask
about that seem to be have
dropped off this plan um that I
think we might need to add back
in, although it's already
extremely loaded, but one of
them is um page 9, and you
talked about it in the budget.
We allocated 18.6 million for
attendance issues.
Attendance is no longer in the
whole child description of
something we are focusing on,
and I cheated, looked ahead at
the work plan, and I don't see
it in there either. And it is
way too soon to let go of that
because none of the other things
we work on will make a
difference if we don't have the
kids in school.
Mr. Chair, um,
Old star for overachievement,
senator and looking ahead,
reading ahead, um, you know,
it's interesting attendance is
actually one of those places
where the country is still
talking about chronic
absenteeism, and what do we do
about it? And we've presented to
you a lot of ideas about what
districts are doing, both in
terms of personnel to support
folks who don't come to school
and what other kinds of
interventions and supports
exist, um.
We haven't forgotten about it.
I think what we're, what we're
going to talk about as we go
through here and and
Representative Baca mentioned it
earlier is what actually gets
kids to school.
And so, you know, yes, there
will always be a need to
intervene potentially, um, if a
school is has an engaging,
welcoming environment where kids
feel safe, and everything's
going really well.
But
They don't have transportation.
That's, there may always be that
need, right? And how we address
that is something that we would
probably want to continue to
think about.
Like, I think the larger
question is,
Is every school a welcoming,
engaging place where kids feel
safe and want to be. And I think
that, so you'll see through the
work plan, some of that, uh,
attention put on some of those
pieces to get at what I kind of
should have said earlier.
The focus on
How important the structure of
the system and the everyday
operation of what happens in
schools is,
Intervention is always going to
be necessary for a, for a number
of issues, but I, I think we
also want to continue to, to pay
attention to and explore a
little bit more.
Are we sure that
Extra things are being added to
a system that runs well.
Or are we trying to fix the
system that isn't working as
well as we'd like with small
extra things.
And so, um, maybe that's a
little bit of a a roundabout way
of answering your question. Mr.
Taran John, no, I just think I
might reverse the order. It is
um
Our chronic absenteeism rates
are too high still, but we have
made a significant drop, 10% is
huge.
Um, and we have allocated funds
to keep working on the issue.
I want to be sure that we're
focusing the funds on those
interventions that have been
working because some school
districts saw 20% drop in
chronic absenteeism and some
districts saw almost no drop.
So we get our average of 10%,
but we need to make sure we're
funding the interventions that
are working and we keep an eye
on that. I absolutely agree with
you that whole school climate
and whole school supports and
making sure schools are where
children want to be, will help
with attendance, but I don't
think that will solve the whole
problem, as you mentioned,
identifying what what's keeping
students from school, which
might be safety issues, um,
Their perception of being
welcome might be bullying, and
might be transportation.
And finding out what the issue
is for every child individually
takes a huge amount of staff and
resources, um, and focus, and I
don't want to lose the focus as
we look at the bigger broader
picture.
Mr. Chair, Senator, absolutely,
uh, I'll just mention one more
thing which is that, um,
As part of your Perf grow
appropriation for this year
attendance is, is one of those
programs. And as I said earlier,
there will be some evaluation
done of those efforts over the
next 3 years, and so you funded
3 years of attendance efforts
and we're working with the
department and the finance
committee to continue to monitor
that so that we can get at what
are those effective
interventions and, and, you
know, do we continue to, to
support those or do we think of
something different?
Thank you, John. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. The other piece that
seems to have been dropped off,
is in the educator ecosystem and
it has to do with educator
retention. We have focused
heavily on preparation, on
residencies, on providing
teachers quality training and
the opportunity to practice
that's been 5 minutes,
so mentoring is gone and some,
at some point we need to work it
back in and you don't have to
answer that. We'll put it back
on the list.
I'll try not to use your time
for me. Thank you, Senator.
Sorry to, to cut you off. Um, I
just wanted to comment looking
through this, I often get
frustrated because once we get
something done, we forget that
we did that and I see all the
things that still need to be
done. This is a wonderful list
of the incredible things that
education committees have done
through the LESC and through the
legislature over the last couple
of years where we've made
tremendous progress and it's
nice to get a
reporting that we've done a lot
of good things rather than just
look at the things that didn't
get done yet. And so thank you,
I, I, you know, this is
encouraging.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
want to do a follow-up on what
Senator Figueroa said. I think
LAC has made a tremendous effort
in including student voices.
Middle school, we had middle
school kids there. Uh, Tim's
working on the AI task force.
He's making sure we have uh some
students at different levels to
hear from them. I think when we
look at attendance, I don't know
the president of technology
Students of America in New
Mexico goes to Volcano Vista,
and I had a deep talk with them
about the impact of their work
on attendance. So I just wanna
make sure that PED and LEOC that
when we look at attendance,
We make sure we include student
voices, that's all.
Mr. Chairman. I have a quick
question. So we have attendance,
we get these students back in
the classroom. They haven't been
there in months or, you know,
days or months or weeks. Do we
look at the effect
this is having on our students
who are there every day and the
teacher who's trying to teach
and then trying to also support
these students who come
Intermittently. Do we look at
that because, you know, we're, I
think part of our scores because
we're hurting those students who
are there every day because the
teacher has to teach everyone,
do we just question Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, we, we have,
and, and it is a complex
picture. Um, uh, I'm gonna
forget the, the month we did
this. Tim did some analysis for
us around uh the attendance work
that Jess did and, and it, and
it talked about uh performance
in relation to attendance, but
it also talked about
performance.
and attendance in relation to
low income students, and so the
sort of um the connections
between all of these things, and
of course, research does show
that, you know, if
If you've got chronically
absent, high levels of chronic
absenteeism, it does start to
affect everybody else in a
school.
And, and as a teacher, you
didn't need research to tell you
that, because, because you've
got to reteach or you've got to
make up assignments, or you've
got to grade something two weeks
after you get graded it for
everybody else, and that adds
more difficulty to the job. So
yes, of course, um.
And again, uh, to, to Senator
Figueiro's point, um.
We, we still need to take a
closer look at that, and, and
obviously the, the goal would be
to reduce that as much as
possible.
Anyone else?
It's not John are you still up
on uh interim calendar and, and
research.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, um, so I
think maybe this is a little bit
of housekeeping that I think.
I think you have a quorum right
now. Um, if you wanted to just
take a look at the first item,
which is your interim calendar,
proposed interim calendar for
behind tabby, anybody who's
keeping up.
And um you do have to, I think,
approve that interim calendar
for the year, unless there are
questions or concerns about it.
motion to accept the interim
calendar when I move up the
calendar. Motion by Senator
Brandt, seconded by
Representative Miel Moya, and
the opposition to the interim
calendar.
The opposition.
See none, the calendar is
accepted.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll just
say one word about it, which is
that you'll, you'll hopefully
notice as we go through the year
that we've planned these visits
out, uh, both in terms of
looking at educated preparation
programs, we'll be in Las Vegas
and Las Cruces. We'll be
inviting one to come talk to us
in Roswell at the very least,
um, and each of them will be
sort of coordinated thematically
around where we're going and why
we're there, and we'll include
uh both uh local presentations
and obviously the work of your
staff.
OK.
So we're gonna go ahead and move
to our uh interim work plan and
research agenda.
Um, in your binders, you should
have a smaller version.
Of this.
Uh, I got the special version,
otherwise I, I can't read it.
Uh.
And these are essentially, this
is essentially a cover page or,
couple cover pages that
summarize everything else that's
behind it.
Still on tabby.
So, I'm gonna go over this
sheet, uh, in a little bit of
detail, and then, and then stand
for questions, but I did want to
walk you through.
Um, one,
Of, of these. And so what you'll
see is that every page,
I
A work plan for one of the
things we're doing this this
interim.
And um,
Usually there's gonna be one
analyst who will lead this work.
Potentially by themselves or
with the support of other staff
who usually we, we do a lot of
teamwork and so I wanted to walk
you through just the structure
of this so that if you want to
go back and look at in finer
detail our plans for the work,
you'll know how to navigate
this. This is the first year we
formatted it this way. We're
hoping it's easy to navigate and
and understand. The first
section is essentially a summary
of the topic itself and and why
it's important or why we want to
do some work on it.
The second section there you'll
see our short term goals, which
is what are we actually going to
try to do for you this interim.
The long term goals are, what
are we actually trying to
accomplish in, in, in addressing
these issues. It's not just
about what are we going to
present to you, but what would
we like to see in sort of an
ideal state.
Research questions and resources
needed, in addition to providing
this to you for information,
these documents actually serve
as a resource for our analysts
as they go through the work and
so they've created this in a way
that's also useful for them to
talk about, what am I trying to
find out? Who do I need to talk
to or what information do I
need, and we provide that to you
here.
And then lastly, at the bottom
is the theory of change.
And it's essentially saying if
we create certain conditions.
to address this issue, we're
going to get to this long-term
solution, ideally.
Some of these are more long term
than others. Uh, some of them
are driven by the road map.
Others may be driven by uh ideas
that you all have, memorials
that you passed this past um
legislative session, and so, uh,
as I said at the end of the last
presentation, if you don't see
something in this plan, um, that
you're, uh,
Concerned about, that is a
priority for you, please let us
know, um, as someone said
earlier, it is, we think an
ambitious plan.
But doable
Um, and always happy to take on
a little bit more if we can even
capacity and time.
So we'll go ahead and, again,
start with this, this high level
sheet, if you will, the summary
of all the work.
This is literally an
alphabetical order. So there's
no necessarily prioritization,
um, as we talk through them, but
you'll probably recognize that
some of them are maybe more
important to you than others or
more important to the system,
uh, than others.
So the first one is artificial
intelligence, and this is
actually going to be paired kind
of, it's, it was paired in a
memorial this past session to
look at artificial intelligence.
Tim is leading this work, Tim
Bado.
I was artificial intelligence
being used in schools currently?
What are, what is the potential
for its use in education.
Where are the pitfalls and
potential dangers in its use.
And then how do we as a state in
in in
Specifically around education,
regulate that and provide
support and resources, so folks
are using it effectively, but
also safely.
That's a very high level, uh,
some work that Tim is doing.
He's already uh
Convening a working group around
artificial intelligence, uh.
Natasha is working on bilingual
and multicultural education, and
as I said before, we're gonna be
doing a review of the kinds of
bilingual programs that exist in
the state.
How much do these uh programs
cost.
What are the various student
outcomes associated with uh the
differing levels of uh
programming.
And then
What is, what are some options
for you both to potentially
increase access, if that's what
you'd like to see, or if we find
that
And and research already shows
that dual language, for
instance, is sort of the gold
standard for bilingual
education, maybe that's not the
right model for every school or
school district, but what are
the right models that actually
result in a meaningful outcomes.
And so that'll be the work of
the bilingual and multicultural
education work.
Uh, Mark is working on Capitol
Outlay outlay, as I said
earlier, this is something that
we still need to find a
long-term solution to as we deal
with the complexity of
construction costs, as well as
local uh
The ability of local school
districts to generate revenue,
what we found is that even in
the cases where districts have
gone and asked for voters and
passed bonds, they're still not
able to afford these projects
because construction has become
so expensive and so how do we
prioritize projects given
limited resources, but also
provide us uh consistent and
fair system uh to all school
districts.
Tim is also working on our
career connected learning,
career and technical education.
Um
We, we started this work as far
as sort of evaluation last year.
We know there's research around
the effectiveness of career
technical education, we want to
look more closely at what that
looks like in New Mexico.
Who are the students actually
participating in these programs,
um, and again, how do we do that
to uh representative Baca's
point earlier, how do we do that
well and make sure that students
have access to these programs.
Mark is looking at charter
school governance.
And this is, this is uh rooted
primarily in some, some
legislation that you've all
considered over the last couple
of years, uh, both about the way
that charter schools, um,
Essentially give up 2% of their
budgets to their local
authorizers or the state
authorizer.
Uh, to support
Um
Well, for administrative
support, essentially. So PEC,
the Public Education Commission,
and the charter school division
at the public education
department, uh, received that
money or state charter charter
schools, local districts
received the 2% for locally
chartered charter schools, we
want to look more closely at
where is that money going? Who's
using it and what does it pay
for, right, as well as just more
general uh charter school
governance issues around
governing councils and and how
charter schools are run.
Um, this is a, it's
Annie, who's not here now, but
we, we hope we'll be back, you
know.
Uh, she won't get so like
convinced that she just likes
staying home. That's what I'd
rather do. But um,
She's gonna be looking at
compensation for school
personnel and, and a few of you
mentioned earlier, not just
classroom teachers.
What are, what are the needs of
ancillary staff, what are the
needs of our support staff.
You know, what does it look like
again to think systemically
about compensation, uh, and
again, this is based some of out
of some of the work from the
legislature this session, um.
We want to make sure that all of
our compensation funds is
paying.
Good salaries for all our
employees.
Number 7, data governance is
part 2, if you will, of, of
Tim's work uh out of um House
Memorial 2.
And you've heard Tim present to
you in the past couple of years
about the importance of data
governance.
Um, not necessarily through
anyone's fault, but we've
struggled to get accurate,
timely data, both from the
department and and others, and
because of that, we're not
always able to make good
decisions or evaluate programs.
And so it's still important that
we continue to look at what is
an effective data governance
structure look like and where
does it live and who should be
involved in that, so that we can
all do our jobs, uh, better, and
that goes from classroom
teachers figuring out what kids
need to you all making decisions
about.
On the 2nd page, um, this is a
couple of folks are working on
this project, Early childhood
school readiness, and um
It's something we haven't, we
haven't done a lot of early
childhood work, um,
We're not technically early
childhood folks, but as it
connects to school readiness and
how the varying kinds of
programs across the state are
preparing students for
kindergarten is something that
we'd we'd like to look a little
bit more closely, and that's
something that merit.
And uh Natasha will look at. We
heard yesterday about our uh
advisory councils and the
expertise that they contain and
provide both to the department
and and potentially to the state
as a whole, and Natasha's going
to take a closer look at
advisory councils, so that you
can at least get an update, you
know, how often do they meet?
Who's on them? What do they talk
about? Uh, every year, these
advisory councils issue
advisories to the public
education department.
What are those advisories, how
much of them are taken into some
sort of account in terms of
action.
Even the system's getting tired
of me. I'm sorry.
I'm gonna keep talking until
they tell me to stop so we can
keep moving.
Uh, um
Again, that sort of level
setting around advisory councils
because we think it's important
and it's not something we've,
we've presented to you all in
the last uh couple of years.
Jessica is, is gonna carry on
this work around education
governance, you'll remember the
the presentation hopefully that
we gave to you in November,
around what some states are
doing around long term planning.
And how to, how to have set.
And continued to move forward a
vision for education in the
state, regardless of who's in
charge.
What are those overarching
things that you want to
accomplish the state wants to
see for students, and how do
you, how do you set up that
governance structure.
Daniel will be talking to you
next month about uh health
insurance.
It's a perennial issue this past
legislative session, you all,
um,
Provided funding for state
employees for this 80/20 split
in health insurance. We'll
provide you some information,
uh, next month about what it
would cost to do that for
education employees, just so you
have that, uh, for context.
Number 12, educator, uh,
preparation course and clinical
experience quality, again, this
is about um
Making sure that there is
consistent, stable quality in
those educated prep programs
across all of them, as well as,
as much as I said about
residency earlier and and how we
should be proud of that work.
We imagine there's going to be
some variation.
Depending on who you're placed
with in your residency.
You know who's making decisions,
who's available as a mentor
teacher. Um, so we'll continue
to look at the quality of
clinical experience as well, in
addition to course offerings.
Number 13 is really about
recruitment.
And
Thinking about the structures or
the uh.
The conditions we, we need to
create as a state.
To get the best people to do
this job.
I always, I always like to think
about it this way.
I would like every teacher.
To be the smartest person in the
room.
And, and
And I mean that.
We, we're expecting these folks
to teach kids, especially at the
elementary school level,
everything.
We ensure that we're getting the
best people to do that.
And that's again, as we talked
about special ed yesterday. Part
of that is salary, and so we'll
continue to look at salary, as I
said about compensation. Some of
this is about, uh, conditions,
but it's also
Uh, and support them through
that system.
Connor is going to be looking at
high impact tutoring.
Um, as Greg mentioned earlier,
there there may be a little less
high impact tutoring this
interim than we had last
interim, but it's still um
research has shown when done
well, I impact children can have
uh huge impacts.
On, on students who need
additional support. And so, what
that looks like, what our
capacity is to do that well, um,
we'll present that to you and
ideally give you some good
recommendations for next.
Session, um, about how to fund
that.
Daniel is looking at the impacts
of House Bill 63, as I mentioned
at the beginning of this
morning, um,
That charter school issue and a
loss of funding is one issue.
But ideally, there's also some
positives that come out of this
change. School districts have
received more money for
secondary students, they
received explicit money for
English learners. They received
additional money for at-risk
students, and so we need to look
at
How districts are spending that
money.
Uh, learning time. This is a
slight variation on our sort of
traditional learning time
conversation where we sort of
look at kids went to school
more, what happened?
This is actually looking more at
that professional work time
aspect.
Uh, as I said earlier, you all
have identified professional
work as an important feature in
the system.
Some districts do that
differently than others, and we
want to look at what that what
that's like in, in across the
state and what works best.
Next month you'll hear from uh
Evan, actually, who's already
looking at what are, like I
said, those, those places in our
literacy system where we still
need some work, some connections
between
training and instructional
materials.
And local decision making about
how are we supporting those
teachers? Are we hiring literacy
coaches? Does the state need to
hire illiteracy coaches, all of
those things, in addition to
what does it look like to
support English learners with
literacy, um, with this li
literacy initiative, um, and
we'll be in Roswell next week,
uh, I'm sorry, next month, and
hopefully we'll learn some
lessons from them because
they're doing some things, as I
mentioned earlier, Daniel's
gonna continue to talk and, and
uh look into this long term
planning.
Most of you know that school
districts, for instance, have a
facilities master plan.
They do that every 5 years, they
have to update that plan. And
part of that planning is looking
at enrollment. Where do you need
a new building? Does this
building need support or
improvements, those kinds of can
we apply something like that.
To just education planning in
general and specifically budget
planning. As I mentioned
earlier, one component of why
districts may struggle to make
ends meet, is because they're
paying.
The same number of teachers.
For fewer students potentially.
And that may not happen year
over year, but in 5 years, it
might happen in, can they use
that long-term planning to
forecast some of their needs.
Some of them probably already
do, but maybe there's a formal
structure we can look at.
We'll continue to look at math
education and teacher supports,
um, in particular, we're
interested in that educator prep
program, and are there some sort
of basic standards and best
practices that all educator prep
programs should be implementing
when it comes to both content in
math, but also the pedagogical
and and math methods that every
teacher needs, especially at the
elementary school level, to be
able to teach math well.
OK. So knowing knowing math
isn't the same thing as being
able to teach math.
And
We need both.
Right? And so we want to make
sure that there were at least
aligned with national best
practices in our educator prep
programs. Connor's looking at
out of school time uh in, in a
very similar way to the way that
we're looking at uh high impact
tutoring, um,
Someone asked earlier and I'm
gonna forget who now about out
of school time.
What is that landscape about a
school time programs? What do
they provide? And then what do
you want to see from out of
school time programs when you
fund it.
Some of them actually provide
additional academic support.
Maybe this is how we get kids
interested in STEM and robotics
programs.
Some of it is just having a safe
place for students.
And does that necessarily mean
we should see better reading
scores? Maybe not, but maybe
we'd see fewer discipline
referrals or maybe we'd see
fewer things happening in the
community if kids have access to
high quality at a school time
programs. So thinking through
those metrics, um, because there
probably isn't a one size fits
all.
To be uh response I gave you
earlier, Senator Figueroa.
Hunter's gonna be looking at
school climate and culture.
We've presented to you in the
past, uh,
Somewhat in the context of, of
attendance, somewhat in the
context of discipline, uh,
Restorative practices
restorative practices as one
example.
Well, again, what does it look
like for school uh students to
feel safe.
And um like they belong in a
school. What are those best
practices and what are the sort
of state levers, although a lot
of that lives at the local
level.
And then on the last page,
Um
Number 22, as I mentioned
earlier, is that special
education identification and
costs.
Right
Um, we'll be looking at some
data to to look at.
How do, how do we identify
students and then what what
services do they receive,
especially in that variation
across school within schools.
In some cases, right? If you've
got 22 different special
education teachers, depending on
how they're assigned.
And they're serving.
Similarly identified students,
you're probably going to see
some variation in the services
there, but you're definitely
going to see some variation
between schools and between
school districts.
And then what does it actually
cost to do that well, is the
money that you all
Uh, already appropriate through
our special education factors in
the funding formula sufficient
to pay for that, in addition to
the, to the money we get from
the federal government, um, are
there needs in particular
places. Uh, this is something
that we started last interim,
didn't quite get all the data we
we would have liked, and so
we'll continue to work on that
and hopefully provide some
insights.
And then lastly, uh,
transportation.
We've looked at the funding
formula a lot when it comes to
transportation.
There are conflicting opinions
about whether or not it works,
and we've, and we've tweaked it
here and there to make sure that
for the most part, uh, districts
can afford to get kids to and
from school. The formula itself
still probably warrants
additional look, uh, an
additional look.
But the other piece, uh, that I
mentioned earlier is
Access to other things.
If you're gonna have out of
school time programs.
And students get to
Them or from them to hope.
Right
What we see across the state and
all of you are probably see this
to some extent or another is
How many field trips can go on,
can kids go on based on the
funding in their school
district, or how many drivers,
or whether or not your PTO can
afford to raise money to pay for
something.
The discrepancies in access to
those kinds of programs, both
affect the the programming
offered, but also whether or not
districts can afford to get kids
to and from those places, right?
How much has your booster club
raised?
And so looking at some of those
variations, um, and ideally
providing you with some, some
good recommendations.
I want to say, just in case
anybody listening or you're all
thinking,
That's all very expensive, or
it's all a lot of work, or it's
gonna take time.
Yes.
And as we provide information to
you, this is the expectation
isn't that we would bring you,
I'm making this number up,
please don't quote me.
$500 million worth of things.
That that's what you should do.
But we do want to provide you
with information so that you can
make decisions, the assumption
isn't that you would pay for all
the things all at once or or
maybe ever.
But you should be have that
information so that uh and with
that, Mr. Chair, I hope I got us
mostly back on schedule, maybe
even ahead of time.
Thank you, John. Uh, it does
look like we have about 30
minutes for questions, again, 5
minutes each person, if there's
time we can go around the second
time, uh, just kind of to start
off, this is very ambitious, uh,
as the chair, lots of our focus
this summer is going to be on
areas where there's a reasonable
expectation that the governor is
going to give a message, uh,
literacy, math, special
education, in particular.
And it's a budget session coming
up and so things where we're
talking about changing amounts
in the budget to reflect
priorities. Uh, and so recognize
that uh as the chair and uh I
know Senator Stewart's been
chair before, uh, uh, Senator
Representative Rometo has been a
chair before. We get lots of
requests from people like, just
let me present in front of your
committee and my software on
math education will solve all
your problems. Please no.
I resisted those fairly
vigorously because they don't
help what we're working on here.
That doesn't mean that there
won't be times when there is a
need for a presentation about a
particular thing, but typically
our work
And what I see the work for this
committee is really going to be
getting us ready for the 30-day
session with committee endorsed
legislation that we have worked
out that we have prepared and
ready to go that there's a high
expectation that the governor
will put on, give us a message
or if it's not just directly
budget focused will be the focus
of the interim. Lots of these
absolutely have budget pieces to
them and so they're appropriate,
but with that, um, let me open
it up for questions.
Uh, Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you again for your um
Presentation on page 3, and I
think it
You made, uh, anyway, it's uh
the school climate and culture,
I think that may be appropriate
where this my question is
excuse me, I'm not quite sure if
I remember seeing or if we still
report out, but it's associated
with attendance, um, the
dropouts, the dropout rates, and
there's a direct correlation
obviously in my view between
that and attendance, and also
what
President uh representative
Andres Romero chair has raised
in the past, uh, and many of us,
that is that students need to be
involved in my view, with their
um
With their education, how that's
going, where it's going, is it
relevant to them for their
future? How do they tap into
that and so.
My, my question is related to
that, do we incorporate that
data somewhere and then do we
incorporate um focus on students
determining their education and
how that looks and how it
relates to drop out in
attendance. That's question one.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
So obviously, we do capture
cohort graduation rates. I'm not
sure if we captured.
Dropout rates per se anymore,
but I think we can get you
information about, for instance,
how many students started in a
particular school and did not
finish. Um.
You know, we, we heard yesterday
from the secretary about level
all the next step plan and, and
I think, you know, we, we all
recognize that in some ways,
next step plans, um, and we hope
level all will, will help with
this, became a bit of a a
compliance uh exercise, you
know, next step plans where we
are is where students are
supposed to identify.
Um, what they're interested in,
what they'd like to do in their
future.
Um, and then ideally, map their
courses every year to that
interest.
And, and that should be guided
by a counselor or an adult,
ideally with the, with the, I
think parents are technically
supposed to be involved,
although my kid's a junior, I
haven't seen his yet, I don't
think, um.
A more intentional effort, I
think around that is, is
important. I would couple that
with the profile of a graduate
that school districts are
developing, uh, currently.
As a way to say this is what we
want our graduates to be able to
to know and do and hear some of
the, our values in our
community.
Right? And all of those things
should be taken into account
when school districts and
especially high schools are
creating.
Their programming.
Right? And, and, you know, we
see school districts respond to
that all the time, but how
intentional it is and how you
guide students through those
processes, uh, are very
important. Uh, the only other
thing I'll say about that
particular item that I should
have mentioned is uh we'll be
gathering data from um PED where
we they're already helping us
with this. Uh, they do a survey
of students every year.
To, to understand not just about
courses, but also how does it
feel to be in the school? Are
there caring adults that you can
trust, those kinds of questions,
and we'll be presenting to those
to you as well as part of this
uh item.
Thank you, Mr. Ha. I really look
forward to that, um.
Because that was the second part
of my question was surveying the
students and getting a handle on
whether their education is
relevant to them and how they
can improve it. Finally, uh, the
other concern I have, there was
a recent article in the AP that
um is really concerning, and it
directly relates to attendance,
and it directly relates to
health, and I think health and
well-being of our children is
absolutely.
Critical, uh, but it also ties
in certain parts of the state
that are more um uh exposed to
this kind of conditions and the
AP article talked about uh the
pollutive industries, uh, being
located in certain pockets of
our state, and um they're high
emissions and how that is
affected. And for example, at
Lybrook, um, in our state, um,
the article mentions
how parents are dealing with
having to take their students
out of school because they're
suffering from headaches,
nausea, other kinds of things
that are directly correlated. So
how do we work closely with the
school boards in those
communities in the in the
communities to be able to help
mitigate the impact, not only
mitigate it, but how we
correlate that to and report it
out in terms of attendance
because this is through no fault
of their own that they're being
that they're out of school or
missing school because of the
effects of their exposure. So
that, thank you.
And that, that'll then be the 5
minutes,
please go ahead absolutely one
last thing I'll say about that
is um
As we said before, attendance is
very complex. We'll add that to
the list and and take a look at
if there are certain communities
that are seeing higher rates and
potentially. Yes, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brant.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You could probably guess where
I'm going. Um, I never talked
about this subject, but
Um, you know, CTE, I appreciate
that you guys have some things
in there. I was worried about a
little bit until I read the.
Long sheet.
I caught on to that before you
told us, but uh I just think we
need to make sure that's really
in depth.
We need to look at what we
really want called CTE. So I
think that's been one of the,
the things that's come up for me
as well as been brought up to
me, you know, it's, it's home
back CTE, right? Is that really
what we're trying to do? What
are we trying to accomplish with
CTE, um, which is where I did
the, uh, you know, the pilot
funding for, you know, the
certificates.
Um, so what are we wanting from
CTE? I think that's, and I'm not
trying to lead that discussion,
I'm just, I don't want to lead
you in any direction. I just
think it's something we need to
look at as a state.
What's our goal?
And then how, how do we get
there? How do we put the funding
to that? Because, you know,
there's some stuff that we've
done forever that I don't
consider CTE. Now maybe everyone
else does, but I don't think it
is. And so I think that we need
to, to look at as a
Policy decision, or do we want
to see to eat to do? What do we
want it to accomplish? Um, I
think we're not working very
closely with Workforce Solutions
on it, which you have in here,
um, that we're really dropping
the ball on it.
Mr. Chair, Senator Bran,
absolutely, um, and I think part
of that is probably also
language and what we call CTE,
um, and, and then having some,
you know, you all get to make
decisions about, uh, again, your
priorities, whether there is a
specific CTE program that is,
for instance, uh, intended to
create, uh, or the outcome is
credentialed individuals who can
enter the workforce. That's,
that's one look at what we
probably consider career
technical education, you heard
the secretary yesterday.
They talk about that pilot
program around uh graduation and
helping students, that was a
work-based learning, the
attention there was probably not
how many of these kids are going
to get.
Industry recognized credentials,
but how do you re-engage them in
the school experience to ensure
that they graduate high school
and can then move to the next
thing. And so to your point,
differentiating those pieces and
then and then allowing you all
to make decisions about where
you want the money to go.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and, and
director Senna, that's, and we
may need to look at, do we do a
bifurcated, you know, process
for CTE where we have some
that's that really the goal is
to get them back engaged in
school, and some where the goal
is and and we split the funding
that way because when you're
going for the certificates, they
can they can get expensive, um,
and the equipment for that and
the and the, you know, I always
use auto mechanics cause it's an
easy one to use, but it's gonna
take a lot more to hire a
master.
mechanic that can come in and
teach that, than it is to to
hire someone that's just trying
to re-engage a student in
another program.
So we have to kind of look at
What's the cost, uh, benefit, I
think to our students, the
benefit is great, no matter what
we're doing for CTE, but we may
not want to cost factor those
the same. I, I hope that that's
something we can, I hope we can
really focus on that this year.
Um.
You know, because I've only got
a few years left.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Others,
Other questions, how are we on
time?
We, we still have some kind of,
oh, Senator Stewart, you're
back.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
As usual, LC staff, I think has
just put together an incredible
set of documents for us to look
at. I really like your theory of
change for the initiative and
the partners, um,
I, I just want to say that when
we're looking at charter school
governance that we need to look
at what's happening with the
virtual.
charters and
The virtual education that's
coming out of some districts.
Or districts are looking for
students.
all over the state scooping them
in and making a lot of money
with very
Uh,
poor results. So, um, if we can
make sure that we're looking at
that issue. I'm assuming we are.
It doesn't say, doesn't say
that, but that has to be part of
that governance.
And that's all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Second timers.
Anyone else?
You have something else in it,
please go ahead.
Your clock's still running, um,
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
move adoption of the road map,
the research agenda and work
plan for the LESC.
The boot in.
Then we've been seconded.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
The opposition.
See no
We are adopted.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Very
quickly, if I could, uh, since
we have a couple of minutes, I
just wanted to give credit where
credit's due, the, the format's
new, the work uh as far as to
your point, Senator Stewart, uh,
the theory of change and the
research questions are really
built on a foundation that our
previous director put together,
I want to give her credit for
doing that. It's my job is not
to screw it up. Um, and, and,
and I've got a great, and I do
wanna again thank our staff, as
you said, they're the ones who
put thought into this, who are
going to do all of this work and
To coordinate all these people
to do all of these things, and
so I just want to thank them
ahead of time for all the hard
work they're going to be doing
this summer. Appreciate it.
Thank you, John, and we're to
the, the last item prior to
public comment, um, if they're
here and ready. Well, Natasha,
you're here. I know, uh, but
public education department
rules review.
And we're running a little bit
ahead of schedule. Very good,
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I am
Natasha Dalos, your policy
analyst. Um, this interim, we're
going to be doing room reviews,
um, I will be partnering with
Connor. Um, I'm not as witty as
him, so I'm pretty sure, you
know, I'll just get through
this. Um, you'll find these real
reviews behind tab 9 of your
binders. I will go ahead and
start with the uh purple Star
Public School rule. Um, this
first review will be the
department's proposed rule for
the purplears public school
program.
Uh, just to give you a rundown
real quick of what the Purple
Star Public school program is.
It's a statue that was adopted
or put into law in 2021, um,
there are schools that serve
military connected students and
are and or recognize honor and
celebrate military services.
So this proposed rule outlines
the criteria and application
process for public schools and
charter schools in New Mexico.
That want designation as a
purple Star Public School.
Schools that are designated as
Purple Star schools would
receive a designation of for 3
years and must reapply once that
expires.
The program intends to support
military connected students.
By easing transitions between
school and recognizing military
uh services with the community.
Um, on the actual rule document,
you will see on page 2, on the
top.
Of and through to the, to the
top of page 3.
The proposed rule would require
Purple Star schools to designate
trained military point of
contacts, maintain and assess an
accessible uh web page with
resources and information for
their families and provide
academic and social emotional
support for uh two students.
Schools would also be required
to submit a resolution of
support to their local board or
governing body to ease
transition for students and
their families.
Schools serving military
connected students would also be
eligible to designate to be a
designated as a purple star
school showing their commitment
um to honoring military service
through military recognition
celebrations, assemblies,
events, um, activities including
sponsoring special events.
Um,
And celebrating students who
commit to serving in the
military.
And that proposed rule would
take effect June 24th of 2025. I
know the report says the 25th of
June, so there's a small typo
there.
Um, this proposed rule will be
collecting public comments until
about June 5th.
Uh, this proposed rule if
adopted, would impact schools,
uh, school districts, charter
schools, military connected
students and families and PED as
it creates a process for schools
to apply for and maintain the
purple Star school designation,
as they're committed to meeting
the needs of military connected
students and their families.
So that's for that rule. Should
I stop there or keep going?
Let's just briefly, we'll take
questions on each one so we
don't jump up around later. Any
questions about this particular
rule?
Represent black.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. So, so how many do we
expect to be Purple Star
schools, and I know that
they're, I'm scared, really
scared of the word required
because required equals
Something that's mandated and
mandated, usually equals money
involved, and so there are many
military members and their
families who live in my
district, and I just want to
make sure that if we're going to
mandate this, that there's also
a pot of money to help them get
these services in the in the
school classroom and everywhere
that we need it. So could you
just
talk a little bit about that for
me, Natasha.
Um, I would love to give you a
number on that, um, especially
how many Purple Star schools we
do have. I do not know that
Natasha I think you've got an
expert who is itching to come up
and help out wasn't sure.
Good morning, chair.
Yes, um, and, uh, Representative
Baca, Amanda Debell, deputy
secretary at the PED, um, we
anticipate probably the first
year, um, a smaller number of
schools, um, maybe 10 to 15
schools that would apply to um
Become Purple Heart schools and
also we would anticipate that
the school, um, that is applying
would be close to some of our
military bases, so, um, many of
the schools near Sandia Base or
in Clovis, we anticipate um
as well, because Clovis actually
is, um, they're, they're ready,
they're ready for it.
In terms of the extra dollars,
um, there is, um, not really
extra dollars, but the
counselors, the school staff
that are in the schools that are
designated as personal and as
Purple Heart schools will
receive additional professional
development, and that is being
done in collaboration with
military services as well as the
school Thank you, Mr. Chair,
that answered my questions.
Appreciate it.
Thank you. Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thanks for that confirmation,
uh, remember I passing this, uh,
a few years back, I was happy to
be the sponsor. So just want to
reiterate to folks that this is
actually uh really a national
program that they were trying to
push from DOD and there was a
lot of support from schools and
districts around military bases
and just want to reiterate, this
is still optional, right, for
folks to participate, it's just
they're having to meet these
requirements to be designated.
is a purplear program, correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair and Senator Pope,
that is true. It is a school
districts and individual schools
will opt in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So quick,
so this is um how are you, how
are you speaking to the schools
or, or sending out things to the
schools, how's that being done?
Um, so, Mr. Chair, and as well
as Representative Saana, the
military services program have
been doing much of the
communication, um, and now once
rule is passed, then the PED
will send out communications to
our charter schools via our
regular communication channels.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and this is a
very important um projects for
our military bases to make sure
we stay up those the BRC and all
these, these things could happen
to them, so we have to make sure
we really, we really try to
contact all the schools that we
can and get this started and get
this going because the base
there I know Kirtland, I was
working with um one of the, um,
Lieutenant colonels there, and
he, he was talking about this
constantly trying to get
something done. So I'm glad this
is happening. I think he's about
to leave so
Maybe we can at least let him
know it's, it's gonna, it's
gonna happen, but thank you,
thank you for this.
Mr. Chairman.
Anyone else?
If not, Natasha, you carry on
the next one.
And the deputy secretary stay
close. There may be other
questions.
OK, so for the 2nd review, um,
this one goes over the proposed
amendment to the implementing
the Indian Education Act rule.
The department is proposing
amendments to the rule to
strengthen processes for tribal
consultation, educational
reporting and to update how
funding is distributed under the
Indian Education Act. The rule
amendment proposes school
districts.
Insult with all Pueblo tribes
and nations in New Mexico whose
students are enrolled in their
district.
Um, the rule amendment also
proposes charter schools with
enrolled Native American
students to comply with with the
same tribal education status
report, which we also referred
to as Tesser, um, requirements
as a school district in which
the charter school is physically
located. The proposed rule also
clarifies that the testers are
due September 30th annually.
Now, beginning on page 7 of the
actual rule document, the
proposed rule amendment would
establish 2 funding mechanisms
for awards, an allocation-based
award, and a competitive award
program.
The proposed rule amendment
would make these awards
available to Pablo's tribes and
nations, as well as school
districts, charter schools, BIE
schools, tribally controlled
schools, tribal colleges, and
state universities.
On the LESC uh rule overview
document, you will find at the
bottom of page one and on the
top of page 2, the breakdown of
the allocation-based and
competitive award program.
The proposed amendment would
provide allocation-based awards
to Pueblo tribes and nations
with 80% of funding distributed
as a fixed base amount and 20%
based on pre-kindergarten
through 12th grade student
counts.
Um, the prior years 80th day
reporting.
The proposed amendment would
also require a funding factor
for students with disabilities
and additional factors.
And the total 80% um is nearly
23.4 million, whereas the 20%
would be about uh 5.85 million,
and the students with IPs, um,
they align with the SCG
provisions for higher program
unit values.
These awards would be made
available no later than
September 1st of each award year
and would not be on a
reimbursement basis, and they
will not be uh reverting, uh,
that's for Pueblo's tribes and
nations.
So Pueblo's tribes and nations
would be required to submit an
implementation plan, explaining
how funds would be used to
improve educational outcomes
consistent with the Indian
Education Act. If
allocation-based awards are
extended to schools, um, such as
school districts, charter
schools, BIE schools, or
tribally controlled schools, the
proposed rule would require
submission of an application
explaining their goals, um, in
relation to the Indian Education
Act Program sustainability.
and program evaluation measures.
Deadlines and award amounts
would be determined by the
Assistant secretary.
Uh, schools would also be
required to complete all grant,
um, activities no later than
June 30th each year of the
award, and unspent awards would
revert to um PEDs Indian
Education Division at the end of
each fiscal year.
Competitive awards would be
authorized based on the
availability of funds.
Elig uh applicants would include
Pueblo's tribes nation's school
districts, charter schools, BIE
schools, tribally controlled
schools, tribal colleges, and
state universities.
Competitive awards would be
dispersed on reimbursement and
reverting basis and applicants
would be required to include
goals tied to the Indian
Education Act.
Sustainability plans and program
evaluation measures.
The awards would be required to
include factors with students
with disabilities and additional
factors would also be determined
by um the assistant secretary.
So upon the proposed rule, all
recipients of competitive
funding would be required to
submit implementation plans as
well, um, into, into grant
assurances, which, um, at a
minimum, these would require
periodic exponential reports to
the Indian Education Division
and reports evaluating the
effectiveness of the
grantsupported programs. So
recipients of competitive words
would also be required to
provide mid-year reports and
final reports each year.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I stand for questions
and I see that the assistant
secretary Katie Ann is also here
to support me. Thank you.
Representing Royal Cavier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your presentation,
Natasha.
Um, my question is, were tribes,
Pueblos and nations consulted in
this rulemaking process.
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
yes, um, from the notes that I
have collected through PED. This
has been, I, I feel comfortable
roughly saying about a year-long
process that Katie Ann has been
um very
Diligently have been making
these collaborations with them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and we're
records kept of the
consultation, so we, if we're
asked questions about that or
some, you know, who was there
who was involved, I was the
outreach, that kind of thing.
Thank you.
What's the trash I might say
that
that,
uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kitty Anne Moniko. I'm
the assistant secretary for
Indian Education for the Public
Education department, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, and representative.
Answer the question, yes, uh,
we've kept he hefty attendance
records, um, in addition to
consulting with published tribes
and nations actually the initial
consultation was that they fall
2024 government to government
summit uh with Governor Lu Hong
Grisham, as well as all tribal
leaders present at the table to
identify the proposed
amendments, uh, from that time
on, we gave them approximately 6
months to provide feedback, um,
we did receive feedback from 4
tribal agencies and partners.
Um, from there, we also did
presentations at the Al Pueblo
Council of Governors, which
includes the 19 public
governors. Um, we also met with
the Indian Education advisory
Council and allowed them to
provide feedback on the proposed
amendments as well to ensure
that we're following, uh, what's
written in statue, um, but yes,
hefty, uh, record keeping, um,
my division also hosts monthly
calls with tribal partners as
well as LEAs um to allow for
transparency.
access to me, um, and also
response time, increased
response time, and so during
each of those monthly calls from
the from October 2024 up until
when the public comment period
would is open, uh, we reviewed
the proposed rules, reminded
them that the public hearing was
available for comment.
Mr. Chair, I'm aware and thank
you for your um effort, someone
that asks the question is
listening, so I'm glad that you
answered thoroughly. Thank you
very much. Thank you,
representatives. Anybody else?
I do have a question myself. Let
me.
Um
Some of the allocation based on
allocation-based awards, we have
legislation a year or two ago
that was doing some of this. It
came through very late.
But it says 80% of the funding
is based on a fixed amount, that
means every Pueblo tribe nation
would get the same amount
regardless of the number of
students, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that is correct.
So 80% of the total. So what you
want to imagine first, right?
It's a $30 million that we
received um in one again
acknowledge and thank everyone
for those efforts, uh, during
this session. So of that $30
million 10% was taking off the
top to support IED operational
costs. After that 10%, what
remained, uh, we then divided
80% to be allocated amongst the
22 published tribes and nations.
not including Fort Seal. We are
adding that as a parameter to
start collecting those numbers
for the next school year and
then 20% was then reserved for
our historically defined Indian
impacted school districts. So
currently we have 30 districts
and charters that met that
definition. So we started with
the 80/20 breakdown. Now we're
moving to the 80 breakdown. From
that 80%, then 80% was a fixed
amount that yes, every public
tribe and nation got a fixed
amount of a
roughly around $850,909 and then
the 20% remaining was based on
student counts.
Thank you, and that's kind of my
concern because, and thank you
for including Fort Salo is often
left out because they do have
last count, some 30-something
students enrolled, but if that
were the case, they would be
getting 850,000 for 30 students.
Pickers, I think is the next
smallest one which has somewhere
around 100 students maybe are
getting the same amount as then
Navajo, which has 100,000
students or so.
they're getting that same base
amount. That doesn't seem fair
when Navajo is, you know, the
big dog, so to speak, you know,
having something like, and then
making up the number 70% of the
total native population, yet
they're getting the same base
amount.
And only getting the 20% other.
When you do the math on how much
each one gets, it doesn't come
out to be very equitable. Uh,
that was the concern when this
came through as legislation in
the past.
It didn't get through and now
we're seeing it show up as a
rule. How is that justified?
That everyone who gets 850,000
when Navajo has the vast
majority of students.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, so what was
released in the memo from the
Office of the secretary, um, and
I, I, I don't know if you all
have the information in front of
you, but in trying to increase
transparency with our partners,
including our districts and
charters. We did provide the
allocation table um for publish
tribes and nations. This is
pretty normal.
The each year we post this
information so that public trans
nations see the allocation
amounts for one another, um, to
answer the question directly, we
did ask for feedback on the
80/20 uh breakdown and we did
receive feedback from published
tribes and nations, the majority
did support the 80/20 breakdown.
We also heard those comments in
the in-person hearing those that
showed up, we had about 25 to 30
participants, um, acknowledge
that they support the breakdown.
Um, so if you
looked at the chart, um, the
example that you gave the pueblo
of I don't think we have that
chart, so.
We'll provide that chart to you,
um, and it's also on our
website, the PED website Indian
Education page. The memo is
there again, that's been
publicly shared, uh, year to
year, but what we see is that
the median for published tribes
for the pueblos and muscalero
and Hickoria is around 856,000.
The end amount for Navajo
Nation.
Speaking to your example is
$4256,47. Uh, so, because of
their high student count, they
would be getting a lot more than
the pueblos Mascalero and
Hickoria.
I understand. Do you also break
it down by how much per pupil
each one is getting total?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, that information
is on the table.
And could you give me kind of
the high and the low per pupil
amounts, please. So the per
pupil amount $108.94.
For students with IEP $217.88 so
double the amount for an
individual without an IP.
Um, Madam Assistant secretary,
that's not what I was asking.
What is the per pupil amount for
like one of the small uh
pueblo's Picas compared to a per
pupil amount for Navajo.
So if you're asking me, Mr.
Chair, um, for Pierre, I mean,
it was the same across the
board. I'm not sure that I'm
understanding the question, but
if I look at Piper, uh, they
have a total of 50 students
enrolled in pre-K through 12th
grade. 4 pickeries using the
$108.94. Their amount comes out
to $3,486.11
plus what they've identified for
students.
with special needs, they only
have 9 students who have IEPs,
that total amount is $1960.94
so the per amount for Pinris is
Pierre is 3,086. What is the per
pupil amount for Navajo?
Mr. Chair, if you give me a
minute, it's a little.
Over $3 million.
The per pupil amount, not the
total amount. How much divide by
the number of people of
students.
The perfect amount including uh
students without IEPs and IEPs
again is around a little over $3
million including the fixed
amount,
not the total amount per
student.
Mr. Chair, again, the per
student amount $108.94 per
student was what we used across
all students for all public
tribes and nations. I'll talk to
you afterwards. You're not
understanding my question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
both. Uh, so,
I'm very confused right now
from, from your answers. So, uh,
Previously,
OK, uh, baseline, can you tell
me baseline, each pupil on the
Navajo Nation, from whatever
they they've been allocated from
this pot of money, specifically,
each pupil.
What dollar amount goes to each
on the Navajo Nation. Let's just
start there.
Mr. Chair, um, so again, the,
the response according to our
table is $108.94
for a student without an IEP.
Um, that's double the amount,
which is $217.88 for a student
with an IEP.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that, Assistant
Secretary. So then in Mescalero,
for example, would it be the
exact same amount?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, yes.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Chair. And uh OK, so then I'm
trying to figure out.
Then the $800,000 about, I think
it's 856 that
Goes to everybody, and then we
put additional money on top of
that. So of that additional
money on top of that, how much
of that is going per pupil for
somewhere like the Navajo
Nation, for example, which has
way more students than Picarus
or somewhere else.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, 20%, again, so we
start off at 80 80% based on the
fixed amount at $850,000 909
dollars for public tribe and
nation, what's left then is the
20%. And again, that's broken
down.
In 2 factors, 1 for pur amount
without an IP and the second
factor for students with NIEP.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I apologize for
not equipping you with the
table, um, but one thing that
you'll find on the table is the
actual factor and formula
published tribes and nations
have asked for this transparency
and to meet that request, we've
identified it on the table. And
again, if you're looking for it
right now, it's on the website,
the Indian Education Division
page.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Assistant Secretary. So I'm
literally looking at it right
now. So I just want to make sure
I'm looking at the same place
you are. So there's column A
through G. Could you tell me
which column you're referring
to, and I apologize, I'm trying
to get my bearings here. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
you're looking at the correct
table. The table is titled table
one, the column B is identifying
the 80% fixed amount where you
see the $850,909. The 20% it's
highlighted in
Blue is identifying those other
two factors, students without
IEPs and students with IEPs and
the per people amount, you'll
also see the breakdown of tribal
membership, and so just so we
are clear, this table one only
identifies their student counts
per Pueblo tribination. That's
not the same for the table 2 for
districts and charters.
Districts and charters includes
all Native American counts
within students, students who
are
affiliated with the Pueblo tribe
with the tribal community within
the United States and Canada.
So the LEAs are receiving
funding for students who
identify as Native American, the
published tribes and nations are
only receiving funding for their
students that have identified
their affiliated with their
public tribe and nation.
All right. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chair. Thank you for that,
Assistant secretary. So I'm just
trying to figure out, I, I just
I'm getting my assistant to
look, look at this, and I think
they, they just sent it to me.
They put it through chat GPT or
something, and it says that the
awards per IEP pupil on the Nava
Nation are 777.
Awards for non-IEPR 209 and then
versus the one that gets the
most, which is Picus. It's like
a crazy amount.
Like 95,150 per IEP and the non
IEP is 26,761. So, I mean,
that's like a huge difference,
and there are way more kids on
the Navajo Nation, than there
are in a very small place like
Pickerus or Tasuke. So I'm just
wondering, how do we reconcile
that? And I know that we said,
we listen to stakeholders, but
out of like the 2030 people who
showed up to the meeting.
How many of those were pueblos
versus the nation.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um, I appreciate the
response from Chat GPT, uh, we
can cross verify that as well,
and I think that Mr. Chair is
what we are question was, um, so
the response to the question
about those that participated in
the in-person hearing, uh, the
majority, um, for the records
were those that identified as
tribal leaders from the pueblos.
Um, you know, they all received
the same notification, the same
monthly calls, they're all on
all those invitations, um, we
did also speak with Navajo
Nation.
directly, um, when we think
about the numbers in the
formula, we also want it to
ensure that each bubble tribe
and nation across the board were
receiving more than they have in
the past, for sure, um,
including what they've received
for competitive awards. If we
look at Navajo Nation, um, they
also have a special allocation
that was awarded in 2 sessions
ago by Senator Munoz. Uh, they
have a high balance remaining,
and we've committed to
uh reallocating that funding,
what seems to be remaining for
Navajo Nation at this point is a
little under $4 million. So in
addition to that 4 million,
they'll receive this additional
4 million here, comes out to
nearly $8 million for an Navajo
nation to spend down within a
year, um, each bubble tribe and
nation will also be eligible to
apply for competitive grants, so
not only do they have this one
opportunity, if they so choose,
they can apply for competitive
grants as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's probably way more than my
5 minutes, so I'm gonna stop
there, but yeah, it's
interesting. It's just
interesting to me that some kids
are getting way more money per
people, just because of where
they live, and I, I just don't
see that it's fair, but I wasn't
involved in the process to make
the rules and it's unfortunate
that more people didn't show up.
Thank you.
And, you know, I,
Off of the chart here, did some
very quick calculations.
Pickerus gets, and this is just
taking the total amount divided
by the number of enrolled
students is getting $20,886 per
student.
And Navajo is getting $165. That
doesn't seem right when it had
come through as a bill a couple
of years back, I thought I was
reading it wrong, and I could
understand that 20% goes out as
a base amount and then 80% based
on it per pupil would make a lot
more sense. This is back to the
one that was clearly not going
to pass legislation. Uh, and so
I've got real concerns about it,
but I'll stop there,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I actually
had the same calculations. So,
so he just, uh, and, and, and
that's my concern. I mean, I
think that, uh, the, the
flipping it, the 20 and 80, uh,
would be more effective because
the fact that, like I said,
those 50 students get 20,000
each basically, where the other
ones were, that's the majority
of our students get a little
bit. It's, it's uh, it's, it's
mind boggling, mind boggling,
yeah, thank you.
Other questions.
Representative Romo Cao,
Mr. Chair, and, and thank yous
assistant secretary. I think
it's important to just note um
that I asked the question about
consultation at the very
beginning because if everyone
was at the table and consulted
and participated and agreed,
then that's, it may be difficult
for us to understand uh the
acceptance of and the approval,
their approval and their
acceptance, but if
We put it into the perspective
of the fact that they were
consulted their sovereign
nations, they understand the
implications, they understand
the impact. They understand what
you were saying about the 8
million and how it has to, it's
a good thing in terms of the
Navajo Nation, then I'm
satisfied because of the fact
that I acknowledge the fact that
they were consulted in their
sovereign nations, and they make
their these determinations, we
set up the structures, and the
funding mechanism mechanisms.
And if we're transparent and we
have the accountability measures
in place, then I'm happy. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Other questions.
It's not OK. Thank you. And, and
assistant secretary in Fort
Siller, I mean, they're in the
process of changing names. They
will be included in the future.
Mr. Chair, yes, we've made sure,
ensured that that will be a
parameter that families can
select when they enroll their
students.
And so following those things,
they're probably looking at
getting $20,000 per student as
well in their funding. OK, thank
you.
Mr. Chair remembers look funny.
I just wanted to know real quick
that I do apologize for not
providing these documents to
you. I did get these, but I, it
falls on me, not Katie, so
letting it.
We are now to the commute
community input, uh, I have 2
people signed up, uh, Jeremy
Ruthford.
You'd like to come up and you
have up to 2 minutes, please.
Mhm
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. Jeremy
Rutherford Registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico School for
the Blind and visually impaired.
A few years ago, um, I had a
discussion with the prior
director about the possibility
of having an agenda item on one
of your meetings for
particularly the two special
schools, the school for the
blind and the School for the
Deaf.
As you probably all know, they
are considered higher ed
institutions. However, other
than their funding, everything
else pretty much relates to PED
thereurriculum, the graduation
requirements, school hours, etc.
Um, but I don't think they've
ever had an opportunity to
present in front of your
committee, so I am asking that
again, um.
Particularly dealing with the
funding issues that they have
had, um, particularly the Mexico
School for the Blind has had
dwindling, um, lease revenue
over the last several years. So
we do face those challenges, um,
we've appreciated over the last
few years that uh the budget is
now actually including funds for
the salary increases, which for
many years was the
responsibility of whatever money
they had from the land grant
permanent.
Um, would also love to offer,
uh, specialist school for the
blinds, either facility in
Albuquerque or Alamogordo or any
of your meetings, we'd love to
show off our campus.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Appreciate it. We
aren't scheduled to go to
Elmo Gordo, but that's a nice
open invitation because we may
be there next year or whenever.
So thank you, I appreciate it.
Um, Sarah Salazar, Sarah here.
Yes, please, you have up to 2
minutes to address us. Thank
you.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chair and committee members. Um,
I do have a leaf behind with
your permission, Mr. Chair,
after my.
Thank you very much. Uh, my name
is Sarah Salazar, and I'm a
parent here in Santa Fe, and I
want to respectfully continue to
bring to your attention an issue
with the attendance for Success
Act. There is no distinction or
students with disabilities.
And this is a problem for my
family and others.
Our child has one more week of
first grade and is covered by a
section 504 plan.
To address multiple
disabilities. This plan includes
approaches for mitigating
learning loss during absences.
All of the absences this year
are excused, documented,
medically necessary and directly
related to these disabilities.
As a family, we maintain
consistent open communication
with the school and teachers and
actively participate in the
defined alternative learning
approaches.
We are proud of our child for
maintaining straight A's and
dramatically improving their
standardized test scores this
year, in spite of being solidly
within tier 3 and very near tier
4 for excused absences.
We highly regard the expertise
of qualified educators such as
many of yourselves, and wish our
child could be in the classroom
more.
As the act does not distinguish
absences for students with
disabilities, however, the
school is still mandated to
notify us when absences reach
given thresholds, including
warning about CYFD involvement.
As a parent, mention of CYFD
related to my child is scary,
very stressful, and erodes trust
between families and schools.
I respectfully request that
going forward, careful
consideration be given to the
policy goals for attendance, the
inherent need for
individualizing approaches among
students with disabilities.
And whether the attendance fores
Act is moving these students
toward the desired outcome.
Thank you and have a wonderful
weekend.
Thank you.
What we had on public comment,
any other?
Comments
The staff, anything of that
sort, I think we are off to,
where are we off to next month?
Is this Roswell, um, we do have
Alonzo has a flyer about
Hotels availability and things
like that if people would like
start making your reservations
for Roswell, um, like uh, likely
you're not, we are not going
there in the fall when they're
having the air races and there's
not a hotel room to be had. Um,
I think Roswell, you know, you,
this time of year should have a
reasonable number of of rooms
available.
Anything else, anyone? If not,
thank you very much for a good
1st 2 days. Our other meetings
will be 3 day meetings, safe
travels back. I so, yes, we
started and now finished with I
so appreciate this committee
that is so loaded with teachers
and educators that we can get to
the heart of most of the issues
rather than needing to, to.
To educate people up to be able
to talk about education, that,
that most of this committee is
so knowledgeable about education
and always keeps children first,
so it tends to be one of the
least partisan committees, I
think of the interim. So again,
thank you and my honor to, to
beat your chair through the next
two years. Thank you. Safe
travels all.
