what I'm doing
um, anyway,
you, you're gonna follow your
presentation on this, I didn't
write my testimony, uh, based on
these slides I'll refer to some
of them, OK, but these are more
uh informa information uh for
you all to look at, and I
wanted, uh, before I started.
Uh, there is a dear friend of
mine in the audience who needs
our condolences, and Jerry
Jeremy Rutherford, his father,
Tommy Rutherford was a dear,
dear friend of mine since 1974
and uh as you all know, Tommy
died last week, so, so my
deepest condolences to Jeremy,
and uh it's tough for me, you
know, and Tommy got me involved
in politics actually, so, so.
At any rate, uh, I'm digressing.
Mr. Chairman. How about we just
do a moment of silence for him.
Would that work,
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman,
members of the committee. Oh,
Mm
Yeah all those legislators are
life short and when you do this
stuff for free. It makes your
life even shorter.
Exactly, yeah.
He, uh, right, thank you for
that. That was very important
and thank you so much. Um, Mr.
Chairman, Vice Chairman, members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today
I've testified many times before
the US Congress, uh, just for
some reason seems harder, but,
uh, uh, the, um, but I'm looking
forward to it. As you all know,
I'm a relatively new to the
position as secretary designate
of New Mexico's Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department.
Inner,
uh, where it has been my honor
to serve for the last 5.5
months. I grew up in New Mexico.
I worked for Bill Richardson. I
actually drove his furniture
across the country when he was
elected to Congress, I set up
and ran the MIT Energy
initiative, uh, was a vice
president of the gas Technology
Institute, and I was at the
Department of Energy.
For the entire Clinton
administration, so 8 years then,
and for the 2nd Obama term.
Around the policy office in the
Clinton administration and
started set up and ran the
energy policy and systems
analysis office in the 2nd Obama
term after leaving DOE in 2017,
Secretary Moniz and I sat up and
ran a think tank to do
technically based unbiased
policy analysis and
recommendations on deep
decarbonization of energy
systems.
I came back this last May to
take this position where I can
put my experience to work uh to
serve my home state. I must say
that one of the joys of running
inner, in addition to working
with a team of hardworking,
committed staff and many of them
are sitting here today, in
addition to working with them,
uh, and serving my home state,
doing the analysis that I've
done for almost my entire
professional life has been
great, but to oversee the actual
implementation of policies and
programs to me is, is new to me.
It's important, and, and I am
loving it and I like seeing what
we're doing, uh, to meet New
Mexico's clean energy, economic
development, energy security and
energy accessibility and
affordability needs.
That takes me to the subject of
today's hearing, Eners FY 26
budget request, as you can see
from the slides we have
developed, in addition to the
department's more specific
goals, so if we go to the next
slide. I'm not talking to these,
but uh anyway, um, uh, in
addition to the department's
more specific goals that I just
listed as you can see on the
front, uh, the objective overall
objective of our FY 26 budget
request.
is to position New Mexico as a
national leader in energy and
natural resources management.
So, so, uh, we're very, very
focused on that.
On the natural resources side
Ener, as you all know, is
responsible for managing the
Mexico's 35 state parks and were
working to add more to that, um,
working on a couple more state
parks, New Mexico's forestry
division is responsible for fire
suppression on 43 million acres
of all non-federal,
non-municipal and non-tribal
lands in New Mexico and for
training and employing
approximately 300 emergency
wildland firefighters.
writers, and that's a hugely
important, uh, uh, part of the
department and uh and it's been
incredibly effective. We are
very, very grateful for having
them.
On the energy side of Emert, our
divisions are actively working
to develop and deploy clean
energy technologies to ensure
clean and responsible production
of the state's conventional
energy resources to mine the
metals and minerals we need for
clean energy transition and to
ensure the reclamation of lands
impacted by mining and oil and
gas production.
Emert is currently maximizing
the value of the $1.225 billion
it has secured for New Mexico
from the bipartisan
infrastructure law, the
inflation reduction Act and
other federal funding sources,
that's a huge amount of money to
put this in perspective and just
the last 5 months since I have
been secretary designate
and energy conservation and
management division has launched
the solar for all program, the
home energy re
program, her, the uh the home
electrification and appliance
rebate program here, the clean
car tax program and and other uh
uh major efforts of uh supported
by these, this federal
legislation I just described,
and uh I'll show you a little
bit more about that in a minute.
As you know, on the conventional
energy side, oil conservation
division, if you could go to,
uh, uh, keep going.
Where uh you did for, uh, no,
I'm sorry, not, not yet. Yeah.
OK, um, as you know, on the
conventional energy side emerge
oil conservation division
regulates oil and gas activity
in New Mexico. It permits new
wells and forces the division's
rules and the state's oil and
gas statutes makes certain
abandoned wells are properly
plugged and ensures the land it
is responsibly restored. This is
a big job. As you can see.
on the front page of my uh
slides, New Mexico is 2nd in the
nation in oil production. When I
left New Mexico in 1982, it was
nowhere near that. It's now 2nd
in the nation. It's 6th in the
nation and marketed natural gas
production, enabling this
significant economic activity
while ensuring that it is
managed in an environmentally
responsible way is critical for
the state's future.
Also of the key metals and
minerals used for the many clean
energy technologies that we're
talking about and on which the
US is 75 to 100% import
dependent. Many of those imports
are from China, OK, a lot of
problems with that right now. 14
of those, uh, have been found or
produced uh in New Mexico. Those
are on the USGS, US Geological
Survey's list of critical
minerals. There's about 65 or
70, 14 have been found or
produced in New Mexico.
And they are used uh to make
for, among other things,
batteries, glass, fuel cells,
etc. etc.
New Mexico is 3rd and sometimes
2nd in the US in copper mining.
Well, that's copper's not on the
USGS critical list, although
there are uh copper mining
companies in New Mexico that
want to be on that list. They
are on a DOE has a list of 18
critical metals and minerals
that they put together and
copper is on the DOE list, um,
and, uh, so it's very, very
important, and I want to put
this importance of this in
perspective, and internal
combustion.
engine.
Vehicle uses 48 pounds of copper
per vehicle.
A
Electric vehicle uses 183 pounds
of coffee.
Almost is 4 times as much copper
for an electric vehicle as an
internal combustion engine
vehicle, so copper is is huge,
and mining these critical
minerals and minerals in
environmentally responsible ways
is a key and growing focus at
Emner.
I hope this helps frame and
provides context for some of our
specific FY 26 budget request.
Let me now highlight some of the
changes from last year's
operating budget. I'll start
with the division request, um,
and, uh, then conclude with
operations, reversions, special
appropriations request. So now
you need to go to State
Forestry, OK, so let's go to
forest. There we go. OK, for the
straight forestry division, we
were requesting slightly less
funds overall.
But have relatively small
increased requests in operating
funds a little under $1.7
million and for authorizing the
expenditure of federal funds
where we are requesting
authorization for an additional
3, almost $3.9 million in in
forestry. These funds will
support 2 new hotshot crews, um,
authorized earlier by the
legislature, as you all know,
those are hugely important, um,
and, uh, since I've been back in
this
job, we've had to manage the uh
the Ruidoso fires and had to
leave while I was in Farmington
with the governor, and we had to
leave to go back uh for the Rudo
so far, so hugely important, um,
that supporting operating
expenditures for the Pecos River
and members hotshots located in
Las Vegas and Socora.
In addition, some of the
portable buildings by the
hotshot crews need replacement,
a lot of that infrastructure
needs constant replacement
updating, etc. etc. and uh and
uh and the restoration projects
need support, as you all know,
those restoration projects are
hugely important as well. So the
additional funding will support
existing staff and local
contractors, no new FTEs are
sought for forestry, just some
internal spending, uh, uh.
small additions that we need uh
to manage the issues I just
described. The FY 26 budget
request for Emer State Parks.
Division is also slightly lower
than its FY 25 operating budget,
but there are small increases
there as well in both its
general fund and the Federal
authorized request, these
increases will, among other
things, support hiring law
enforcement park rangers
statewide to promote public
safety and protect natural and
cultural resources, filling
vacancies to better serve New
Mexicans and grow the outdoor
recreation economy that is
tough.
Or, um, the, uh, the parks
division filling those
vacancies, cause so many of
these are in remote places,
tough to fill vacancies,
providing additional funding to
support overall state park
general operations, and again,
supporting funding to help
reduce unfunded vacancy rates.
Um, again, like our forestry
division requests there are no
new FTEs uh requested for state
parks, just some internal
increases to meet key needs.
Emner's oil conservation
division has had an extremely
busy year.
As I noted earlier, New Mexico's
#2 in the nation in oil
production, 6 in marketed gas
production, oil production,
these figures are pretty
stunning. Increase 750% in the
last decade and over the last
year averaged in New Mexico
approximately 47.8 million
barrels per month, and we have
over 54,000 active oil and gas
wells in New Mexico.
At the same time with all of
those high rankings, New Mexico
ranks only 9th in regulatory
staffing for manage the managing
the environmental impacts of
this production.
OCD is also a leader in
implementing federal methane
rules is implementing the
state's produced Water Act has
updated the release spill rule
and a scaling up orphan well
plugging to deploy uh
approximately $100 million. We
have obtained from funds in the
bipartisan infrastructure law.
So another huge infusion of cash
from bipartisan infrastructure
law into um OCD.
It is also working closely with
New Mexico's Environment
Department on ways to transform
produced water from oil and gas
production into a valuable
resource for the state.
Another, and I think very
exciting thing, OCD is doing is
seeking class 6 primacy. This
would give New Mexico the
authority over and the
responsibility for classics,
underground injection wells,
which are used by the carbon
capture and sequestration CCS
industry to permanently
sequester captured carbon and
underground geological
formations, only 3 states in the
country currently have Class 6
primacy, that's Louisiana, North
Dakota, and.
home.
I'm getting primacy from EPA is
a lengthy and extensive process,
we'd like to speed it up if we
can, um, OCD has initiated a
contract with New Mexico Tech to
provide support, outreach, and
analysis for this process, OCD
when the state receives its
primacy status, which is at
least a couple years from now,
if not more. I will be
responsible for managing
underground injection and
storage of carbon, which will
dramatically reduce emissions.
how we work to transition our
energy systems. OCD is seeking
funding for 2 additional FTEs to
support this process. I want to
give you all a couple of data
points to underscore how
important CCS is, and I know
there's opposition, but let me
tell you why we need CCS to make
glass, for example, and glass is
critical for making solar
panels. We have to have it.
87% of the fuel used for the
heat and the processes for
production of glass is natural
gas. So you, uh, New Mexico's
natural gas industry is
contributing substantially to
the solar energy industry and
technologies that we need for
solar. Wind turbine blades one
they're made with oil. OK, but
they require 2800 °C of heat and
electricity can only provide us
4000.
degrees Centigrade.
So we need these key products
now for the clean energy
transition, New Mexico's natural
gas and oil are helping to
provide us with the heat and the
feedstocks we need for these
products, and their uses emit
carbon. That makes CCS critical
for the energy transition, and
we need to be mindful of how
critical it is.
Switching gears, energy
conservation and management
program is also the recipient of
significant federal funding from
the, the bipartisan
infrastructure law and the
inflation reduction Act, this
fall, as I noted, it launched
the her program for which it
received around $44 million in
federal funds. The program also
launched this fall, received
another close to $44 million in
federal funds. In addition, in
April 2024, New Mexico.
via Emert's ECMD was awarded
$156 million for our EPA solar
for all program, and that's
designed to make solar power
available to low-income
households. It is expected that
these funds will be ready for
distribution early next year.
We also implementing the clean
car income tax credit and clean
car charging unit income tax
credit. This highlights some of
the recent funding that ECMD is
bringing into the state and
distributing to its citizens to
administer these high large,
high value programs, ECMD is
seeking an associated increase
in staffing, and that's a mix of
permanent and temporary
employees, these huge infusions
of cash will not always be.
there. Um, we are looking to get
temporary employees, so we don't
leave uh uh uh a lot of
employees at ECMD that we don't
have funding for in the future,
so we're seeking a mix of
permanent and temporary
employees.
One position ECMD is seeking to
fill is particularly important,
and I think noteworthy for New
Mexico. We're looking for an FTE
to launch a geothermal program.
Um, New Mexico has some of the
highest geothermal potential in
the country, I think were 6 in
the country for geothermal
potential, and this is
important. It has an oil and gas
workforce, New Mexico has that
oil and gas workforce that has
significant knowledge of the
subsurface, um, that cross
walking the skill sets of oil
and gas to geothermal could be a
very, very valuable in the clean
energy transition and
too important for jobs, the
economy, and, and, and again,
the transition.
Finally, the last division of
focus in our FY 26 budget
request is the mining and
minerals division, as I noted
earlier, New Mexico has
significant potential to provide
key metals and minerals needed
for the clean energy transition,
but I would note in many of
these metals and minerals are
crucial for conventional energy
as well.
Um, tellurium, for example, is
used across the board for
energy, conventional energy
production, and we have that in
New Mexico. Manganese,
molybdenum, niobium, and
vanadium all of which are found
or mined in New Mexico are used
for making steel. You need steel
for pipelines. You need steel
for uh for a wind turbine
towers, you need steel for
transmission towers, so you need
that, those for both clean
energy and
uh conventional energy as well.
While historically mining has
had a poor environmental track
record inner MMD works hard to
ensure that modern mining in New
Mexico is conducted responsibly
and cleans up legacy mining
hazards. MMD's abandoned mine
lands program uses federal grant
dollars to reclaim historic
mines abandoned prior to 1977.
This accounts for most of the
federal dollars in our budget
submission uh to MMD is for
that.
Legacy program. MMD's coal and
hard rock programs regulate
modern mining in New Mexico, and
that industry, and this is
important, has produced $1.6
billion in commodities, uh, last
year alone. So hugely important
for the economy of the state,
for the clean energy transition
for the conventional energy uh
needs and uh and just a very,
very valuable uh for the state
of New Mexico.
These MMD programs help ensure
that mining companies in New
Mexico responsibly restore mined
lands to productive post-mining
land uses wherever possible and
avoid unnecessarily
environmental impacts, I would
say, are just two weeks ago I
had the opportunity to look at
copper mines and reclaimed sites
near Silver City, the reclaimed
sites are amazing. Everyone
should see them, and, and the
how extensive those operations
are.
And so we should be proud of it.
We're doing a great job on
reclaiming, and it's just very,
very impressive.
These, however, established
under the State Mining Act have
not been updated since 1994. I
looked at the the uh the
inflation rates, uh, it's, it's
uh 221% increase since 1994, so
we haven't kept pace with
inflation also federal funds for
coal regulatory programs require
a state match, MMD request a
modest increase from the general
fund, so that our regulatory
programs
continue to ensure a responsible
mining and post-mining land re
reclamation throughout New
Mexico.
And finally, uh, Emer needs a
modest increase in its program
leadership and support funding,
uh, Imner has has attracted $400
million in federal funding this
year alone, 1.2 billion over the
course since 2021, but 400
million this year alone is
funding uh is needed, uh, uh,
and recognizes program supports
important role in in securing
these federal funds, uh, it
helps pay me, so uh.
That's really important, but I'm
just joking the uh the uh but we
do incredible work and, and with
a small program leadership
staff, uh, we help ensure and
manage the implementation of all
these federal dollars, and that
includes federal legal
compliance, which is very, very
complicated as you might
imagine and uh takes a lot of
time and effort on the part of
the leadership and the divisions
to ensure that we are complying
with all the
laws and requirements.
We are also seeking to add a
grant-funded climate policy
advisor to our staff, and we
need a new FTE to address
increased demands on our IT
office. We don't really think
about these things very often,
but we have had to add many
portals for public information
and for the applications for the
range of tax credits that I've
described, uh we're managing
significant new federal funds
that requires a lot of IT
support and all of that needs to
be.
be done securely. So, so we'll
be looking for an FTE for IT.
Um, the, uh, the little bit
unreversions.
OK. Switching gears to
reversions, with 3 exceptions,
uh, the reversions, uh, from
Mnerd are pretty small.
The largest reversion, you can
see this in the slide is the 11+
million dollars, uh, uh, uh, in,
uh, uh, for the general fund,
and that is really a
reimbursement.
For money that we advanced uh
for fire disasters and uh and we
advanced funds to fight the
hermits peakal Canyon, and other
fires, and that is just a
reimbursement from the federal
government, so that's the
largest reversion, the next
largest reversion you see there
is 1 point, almost $1.2 million.
Um, that's for penalties
collected by our OCD, uh,
division and that those those
penalties were.
to the general fund, um, the
approximate 1.2 1.3 billion that
you see down there, uh, for, um,
the HB 2 section 4 reversions,
the 1.3, that is from OCD and
that is from funds for staffing
positions that we have been
unable to fill a lot of
difficulties in uh in filling
staffing positions in parks in a
forestry and an OCD, uh, with
the booming oil and gas
industry, filling positions,
they're paying a lot in the
industry. So filling those
positions is tough, and that's
what that.
large reversion is, and the
other aversions are are small.
And so, so, um, uh, just a
couple more things in closing, I
note that M nerd is also seeking
special appropriations and you
can see them, they are listed on
the slide, uh, and that's for a
number of projects, including
one that I believe is essential.
Or positioning New Mexico as a
national and perhaps
international leader that I
described up front in our energy
and natural resources
management. Our state has huge
conventional and clean energy
resources.
And state lands that have seen
many wildfires and other
catastrophes, the uh the
flooding we saw recently, we are
a very water stressed state.
How we manage our water and, and
its use in energy production,
etc. etc. is very important and
how we manage of all of these
issues in the days and years
ahead, could provide a road map
worthy of replication across the
country and, quite frankly,
around the world. Middle East,
usually reliant on oil and
natural gas also vary water
stress, and so, so, um, how we,
how we transition here.
With our huge conventional and
clean energy resources, how we
transition those jobs, um, uh,
how we get investments, etc.
etc. inclusion with the huge
Native American population,
very, very important. How we do
all of that, I think could set
an example for the rest of the
country, and I think you're
going to see a lot of focus on
state activity in the next
couple of years and so it it's,
it's increased in
important, uh, after the
election. During my most recent
time at the Department of
Energy, President Obama
instructed 22 agencies of the
federal government via executive
order to do among other things,
and this is a quote, affordable
to to address affordable,
affordable, clean, and secure
energy and energy services are
essential for improving US
economic productivity, enhancing
our quality of life.
Protecting our environment,
ensuring the nation's security,
achieving these goals requires a
comprehensive and integrated
energy strategy resulting from
interagency dialogue and active
engagement of external
stakeholders.
My office at the Department of
Energy did the analysis and
coordinated this extensive
effort across 22 agencies.
Um, we did installments in lieu
of 1800-page document that no
that no one read, we did
installments. Um, our first
installment was a comprehensive
analysis of energy
infrastructure in the near mid
to long term, and that, that,
um, installment, 36% of its
recommendations were enacted
into policy or law, the
Democratic administration, a
Republican Congress.
I think New Mexico is a perfect
place to replicate this review
to provide recommendations for a
path forward based on unbiased
sound analysis of energy
security, clean energy, energy
affordability, energy jobs,
energy inclusion, energy
infrastructure, and energy
investments needed across
agencies, regions, and the
entire state, regions of the
state of New Mexico have very,
very different interests in how
we do all of these.
ing s And so I think that um and
we don't need 22 agencies. I, I
go to cabinet meetings, I count
8 or 9, but there are many, many
interagency and cross-agency
issues and all of this, and so I
think uh uh uh we could be a
shining example for the rest of
the country and putting forward
a thoughtful, technically based
sequence set of policy
recommendations to help meet our
incredible states near mid and
long-term energy goals.
needs.
So thanks again for the
opportunity. I look forward to
discussing these and other
issues raised in our FY26 budget
requests. Thank you very much.
You want to give us a list of
which cabinets you want to
secretaries want to get rid of.
No, I think we'd be more
obliging to be cut onto that
rather quickly,
I mean services transportation
clearly has a huge interest, um,
the uh state lands, the
environment department, I, you
know, I can go higher education
because we need a huge amount of
innovation, you know, I mean,
it's just, and to put something
together that's thorough and not
just what I would do, but what
they would do and need, uh, I
think it's very
important and, and you pro
probably know we went to Mexico
with the governor. There's a
huge cross-border interest as
well between Mexico and New
Mexico, and that could be part
of this as well, looking at
border flex and what can we do
there? So, so, uh, anyway,
sorry.
Yeah, I was invited to the
inauguration, but I did not
attend the inauguration, uh,
Representative Chatfield, you're
first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. Thank you. um.
I guess my first question is
class 6 primacy where, where is
CO2 stored underground?
Uh, it's, it's stored very, very
deeply underground, uh, New
Mexico has many, many, uh,
subsurface formations that are
appropriate for, for CO2
storage, um, saving aquifers is
a good place, although we could
be using that, that that saline,
that brackish water too for
resource, so we've got to look
very carefully um uh unlinable
coal seams, although that's,
that's a more problematic area,
uh, uh
Uh, uh, the, uh, oil and gas
reservoirs that that so there's
a range of of geologic
formations where you could do uh
CCS, and it's very deep, way
below the water table and and
so.
Uh
So Mr. Chairman, it's a little
bit of a quick trick question,
as you probably already
suspected.
But you're correct. It, it's
stored in poor space, whether it
be in saline water coal
formation, it's in poor space.
And the real question is, who
owns that force space?
Well, it's interesting because
This is uh a little known fact.
The United States is the only
Country in the world.
Where the surface, the owner of
the surface owns a subsurface
rights and, and it's not a
problem in the, in the rest of
the world, the government owns a
subsurface. The US is the only
country that owns the the where
the the property owner owns a
subsurface, so it's very
complicated, uh, uh, you have to
look at unitization and what can
you can do in that regard and um
and so that is complicated, uh,
but
It's, it's being done and um and
I think, and I, as I described
earlier, it's critical uh for
the transition. So, Mr.
Chairman, you are.
Also correct in that it's been
tried in 7 states in the United
States in court, and in each
case, it was ruled that the
surface owner, unless
They had sold severed or
otherwise transferred that
property to circus owner owns
the horse base, and he, and it
is unitized just like we unitize
oil or gas or whatever, and I
think uh
I worked on the on this a lot of
years, OK? So I, I think uh
carbon sequestration is the key
to making conventional energy,
clean energy, and also um making
clean energy. So,
Uh, I, I appreciate your
knowledge of the subject and
you're correct. It is owned by
the surface owner.
My second question.
Uh
We recently have gone through
many, many fires in New Mexico.
And to fight those fires, the
governor had to repeatedly
uh, declaring a state of
emergency to get money to fight
the fire. Uh, some days,
multiple, multiple, uh,
declarations of emergency
because of the limit that's put
there, uh, what is your proposal
to make it so that we are
prepared to fight fire when the
fire lights instead of uh having
to
Go through all the process which
I sounded like you were in on
some of that. I, I, I did watch
the governor sign like 3043
emergency orders, OK, and was a
little shocked at that's how,
that's how it.
Uh, is done here, and I think
that we need to aggregate that
authority. Ben, do you have any
more, he's he's our general
counsel. He knows the legal
answer. I have watched her do
it. I am, I am, I was a little
shocked.
That that has to be done, and we
need to figure out how to
legally aggregate that so we can
do it without 43 emergency
orders, we can do it with one,
and so then anything.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, that, that's
we correct our forestry division
starts submitting executive
order requests well in advance
of fire season so that we have
the cash on.
So possibly a fund, maybe that
would give us the ability to
fight that fire.
Is that any, is that any, in any
of your thoughts? That is very
much Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, that's very much in
our thoughts. It's an idea that
we've bandied about and um
started giving a little bit of
shape.
OK
So, my last question is
considerably easier. One of the
lakes in my, in my district is
Conscious Lakes and uh state
parks have just pulled out of
there.
And uh, you know, it used to be
a thriving place with a lot of
things going on when I go there
now, I just see nothing. Do you
have any plans to do some, do
something in at, at uh conscious
Lake and make it a little that's
the hardest question you've
asked me, so this hasn't come
up. The uh
You wanna
These are state parks, Mr. Chair
Representative Chaffield, uh,
just for my clarification, what
do you mean we've pulled out
because I still have staff
there. We're fully operating
the, the park now, maybe I'm not
aware of what that means the
camping area, uh, there's no
boat docks there that uh, to my
knowledge, uh, they took the old
ones out. I don't know if they,
they were operated by you guys
or who I, I think there's a boat
ramp there, uh, there,
there.
I don't see that much going on
there. I used to have a, you
know, the military had a, had a
recreational area there and they
took it out, um.
What do you
Maybe an eager question is, what
do you have in conscious, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chatfield, we have a full staff
at Conchos now, which we haven't
had in the past. We're still
operating all of the same
recreation areas that we always
had. There's boat access on both
the north and south side. Um, so
Puncho's is operating, uh, the
marina, uh, that you may have
referenced from years ago is no
longer there, but that happened
decades ago when uh Mr. Hann
pulled out and so uh we haven't
found any concession interest in
running that type of operation.
in Konchos, but we're fully
operating. We're serving
visitors every day. Uh, we
continue to work with the Army
Corps of Engineers in that
effort and uh Cuchos is, is up
and running, um.
So, and you've never decreased
your staff there?
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, we have never
decreased our, our staff there.
We had a hard time for about a
year and a half finding staff.
There was a point in time which
we had no staff at Koncho's and,
uh, you know, some of the
challenges that we have in these
rural areas, especially uchos
and far, uh, eastern San Miguel
County is there's some quality
of life issues there where kids
don't want to be bussed, uh, 2
hours a day, uh, and families
don't want to commit to those
really rural areas, but we do
have a full staff at Cuchos now.
Uh, we're back in, in running
and um it's one of the best
boating lakes in the state, in
my opinion.
Thank you, Mr. Cherry. It
definitely is, and I hope that
we can work maybe with the base
in, in Clovis to reinstate some
of their recreation area there
and uh I appreciate that you do
have personnel there. Last time
I was there must have been
during the time when they all
left because I didn't see much
going on. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have not heard of it as an
issue and not with other than
the general staffing issues that
we have, uh, with a lot of our
state parks, so, so I had not
heard of it as a problem, which
is my excuse for having him
answer the questions
in my voting citation he'll
remember
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you all, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for the presentation,
very lighting and you did really
well if you present it in
Congress, and he said this is
harder. I don't think so. I
think you did a good job.
Um, I only have a couple of
things, so there's a lot of
parts that were very.
presentation, but I know that
there's other members that have
a lot of questions.
And uh in reference to, you
mentioned copper.
And Molibyan and so is there any
hard that it might be that we
might reopen some of the former
minds that we had.
Uh, we are looking at uh opening
new mines and our mining copper,
as I said, we are
Third, I had thought we were
2nd, but apparently it was Utah
or Nevada, uh, keeps displacing
us, but it moves back and forth.
And so, yes, we are, I, we, I
actually went to uh tour another
mine, uh, south of Socorro, not,
not near, not further away from
Silver City, where they are
looking at uh uh a reopening and
uh doing copper mining there.
They've done other mining there
and so, yes, we are
Um,
uh, looking at that, I cannot
stress how important copper is.
Now, I use the electric vehicle
numbers that, that I, I, uh, in
my presentation, but you use a
copper in uh wind turbine
towers. You use it in in uh uh
transmission towers, you use it
in transmission lines, and
that's, that's for the
The clean energy transition that
we're talking about, we're using
it in everything for just
everyday electronics, etc. etc.
So there's huge and growing
competition for copper, um, it's
not on the DOE or the USGS
critical minerals list because
there are other sources of
copper in the world, multiple
with more than one source, and
so we're we're importing a lot
of our copper from South
America.
We're gonna need that in the
United States, and, and there
are missions associated with
moving that copper around the
world too. So, so there are a
whole lot of drivers that could
make and should make New Mexico
a major, major producer of
copper and miner of copper, and
we already are, um, but we need
to grow that industry as well,
but we need to be
Responsible in our mining and,
and have have uh the mining
industry has a very, very bad
historical track record,
so, no, no.
So, does that hold the same for
Olivia?
Yes, yes. And uh yes, that, I
mean, we need all of these, so.
Copper, copper just happens to
be used across the board, um,
there are some more specific
uses uh for some of these, but
yes. And I guess Mr. Chairman
and the other part of
understanding is uh window.
When
A Chevron mining was with a
quest of mine.
And one of the factors was uh
the competing prize per pound
from foreign.
And you know, so that's one
thing that probably will have to
be out to.
How does he become back again to
be a profitable, you know, to,
to just obviously it's demand
and and uh that increases the
profitability and the uh the uh
The regulation is expensive.
OK, and, and there's no denying
that, uh, but again, there's
huge demand in the world, and,
and I would note about the
regulation, I was having a
dinner one night with the CEO of
Rio Tinto, 2nd largest mining
company in the world, and I had
a map. It had inactive mining
sites on it, and I couldn't tell
whether it did were they
inactive because they depleted
the resource or because it
became uneconomic to.
them per your question.
And he said they're all super
fun sites.
OK, that's the history of the
mining industry that has been
very, very costly. We need to do
a much, much better job, but we
are going to need huge, huge
volumes of these metals and
minerals, uh, for the clean
energy transition and for
conventional energy, as I said,
so.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
have one more question, and uh,
and actually not, but uh it's
expanding a little bit to uh.
Uh, Representative Chatfield and
uh when we're looking at um
With a
Fighting forest fires, you know,
I try to see as uh as a big
picture.
And actually at one time, we had
that in New Mexico and then he
was gone, but we had a fire
crews in just about every
community, which uh blending
very well because um it was um
seasonal, but it was a good
economic development, and at the
same time, uh this uh crews were
transported to and from to every
single part of every state in
the West.
And uh it worked and uh and that
disappeared.
And uh now seen with um.
Uh, starting the two programs
that we have with a hotshot.
And by the way, Miss McCarthy in
the back, she did an excellent
job the other day in Channel 5,
you know, our presentation, but
she did a real good job, is uh
why can't we look at a big
picture.
And have to where.
Because there is so much work
that needs to be done with a
care of the forest from the
thinning to the responsible too.
Balancing the act of grazing.
And why can't we be the leaders?
And as a demand comes, as you
mentioned for coppermolyan, you
know, the demand is this people
in our state will be the ones
that will be taken out to those
places for employment and not
meaning that they would leave
the state, they would just be,
you know, on track to to do that
kind of work. And there's a lot
of individuals that would love
to do that so because uh at that
time you had a very high
concentration.
Of individuals doing this kind
of work, and then they would
return back to do their farm
work and to do their work at
home.
And uh I think with uh staying
at home kind of concept that uh
developed over convict with uh
COVID, you know, that falls
right in again, you know, uh.
Individuals like being at home,
you know, but at the same time
being employed.
And uh that's something to think
about, you know, and uh.
Uh, for whatever reason, if you
feel you want to use my part,
you know, I.
I know quite a bit about it I
work with, uh, on I'd love to
talk to you and I don't.
I, I remember when I was a kid,
you know, we had local
firefighters and, and I don't
know the history of why that
diminished, and I mentioned
something like doing something
like this, this, uh, statewide
strategy, OK? And, and I think
that that should be part of it.
Look at that history, what can
we do? What policies do we need?
What do we need to be supporting
in order to to reinvigorate that
kind of uh.
Uh, a firefighting, I think it's
a very uh important issue to
look at, too.
Very well. I would be more than
glad to, and uh thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary. I
appreciate your knowledge in the
oil and gas and mining industry,
and I had a couple of questions
for you regarding the uh the
hotshot cruise and I was just
wondering where you, where were
you house these two crews at.
I, I, you know, I don't know.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Vincent, our
crews are located in Socorro
and.
Oh, yeah, I thought he was
asking specific locations where
they were housed, yeah.
Thank you for that. And so.
I'm trying to get a vision of
what this hotshot crew looks
like, so in the summertime,
they'll be on standby for
anything that we have in the
state. And if we have nothing
going on in the state just to
save, you know, FTE money, would
they be possibly attached to a
federal fire somewhere else
would do they have buggies, are
they gonna be able to be
transported. We actually, uh,
and there's about, as I
understand it, 20 people per
hotshot crew, OK.
And, and where are they, again,
I thought you were asking me for
a very specific location in in
Las Vegas or Socorro, but, but,
um, uh, they need a lot of
infrastructure where they are
located because they've got to
stay in shape and they've got,
you know, they, they need the
equipment, etc. etc. uh, but
when they aren't being utilized,
I think that we and other states
are sharing crews, and so, so
when uh there aren't
Fires in New Mexico, our crews
are in Colorado or where, you
know, Nevada or where there are
there are fires and, and, and
that there's reciprocity there.
Same thing, we get support from
other states when we have fires,
so, so, um, so, uh, they are
busy a lot of the time, whether
there is no fire here in New
Mexico or not, uh, uh, they are,
they are quite busy and staying
in shape and, and, uh, working
to protect.
And so
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, and the other
question that I had was
Will they be seasonal employees?
Will they be full-time
employees? Are they permanent
positions, and if so,
In the offseason, would they be,
would they be utilized to do
possibly project work on state
lands.
They are permanent employees,
Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, yes, these are, these
are year-round employees, the
two, the two answers, I think to
that question is one, the burn
season is a much, much longer
season now than it was in the
past, so we're seeing even some
of our what we were previously
designated as temporary
seasonal.
We actually almost have on staff
here.
particularly some of the
business support staff.
For our firefighting.
Um, the second answer to that
question is yes, FEMA projects
and thinning projects are part
of the year round chakra.
Hotjackers and I, I also want to
just make sure that we are um
accurate in our terminology
here. They will be hotshot crew,
hotho crew is something that you
uh attain after years and years
of training and certification.
At least one of them is type 2
initial attack.
Uh, so we will get to the point
where we are, we are considered
hotshot crews that have fairly
rigorous, I mean, the
firefighting context, you don't
just get that by declaring
itself.
But yeah, their own thinning
projects on all sorts of
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate that answer and I
appreciate your vision. Um, we
do need lots and lots of
thinning work done in our state
lands and and just to have them
go and do project work around
the state. I think it'll be,
it'll be uh um
very well served. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
You, Mr. Chair.
I think some of my questions are
answered the big picture, and I,
and I just want to make a
comment that that big picture,
um, that you have uh crafted for
us is, is so important to our
state, especially when we're
looking at the energy, um,
portfolio that we have and how
you have a vision for that, can
you perhaps draw a
Together, as we're talking about
all these, these uh independent
types of
Uh, divisions that you have,
the, the, the minerals, the
mining and the bigger picture
with the ETA and what that means
for our state. Briefly, kind of
like the big picture, like we're
talking about fire, and you've
really drawn in on that. Can you
do the same for that energy
vision for our state
that it's interesting because
that was one of the first.
My first initial reactions when
I started the job, is that these
are very, very disparate
divisions, and, and, uh, quite
frankly, the common
Commonality that I see between
them is uh focusing on
The
Energy transition.
And the need for that, um, has
been mentioned, the fire season
is much, much longer than it
used to be, and that is because,
because it's a much hotter and
much drier. The climate is
changing, OK, the some someone
else asked earlier and said
something about the uh uh uh
Representative Chatfield, I
think, where the the docks, you
know, where are the docks. I did
not anticipate.
understand when I started that
because of the drought that New
Mexico has been in in large
parts of the southwest, some of
the docks aren't in the right
places anymore. The water has
receded, and so, so that, so
that's forestry, that state
parks and how all of that
relates to uh OCD and the uh
conventional energy resources
that we're managing and
out, um, and the clean energy
resources and the metal and
mining, it's all related to the
changing weather and climate and
the droughts and the uh the uh
longer fire seasons, and, and,
uh, and so I, I would like to,
um uh look and have mentioned to
the staff, looking at some of
our cross-cutting issues within
Inert, but also looking at the
cross-cutting issues, as I
mentioned,
across agencies, and I think
that that's hugely important. We
get into agency stovepipes, and,
and we all work together until
it comes to appropriations time
and then everyone, it's my
money, you know, blah blah blah,
and I think that we need to
think about both inner and the
state other state agencies in
that regard, and how can we, how
can we work together.
And, and, uh, to maximize the
value of New Mexico's uh uh uh
very substantial, uh, natural
resources, so
And, and, uh, to maximize the
value of New Mexico's uh uh uh
very substantial, uh, natural
resources.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that, that response. It is,
it's why, um, more of a comment
for you, Mr. Chair, is why it's
important. We have a visionary
and um.
secretary that we have in our
state that's, that's looking at
things as a whole with your
background and your expertise
and all the things that you've
done nationally. I think that
this is just a pivotal time, um,
for our state and for our
nation, quite frankly, and that
vision you have and how you're
going, how we're going to
really, um, bring this to that
that full circle to that point,
takes a portfolio approach which
you, you have um engaged in, and
it's a balanced approach, uh,
and how we're going to engage
with all.
the shifting, um,
Resources that we have as a
state and that being an energy,
the energy resources that we
have to mitigate the issues that
we're talking about, um, through
climate change. Uh, so I just
wanted to say, Mr. Chair, uh,
there's probably more to come
from, from this uh agency in
that regard, and, and I just
want to support your budget,
your report card here shows that
um you're doing, the agency
itself is doing really well as
we've been incrementally
increasing and seeing some of
the biggest revenue increases
and um
one of our agencies, but the,
the
The amount of work that we have
at hand with us, we, we talked
about with other agencies with
the PRC. That's another
component of how all this comes
together. It's really, really
taking that focus approach but
really a balanced in portfolio
approach because it's gonna be,
it's gonna be very wave uh
shifting those balances and how
we get to where we need to, and
I just want to say thank you uh
for your commitment to New
Mexico, first of all, and I'm
looking forward to the work.
We're gonna have to uh mix uh
and balance your budget as well.
But I just wanted to say those
things because Mr. Chair, in
the, the energy sector uh as New
Mexico is an energy leader, we
need to really focus in on this
a little bit more. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
thank you, Secretary designate.
Nice to meet you. I've seen you
around, but I have never met
you, so thank you for that. Um,
one of the questions I have is
on the, the, uh,
OCD
Uh, the conservation tax that's
paid on every barrel of oil. Um,
100% of it used to go to the
reclamation fund to plug wells,
and now only about 219 of it
goes into that and with an
infusion of 25 million, it looks
like in your presentation from
the federal government. How many
wells are we on track? Abandoned
wells are we on track to plug?
And how many have we plugged?
We plugged a huge amount, but
Benza expert in this area, Mr.
Chairman and Representative We
ug.
Between our 5 crews that we have
on contract, we plug about one
well per week.
It's about 70ish a year or so.
We, uh, most of the lugging that
happens is plugging that we
authorize. OK, thank you for
that. I was uh I was just
curious. I didn't know if
everyone knew that there is a
tax page on every barrel of oil
for the conservation. Um,
anyway, the other thing I just
want to con to say is I'm all
in. Let's get that to your see
mine copper mine open, uh, that
was 10 years ago. I've, I've
been in the legislature for 8,
we started, we're working on it
before.
then
And we're still working on it
and so it could really be jobs.
In that community, it could help
the state of New Mexico and I
agree with you. Let's do it and
let's do it right. So thank you
for that. I, I, anything I can
do to help, please reach out.
I'm, I'm all in. Thank you so
much and, and, uh,
It, it, the, the number of years
that we are talking about to get
these things done is stunning.
It takes 7 years to site a
transmission line, takes 5 years
to set this averages, a gas, a
gas pipeline and and
transmission, you know, I mean,
We're talking uh the clean
energy transition and, and
those, the number of years that
these things are taking is we've
got to do something about it.
And the, the, I, I, the problem
is, is most of that's federal,
uh, but we can push hard, and
I'd love to talk to you about
how I can be obnoxious in that
regard, so
well, uh thank you I'm, I'm very
good at that. Thank you for
that. I, uh, uh, Mr. Chairman,
you know, we, we talk about, uh,
doing things better. Uh, there's
a lot of areas that we can do
things better, but we still need
to do it. We still need to mind.
We still need.
To, uh, a clear forests and,
and, and things like that. We
still need to do that. Yes,
we've made mistakes in the past,
but we have learned from those.
We cannot just shut it down
completely. We could be part of
the solution here in New Mexico.
So please, let's just get it
done. Of course, yes, we want
electric vehicles fine.
Well, we could be mining copper
for those electric vehicles,
more than we already are in New
Mexico, uh, and, and several
other entities, uh, but let's
get it done. Thank you. I'll
help you any way I can. I look
forward to our conversation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary, for
your, uh, presentation. I just
have a quick question. What is
your level of concern on seismic
activity, um, when it comes to
wastewater injection and
hydraulic fracking because we
know that the main cause, so.
I, I know there has been uh some
seismic activity associated with
fracking and uh and we have to
be very mindful of it and look
at the geology where that has
occurred and understand it and
uh and uh not do it where there
are problems, OK? I don't think
there have been any severe
Seismic issues, but I do know
that there have been some, uh,
Mr. Chairman Representative, you
heard me talk about this last
time I was in front of this
committee. We do not mess around
the seismic activity when we
start seeing indications that
injection or pressurization of
Uh, of the subsurface is causing
seismic activity. We're pretty
quick to shut in SRAs. We did
that, um, just in the last few
months with it's called the
county line SRA, um.
Uh, the division has been, has
taken a pretty proactive stance.
This is an issue not just for
the communities around the
Permian um, particularly
Carlsbad, which is a place that
probably will not tolerate a
great deal of shaking. Um, this
is a liability issue, the
railroad commission has done a
little bit of saber rattling
with us as well before action,
so we, we kind of look at it
from a few different angles or.
Um, pretty diligent practice.
Can I, can I just say that that
the that raises a much larger
issue that we, that if we did
something like this, uh, this
cross agency planning that I
would look at, and it's mapping
of the subsurface.
OK, we're talking about CCS.
You're gonna store hydrogen
underground. You restore natural
gas underground. We're doing
this production and and the
seismic activity that you
describe, geothermal is gonna
require mapping of the
subsurface, and I think we need
to start looking at at that very
seriously, working with our
academic institutions and maybe
the laboratories do and quite
frankly, the industry, and I
I said earlier, the oil and gas
industry has huge, huge
knowledge base on the
subsurface, and using them to
map that subsurface where we're
gonna need to deal with the
problems that you described,
we're gonna need to make sure
that basins are discrete, OK,
when we're, if you're
sequestering carbon, you've got
to protect the water table, all
of that. I think that that's
hugely important, and we ought
to be looking into that. Thank
you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sector.
Kindergarten, I
Sorry that I missed your
presentation.
I was out of the room.
So if I ask something here that
you've already covered, just say
covered, and I'll look at the
tape. I'll say brilliant too,
OK. Well said, well said. Well
said. I've got 4 topics I would
like to talk about.
I would like to talk about your
performance measures. Why are
there so many NAs on your
performance measures. I would
like to talk about the PAs and
fire retardants. I would like to
talk about ethos and fracking,
and I would like to talk about
utility, wildfire, liability
management.
So I'm going to talk.
First, about your performance
measure, because, and you have
to keep your answers real short,
because these guys down here
don't like me testifying. They
want you to testify, but we got
a lot to cover. So talk about
your performance measures first.
Performance measures what,
yeah, give me an example.
Let me give you an example.
We've got a lot of them, right,
so this.
The estimated
Co
cumulative energy savings to a
certified performance audit.
You have not done that anywhere,
we don't have any information on
that. This is under your
It's
energy conservation management.
Right, right.
OK.
Your estimated reduction in
carbon emissions resulting from
certified energy saving
performance contracts in metric
tons.
You're, you're, uh,
Number of clean energy projects,
which the division provided
information and technical
assistance.
That's one case.
Oh here's another case, uh,
Uh, under
Your uh state parks.
Uh,
What is the number of the
proposed new Rio Grande Trail
miles to the Rio Grande Trail
Commission.
Another
is under your
Warm gas conservation.
OCD OCD.
Uh, number of oil and gas
facilities inspected and
reported.
And high priority sites.
The number of oil spills
reported.
doing all conservation division
annually.
The number of violations issued
and association with
administrative penalties. The
number of relative filings
approved.
I'm gonna stop there. You get my
idea, if you want money.
Right. I need information to
say, man, they need money,
so I'm gonna let Charles
interject here for a second
because Charles
may help us.
Mr. Chairman, it looks like if
you see NA across all of those
columns are budget system is
pulling in old performance
measures, and it shouldn't have.
Um, that had been discontinued.
Um, so we'll make sure to
correct that in the final, so we
have got information for the
information that they're
supposed to be reporting, they
have been reporting. OK.
So it's not your fault. Right.
Thank you.
I'm the one that. Thank you for
answering the question for me
because
Um, right, my second one, let's
move on. OK.
All right, you know, on my part
of the world,
The, the, uh, fire retardant.
fire retarded.
Has, has been a, a major issue.
And I have wondered.
For a long time.
When word sprang retardant on
forest fires. Is there any
pathos in that?
Um, I don't know about retardant
in in forest fires, um, I would
say that we had, uh, just last
week we had 4 days of public
hearing on Phos and the oil and
gas industry, um, the oil and
gas industry maintains that it's
not using POS, OK? And, and
hasn't, um, so I, I don't think
the ban would be a problem for
them, uh, but, um, the, uh, I
don't know about forest fires.
Do you, uh, I mean fighting
forest fires, whether it's in
the retardants, um, Mr. Chairman
and Senator Woods, I just
conferred it before, so we're
gonna have to follow up with you
on that information, OK, that,
that'll be fine. We don't need
to testify on that either. Now
you're, but I will go back to
the, uh, the fracking.
Part of that.
At what point in time do we need
to disallow any PF uh PFOS.
In state well, as, as the
industry testified at these
hearings that are, you know, uh,
not testify, but, but provided
input at the hearings, they said
they're not using POS in
production, and, and, uh, so.
I, I'm not sure that it's a, a
problem if they're not using it,
OK? Now there's some, but Mr.
Chair, the question I'm asking
you today, right?
He is in lots of consumer goods.
You're, you're, you're saying,
well this one industry.
We shouldn't allow it or or.
We're not going to allow, we're
going to say they're not using
it, so we're just gonna make it
a rule that not to use it.
When are you gonna make the same
rule across all the rest of the
industries.
And why I'm saying that.
I'm not trying to testify, but I
guess I.
Canada Force Base.
That seems to be coming out of
landfills. I don't seem to be
coming out.
of
Where they sprayed the foam.
Uh, I, I'm gonna let Ben, uh,
answer some of this, but all the
other
Products and I've looked at the
long list of products where
where people associated with
POS. I don't have jurisdiction
over them. OK, I have
jurisdiction over the oil and
gas, uh, industry in, in that
regard, but I don't have
jurisdiction over others. So
Ben, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
we actually had a full week of
hearings last week on this and
we're still in the process of
deliberating an OCD. I think the
conversations seemed to center
around level of agreement on
disallowing continued use or or
any use of
Of PAS bearing products in
downhole work that this dispute
tended to be around the margins
of the definition.
Um, of
Some of the things that they
were so broadly speaking, I
think that we are
tipping your hand too much or
tipping your hand too much,
I won't, I won't.
But is that
Information
I know that's publicly
information.
My last one before they cut me
off.
I'm trying to put together a
bill.
Something to do.
With the utility protection.
Um, going to the National
Forest.
Because are going through any
kind of force, even on, even on
the, on the grasslands.
I'm trying to figure out a way.
That we can limit liability on a
utility, and I know there's
people in the room that just
hate utilities, but the reason
I'm doing that is to keep the
cost of electricity down and
keep the cost of electricity
reliable, where they're cutting
those lines completely off in
California, for cutting people
out of electricity for a period
of time, because
They can't afford the liability
of those lines going across
there during high wind storms.
What I'm trying to do is come up
with some kind of legislation to
put borders around right away
maintenance.
So that we can try to figure
out.
When it's an act of God.
And they don't have the
liability for it.
But I'm just bringing that
in this committee, uh,
It, it's an important thing.
We're trying to figure out how
to harden up these homes.
We're trying to, the, the
indust, I know that.
The superintendent industry,
this is her wheelhouse, not
yours.
But it all has to do with, with
Feel far.
Where we are in the world today,
and I'm trying to drum up some,
some.
Interest.
And how we can help our citizens
lower their liability insurance,
lower their property insurance,
and it all has to do, starts
right here with your group.
Tell you the truth.
With your group.
Because you are the natural
resource bunch.
So
I'm just telling you that you
don't have to comment on it or
you don't have to do nothing,
they're gonna cut me off anyway,
but I, I, I'm not. I would never
do that
I thank you for your time today.
Uh, if you have any comments,
I'd be glad to let me just say
that the, the issue you
described on the, the
transmission lines is obviously
it's an issue for uh for uh
electricity, but it's an issue
for as I, I mentioned, for a lot
of things, the sighting.
Uh, is, is just taking an
unbelievable amount of time,
and, and for those of us who
focused on uh on uh mid-century,
and there are 28 states in the
country that have net zero
targets by mid-century. We don't
have the kind of time that is
taking for that kind of
sighting, and, and so I think
that that's one issue that we
really, really need to be
looking at and how do we
expedite that?
And, and, and the sighting of
all of this infrastructure that
we need, uh, for increased
demand to keep electricity
prices lower, uh, as you
mentioned, but also we have been
working with the uh uh the
insurance commissioner on the
hardening of homes and
properties, uh, you can drive
through Ruidoso and you can look
and see which homes were
hardened and which ones weren't.
And, and
Uh, uh, there are many, many
things you can do to
dramatically reduce your risk in
that regard and reduce your
insurance rates, but it's
expensive and poor people can't
afford it. And so, so we need to
look at how we can get that done
and in ways that are affordable
for people who can't afford it,
but it's, I totally agree with
you. It's hugely important, uh,
that we harden, uh, and that's
gonna be an increasing need, and
we have spent
A lot of time, uh, looking at
that, the impacts on insurance
rates and what can we do about
it. And I think, quite frankly,
talking to our uh federal or
congressional delegation or
Washington delegation about
something that might be done at
the national level on the
insurance issues and some
funding for, for those who can't
afford it to help harden their
homes, uh, uh, uh, is important
and it's important at the state
level too, so.
So, so you would agree though
that uh we have too much
undergrowth inner force so that
we do need to also harden our
forces. Yes, we need to hard
wish. there are many,
absolutely, many, many things
that we need to be doing and so.
Yeah.
And you would advocate that on
our federal forest also.
I mean, I, I don't have
jurisdiction over federal for
us, but
advocate I'm avoiding injuring
it.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, we're gonna put a
note texting and testifying
policy in place.
Uh
Represent Dixon, you're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll just
keep this very brief and it's
actually not a question, but I
wanted to just comment and
express my appreciation for um
some of the priorities and
budget requests that you've
made, uh, that not only um
address some of the energy and
climate concerns, but also uh
will diversify our economy and
create jobs. So thank you.
Represents small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thanks to your
team. Um, a few things, uh,
first, broadly, I would echo the
appreciation. There's a number
of initiatives that are, uh,
first and foremost decarbonizing
our economy.
Second diversifying and growing
our economy, um.
And 3rd, sort of just creating
more prosperity for all New
Mexicans, and I, so many of the
initiatives that you outlined,
uh, have been begun, uh, with
this legislature and I think
we're very excited to continue
those, um, so kudos, um,
secondly, um, around with
uh
with this legislature and I
think we're very excited to
continue those, um, so kudos,
um, secondly, um, around with
I very much appreciate and have
looked very much at the numbers.
My fun, uh, what was
our oil production in 1983, the
month of November.
And I, I, I, I was Mr. Chair,
sorry, the, the I don't know
the, the, the quick answer is no
less than 5 million barrels, no
more than 7 for 40 years, it was
flat that we're now the number
as you pointed out, number 2,
oil producing, um, we're at the
top of so many other good lists
to, uh, Madam Secretary, do you
know the, what is the 4th most
biodiverse state in the country.
Yes, I understand New Mexico,
New Mexico, that's right, uh,
and so.
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary, um,
the direct purview with state
parks and indirect attached
agency administratively attached
with uh the Department of Game
and Fish have a huge role to do
with that biodiversity. Would
you agree? Yes, absolutely, and,
and, and that's why I want to do
this cross-agency planning. It's
hugely important. Mr. Chair and
Madam Secretary, there are state
park uh ex
di men sion s and creations in
the community that I come from,
uh, in Donana County, and so I'm
excited to see that, that that's
at the top of your list. We need
to make sure and uh ensure that
those efforts are funded, that
you have the resources and want
to very much encourage you in
the final two years of this
administration to see those two
areas with state parks and with
uh with game and fish as
real opportunities for uh
serving all New Mexicans even
better that Mister Chair, Madam
Secretary, I know that includes
areas like fees and others, and
uh I wanna, I, coming from the
southern part of the state where
we have some really vibrant
parks.
Um, and the ability to sort of
better serve New Mexicans and
those who come from other
states, particularly Texas,
since they don't have the public
lands that we do. Um,
Really exciting opportunity. The
fact that these are near water
where biodiversity, of course,
is really concentrated only
highlights it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
briefly on our sort of the
forest piece. I want to praise
Director Seli, the LFC staff,
chairman, your leadership, and
of course director McCarthy and
her team, I think we are very
close to a piece of legislation
to have a much better way to
respond to, particularly when it
comes to fires and floods.
Um
I think we're moving very much
in the right direction there,
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary, just
sort of to go back to it, um
Sort of beginning of the 20th
century.
Or I guess
Early part of the 20th century
through the entirety of the 20th
century, we had a basic policy
related to fire on forests.
My understanding of that policy
was basically any fire, you put
it out immediately. Is that your
sense as well in Director
McCarthy.
That broadly, right?
The uh
At the, uh, I, I was alive for
most of the 20th century, so I,
I don't, I, I don't know. OK, I
would assume that that that that
is correct and, and, uh, one of
the other senators, uh, who
raised the issue of how we used
to fight fires and, and uh can
we uh look at that history and
start replicating that again, I
think would be I love it, love
to talk to you about that, Mr.
Chair, same on my end.
we've learned a great deal. Our
two hot, the, the two crews that
this committee in a bipartisan
fashion endorsed the creation
of, and I, as I've come to find
out, there is a federal crew, is
there not based in Riodoso
around Riodoso and Mescalero.
OK. So, yeah, we've created the
two-state crews in areas that
didn't have coverage.
There are federal crews already
existing that do have that
coverage.
The idea of putting out every
single fire ran counter to how
those forests evolved and was a
very big contributing factor to
creating along with a hotter and
drier climate, the catastrophic
burns we're dealing with now.
So, sort of a broader um
prescribed burns, thinning, uh,
logging and other tools.
But in a much, much more, we
just, we know a lot more now and
we can apply that knowledge and
I think with Director McCarthy
and the broad team there were in
a much better place to do to
apply that knowledge and Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, I
understand that the two crews we
have a great deal of their work
as the months get colder is
actually engaging in some of
those very
Focus prescribed burns, right,
and, and yes, and uh I would
love to sit down and and have a
a deeper dive discussion on
this. It, it's, uh, there's been
a lot of uh uh theme here about
evolution and, and how these
things have changed and, and
starting with the much longer
burn season and, and the less
water, etc. etc. What, what
should we be doing? I think
It's hugely important for the
4th most biodiverse uh state in
the country, and uh and we need
to look at it, and I, I would
like to the your question, you
know, how much oil did we, we,
we were producing, uh, X X years
ago that as recently as 2003.
And, and I was in Washington and
was working uh to do on a shale
gas R&D company, OK? And uh
when, when gas was considered
gas green good, OK, in the early
2000s. Lee Raymond, the CEO of
Exxon testified before the
Congress that the North America
was running out of natural gas.
OK, and so that was the thinking
in the industry for a long time,
changing the ways of
conventional thinking, hugely
important, uh, and, and we could
apply some of that that change
in thinking to the forest fires
that you're talking about too.
I'd love to talk about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, thank you. And I also
sort of wrap up, um, I think
there's a lot of interest from
the committee and, and really
excitement about you.
Thank you. Have a great team. I
know you have an acting OCD
director right now that's a
particular as you point out a
challenging area to, to find
that permanent position, but we
do need it, you know, we have so
many important pieces, um, and,
you know, I think it is very
fair and it's welcome for you
and your team to ask for more
resources and engage in this
conversation and, and we're, you
know,
We're also the side of the uh
largest onshore wind farm on the
continent with the ability to
grow that footprint
substantially and just around
solar back home again, there was
just an option for, I think it's
like 970 acres of land for a
solar energy zone that brought
in over a million dollars, uh,
to our local federal, to the BLM
office.
We are an energy and
biodiversity and of course,
coming up next, the most
culturally diverse state. We are
so well positioned to um
Leverage these many strengths
and to have the sort of
leadership you and your team are
providing, it will take a lot of
detailed work.
Because there are ways to sort
of
You know, these are some
Clear and rewarding roads, but
they can be narrow at times,
just like going into the
mountains, right? That there are
ways to do things right. And
there's ways to go a little bit
too far one way or another,
where you at best go off the
ditch and get stuck in the snow
and at worst, you know.
And the against trees, 30, uh,
you know, bunch of feet down.
We, we just have to do it right.
And, and I think you're, Mr.
Chair, I just the, you're
welcoming of that work and the
detailed work to get things
right, and you're very extensive
and strong track record in doing
that is really encouraging and
gives me a great deal of
confidence that we can do it. So
thank you so much and, and
again, love to talk to you uh
about a lot of these issues. I'd
love to talk with all of you,
um, uh, about the issues you
raised and
And uh agree with you about the
uniqueness of New Mexico, and,
and I actually have uh done a
tour of the pattern, uh, uh,
wind farm and uh and it's very,
very impressive. I met a couple
days ago with uh with a company
that's investing in building a
transmission line, um, what I
would love to see is is more off
take in New Mexico for some of
these, OK, quite frankly, and
that's what I said when I
talked to pattern. What about
offtake here, but we need to
support the infrastructure for
that offtake, OK, so, so we need
to be thinking about that as
well and uh and, and hugely
important, and something else I
would throw out, uh, for
everyone's, uh, thinking and
consideration. I was a little
surprised how much wind
generation utility scale
generation there is in New
Mexico and how little so
or utility scale generation
there is, but I've been, I
looked at uh P&M's uh portfolio
and what they're planning in the
next 34 years. It's all solar
generation. That's what they're
solar generation and batteries,
so, so that's coming down the
pike and we need to be thinking
about how to support that as
well, but I'd love to see more
offtake uh in New Mexico, uh,
from those uh those uh companies
and
And instead of sending it all to
California, so thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, chair. So just
wanted to make mention, Madam
Secretary, thank you for your
presentation and thank you to
the entire team. So I've been
working with uh your team on uh
wood um byproduct, uh, biomass.
Um, disposition and, and sort of
like, what can we truly do from
an economic development
standpoint on biomass, but then
also can it help us with these
out of control and, and, and,
you know, unpredictable
wildfires that we have been
experiencing. So, you know, uh,
several years ago, I, I went
into a one person, you know,
what kicking contest, trying to
get something on it done and I
didn't quite get it done then,
but there's a growing interest
in the legislature to get
something like this done in a
really big way. Uh, so this time
instead of just jumping head.
first into it with a piece of
legislation. I've agreed with
your team, um, maybe they've
briefed you. I don't know if I'm
sure they have, um, that we're
gonna go the route of a Senate
joint memorial and bring all the
heads of all the five families,
if you will, around the table
and, and, and figure something
out together and then come
forward with a piece of
legislation that can be more
meaningful, but I wanted to
alert that, uh, alert you to
that, and it's a conversation
we've had here a couple of
times, but we just really need
to get something done on this.
So I don't know if you want to
comment on that at all. I just
wanted to make you aware of it.
It's, it's amazing that
you mention that and and uh it's
a, uh, could be a boring story,
but let me tell you a story.
Secretary Moniz and his wife had
a cabin in southern Colorado,
just on the other side of the
Conejos River where I used to
fish when I was a little kid.
And we went for a hike up in the
mountains. You couldn't walk for
the dead trees, you know, the
bark beetle and the drought, and
there were so many dead trees
and a huge fire hazard, as you
mentioned, and, and my thought
then and I started thinking
about can we look at this and,
and develop a program to harvest
those dead trees, reduced the
fire danger, and, and create a
jobs.
In rural, uh, rural New Mexico,
and hugely important and, and,
uh, could we do, uh, a small
scale biogeneration, you'd need
CCS, OK, because they're, there,
there's a lot of emissions and
particular emissions, etc. etc.
from from burning wood, but
could we create uh uh economic
development plan using that
wood, and I'd love to talk with
you about it. So you and I have
had this.
thought about how to do that,
and I think that it's, it could
be, I, I spent a lot of time
worrying about rural development
as well. So I'm worried in that
regard and I will say from an EV
perspective, the number one
center of commerce in small
rural towns is auto repair.
And you don't have that with
EVs, and we need to think about
replacing that commerce, and
that's one thing that you just
described, I think we could do,
so. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Madam Secretary.
So I would, I would ask just
publicly now that you make your
team available
to help us get the work
together, I want to be part of
that team so thank you.
Thank you, Chair, and again,
economic, everybody can win with
this thing. I agree
totally.
Thank you for your presentation.
Uh, uh, you know, just to
continue that the comments on
biomass in Milan, they have a, a
plant, right? But the problem is
getting
getting it's it's transporting
it, yeah, yeah it's transporting
loads are not worth the
transportation costs and so you
got to figure that out and
that's the big issue, and I've,
I've thought about that for a
long time, and could we work
with the agriculture department,
for example, and where it has,
has a jurisdiction over national
forests and get some kind of
Subsidy of the transport, that's
the issue, and so, and, and if
you burn it, you get a high
processed organic soil
byproduct, right? And that is.
Unbelievable, I guess. I, I
don't know, but um.
You know, it's kind of, it's
good to hear that you have a
leadership and a vision for an
agency.
And, and I think this happened
with the other secretary too,
but your vision of what needs to
happen, especially as we
generate power and we had the
PRC here yesterday and, and, and
how we complete the, the, the
grid, the modernization, the
whole system.
And, but you have a vision and
you know, no, these are the
pieces that I need to
manufacture this in order to get
into compliance and and to make
this successful.
If you don't think about the
back end, you know, we gotta
have money.
And we're gonna have processing,
we're gonna have manufacturing,
and, and then we got an end
product that goes somewhere to
be built in and put in place.
Um
That, that's a true vision of
what has to happen in a process
to get things.
Can I, can I say and, and, uh
I don't know if this is a
visionary, but I think you want
me to quit phrasing, yeah, yeah,
stop, you know, I don't like it.
So, the, the, and, and it has to
do, I mentioned the uh the
pattern and the uh the uh wind
farms that, you know, a huge,
huge uh infrastructure.
A 5 megawatt wind turbine.
is anchored with 30,000 tons of
cement.
OK, and, and that it's one means
a major carbon emitter making
cement, so you need CCS, but we
have cement plants, uh, a couple
of them in New Mexico. We need
to expand that industry, um,
because we're building all these
transmission lines and these
wind turbine, uh, turbines and,
and think a little bit in
advance about what industries we
need to incentivize here in New
Mexico to support all of that
activity.
You know, the, the wind turbine
blades, you know, I'm seeing
them, I saw them going down the
interstate the other day. It was
quite a mess, OK, but, but
making wind turbine blades here
and making the towers that we
need, uh, uh, for to to um
expand our transmission system.
All of those are, are, uh, uh,
things that we need to be
thinking of, and those are the
kinds of recommendations that I
think would and
and very, very substantiated by
a hardcore analysis
recommendations that we could
get out of this cross agency, a
strategy for the state of New
Mexico, so you, you know, you're
gonna set that up, but also
In New Mexico, we transmit and
generate more energy. There's no
offload, just like you said,
yeah,
and, and the problem is.
You know, when I was young and
in college and one of my
friend's dad invented the milk
carton.
He said, let me tell you
something, on the milk carton,
not the milk.
Right? Yes. And, and so at some
point, New Mexico is going to
have to figure out how to, how
to generate these off
transmission.
It's an ever-going process that
flows every single day. It's
like school milk in the 70s and
80s. Every school had to have
it.
Right?
And, and so we got to figure
that out on how to generate
income.
Off this new revenue source. It
is a revenue source. We're
allowing them to, you know, if
You want to call it whatever you
want to call it, put turbines up
in, in, in everywhere across the
landscape and you're seeing
them, and New Mexico has zero
benefit other than we're
transmitting power.
The landholders have a leasehold
estate. There's some there's a
little bit of construction
money, but for a revenue source
when oil and gas goes away, if
we're gonna transfer, transmit.
Energy
That's a revenue source to me
and at some point we're gonna
have to figure that out and
Mexico is gonna say, that's
fine, we'll let you go across,
but there is a cost to doing
that.
that's, that's a huge, I
consider that a huge part of my
mission, OK, it's trying to, how
do we, how do we get value for
all of this in New Mexico. And,
and I don't like, again, I said
the pattern, how about some off
take? OK, and I think it's
hugely important, and but, and
I'd say one other thing that in
that regard, the uh, you know,
I'm a, I'm a data analyst freak,
OK? And so,
the, uh, I did a reference for
him of
If we have to, how much, how
many miles of transmission do we
need to build out to meet net
zero targets, and the Princeton
Net Zero study, a major, major
and very significant analysis
says that we need to increase
our transmission capacity by 75%
by 2030.
We need to increase, and that's
the miles for those
transmission. And, and I did an
analysis, it's 5 towers per
mile. We need 360,000 towers by
2030. New Mexico needs to get in
on those towers and making those
towers. So it's just one set of
many, many jobs that we should
be looking at for the state.
Well, you can only resolve one
conundrum at a time in one issue
at a time.
Cause the workforce doesn't
exist bunch of problems sitting
around me. I have to resolve
them all the time
just joking. I have wonderful
people, uh, let me kind of wrap
this up quickly and so, uh, your
fees.
I mean, you're getting political
pushback, right? Those have to
happen.
I mean, you have the statutory
authority. You, you need to
increase the fees, you need to
increase the operational because
we all want to go to the parks
and we all wanna not wait in
line for a boat ramp and have
clean bathrooms and clean
showers, and we want to have a
good friendly staff there, not
grumpy staff that was overworked
and underpaid and and so those
have to happen.
The political pressure, wherever
it's coming from, uh, I mean,
uh, I, if you're gonna use
something, you, you gotta pay,
and that has to happen in, in
just do it and get it over with
and and and go down the road.
Um, let me ask you something in
your presentation, the 10
litigation, what is that? And
it's 250,000. Yeah, this is,
he's our general counsel, so.
Um, Mr. Chairman, last year we
were, uh, state.
Environment Department, energy
and minerals, and the governor
and the legislature were all
co-defendants named
co-defendants in a
constitutional challenge to the
oil and gas permitting and
regulatory.
So this is the legal costs
associated with.
Are we trying to lose that
lawsuit because most other
litigation costs are a lot
higher.
I mean, uh, I mean, who, who's
the attorneys we have hired and,
and most attorneys in class
action lawsuits in in the
education field or, you know, at
least 500,000 to a million
dollars for attorneys, I mean,
250,000 for attorneys just tells
me like you're.
Trying to set us up for a losing
position defend us, but not
really defend us. Mr. Chairman,
that's $250,000 for this year.
We also received appropriation
to have some money out the door
for this last year, um.
We basically are not asking for
the what we think of the entire
amount's gonna be, we are
currently up on interlocutory
appeal, so that's like a long
side diversion, uh, before the
rest of the case in chief
proceeds, so this is something
that's going to likely last a
very long time and we are going
to be back before you asking for
money for legal fees for.
And then your reauthorization
for OCD compliance backlog. What
backlog is that? Is that?
Abandoned wells or what's the
backlog, Mr. Chairman, my
understanding is that that is
funds that we need
reauthorization for because they
are match funds for federal
dollars that have been slowed.
To be authorized. And and what
are they used for in in OCD, uh,
Mr. Chair, I believe those are.
Those are abandoned well
plugging plugging,
yeah.
And then
Um, let's see.
Where we are, and, and I don't
know and.
I know enough about energy to be
done about it.
This this script modernization
in this comprehensive state
energy plan.
And are we working with the PRC?
What other agencies are we
working to complete that, that's
$3 million project. I mean, how,
how are we working the grid
modernization in, in a
comprehensive state energy plan.
I don't know what other agencies
comprehensive energy plan is
what I've been talking about. We
haven't started that. OK, that's
the, the uh the QER like
quadrennial energy review
process that I would like to do
with all of the relevant
agencies, and so that's
that's the, that's new. The uh
grid modernization um is and and
I have, I'm actually meeting
with the PRC staff next week. I
was with them in San Diego. I've
had uh uh meetings uh with their
staff on all the things that we
need to do for grid
modernization, and I, I
mentioned to you how much
How many towers we need. If you
can get more power onto existing
lines, you don't need as many
towers. Those are the kinds of
things we want to be looking at
in a grid modernization strategy
and, and, uh, and I would say
one other thing on that is that
And when I was at the Department
of Energy in 1998 is when we had
huge fights across the agencies,
but decided the structure,
current structure of our
electricity markets was decided
in 1998. OK, we need to take a
serious, serious look again at
at the structure and the
regulation of our electricity
markets. What can we do in New
Mexico exclusively um from that.
perspective, and those are uh uh
uh there are a whole range of
issues on grid modernization.
Those are just a couple, and I
think there's a huge and growing
need for that on the, on the
comprehensive energy plan that
will cover all agencies. We
don't have independent agents
coming saying, oh, I want 2
million for PRC and what no no
no this is this is to do the
plan, OK, and, and, uh, as part
of that plan, and I mentioned
earlier when we did it at the
federal level, we had regional.
workshops around the country and
we had workshops in Canada and
Mexico as well. Um, part of that
clearly you've got to do the
analysis, but part of it is
going around the state and
listening to what people have to
say in Curry County and what
people have to say in Las Cruces
for a border plex and all of
those issues and, and, uh, and
so, uh, part of that would fund
and support regional workshops
that we would do.
analysis for an analysis from
and uh and then put it all
together in a comprehensive plan
in our community energy
efficiency, right? I think we
funded that almost 10 million
every year and so how much is
being out there and how many
people are being served and what
are those numbers looking like?
And how many, how many providers
are there and
Uh, I want all the details on
that.
Mr. Chairman, we have spent the
entire ballots down from the
first round of funding and we
will get you the detailed list
of all the recipients. I wanna
see how many because MFA has a
similar program, and so we're
duplicating programs in two
different departments, and so,
yeah, they, they are, they're
doing weatherization and windows
and everything else and MFA does
the same and he's shaking her
head from your department. And
so I want to see the numbers
provided to see if, if that
we're getting that complete so
thank you for your time and
thank you for your focus and
And
we're here to help you lead
this right in in hopefully
within your agency there's not
pushback behind you and and your
staff is with you 100% of the
time, um I think they are, but
you never know. You never knows
the cabinet secretary until
faces behind me here
no wonder you're right has been
texting and like a a madman in
in uh it's usually when you
testify we want your focus on us
and we're focusing on you.
Um,
and so I think that's really
important. It's a matter of
respect for the legislature and,
and so we do have a vision and
you want to build it from the
ground up and I think it's, it's
refreshing.
Like I said before, to hear this
happen.
Uh, uh, not that the prior
secretary wasn't on board in, in
doing this, but you have a
different skill set than her.
And, and you know what it takes
and how to build that. And so I
know we're gonna be pulling you
constantly, so don't turn off
your phone on Christmas Day
because that's still a workday
in the legislature
Um, but, uh, we, I appreciate
that and, and it's really, it's
great to see vision and
leadership.
And to know where you're going
to plan because sometimes New
Mexico lacks a lot of that.
They're like, here's some money,
OK, we'll just do whatever,
behavioral health is a big
issue. There's no vision,
there's no leadership. It's,
there's some money and we're
gonna hodgepodge and, and go
down the road. But vision and
leadership is very important to
me and how you're going to lead
the state to figure out the ETA
figure out all the other issues
that we can't come in and
perform across the nation, how
we can generate income for the
state of Mexico. Thank you very
much and I, I can't disagree
with praise, OK, but the, the
one thing I would say is this
kind of
I am totally data driven, not
ideology driven. That's good and
that's, that's, that's, I think,
critical is, is this can't be
about ideology, OK? It's gotta
be about data and, and, and
analysis and what actually
works, so and technical
limitations and, you know, we,
we can all close our eyes and
throw darts at the dartboard,
but when you look at the data
and what really works and what
that's what really changes the
shape of what your vision is,
so.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. This is great. Thank you.
affairs
cultural affairs.
No.
All right, we'll, we'll get
going pretty soon here, Madam
Secretary. It's great to see
you. If everybody can grab a
seat.
I thought everybody was here for
M nerd. It turns out.
At least a few folks were here
for cultural affairs
just a handful. Uh, great to see
everybody. Thank you all for
making the trip, Madam
Secretary, great to see you. Uh,
we'll go ahead and get started.
Please feel free to introduce
your team, and we'll go from
there. Thanks so much.
Thank you, Mr. Tarr. Members of
the committee, as always, I
appreciate your valuable time,
madam, uh, secretary, if I could
ask everybody to grab a seat
really quick.
Thank you all. I apologize, but
we want to stay close to
schedule.
All right, Madam Secretary,
thank you. Apologies again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, again, I always
appreciate the time you afford
me on the agenda and the ability
to um appear in front of you.
Um, I know your time is
valuable. Um, I wanna introduce
today to my right, Deputy
cabinet Secretary Michelle
Gallagher Roberts, to her right,
CFO Greg Geisler.
And Jean Harris, budget
director.
Um, uh, we also have with us,
uh, a number of our constituents
from our friends, our foundation
groups, and our boards and
commission, and if you could all
just raise your hand quickly and
be acknowledged.
Um, my presentation is gonna
focus at a pretty high level or
reminder of my agency's work.
Switch microphones.
A reminder of my agency's work,
a brief overview of some of our
successes over the past year.
And then, uh, really focus on
our budget priorities in terms
of operating budget and um
special appropriations, um, but
I am gonna, um, share with you a
little bit because it talks
about the successes of our
agency. I'm gonna try to
remember to share with you about
each picture that's in the
presentation. So this is an
exhibit that we just opened at
the New Mexico History Museum
and the palace of the Governors,
and it's called
forks in the road and it's a
culinary history of New Mexico.
It's up right now and uh would
love to have you come by the
History Museum and take a look
at that exhibit.
Um, about us, in short, I say
that our mission really is to
preserve, protect, and present
New Mexico's unique cultural
heritage for all New Mexicans,
but especially for the youth of
our state. Um, to that end, we
have 4 key goals that we
organize all of our work around.
We seek to expand access and
inclusion for all constituents.
We want to grow our collective
impact both as a state agency as
well as as a sector, uh, enhance
ours
of cultural resources, and this
takes a lot of uh forms when you
think about the vast rate of
materials and cultural heritage
that we are charged with
protecting.
And we want to increase our
partnerships in rural and tribal
communities around the state.
Um, we really focus our work in
4 main areas, education, um,
this may take the form of
Turner's classroom visits,
activities, presentations,
lectures, etc.
Programming, which would be
exhibits, performance, events,
partnerships, lectures, etc.
Uh, stewardship is preservation,
conservation, and our vast
collections, including our
historic buildings, and then,
um, the area that is really
important to us but is often not
really talked about a whole lot
of scholarship, including uh
research, our libraries and
archives, fellowships, and uh,
any number of databases that we
maintain. And on this slide is
an image of Alvado Motel, which
received a historic preservation
award, uh, a year ago, uh, for
that work and it's
representative of
Just one aspect that comes out
of our historic preservation
division.
Um, as you all are fairly
familiar with, we have 4
different areas. Thank you,
Michelle. Uh, 4 different areas
that we focus our work on our
museums and cultural centers
around the state, starting with
Farm and ranch in the south all
the way up to Los Luceros up
north.
Um, sorry, that's also a
historic. Those are historic
sites as well. Uh, we have a
number of statewide services,
and this is where, um, we do so
much of our important outreach
to rural and tribal areas and
really do manage to serve every
county in the state, and that's
from New Mexico Arts, which is
our statewide arts agency, so
they do grantmaking, public art,
artist services and a whole
bunch of other interesting work
that really helps uh local
nonprofit arts organizations in
your community, uh, function.
Uh, we also have the historic
preservation division, the New
Mexico State Library and the
Office of Archaeological
Studies, and then, of course, uh
there's statewide support, which
is all of the backbone it takes,
including the IT financial and
capital infrastructure to keep
the department running. And on
this slide is an example of a
program that you graciously
funded, um, with an increase a
couple of years back and it's
our um arts in the military
program and this is an example
of a micro grant that was made
to the Otara.
Arts Council, um, to celebrate,
uh, veterans and military
affairs Arts Month, um, and this
was just one of many exhibits,
um, and opportunities that they
had over that month.
So to quickly highlight some
program successes, and I don't
necessarily want to read every
bullet point, but it was hard
enough to narrow down our
successes, so, um, if you would
indulge me, I'd like to, um,
acknowledge the hard work cause
this all really does come on the
backs of um the 500 plus members
of DCA staff. Um, so we opened
the first phase of the Taylor
Masa Historic site with the
Reynolds Visitors Center to the
public, we had a wonderful
public opening and had about 300
people out on the plaza that day
to celebrate the first pha
of that we produced a
documentary that explores
Hispanic identity in New Mexico,
um, we did this with a grant
fund, um, and I'm really proud
of the work, um, it actually
made me, um, kind of tear up to
explore those issues and see how
different people, um, identify
as Hispanic because it is a, a
broad range of identification.
Um, we opened weaving with
Meaning, which features um
telephone art from South Africa
and I'm very proud to say that
this is
the first major exhibit of this
art form in North America, uh,
that opened Friday at the Museum
of International Book Art here
in Santa Fe. We also, um, in
partnership with the Northern
Rio Grande National Heritage
Area hosted the first ever Rio
Grande Skyfest, that's the image
you see on this slide. We had,
uh, just over a dozen balloons
out at Los Luceros for 2
mornings and 1 night and uh the
response to that program was,
uh, overwhelming. Uh, so we'll
be looking forward to doing
that.
on. We celebrated the reopening
of the fully renovated palace of
the governors with uh new
exhibits and some of you joined
us for that opening in April and
got to see all of that great
work with, um, arguably the most
historic building in the United
States and certainly one of the
most important in uh New Mexico.
Um, over at Bosque Redondo
Memorial at Fort Sumner, we
unveiled a mural featuring over
1000 tiles designed by students
that have visited the site.
They're now installed on the
exterior wall.
We launched a contemporary
gallery at the Museum of Indian
Arts and Culture, that Bob and
Joanne Bals are native market
and contemporary art gallery.
Uh, we continue to make the most
significant infrastructure
investment in Fort Stanton since
the New Deal era, including
opening the renovated uh nurses'
quarters. Uh, we awarded the
first million dollars out of the
cultural affairs, I'm sorry,
cultural properties restoration
fund. We presented a free artist
professional development
workshop.
and gallop through the Mexico
Arts in partnership with Gallup
Arts. We inaugurated an annual
pot statewide poetry contest. We
opened a new outdoor education
pavilion at Coronado Historic
Site, funded by one of our
longtime volunteers who passed
away unexpectedly and her
husband um made the gift that
allowed us to construct that
pavilion, um, in her memory and
um we also received a a um
reaccreditation for uh the New
Mexico Museum of Natural
History.
in science.
In terms of operational success,
we had um a general fund
reversion of less than 0.01%.
Uh, we had no transfers out of
the 200, we requested no
reauthorizations or
re-appropriations. We created
and advertised the 6 new FTEs,
um, you funded in the last uh
legislative session. Those were
fun, uh, created and filled
before the middle of the 1st
quarter.
of this year. So thank you so
much. Those 4 employees down at
Taylor are making a huge
difference along with the uh new
educator at the Office of
Archaeological Studies and the
uh professional development
librarian at the state library.
Those are, are huge resources in
our state.
Uh, we expended over $18 million
in capital. Um, a few years
back, uh, the legislature gave
us $5 million in ARPA funding
for improvements outside of
Santa Fe County, that amount is
fully encumbered and 80%
expended and we anticipate we
will have no trouble expending
the full amount by um the
deadline for that funding, which
is in June of this year.
Uh, next year, sorry. Um, we
served over 2 million visitors
over 685,000 children. We filled
138 positions, that's continues
a near record um filling of
positions, um, but that includes
23 promotions, which represents
a 17% promotional rate. I always
say you want to have people that
other people want to hire, but
more importantly, people you
want to hire for new jobs.
Um, we purchased a new rule, um,
bookmobile along with the new
Wonder on Wheels. These are
services that drive around the
state to people's communities.
We invested $427,000 in Nimcris.
Nemcris is the New Mexico
Cultural Resource System. It's
the database system that
everybody relies upon when doing
environmental clearance and
construction and oil and glass
work to know what um cultural
resources may be there and what
types of environmental
clearances.
going to be necessary. Uh, we
leveraged over a million dollars
in federal funds to provide
digital archive services of
collections and documents, and
we leveraged over 900,000 and
FEMA funds to do fire mitigation
at Basque Redondo, Fort Stanton,
and Los Luceros. Um, we've also
just, um, as of Friday submitted
an application for FEMA funding
in the amount of $10.8 million
through Homeland Security to do
more fire mitigation at Fort
Stanton.
Um, I would also say that we've
done um significant water system
improvements at Fort Stanton for
a long time, our joke was, if
you go to Fort Stanton, we put a
lot of money into it, but you
can't see it because it's
underground. But now we're
seeing that benefit on the
ground. So the ISO rating for
the local fire department
improved 2 points, and that will
increase the amount of funding
that the local fire department
gets from the state fire
marshal. It also will have a
positive impact on um homeowner
and business insurance.
in Lincoln County. So that is a
real tangible benefit to that
larger community.
And then I received
archaeological contracts for uh
the New Mexico Department of
Transportation, New Mexico
Department of Game of Fish, the
state land Office, and a really
amazing project, $800,000 with
the Pueblo of Akima and as you
may recall the last time I
appeared before this body and
then interim hearing there were
a lot of questions about the
Office of archaeological
Studies, and I think the renewal
of these contracts after over a
decade is a, is a real statement
of the improvement that has been
made in that office over the
past year.
And then last but not least, our
foundation and friends groups
raised over $8 million in
private support to support the
agency and its work. And this is
an image from the National
Hispanic Cultural Center, one of
our annual performances entitled
Bale Bale.
Thank you. So moving on to our
FY 26 budget request. This is an
example of that African wire art
that we have on display now at
the Museum of International Folk
Art. It's a really um stunning
and under um exhibited art form.
So, at the absolute highest
level in my general fund, I am
asking for just over a 10%
increase in the vast majority of
that almost $4 million is in a
request to increase my funded
vacancy rate.
So to talk about that a little
bit more, um, I'll start with
the pretty picture. This is
driving the market. Um, it's an
exhibit that opened the new
contemporary gallery at the
Museum of Indian Art and
Culture, and this is a wonderful
car that was made for um the
Indian market, um, probably 15
years ago or so and it features
a number of artists. This was
the showpiece of that inaugural
exhibit along with a lot of
other great items from the
collection.
So, um,
When I took this position, I
made an agreement with great
guys through my CFO that we were
going to hire, higher, higher
until he waved a red flag. And
that is what we did.
Um, we had a very high vacancy
rate. We needed to get it down.
We needed people to run our
museums, our historic sites, our
operations. We are personnel
heavy division, as you all are
aware. So in mid-year of last
fiscal year, Greg started, um,
waving the red flag. We had a
12.5% vacancy rate and that put
us um 3% over our funded vacancy
rate. Now that's from LFC Volume
3 last year. In reality,
by the time this came around, we
were probably a little bit
further over that.
Um, it really was, um, a result
of increased hiring and reduced
turnover. I think my agency for
the past several years had been
seeing a lot of people leaving
their positions as we navigated
through the other side of the
pandemic. And then we really
dramatically saw that turnover
reduce. And so we went from 375
FTEs to 466 FTEs from January 22
to January 24. I thought, uh, as
we continue to look at this, we
were projecting a $1.6 million
deficit. So we had to take
immediate action to manage our
budget responsibly and to stay
within our um means. So I will
say we ended FY 24 without it a
deficit in our 200s.
How we did that is we
immediately slowed hiring. If
every division was asked to
prioritize its vacancies and
really to advertise them one at
a time so that we were creating
the natural slow and let it slow
down and letting nutrition work
for us. We also looked at and
evaluated the use of temp
employees, which was
particularly strong at the
National Hispanic Cultural
Center where they were using
them to do rental events, and we
made adjustments there to make
the use of those temps more
efficient.
We also um adjusted the labor
rates that we charge to rental
clients to make sure that they
were really encompassing the
full package of benefits and the
full cost of those employees. So
we increased our labor rates for
uh outside rentals.
Uh, we also dramatically
increased our review of
overtime. So Greg Geisler now
has to review every piece of
overtime that goes through, and
if it's for rental, he needs to
make sure that the rental fee is
covering um that.
Um, we also ensured that we were
fully leveraging um other
funding sources including our
federal funding and our special
appropriation. You graciously
allowed us to expand the $6
million special to include up to
$1 million in personnel, and
last year we used about half of
that, um, on exhibit related
personnel.
But the reality is that this
problem persists into the
current fiscal year.
Um, it is the cause of increases
in benefits, increased cost of
employees, and more competitive
environment. Uh, we are paying
more to hire employees,
particularly in human resources
and financial positions. Um, so
into this year, we're gonna keep
all of these steps. We have kept
all of these steps in place.
We're meeting at the end of
every pay period to look at
those budget numbers and make
sure we're feeling comfortable
with where we're at and we're
doing what we can to manage um
the deficit.
it, but we are exploring a
increase in non-resident
admissions, um, so those are our
out of state admissions. We'll
be going to our boards and
commissions with proposed
increases in those. Those have
not been increased in some time
and that will be a way of
increasing some revenue for the
department. Um, we're also, um,
further restricting our hiring.
So there's, now we're not only
just prioritizing, but we're
actively asking each division to
identify position that they can
hold vacant, that they can live
without for.
For, um,
The current moment.
And really our you this problem
is just gonna continue to go up
and the only ways I have very
limited tool kit to manage it,
and I'm doing a fairly good job
right now, as I said, I ended
last year without a deficit.
We're looking pretty good right
now. Um, but we have a lot more
months left in this fiscal year,
but I'm surprisingly, our
current vacancy rate is now up
to 16.8%. And it's gonna
continue to go up because that's
really the mechanism that I have
to control it. So I'm seeking
this increase in our funded
vacancy.
rate, which again,
Appearing before you last year,
I was hired beyond that and that
funded vacancy rate by 0.3%,
probably more like 0.5% by the
time I got to you. Um, so I just
really need this increased to
stabilize our personnel. This is
not new personnel. This is not
extended personnel, this is to
pay for existing people and to
maintain our current levels of
services. If I do not receive
this increased uh rate, I'm
gonna have to get much more
aggressive with um
slashing positions and hiring
freezes, and that will result in
having to reduce some of our
levels of service. So I'm trying
to be proactive. I always, um,
and honest with you about what
my agency's needs are. Um, I, I
have been managing this
situation proactively and will
continue to do it. There is not
a crisis, but this is a warning
flag that I really do need an
increase in that base funding
for personnel in order to
maintain current levels of
services and to not have you ask
me in January why my vacancy
rate is 18 or.
19%, but now you know why that
is, and it's only gonna go up
from there.
So
Um, moving on to highlight, um,
the non-recurring request. Uh,
the Native American Graves
protection and repatriation Act.
I have a $5 million request.
I'll tell you a little bit more
about that on the next slide,
but it's for compliance with new
requirements and timelines for
what is a federal law.
Um, I'm asking for $1 million to
develop a suite of marketing
assets that really um are aimed
at promoting the museums and
historic sites as a whole, and
as they can be visited every
year. This is part of an effort
to raise admissions, right? So
I'm trying to balance
expenditures and revenues and
one way to do that is to try to
increase revenues. Um, we really
need assets that allow us to
market to people who are coming
to um Santa Fe.
coming to Albuquerque, coming to
New Mexico on vacation and are
looking for things to do. Most
of our exhibiting because of how
most of our advertising because
of how we're funded focuses on
individual exhibitions over a
short term. What we really need
to do are some assets that
market our um museums and
historic sites as a whole.
Um, also the 250th commission
was created um last session. It
is a group tasked with um
developing programs that
commemorate, um, the, the 250th.
Founding of, um, our country.
And so this is a request for
500,000 to support that
committee's forthcoming
implementation, um, forthcoming
recommendations. And then uh the
rural library endowment $10
million this would increase the
principle to 40.5 and increase
the individual payouts to um
each library, you have
generously made significant
investments in this fund over
the past year, over the past 4
years, um, and this one will
really bring that principle.
up to an amount that it's paying
out, um, good, good returns to
our rural libraries.
So, um, just wanted to visit
with you a little bit about the
Native American graves
protection and repatriation Act
or uh night prep. As I
mentioned, it is a federal law,
um, that requires cultural
institutions to repatriate or
transfer um both human remains
and associated cultural items to
appropriate tribes. Um, you do
this through a fairly um robust
process of consultation, um,
That ultimately leads up to as
appropriation as appropriate,
the reappropriation of these
items to, um, the descendant
community.
Um, failure to comply is
actually subject to uh civil
civil penalties under the US
Department of Interior, um, for
each individual instance that
you fail to comply. So if you
have 100 items, you're looking
at 100 notices of non-compliance
and potential civil penalties.
Um, but what really has happened
is that in um January of last
year, uh, the federal government
announced new guidelines that
create a tighter timelines for
achieving this work.
And so there is a flood of um
institutions trying to do these
repatriations in order to comply
with the timelines. It's putting
a tremendous amount of um
burden, not, not just on
cultural institutions, but on
tribes who are being inundated
with requests from cultural
institutions to do this cultural
repatriation. Um, we are very
lucky here in New Mexico have
the El Pablo council, uh, which
tends to work collectively in
order to make those
repatriations a little bit
quicker. They tend to
identify 11 party who will
consult for everybody, uh, but
nevertheless, um,
It is, it is a significant uh
compliance issue facing
institutions around the country.
Now, for most museums, this
museum's archives, um, holdings.
This is a one time process. You
have what you have and you send
it back, but
New Mexico's uh archaeological
resource, um, repository is the
archaeological research
collections at the Museum of
Indian Arts and Culture. So
there are the both the federal
and state repository, who is
consistently receiving items as
they are being removed um for
various purposes. That requires
every time that you trigger. So
this is a long way of saying
that New Mexico and, and the
Department of Cultural Affairs
will always be involved in
Nagpro.
processes. There's, there's not
an endpoint to it. Um, recently,
we responded to a letter, a lot
of cultural institutions got a
letter from the US Senate Indian
Affairs Committee. We responded
to it and in formulating that
response to them, I can tell you
that the Department of Cultural
Affairs is very compliant. We
are in better shape than a lot
of um other private museums
around the country, but the
sheer volume of materials is
pretty overwhelming, and these
new timelines are very
aggressive and.
And so really this is a one time
request to allow us to build
capacity. This is a very
complicated federal process. My
staff has done a great job
getting up to speed on it, but
there are people who understand
and specialize in this process,
and I'm requesting funds to
bring those individuals in to
help us build those practices,
those procedures, those
policies.
I'm also asking for money for
temporary staff to come in and
do the inventory work that has
to be done and the consultation
process that has to be done.
Last but certainly not least,
I'm also asking for money to
help work with tribes on these
consultations. It requires time,
it requires travel, it requires
um all of the expenses that come
with that, um, and to do this
effectively, we really need to
be able to work with tribes and
help fund that process as well.
So that's um a little bit about
that request.
Um, and really that is, that is
the total of my uh presentation.
I wanted to make sure there was
plenty of time for questions,
but thank you all for your
attention, Madam Secretary,
thank you very much. You had a
lot to cover, but you did it
very well. We're gonna first go
to representative aka and then
go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I'll be brief.
Uh, one I, I really support and
I love as far as what, what you
guys are doing. Um, New Mexico
is truly unique, so we have a
true blending of the cultures,
and I think that we need to
celebrate that.
Um
Cultures many times are divine
or, you know, basically defined
by our art, music.
Food and dance, and so, uh, I do
think that we have a a unique
opportunity and responsibility
to keep that heritage alive and
also show where they intersect
and how they all have come
together, like they have. So,
um, Mr. Chair, my question is
really is,
What types of activities and how
do you engage with the public
schools.
And as far as for outreach
programs for internships.
Um, I'll let you answer that.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
members of the committee, um,
there are a variety of ways that
we interface with public school
systems, both those, um,
immediately adjacent to a
facility as well as those
statewide. So obviously field
trips, um, are one of the
biggest ways that we interact
with public schools, um, little
sideline here. We actually did
one of those, yeah, um, poetry
workshops in one of our division
directors and it was built
around, you know, what does DCA
sound taste da da da. One of the
Sounds of DCA were kids coming
out of a school bus. So it's one
of the, the strongest ways that
we reach those 685,000 students.
Uh, we also have educators who
go into classrooms and do
pre-post or standalone visits.
We still remain, uh, we still
maintain the DCA uh educates
website, which is a way that um
public schools, charter schools,
homeschoolers around the state
and actually as it turns out
around the country, um, can
request um virtual.
classroom visits. We have the
wonders on wheels mobile
exhibition RV. We just bought
the new one. It should be here
soon. That each division, museum
division, um, and historic sites
takes a turn, um, building an
exhibit into that, um,
Into that RV and traveling it
around the state right now it's
featuring Farm and Ranch. Next
up will be um his uh historic
sites. Uh, we also have, uh, the
rule bookmobiles, which go to
communities that don't have
libraries and service public
school children.
Through New Mexico arts, we do
poetry out loud, which is a
poetry, national poetry
resuscitation, um, competition,
uh, and then we also have the
activity books and um activity
kits. There's an example of one
of our activity books in the
pocket that was handed. We send
those out all over the state and
pretty frequently get teachers
asking for copies of those for
their classrooms, um, as well as
the activity kits, which um we
really built those up.
Over the pandemic, but they
continue to be an incredibly
valuable service. So we have
educators that, um,
That put together lessons and
then we pack them with supplies
and books for relevant grade
levels and ship those out
through the state primarily
using the uh New Mexico State
Library.
Thank you. And, and Mr. Chairman
and, and uh secretary. I think
that for me, you know, uh, a, a
good opportunity to go out
reaching into the schools. You
know, it's one thing to go and
look at a museum, which again, I
love museums and I love art
museums.
But when the, the, you know, the
history comes alive, whether it
be working on the tables, or
whether you work in a poetry or
or even food. That's an
important piece about that
because that actually
Uh, it, it takes and it makes
history come alive.
To appreciate what, what goes
behind that. So I would
encourage this cause one of the
things, uh, Mr. Chairman, is
when, at least for myself,
When we're looking at investing
money. I'm looking for an
investment in money that's going
to bring our families together
and our communities together
and, and to celebrate that. So I
really, when we're, when we're
making these requests.
It's gonna be important, at
least for me and for many of us
here is how does that help us to
foster these relationships. How
does that help us to uh foster
community because I think that
we need to get back to that
sense of community and celebrate
and surround.
And uh, are, are different
cultures here. So, Mr. Chairman,
I appreciate that. Um, I know
you could probably give a long
answer to that. I would love to
give you my contacts so we can
sit down and talk about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Baca, very well
said. Uh, next, we're gonna go
to Senator Shindo, representing
Wuhan, and, uh, Vice Chair
Rodriguez. Uh thank you,
Chairman and thank you for the
presentation. Just a couple of
questions, um.
Um, the 2 million visitors per
year, I think it says only your
uh documents.
Do you have a breakdown of like
the various sites, if you can
maybe with one of your staff
forward that to me kind of like
to see. I know I have several
historic sites in my district
and want to see what that maybe
a kind of longitudinal whether
it's a crease I know, I know the
traffic through Haman is always,
it's been crazy and so I don't
know if those visitors are
actually stopping or they just
straight going towards the
mountains and up to the lakes
and streams and so forth. And
then also a question on the $5
million one-time request for
An ACRA initiatives and so
forth, uh.
Is that funding for your staff
only or is that funding also to
support tribes and their
expenses as well, because I know
I've been on the other end where
it's very costly and for tribes
that don't have the resources,
you know, it, it
So uh Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary.
Mr. Terror Senator Sendo,
members of the committee, um,
yes, I would be happy to get you
a breakdown by sight. Um, we do,
we do have that data and um AMS
is very well visited, um, but
I'm not sure I can claim that
everybody going through there
are stopping at the site, um,
and yes, to answer your
question, um, that funding is to
help tribes do their
consultation with the state,
with the Department of Cultural
Affairs for those items because
I do appreciate that it's very
uh costly, so, um, that funding
does include travel.
and food and other types of
stipends.
OK, um, the chairman, thank you,
Mister Secretary. No, that's
great cause I know it's a lot
and I know that.
All the universities and state
museums and private museums when
everybody is now contacting, you
know, tribes and these things
become very, very complicated
and so forth and I know I was
involved with the
A large repatriation, you know,
with pickles.
Back in the late 90s and so
forth when I was a governor of
Pecos, for those of you that uh
may not know in Hamus
internally, the 2nd lieutenant
Governor.
And the pueblo is referred to as
the Picco's governor.
Uh, and externally is the 2nd
lieutenant governor, but we
still have administrative
oversight over all of uh Peco's
ancestral remains and so forth,
so.
That was a huge endeavor and I'm
glad it finally got that done
after Namos passed, so I
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Shindo. I uh Representative
Luhan please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you for the presentation and
Yeah, I have a couple of
questions too.
Maybe just trying to narrow it
so charity for time purposes,
um, in your present, the
non-recurring, um,
Funding that you're requesting
for the 250th commission for the
$500,000. Is that, when does
that commission meet and when
will we have those
recommendations, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Luho members of
the committee, the committee has
its first meeting actually
tomorrow. Um, and it's
recommendations are due in
December, so we will be marking
very quickly on some initial
recommendations and then fine
tuning those in the new year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I'm
also looking at
Within our our budget and our
facts, how we um incrementally
increased your budget, even over
the uh the last year and, you
know, seeing the request now to
what
And just being here in Santa Fe,
we have, you know, this is kind
of, I, I see it as uh um mecca
for the states in our fine arts
and culture museums and and
everything we have here, um, but
I'm also aware of our entire
state as I visit across the
state all the resources.
But um
And I would assume that uh the
revenues that you build are uh
increasingly from probably Santa
Fe. Uh, could you, can you give
me a little bit of that
breakdown, how that, how those
revenues are, are, you're seeing
a better return on the
investment if you will, by the
increase of of how we've
increased your budget, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan
members of the committee. Um,
yes, we've been very fortunate
that this committee has been
very generous and given us
incremental increases for
critical needs over the past 6
years. Um, and some of it has
been pretty foundational,
including things like janitors,
which um don't necessarily um
seem like something I should
have to be asking for that
particularly exciting, but I can
tell you they have fundamentally
changed the morale.
Of our divisions, and they have
increased visitor satisfaction.
So I am taking the long way
around to answering your
question. Um, I used to get
probably at least once, if not
twice a month, a visitor
complaining about the restrooms
in one of our facilities. After
we received the, the funding for
those janitors. I actually have
not received a single complaint
about the cleanliness of our
facilities, and in fact, several
months ago got a compliment from
a constituent and his wife who
had visited the natural history.
History Museum, um, who said
they go to museums all around
the world, and they were by far
the cleanest restrooms they've
ever seen. I should mention that
natural history was one of the
ones that I was most likely to
get complaints about. Um, so
there have been sort of these
incremental changes that I think
have built up the capacity of
the department to really serve
and engage and you hear in my
presentation, I'm focused on
services to New Mexicans,
especially youth. I'm focused on
the impact that we can make in
communities, but at the end of
the day, we do have to do a
bottom line revenue.
Um, so I think our continuing,
we continue to see recovery
coming out of the pandemic when
of course our revenue bottomed
out when things shut down, um,
our, our strongest attend
attendance numbers are actually
in Albuquerque Natural History
Museum is probably everybody's
favorite museum to go to, hence
the need for the janitors, um,
but we are seeing, we are seeing
an increase in revenue. Um, I
would like to invest more in
marketing. I think until we do
that, until we start um
investing a little bit more in.
that kind of ongoing brand
awareness marketing within the
state for visitors who are
coming from out of state, um,
and really complement the
efforts of the tourism
department who's who's about
bringing people from out of
market. I want to get people
once they're in market, I think
we can really see some increases
in our revenue. I also think a
lot of the investment that we've
been doing in capital, um, and
then our facilities over the
years is really gonna start to,
to pay off. I mean, the palace
looks beautiful. Fort Stanton,
if you've been to Fort.
Stanton, it was, it was pretty
rough there for a while. It's
looking even rougher because
there's a lot of scaffolding,
but it's gonna look great. It's
gonna look amazing. We have a
capital request in to redo the
one of the major galleries down
at New Mexico Farm and Ranch.
Um, so I think those investments
are starting to pay off as well.
So, um, there's always room for
improvement in visitorship.
There's always room for
improvement in um our revenue. I
need staff to be able to do
that, and I need marketing
better dollars to do it.
better, but there are
incremental improvements in both
the capital and investments that
you all have made.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I really
appreciate that overview, um,
and really in that marketing,
um, point that you made, I think
that's, that's really where it's
at when I, when I travel outside
of New Mexico and I see how we
are advertising to the tourism
department. It's, it's, um, and,
and the return on that, uh,
investment is is great and I'd
love to see more of that in in
this agency because that those
are the attractions and and the
drawing in and and um.
I just want to say thank you and
the last thing I wanted to touch
on was the amount of information
and data that you have to
collect, um, and, uh, uh,
preserve and uh how is there
any, anything in your budget
that's reflecting, um, that as
we're data is gonna be the the
big thing thing across our
agencies.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair representative members
of the committee, yeah, there's,
there's lots. I'm, I'm trying to
figure out which angle to answer
that question because there's
lots of data that we that we
collect and aggregate. Um, I
will say on, um, you heard about
the investments that we made in
the Nincrist system. That's one
of the biggest sets of data.
Um, for cultural resources, um,
those we've been using through
the IT capital funding and
making those investments. Um, we
just got those over a million
dollars worth of federal grants
for increasing our archives,
we're really trying to lean in
or have been really trying to
lean in on, on some of the
congressionally designated
spending and some of the federal
resources for building up those
capacities, um, in terms of the
data that we collect um on our
own audience and through our own
ticketing system, uh.
The ticketing system that we
implemented a few years back,
um, has given us a lot of data.
I need to make some investments
in getting people to create
those data pools that then allow
us to pull the information from
all those different resources
and so that's actually a
contract that I'm looking at
right now. Um, I will say our
data analyst, um, left us and so
that is one of the positions
that for budgetary reasons, I've
been holding back, but I do have
some contract money, so I'm
looking at a contract, uh, for
somebody to look at all those
sets of data that we as an
agency
really around attendance and
visitors, um, and admissions and
how that can be put in a pool
that then we can pull out
information that better informs
marketing as well as programs
and services.
Thank you, and I just want to
thank you for all the things
that you're doing and and um
uplifting this agency and I I'll
see you at the next gallery.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Uh, next, we're gonna have
Senator Rodriguez and
Representative Herndon and uh
Sam Chatfield, Richard.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
won't take much time. I know
we're running out of time here,
but I'll, I'll just um ask a
quick question, secretary, and
thank you to you and your staff.
You truly have done a great job
and, and I want you to, I
appreciate you. Um, let me just
ask quickly, on the temporary
positions that you're
requesting, um, are you looking
at requesting those as permanent
in the future, or are they truly
temporary, uh, you mentioned
that they would be specifically
for um I can't recall here what
oh for inventory, I think you
said.
Now, are those going to be temp
now and then maybe request him
to become permanent for next
year ongoing, just briefly, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Rodriguez, uh, members
of the committee. So the
temporary physicians for NAPA
compliance would actually be
truly temporary. We just need
extra hands to complete, uh,
the, the inventories that are
backgrounding us. I see. OK,
thank you very much for that.
And I know you mentioned your,
one of your main increases here
that you request me for
personnel to.
be able to maintain your
services, and I can understand
why.
You have a pretty major job and
I've had the good fortune of
being around the state with the
different committees and, and
having you on the agenda at
those other places and showing
us the museums and everything
else you do, so thank you very
much. I'm going to stop, Mr.
Chairman, for the sake of time.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez.
Uh, next we're gonna go to
representative Herndon, then
represent Chatfield, then
representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary, and I
enjoyed listening to the
presentation. My uh one question
to you is with respect to the
programs and successes. I see
that there is an open weaving
meaning, uh, telephone wire art
from South Africa that is, that
is, uh, presented, but
otherwise, how are you
incorporating the
African-American culture into
the work of the, of your
department.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, members of the
committee. Um, we have some
really exciting work that is
happening at Fort Stanton, um,
that just recently came to light
regarding the presence of
buffalo soldiers, um, their
involvement in actually building
the site potentially as well as
their involvement in the larger
areas, so that's something
that's on the top of my mind
because uh the um site manager
there, uh, Oliver has recently
uh discovered that.
and it's been trying to connect
with a few of the folks, um, in
Albuquerque around uh a little
bit more information with that.
Uh, we've also been working with
um
Senator Perold and uh so some
descendants of Blackta on the
issue of actually getting um
Um, access to the former
township there in just outside
of Roswell. It's uh become a
fairly landlocked piece of
parcel, but there is a parcel
estate property and county
property, and so we're um trying
to find a path, and I, I think
we have, this was a resolution
that Senator Purle passed a
couple of sessions ago. Um, I
think we found that path, um,
because a number of the
descendants are interested in
both, um, going back out and
potentially re-establishing a
portions of, of the homestead,
but also in making
sure it's interpreted. There's
only one, small plaque and it's
well away, um, historic plaque,
and it's well away from the
actual site. Um, we also explore
the African American experience
in America uh in New Mexico at
Fort Selden was also has a
buffalo soldier history as well.
Um, and I, I know that the
museum of New Mexico, the
History Museum, has really taken
it um seriously to start telling
or, or to tell better all of the
stories statewide and certain.
the African American experience
in New Mexico, um, is part of
that. So, um, those are some of
the ways that we're doing it. I
will be honest with you, we need
to do better.
Thank you, um, Madam Secretary,
and Mr. uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Oh just stuff for clarification
was the provision the uh
location in Roswell, you're
talking about is that the
regeneration of black them?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
members of the committee, yes,
it's the Bloom historic Township
site. OK. Thank you and Mr.
Chair, I just have two more
questions with respect to, uh, I
know that tourism is fairly big
in our state, but I see that
you're exploring a non-resident
admissions fee increase. What is
the difference now that we
charge between residents and
non-residents.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
members of the committee, it
really, um, varies site from
site, uh, because the boards and
commissions actually set the um
uh the admission fees, but for
instance, I think in Santa Fe,
it's maybe $3 and part of the
work that we're trying to do is,
um, look at a comparable
cultural attractions within New
Mexico and within the region and
what they're charging out of
state visitors, um, and I'm
seeing some room where we could
reasonably increase those out of
state um admission fees, um, and
still be well within a threshold
for both surrounding non-state,
uh, attractions as well as ones
within the region.
Uh, thank you, and, and Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, just
for my information, is that a
common practice among cultural
or um organizations around the
country to charge non-residents
more than residents. Uh, Mr.
Chair Representative members of
the committee. It's not unusual,
um, to have a lower fee for
either your in-state or in city,
um, constituencies. It's not
abnormal. It's also, I'm not
sure, you, there are lots of
places that charge one fee.
Thank you, um, Madam Secretary,
Mr. uh, Chair, one more question
I have is with respect to your
uh vacancy rate, one of the
things you're looking at is
increased review of overtime
requests, and most cultural
places have definite times in
which they open and close. Uh,
could you explain just a little
why is there an overtime rate
and why is that a concern?
Uh,
Mr. Chair Representative members
of the committee, um, the
primary use of overtime is for
outside rentals and for
after-hour programs, openings,
lectures, those types of things,
um, and what we wanted to make
sure is that if it was an
outside rental from a third
party for private use, that we
were really charging the labor
rate that accurately reflected
that over time and that we were
appropriately charging it to the
client. So having that
additional layer of the CFO
looking at it has really made
sure
that we are not only not losing
money, but certainly making
money on private rentals outside
of ours. We're extremely popular
as film screening venues,
concert venues, wedding venues,
uh, we also see a lot of, uh,
quinceaneras at some of our
facilities.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. Thank you
very much Representative Fernan.
We're gonna go to now to
Representative Chatfield and
Representative Vincent, then
chairman.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Secretary, I have a passion for
New Mexico history. Anybody that
knows me knows that's true. I
hear rumors of a New Mexico
archaeological center where it
is the repository of many of the
archaeological finds that has
been, came from our state down
over the years. And uh is there
ever a chance to see any of
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representatives,
members of the committee, uh,
yes, any member of the public,
uh, is welcome to call up and
book a tour. Um,
And then also, uh,
archaeological day which just
passed in November, we always
open it up to the public, but
like all of our collections
areas, all somebody needs to do
is reach out and we will make an
appointment for them to come and
get a personal tour. So Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, who do
they reach out to?
Mr. Terror representative
members of the committee, uh,
they could certainly reach out
to my office and we will be
happy to do that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Repent Chatfield. It
sounds like they should expect a
call very soon.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
represent Vincent and then Chair
Lindon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary. And I just
wanted to make a comment, my
question was asked earlier, uh,
or answered.
I appreciate what you've done
for Fort Stanton, uh, I, that's
in my district and Lincoln, the
town of Lincoln, um, not only
are you restoring the culture
there, you're making
improvements that helps the ISO
rating, and, you know, as, you
know what's going on in Lincoln
County, we have a hard time with
insurance, so I, I do appreciate
that. And then I would be remiss
if I didn't tell you this small
short story and uh I had the
privilege to uh
have supper with um Senator
Shindo and uh Senator Rodriguez.
And we were talking about some
of the activities that go on at
Fort Stanton after dark.
I'm not that guy. I don't like
to be out there after dark, and,
uh, Senator Rodriguez and I, we
decided to take a back seat, but
anytime that that ghost hunter
show comes back out, I would
like to get Senator Shindo on
that cadre, and I want him to
spend the night out there
telling me he's not scared.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative,
uh, next we'll go to chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you secretary for sharing
uh your department's charge and
also want to thank you for
educating the public in the
beauty that is New Mexico. I
wanna also recognize uh Senator
Shino for asking many of the
questions on Mag but I think
that's very important as we want
to make sure that we're in
compliance with NAPA. My
questions are in reference to
your page number 10, the
non-recurring uh
Request that you have
specifically rural libraries and
rural libraries, my question is,
Mr. Chairman and secretary, how
many rural libraries are there
in New Mexico?
Mr. Chair, Representative Linte,
uh, members of the committee,
I'm gonna go with 34, but I'm
gonna double check with the
state library.
58.
You're a little bit off. Mr.
Tremor and secretary. Are there
34 tribal? No? OK. I stand
corrected. It's the reason I'm
so pleased to have an
outstanding staff.
Mr. Chairman and secretary,
thank you for that. So with 58
rural libraries, a percentage of
that tribal in some cases, um,
you have a current budget of
$30.5 million correct on the 10
million would bump that up to
$40.5 million of that then.
Hoping that in fact this, this
body would approve such a, such
an increase. What would that
provide each of those libraries
in terms of what their dispersal
rate would be.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
members of the committee. I'm
not gonna make the same mistake
twice, so I'm gonna let you like
and a state librarian answer
that question.
Mr. Taran, Representative, thank
you for the question. Um, at the
40.5 million level, the maximum
payout would be 33,000 per
library with the current number
of 58 rural libraries. Thank
you, thank you. And Mr. Chairman
and secretary, I only want to
bring that up as a point to, for
those rural libraries, for those
of us that represent rural parts
of New Mexico, 30 million
$30,000 per year is not much to
operate on when we're talking
about making sure that our
students or our citizens have a
place, a safe space to.
go where it's uh warm in the
winter and cool in the summer to
make sure that they have
internet access and those types
of places where, uh, those in
rural New Mexico don't have the
luxury of having a public um
library in the middle of a town
in an urban center that some of
you that come from those parts
of New Mexico do. And so I want
to make an emphasis on rural
libraries and I think those are
certainly the backbone and the
heart of many of our smaller
communities in this state. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
Secretary. Thank you very much,
uh. Next we're gonna go to
representative Garcia.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just to follow up on uh
representative Dentist's
question. It says right here to
eligible.
Rural libraries, what do you
mean by that? What, what makes
him eligible or not, not
eligible?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, by statute and
eligible library serves the
population of 3000 or under, or
is a nonprofit library in an
unincorporated area.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that answer. I
just wanted to clarify that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much for Garcia.
Uh, I think, uh, so, Madam
Secretary, um there's been a few
requests, I think for follow up,
uh, on information. I know from
back home, uh, Fort Selden and
its interplay with uh Leesburg
State Park is, is very
important, um, and I also want
to stress, appreciate the work
that's being done with the
Taylor family home, really
underline that the Taylor
family, although of course
Uh, Jay Paul and Mary and others
have passed on the Taylor family
and their um friends, uh, and,
and folks who just sort of adore
that family as they do all
across the world, are very, very
much a part of the community.
And so as you continue to work
in your department continues to
work and thank you for the great
staff who are down there.
Really working closely with that
family and finding ways to
continue to honor both that the
past legacy, but also the living
wishes of the family is the
can't stress enough the
importance of that.
OK. Thank you all very much.
We're gonna now move on to
Capitol Outlay.
All right. We're gonna, let's, I
know we're a little bit behind
time if folks can clear out of
the room and take any
conversations outside
uh, Ms Carswell, if you can kick
us off and we'll dive in from
there.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Kelly Carswell, Capital Olay
analyst for LFC. I joined with
my colleague Antonio Ortega, and
we are here to um give you your
capital outlay, quarterly update
for the first quarter of FY 25.
So, um,
But the balances we're reporting
here are for the first quarter
of FY 25, even though the first
sentence says 4th quarter of FY
24, which
Somehow made it through 3 levels
of editing at the LFC and um if
you are paying attention last
time, um, you may notice that
the kind of high-level and some
of the detail numbers here
haven't moved that much from
last quarter, um, but I assure
you the numbers in the first
paragraph on your memo, um, has
been updated. So, um, our total
capital balances at the end of
the first quarter of FI 25 are
an estimated $5.8 billion.
across roughly 5300 active
projects in the state. Um, I did
wanna kind of pause and unpack
this number for you, um, just as
a reminder that, well, this
includes what we call
legislatively authorized
projects which are um
essentially the local and
statewide projects that you fund
through the capital bills in the
legislature each year. Um, it
also includes elements of the
capital program that sort of
occur outside of the legislative
process.
Um, including the Water Trust
Board, Colonia, Tribal
Infrastructure Fund, um, and the
public school Capital Outlet
council. So, um, the legislative
legislatively authorized
projects do make up the biggest
chunk of this overall balance at
about $3.3 billion
the next biggest chunk is, uh,
the overall balance in the
public school capital outlay
fund, which has been at about
$1.6 billion for a few quarters
now.
Uh, the balances and the
severance tax bond earmark
programs um are also quite
significant, um, due to a large
increase in revenues to those
programs over the last couple
years, and those are about, at
about $650 million right now.
And then uh for the last several
years, we've also included, um,
balances on special
appropriations to capital
projects that were made in 2021
and 2022, um, those were sort of
the leading edge of
a big increase in state revenues
as well as when, um, a lot of
federal ARPA funds came to the
state and many of those were
appropriated through the regular
budget for capital purposes to
the tune of almost a billion
dollars, so we've thought those
were important to track, um, and
those balances, uh, now, um,
accounting for both expenditures
and encumbrances are at about
$225 million. And then in the
chart on this first page, you
can essentially see how the
legislator.
of project balances breakdown by
appropriation year and category,
uh, with the biggest chunks of
these balances being in local
and statewide projects.
Um, I also wanna know, you might
see that the higher end number
for 2024 is pretty small, um,
and that's because the balances
do not yet include general
obligation bonds, um,
appropriations from 2024, which
were approved by voters this
month, um, and those bonds will
go out to sale by the Board of
finance the spring probably in
May, so they're not likely to
start to become available till
next summer.
Um, all right. I wanted to just
kind of
Unpack a couple more details for
you, um, on the overall
balances. So in the last quarter
we saw um our estimating that
about 140 million was spent down
on legislatively authorized
projects, uh, which is about 7%
of the previous quarter's
balance and about half the rate
of spending we saw at the end of
the last quarter of FY 24.
Um, in the third bullet under
key points, you can also see the
funding sources for the
legislative balances, um, it's
primarily general fund at this
point, uh, due to the large
general fund appropriations
project appropriations packages
and 23 and 24, at about $1.9
billion about a third of the
balances are in severance tax
bonds, $1.1 billion and then
general obligation bonds, make
up, uh, a relatively small
percentage, only about 6% of the
overall.
Legislative balances. So, um,
I'm gonna transition now, um,
for the rest of this overview
before Antonio gets to the
report to kind of talk about
some important sort of things
going on in the capital
landscape and construction,
landscape in New Mexico right
now, um, that might inform how
you think about capital for the
2025 session.
And we can turn to that now.
Um
And the first one of those
things I wanted to focus on, if
you turn to page 2 of the memo,
um, is essentially just what's
happening in the construction
market in New Mexico right now
and give you an update on that,
um, relative to the last time we
talked about some of these big
trends.
Um, overall, construction
activity in the state is still
extraordinarily high and growing
at significant rates year over
year. Um, we talked about this a
lot, uh, last year in this
committee, um, when we were sort
of trying to dig into the causes
of the really big cost increases
we saw for public projects, um,
last year, kind of on top of all
the COVID related cost increases
we saw. And one of the major
factors that we identify
is essentially that we've kind
of reached a bit of an imbalance
between supply and demand, um,
for construction in the state,
uh, with demand increasing very
significantly and very rapidly
and kind of the market having a
hard time keeping up, um, with
that demand, leading to higher
prices.
Um, so, uh, interestingly, you
know, this is one area of
economic activity in the state
that has increased at a much
faster rate than it has
increased nationally, so, um,
private non-residential and
state and local construction
spending in New Mexico from 2019
to 2023, um, increased by 83%
relative to just a 37% increase
nationally.
Uh, and that growth is
essentially driven by big
increases in 2022 and 2023 in
both public and private
non-residential spending. The
increase was really significant
in 2022 on the private side, um,
and that sector has continued to
increase, though now at a slower
rate, um, then the public sector
increase, which you can see in
chart 2 on this page, um, that
said, private nonresidential.
Spending overall um an absolute
terms is still uh significantly
above the public sector, state
and local spending. Um, alright.
So
Um, one of the reasons that
matters, um, which, you know, I
know we've talked about a lot is
that it might inform sort of how
we think about um one, just
The cost of projects, what it's
going to cost to keep building
things in the state and also
sort of at what level we might
continue to uh infuse new public
funds into the capital program
in New Mexico and what we might
expect in terms of capacity to
spend those funds. So now I'm
gonna kind of transition to
going back to balances and um
there's, there's been kind of a
question that's arisen in this
committee of as these numbers
continue to um
creep up or maybe jump up is a
better word, um, what, what is
that really telling us? And this
has increased your interest in
how much of that money and how
many of these projects are uh
progressing and how many might
be stalled, um, or the chair is
sort of asked us to look into
more, um, whether we can
identify how many kind of
unviable projects, uh, at what
level of funding we have out
there.
So, um, I wanted to first talk
about kind of
Just really big picture what
those grow growing balances
might be telling us. Um,
sometimes there can be a
perception that it means that
money isn't getting spent at
all, and that's not what's
happening. There is money
getting spent, um, but, you
know, we, the, the growing
balances are a function of a
couple different things, you
know, on the one hand, it's
telling you that we're pumping a
lot of extra money, uh, relative
to the past into the capital
program. So we've had larger
appropriations packages.
you know, every time I knew one
of those come online because it
takes a few years to spend this
money. It causes the amount that
that is unspent to go up.
Um, we've also seen a
significant increase in bonding
capacity for the public school,
uh, capital outlay program, um,
and revenues to that fund and
balances and that fund have
increased by a lot over the past
couple years. Um, we also think
it's telling us, um, something
we've known for a long time, but
this is one reflection of it,
um, that we are, uh, still too
frequently funding projects
before they're really ready to
go, um, and this increase in
balances is uh part
a function of that, and then
kind of going back to just the
level of construction activity,
um, and how quickly that has
increased. Um, we also think
it's telling us, at least in
part, um, that we're
Uh, we're near or kind of at
capacity in both the public and
private sector, um, to, uh, take
on the amount of projects, um,
that we've started in the
So, um, going back to the
question though of like how much
of this money might
is really being put to use and
how much of it isn't.
Um, so before I get to kind of
how we've started to answer that
question. I wanted to talk a
little bit about um why it's
difficult to answer that
question. Um, and
Actually, sorry, you know, one
sort of final thing on the
balances, um, before I do that,
is that, you know, with, with
all of those different factors,
I will say that the growth does
seem to reflect one basic
reality, and that is that
there's more money kind of
flowing into the pipeline, um,
at a faster rate than we are
able to spend it, um, at least
on a year to year basis. So, OK,
why is it kind of difficult to
answer this question. Um, one,
we, uh,
on reporting to you all
regularly on balances because
balances are um kind of the
simplest proxy we have for
whether projects are
progressing, um, whether things
are moving along on the projects
that you have appropriated funds
to, uh, that said, you know, we
know the balances are ultimately
an imperfect, uh, total proxy
for whether a project is
successful or in some cases,
even whether it's progressing.
Um, and one of the reasons for
that
is because our current system
for monitoring and tracking
capital projects is not um very
well equipped to tell us exactly
what it means that uh when a
project has not spent money and
to kind of identify projects
that are truly stalled.
And that's essentially because
high balances could still appear
on projects that are that are
progressing for a couple of
reasons. Um, one, the funds
actually getting drawn down on
the local level, at least, rely
on local government spending the
money and then submitting pay
requests to the administrative
agencies that oversee those
appropriations so they can get
reimbursed. Sometimes local
governments don't do that until
the very end, even though
they've spent the money.
Um, and we only know that if
they tell us in the system, and
they don't always do that. Um,
additionally, kind of going back
to the project readiness
problem, um, because for local
projects in particular, we don't
have a consistent approach to um
identifying and kind of vetting
readiness before funding
projects, um, if projects have
not gone through planning and
design before they come to you
asking for money, um, they might
use pretty small
amounts have been appropriation
to complete those processes, and
you might not see uh kind of
larger levels of spending on
individual projects for 3 to 4
years or sometimes longer after
an initial appropriation is
made.
Um, that said, you know, we have
been trying to think about how
we can do a better job of
starting to give you an idea of
how much of this money is tied
up and what we might think of as
stalled projects.
And um the best way I thought to
start was to look at the amount
of money remaining in projects
that are going to expire, um, at
the end of the next, sorry, at
the end of June in 2025. So
essentially projects that are
approaching their reversion
date.
That have spent either 0.
Dollars of their original
appropriation or have spent 10%
or less of the original
appropriation, um, and so what
we're talking about here is
essentially 0 to 10% of spending
on a on a 4-year appropriation
or construction project, so 4
years, at this point, 3.5 years
basically have passed since the
appropriation was made, very
little to no, none of the money
has been spent, um, for two-year
appropriations, which are made
for just.
purchases of vehicles or
equipment, stuff like that. It
would mean that about a year and
a half has passed with um no
spending.
So, um, on chart 3, on page 3 of
the memo, if you're, if you'll
turn to that, um, you can see
what we identified, and I'll
describe it right now. So, um,
we identified about 560 projects
that are set to expire in June
of 2025 that had spent spent 10%
or less of their original
appropriations with unspent
balances on these projects
totaling nearly $190 million.
Um
You know, like I said,
This doesn't always mean that a
project that there's no activity
on the project, but such low
levels of spending are a good
indication that there's at least
delayed projects, if not
something that's stalled
altogether, um, and kind of
going in additional layer into
these 560 projects, we found
that 85% of them with balances
totaling nearly $123 million had
recorded no expenditures. So to
me, that's even a better
indication that there's um very
little progress.
being made on some of those
projects, um, nearly 400 of
these projects were local
appropriations, so these are
discretionary appropriations
made by the House Senate and the
governor.
Um, and those appropriations had
balances totaling $94 million
the next largest category among
these.
Probably possibly stalled
projects, um, were reauthorized
projects. There were 145 of
those with balances totaling $72
million.
Um, DFA did run some additional
numbers looking at encumbrances
on these projects after we did
this analysis.
And they identified about $46
million on these projects that
were encumbered in Cher, um, an
additional 10 million in
obligations were reported into
CPMS, um, those kind of could or
couldn't be valid, we don't know
for sure they self-reported, um,
but
With those numbers, you're still
getting to, you know, somewhere
in the ballpark of $120 million
in projects about to expire, um,
with essentially no activity.
Um, Mr. Chairman, that, that was
really for you, so glad you
walked in in the middle of that.
Um, all right, so I'll, I'll
kind of end before Antonio will
do some highlights of our Mill
and greater report for you, um,
by following up on some of those
numbers, which, um, honestly
surprised me that they were that
high, um, just going into it, I
would have expected them to be
more and, you know, maybe the
$150 million ish range, and um
I, those numbers are quite
significant.
Um, so, so let's kind of
transition to talk a little bit
about opportunities to improve
the uh success of local
projects, which again are the
primary area where we're seeing
projects stall out.
Um, and I'm saying that kind of
in contrast to statewide
projects or appropriations that
you all make to uh state
agencies, um, to improve state
facilities, do projects owned by
the state, you know, do major
water projects, stuff like that.
OK, so, um, one I kind of wanted
to start by talking about the
type of things local
appropriations are most commonly
flowing to. So the largest
overall amounts of these
appropriations we see pretty
regularly are appropriated to 3
categories of projects, um,
roads, bridges, and
transportation, water and
wastewater, uh, and parks and
recreation facilities.
So this tells me a couple of
things. Um, it's indicating
likely that these are major
areas of need for local
communities that they're asking
for additional support in, and
also it's um indicating a desire
among legislators, um, to kind
of on the important stuff, you
know, to, to put funding towards
uh critical infrastructure, um,
roads, wastewater, water, um,
those things all fall into those
kind of must-have, not nice to
have categories when we're
talking about.
The capital assets in our
communities.
Um, however, funding this kind
of critical stuff through
capital outlay is a challenge,
um, for a couple of reasons, and
one of the biggest one you can
see in chat chart 4 is that um
there is such high demand for
capital outlay dollars from
local communities that
legislators are often able to
only contribute a small fraction
of project costs, um, through
capital appropriations and uh to
give you a better picture of
that, you can see that.
Requests versus what you
actually had available. There's
a huge gap. The result is that
we see um piecemeal funding and
in 2024, that meant that almost
half of the projects in that
bill received 50% or less of
their requested funds. Um, you
know, this is one of the things
that can contribute to projects
getting stalled out over
multiple years.
So if you'll turn now to page 4,
you can see in the table on the
top of this page. This is kind
of breaking down, um, with
specific total appropriations
amounts, um, the, the three
major categories, um, of local
capital appropriations.
And, you know, kind of the next
important thing I wanted to
point out about these particular
areas of spending are that all
three are areas in which you all
have created or significantly
boosted special grant programs
that we have for the same types
of projects in the state.
So, um, starting, let's start
with Parks and Rec. um, you all
created a special grant program
for recreation and quality of
life.
Projects, uh, through DFA.
With appropriations in 2022 and
2023, totaling $85 million. You
all have also recently created a
kind of more specialized, um,
recreation grant program related
to infrastructure through the
economic development
departments, outdoor recreation
division, um, for trails.
Uh, for water and wastewater,
um, we have a number of
different um special grant and
loan programs to support these
projects. I know the biggest one
I'll focus on is the water trust
board, um, which has seen a
significant revenue increases,
uh, from severance tax bond
capacity that have allowed it to
support more projects.
Recently, um, and you all have
also funneled additional money
um into that program, um, to
kind of close the gap that
they've had between demand for
funds and even that huge
increase in revenues that
they've had through their
earmark.
Um,
additionally, um, roads and
transportation, um, you all in
2019 created the transportation
project fund, uh, which provides
95% grant support for local
projects, um, you know, all
three of these funds have been
very successful, um, they have
both been very popular with
communities and LSC program
evaluations on many of them have
also showed that they are
successful, um, in spending down
the funds over their regular.
Appropriation period, so kind of
not needing a lot of time
extensions or reauthorizations,
um, and a higher success rate
than capital outlay in projects
actually getting done at the end
of the day, um, not just the
funds being spent.
So, you know, one of the options
that you all might have
available to you, um, to kind of
support, uh, successful
continued investment in these
areas of critical need in the
state is to continue what you've
already started in terms of
building and boosting these
grant programs that we know are
working.
So I wanted to also just kind of
give you a couple examples, um,
of why these grant programs for
these projects, um, might be
more successful, uh, than the
capital outlay process, and you
can see one of the basic reasons
in chart 5 on page 4 of your
memo. Um,
So, uh,
Basically, these programs are
able to provide much higher
levels of support um to
individual projects and those
blue and red bars in this chart
are showing you that gap for the
water trust board, so this is
the average, the blue, the blue
bars are showing you the average
award amount from the water
trust board for individual
projects by year, and the red
bars are showing you the average
capital, uh, outlay
appropriation for those same
type of projects for local
entities. So in 2024, the
difference
was the average capital
appropriation for water and
wastewater was about $450,000.
The average Water Trust Board
award was over $3 million.
Um, for the transportation
project fund, we see not quite
as big of a gap, but still a
significant one.
With the transportation project
awards providing about double,
um, the average award uh than
the capital outlay
appropriations can support.
So, um, I am going to pass it
off to, oh, actually, sorry, one
more thing and then I'll pass it
off to Antonio.
Um, so, you know, another way
that we can support um
Better success among local
projects, uh, is essentially to
do, um, better and more
consistent vetting on the front
end of appropriations. Um, this
is one of the reasons we
implemented an earlier capital
outlay deadline for requesting
funds for local projects this
year, and then you can see on
page 5,
Uh, some of the recommended
betting criteria that this
committee has um made for a long
time to the legislature as a
whole, uh, when considering the
um request that you all receive.
Um, I did wanna be able to bring
you guys some details on, um,
given the earlier deadline for
local requests when you could
actually expect to see those
requests.
And in what format? Um, I
understand that LCS has not
quite made those decisions yet,
um, pending kind of a
resolution, um, among majority
and minority leadership in both
chambers about uh kind of
separate but related issue on um
the process for introducing
projects during session, um, so
I will, uh, make.
Those details known to you as
soon as I know. Um, and now I'll
pass it off to Antonio and he
will take you through our
million.
Thanks Kelly.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, before
diving into the nitty gritty of
the report, I just wanted to
provide a brief overview of what
we found. Uh, so the million and
greater report for FY 251, uh,
provides
Updates on about 712 active
projects with appropriations
totaling 4.3 billion.
Uh, notably 66 blue rated
appropriations have been fully
expended or reverted, well 277
red rated appropriations
indicating no activity, um,
Significant delays or recent
reauthorizations, uh, were
reported in this report. You can
see a summary on page 5 and 6 of
some of the projects that have
been rated blue or red or uh
find a complete list at the back
of the memo.
Uh, now diving into the 1
million and greater quarterly
report, starting on page one,
lines 34, and 10, so 3
appropriations to the Santa Fe
County Magistrate Court building
construction project. Uh, this
is a project that has
experienced delays in the past.
Next on to page 2.
Lines 25 through 32 under the
border authority, you will see
appropriations, experiencing
high balances.
Uh, moving on to page 6 under
the Department of Finance and
Administration lines 111.
You will see the South Central
Colfax County Special Hospital
District, Springer Long-Term
Care construction project, which
is in good standing.
And just below that on line 123,
you will see the University of
New Mexico, Donaana County,
reproductive care clinic.
Uh, our sources tell us that the
programming for this project is
approximately 95% complete and
um with full schematic design
being anticipated to be complete
within the next 6 weeks.
On to page 7.
Line 125, the public schools
food security, equipment and
renovation project. Uh, this is
a $20 million appropriation of
which a majority has been
awarded to 87 grantees, but not
yet spent.
This funding was intended to
support capital enhancements to
facilities, male quality
improvements at public schools.
And on to page 8, line 152, the
Clovis behavioral health
facility construction project
appears in good standing as
well. Uh, this is a regional
facility that 3 counties are
collaborate collaborating on to
build.
Appraisal and negotiations were
completed on the property for
this project and the purchase
and title have been filed with
Curry County.
And finally for DFA on page 9,
line 185, you will see a 2023
appropriation for urgent and
emergency infrastructure
projects statewide, one with
minimal spending and no recent
reporting.
Moving further along within the
report onto page 12, line 255,
you will see the Department of
Information Technology,
broadband world infrastructure
development, statewide project,
uh, and this is one that it's in
its final stages.
And just below that, under the
Department of Transportation,
page 13, line 293 shows a 2022
appropriation with zero
expenditures for the Albuquerque
sawmill, Old Town Street and PED
route improvement project.
Albuquerque often waits to draw
down funds until the end of the
project, which may contribute to
the high balances seen here, but
we don't know for sure unless
the entity provides more
specific reporting on the
activity for this project.
Just below that line 298, the
DOT Dixon to Penasco loop gas
pipeline construction project is
still pending their grant
agreement.
And on page 16, line 350, you
will see the 2022 EDD next
generation Media Academy project
for 20 million and the status of
those funds.
That was um line 350.
Onto page 17, the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department is making good
progress on all of its
appropriations.
The agency has increased its
capacity to implement watershed
projects for wildlife risk
reduction intended to make it
less likely that fires will
damage watersheds, like what
we've seen with recent fires in
Las Vegas and Riodoso.
Uh, you can find details on the
number of projects benefiting
from statewide appropriations in
the project status.
And onto page 23, this section
consists of projects managed by
the General Services Department,
which shows overall good
performance and spending down
funds and keeping projects on
track.
Next on page 25, lines 544
through 549 under the Indian
Affairs Department, you can see
balances on the tribal
infrastructure fund, uh,
specifically, I wanted to point
out the 7 million remaining on
2020 awards, which is about 1/3
of the overall appropriation
package for that year.
Onto page 26, uh, line 562 and
page 27, line 575, you will see
two appropriations for the
Sandia Pueblo early childhood
Development Center, one in good
standing and one that has been
closed.
Uh, with the project reported as
on track for completion this
summer.
And below that line 577, you can
see a high balance remaining on
the 2022 OK Owing storm surface
water control improvements. On
page 30, lines 641 and 650 under
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, you will see project
roll-ups for the water trusts
board and Colonious
Infrastructure Fund and the
status of those projects.
Next on page 31, lines 663 and
664.
You'll see 2 2024 appropriations
to the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology that are
on DFA's authorized but unissued
list for missing questionnaires.
Next on page 32, line 691, the
2022 New Mexico State
University, New Mexico
Department of Agriculture
building, phase 3 renovation
project is in the design phase
with 50% construction documents
under review.
The project was delayed due to
cost increases during and after
the pandemic and required the
supplemental appropriations, but
is now fully.
Next on to page 33, lines 726
and 727, you'll see dam
rehabilitation projects,
administered by the Office of
the State Engineer, uh, dam
rehabilitation has been a
priority for the legislature in
recent years, but the data shows
a pattern of these projects
struggling to get funding on the
ground efficiently.
And finally, on page 36, lines
792 and page 37, line 808.
Uh, you'll see two significant
UNM projects in construction,
the UNM HSC Children's
Psychiatric Center construction
expansion project, and the UNM
Health Sciences, uh, Cancer
Center renovation that are both
in good standing. The
legislature has provided funding
over the past 2 years to fully
complete the cancer center,
which is now occurring.
The children's psychiatric
Center uh has proceeded to
construction without
supplemental appropriations,
unlike many of the other new
construction projects for the
2022 GOB cycle.
And before we stop for
questions, I just wanted to
mention that um I'm looking to
get sponsored reports out by the
end of this week, so just keep
an eye out for those.
Thanks.
Did you buy red ink for mine?
What did you say?
Mr. Chara said lots of ready.
Mr. Chara said lots of re,
Mr. Chara said lots of ready.
Um, let me ask you a question
before we go to 10%, I don't see
as a placeholder, cause I see
some of this stuff in, in my
district and
I'll point them out if I need
to.
No one wants to get the the code
talkers museum more done than
all of us in this room, right,
to honor our veterans.
But when they draw down 10% and
it really doesn't make and move
the needle, they're not getting
anywhere or accomplishing that.
I mean, in
I'll I'll, you can, the Navajo
Nation is infamous for drawing
down a percentage and say, oh,
the project is moving.
I, I think we need to look at
the percentage of drawdown.
And not just say we're drawing
down 10% and you get, there's no
way you can touch our project.
And, and say, we're gonna have
to change that to a different
amount.
And say
You got dry down 30% in the
first year and
30% in the second year and
finished the project and
33.33.
And, and, and do that, but the
percentages sometimes are just a
bluffing of the legislature
saying, oh yeah, my money's
encumbered, right? Cause that's
what we taught them.
You draw down something, it's
encumbered, and you can't touch
it. I think that needs to
change, uh.
And so
We're gonna have a capital
outlay subcommittee. I'm gonna
start shopping around the room
here while we're going through
questions, but we're gonna lay
that out pretty strongly, I
mean, to fix Caval outli this
year in
It, it, it's getting out of
hand.
There's no other way to put it
than.
I mean, it's one of the worst
things that I can do because I
create winners and losers.
And I don't get things
accomplished and they don't get
things accomplished, and we
never succeed and that's not
what the system was set up for.
You mean the.
$500,000 to $13 million sewer
project that's.
That's not the design and intent
of of capital, so.
We'll start with uh
Representative Baca.
The longer you talk, the, the
more you're on the committee.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for this, uh, first of all,
for Mr. Chairman's benefit, um,
the hospital that you asked
about last year in the interim
that he wanted to take the money
for, we're doing the
groundbreaking tomorrow, so,
sir, it's gonna stay in Valencia
County, so, but thank you for
that. That's a, it's a great
investment. Uh, Mr. Chairman and
committee, one of the big issues
that I have.
is our public school capital
outlay.
Uh, Kelly, you did say that as
far as was the amount 1 billion,
can you repeat the amount of
projects that are designated for
school buildings.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, so the actual balance in
the public school capital outlay
fund is currently $1.6 billion.
Some of that is committed to
projects, um, and I, I think the
uncommitted balance uh right now
is somewhere between 500 and 600
million.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you because I, I think
that's an important part is we
do have a, I believe it's the
Senate bill, the number escapes
me now. They talked about the
districts of proportionate
districts share that, that I
believe is going to sunset. Is
that, is that your
understanding?
Um, Mr. Chair represented Bake,
yes, but um the public school
capital outlay oversight task
force.
Um, is, uh, his asked for a bill
to be drafted that would extend.
The local match reduction for
that, um, and, uh, they are
planning to endorse that bill, I
believe, in December.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
again, for just because this is
the appropriating. I sit on the
education as well. And I think
it's important, you know, very,
you know, kind of off and again
just a couple of sentences or
not.
What are some of the major
reasons or obstacles for
districts and why is that $600
million that has been given to
our schools sitting without
activity.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, you know, there are, there
are a lot of districts coming to
the public school Capitol Outlay
Council for projects and uh the
action the legislature took to
reduce the local match, um, did
have the intended effect of
increasing demand for those
funds. Um, you know, this is a
question that um staff from LFC,
LESC and Board of Finance have
started, just started trying to
dig in too much to kind of
identify, um,
Better some of the, the barriers
that you're speaking to, um, but
some of this is just a function
of uh
A very dramatic and quick uh
increase in the revenues that
are flowing into that fund and
sort of an, an uptick in
projects not not quite keeping
pace with that.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, you know, in your
report, you say that that in
order to address and make a dent
into these capital projects, we
need 2000 construction workers.
Um, Mr. Chairman, have, have,
what do we know or are we aware
of
Um, how we're going to come up
with those because right now in
New Mexico, Mr. Chairman, we
have a labor force of 200,000
people that are labor force age
and are not working or
participating in the labor
force, which is causing issues.
So do we know or how can we
Interface through schools,
through training centers,
through investments because this
$6 billion sitting in a bank or
is this not making movement.
It is a problem, and I, I think
that that's
Something that we need to, and
my final question, I know that
it's gonna be probably asked
again.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Cal is the
vetting process, and I, I think
that as we, people becoming
before this legislature or
through this committee.
There has to be a process in
place that will
Basically, help us to make a
decision or determination of how
likely is this project.
Going to reach full completion.
And I think that's
That's an important part of this
because these dollars, these
taxpayer dollars are out there,
and they're looking at the uh
activities. These are for
Community centers, these are for
schools. These are for quality
of life types of things that are
not moving on that. So I really
am interested in a process of
not only oversight but of
vetting to make sure that we are
making some movement.
On the series of capital because
that's, that's just a huge
In my opinion, uh,
Injustice, and it's a total
Uh, was, so thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Welcome to the
Capitol Committee.
Sitting here Rodriguez thank you
Mr. Chairman. I'll be really
fast. I know we're getting short
of time here and close to lunch.
Thank you, Kelly and Antonio for
your work, just quickly on
number on page 4, the recovery
center, you know, that's been my
big project for many years now,
um, and ejected quite a few
millions of dollars in there.
Um, I noticed that on page 4,
it's in red, the marker is red,
but yet they execute a grant
agreement.
It says on there, so why is it
red? Wouldn't that have moved to
green, if it's moving ahead.
I just want to make sure we
don't go, um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, so you know, we have,
we have, we try to follow kind
of like consistent criteria for
how we rate the projects and so
for that one in particular, um,
you know, it would be, it would
be linked to the date of the
original appropriation relative
to the amount of progress the
project has made to date. I see,
so, OK, thank you. So it doesn't
mean that.
Because it's red, it's gonna be
cut off. um soon or anything
like that. It has to, you you'll
follow the progress. I won't be
here next year to, to follow it.
So I want to make sure it's
somehow it's followed as it
progresses, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Rodriguez, um, we as
staff in trying to use these
color codes to give you guys
sort of a quick and dirty sense
of where projects are at are not
intending to make.
specific judgment calls on
whether you should like pull
funds for a project or not, um,
they're merely intended to be a
starting point, um, for you all
to understand, uh,
What sort of progress projects
you've made appropriations to
are making and a starting point
of specific projects you might
be concerned with, um, for you
to ask more questions. I
appreciate that. So being a, a
grant agreement being already
executed, uh, means that
they're, they're somewhere,
they're actually come a long way
there, and it's up to
individuals as I always have
followed as, you know, on my
capital outlay allocations, but
because I'm not gonna be here, I
just wondered if that would put
it in jeopardy.
But unless they don't follow
through like any other project,
it would be in jeopardy. Thank
you so much. Appreciate it.
That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm always impressed at your
ability to keep numbers and
inside your head and just spit
them out when you're asked the
question. I may test them a
little bit though.
Uh, of the, of the dollars.
That are set for possible
reversion. How many of them
Our general fund dollars.
And how many of them are
severance tax.
dollars and how
How would they differ in, in the
effect of their reversion. How,
how would that, how would that
uh the reversion of severance
tax dollars would be different.
From the
version of Dollar out of the
General Fund.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, I don't have those
numbers off the top of my head,
but I can calculate them quickly
after this for you. Um, it is a
mix of severance tax bonds, and
general fund. Um, although,
My hypothesis is gonna be that
there's probably a larger
absolute amount in severance tax
bonds just cause the original
appropriations were
That are likely to be larger or
in a year where we didn't
appropriate much general fund.
So the difference in the
reversions would be um general
fund reversions would go back to
the general fund, severance tax
bond reversions revert to the
severance tax bonding fund, um,
and then, uh, eventually likely
flow to the um permanent fund.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Welcome to the Kali.
Representative Vincent, you're
next.
My question was answered. Thank
you.
Representativeente.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Kelly. Thank you, Antonio
for your presentation. Uh, I've
learned from both Senator
Rodriguez and Senator Campos,
who are most senior legislators
in this body still above this
process and they've told me that
they've been working for decades
and trying to improve this
process and so, uh, as they, as
they, uh, one of these, uh,
they, they leave us with the
task of still yet trying to
improve what's going on here. I
agree with you, uh, Mr.
Chairman, in regards to how can
we improve the expended process
in regards to
30% year 1, 30% year 2, 30% year
3, and perhaps 10% year 4 just
to get these things moving and
it's gonna take that tough love,
unfortunately, I think in
regards to, we're going to stop
reauthorizing stuff and or we're
just gonna have to pull back on
the dollars that aren't being
spended in regards to how we
have to teach a lesson, I think,
and, and I hate to say it in
that way only because when you
look at this list and, and the
red progress ratings that are on
this list, that's almost always
tribes and small communities.
that don't have the capacity to
to to really get these things in
order and, and, and if, if
that's the case, then we're
gonna make winners and losers in
many cases, the winners often
are will always be the
Albuquerques, the Santa Fe, Las
Cruces of New Mexico when I
don't.
And and then and I, and I, and I
say this openly and candidly in
regards to doing this type of
work is that I, I don't want to
see that because I represent a
large portion of, of rural New
Mexico and tribal New Mexico,
and I want to make sure that we
have an equal playing field when
we're talking about capitally.
So as you move through this
process, I wanna again thank you
too for your work that you've
done and, and always being able
to look at numbers openly and
then providing these progress
reports where you're keeping
numbers in order, uh, because
without YouTube and without your
your work, uh, we'd be, um,
I don't know where we would be,
but thank you again. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, I, I, I agree, I
mean, and, and I'll give you the
perfect example, but it's the
nature of the Navajo Nation, a
simple build a fence project,
right?
simple to complete.
4 years later we still can't
complete, just build the fence.
And and it, the people need it.
People want help cause they're
storing firewood, they're
storing coal, they don't wanna
just.
swept out of there compound and
just simple things, but
sometimes our hands are tied
with other governments, so same
way with local governments,
Gallup reverted $8 million cause
they couldn't buy pipe for a
sewer line.
I mean, that's a simple process.
And sometimes no matter how
simple it is, it just
bureaucratic government can mess
up a lot of things, um.
Think about
that center Gallegos.
There he goes, I'm sorry.
Then you send Gonzalez. Thank
you, Mr. Cha. Thank you both for
the information. Uh, I've been
on school board for over 22
years, and I also do
construction in my day job, uh,
but I had a question on when
they report these balances? Is
it monthly?
Report and is there any
documentation that follows it.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gallegos,
um, the local entities report on
a quarterly basis and um we pull
our data from what CPMS, which
is the capital project
monitoring System and it
accounts for um expenditures as
reported and share, you know,
like, which are what we would
consider definitely real. It's
the state's reporting system,
you know, the state has cut a
check that the local government,
if it's showing an expenditure
and share.
Um, but local entities can also
report, self-report into CPMS,
um, what they've already spent
that maybe they haven't been
reimbursed or um by the state
yet and we do account for that
in the balances, so, um, we
essentially like,
Take their word for it, um.
When we're doing this report.
Thank you for that, Miss Elliot,
this morning I was looking for
you cause, uh, Lovington
schools.
At $11 million as through
capital outlay through their
legs to grow, and so I brought
that packet up to see if they
had any other opportunities, but
I was wondering if they can
self-report delays, for
instance, in Eunice, were built
in gymnasium.
Uh, someone had laid a gas line.
Myself, when I worked for the
gascon in New Mexico and it was
in the way it was gonna take 2
months to have it moved, which
was going to stop the process.
Uh, luckily because I'm in the
legislature all the gas company
and they moved it within a week.
But the original timeline was 2
months, and I don't know if a
delay like that ever surfaces.
Now these are long term delays
on the books, but I'm just
wondering if they can highlight,
uh, something that's out beyond
their, um,
Opportunities to to resolve.
Um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Gallegos, yes, so in the
project status column, um,
there's essentially a field in
the reporting system where they
type in kind of qualitative
updates like your um pointing
to and we and hopefully you
also um can encourage local
entities to do that. It can be
pretty simple, you know, like
one sentence, um, and then, you
know, we account for that when
we're giving the projects, these
ratings, and
For something like that, you
know, we would probably flag it
as like yellow if it's a
significant delay, which going
to Senator Rodriguez's question
and the point I was trying to
make there, you know, like from
the staff perspective, we don't
do that to like ding them or to
be punitive. It's to let you all
know there's an issue, um, and
you know, you can do with that
information what you will.
Well, thank you for that, uh,
and, and it's a blessing to be
here in the legislature, but
there's some entities won't have
that direct connect, but uh
Finally enclosing his chair in
alley uh Sen Woods gave me your
name this morning and told me
you need to be my new best
friend. Thank you for what you
do.
Let's go.
I'm sorry, I didn't hear that,
but
I thought I was his best friend.
How does that work?
Senator Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Antonio, I need to
ask you that because Senator
Wood said this, no, I'm just
kidding.
Uh, you mentioned, uh, a couple
of projects and one is that
Dixon pipeline.
And what else was going to ask
you is how do you weigh in?
On the permits.
Because uh right now like I have
an email of all the permits that
are being.
In in force, you know, for this
project. So it doesn't mean that
they're not working or nothing
has been done, you know, there's
a lot of that has been done.
And then with uh that part
because it has two parts to that
project.
In one of them.
You're in the process
of Pueblo decided to also go
with fiber at the same time.
So that has time wise, you know,
that has been uh.
Takes more to to do that both,
you know, that well, the
original intent was.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
um, certainly, and, you know,
that's kind of what I was trying
to get at when I was introducing
sort of.
How we decided to try to start
to identify projects that might
be stalled as it is complicated,
you know, expenditures don't
always perfectly correlate with
whether a project is making
progress or not, and it's also
certainly true that different
types of projects take longer to
um spend money than others and
uh.
Things that I, I think this
project probably involves like
rights of way and things like
that, um, and I know it had some
administrative complications
beginning to, um, so.
Yes, I mean, what you're saying
is is true.
Uh, the other part that I want
to mention and, you know, um,
I think that for my part and uh.
And at one time I served for
quite a few years as chairman of
Capital Ali on the House side
and, you know, seeing
everything.
But, uh, and I won't change my
mind for anything on this is I
do represent some places with
larger population, but also some
very rural areas.
And I have seen some really,
really good projects for
$25,000.
You know, and I can show you and
I can take anyone that wants to
go there, that improved the
water irrigation and improve the
efficiency, and all it took was
that they didn't need 100,000,
they just 25 did it. So I think
to rule out uh, you know, or to
put a limit that nothing under a
certain amount, we're really
hurting a lot of the very small
communities, and uh I think we
really have to keep that in
mind, and I would not support,
you know, um.
With that part of uh making a
with a limit part.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, just a
real quick response to that. Um,
yes, I, you know, it can
definitely be true that
sometimes a small amount is
what's needed, and I think what
that speaks to more is the need
for a more kind of consistent
vetting process across the
legislature as a whole, you
know, I mean, some of you are
very good at doing this already.
um, and not everyone necessarily
has the knowledge or experience
or in some cases maybe just the
time um to know.
With every request that comes to
them. So if we can build a
little bit more of a structure
and foundation for you all to
have that sort of information at
your fingertips when you're
making appropriations decisions,
$1000 appropriation in this case
is, you know, good, and in some
other cases, um, it is not
enough and my, uh, ultimately
lead to spending not occurring
for quite some time.
You know,
and terminal
all along, and with this, and I
don't know if there's any
member, I don't think there's
any member here that
Recall this and actually uh the
process was actually designed by
the, the late Ben Duhan speaker
Duhan.
And in the house outside, what
it was is you would have a
hearing.
And then within that, you know,
he would have the different
agencies right there at the
meeting. So like uh 75% of the
technical assistance was really
right there.
You know, and it really helped,
you know, there was no, uh, like
you're saying on the wedding or.
Especially the very small rural
areas that needed a.
A lot of the assistants, and it
worked for years and years, and
then as House members.
You know, they, because it was
very time consuming.
Met on the other part, you know,
in the long run need help
because you know more projects
would move.
You know, through that part and
it worked for many years.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
this is more of a comment than
a, than a question. I'm glad
you're trying to fix the
problem, Mr. Mr. Chairman, but
we need to make sure that this
problem gets fixed for
everybody, you know, we have
representation and Albuquerque
in the metro areas that they
represent 6 city blocks. I, I
have 6 counties that I
represent, and we have the same
amount of funding that they do.
And you know, I have 10
chapters, 3 pueblos.
Uh
rantable I mean I got
a big, big district and my money
goes very, very, it didn't go
out anywhere. So the problem
we're having here, Mr. Sherman,
is
All this money is going to
revert back to the state because
they just don't have enough
money.
And when you do fix it, I hope
you keep in mind our room in
Mexico, not just South City and
and uh.
Las Cruces just there's a big
issue, Mr. Chairman, and you
know, I'm not gonna be here next
year, and I've been here for 9
years now, and the problem
existed 9 years ago.
And it hasn't gotten any better,
and I'm glad you brought it up
that you're gonna try and fix
it, but we need to make sure,
Mr. Chairman, that we fixed it
for everybody, not just
Albuquerque Las Cruces in Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well our intent was never just
to fix it for the big cities,
right? That I I represent the
same amount. It's
the Pueblos, right?
And and Zuni's all green on this
list.
It's a lot of the pueblos are
green on this list and in some
of them are red and that nation
red cities and
But we're gonna have to figure
out if you come and you request
money from us for a project.
You want plan money?
Like, cause you're not gonna do
plan design, build, construct,
furnish, and equip.
You're gonna get plenty of money
and then you're gonna get
construction money later on
cause you don't have a viable
plan.
And I could pick a lot of
projects out here.
I mean, there's 2 public safety
buildings on the Navajo Nation
that do not have any plan of
staffing anything that that once
we build these public safety
buildings that they're gonna be
police and judges and stuff in
in the building, and I can only
speak from my knowledge of what
I know. I don't know about
anybody else's district.
But the, the plan is not there
to
To furnish the buildings to have
the staff there to have the
police there.
Until we have a furl of
full plan.
That it needs to be different.
Some of these small numbers may
just need to be grants.
If you're gonna go fix a head
gate on the secia or an
irrigation ditch. Just give up.
put a grant in and give them the
$50,000 grant and not go through
the capital process.
And and so,
It's, it's got to change at some
point.
I, I, I think some of this stuff
I needs to be, let's pick a few
and audit them, Kelly.
And see if they're really
telling us to the truth that
they've got the 10%.
Spent.
Right.
And say, OK, we want to see the
invoices and we want to see
this, and if they don't have it,
then they don't have the money
expended.
And are the, is the money spent
for the intended purpose of the
project, and you're not just
saying, well, I'm gonna re off
that later on for this. I'm
gonna change my design later,
later on.
But we got to figure out.
He got $6 billion.06 times 5 and
give me roughly $350 billion
sitting in the bank.
Right?
$350 billion we spent roughly.
That legislative capital, Kelly,
roughly.
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't think
Charles will let me do that,
but.
How much do we spend on, on, on
legislative capital.
Statewide in total importance
about last year was about 5
we're going to exclude the
governor.
But I mean, there's 3.
There's $350 million that you
could have reoccurring every
single year without bonding and
going into your general cash
fund I mean.
Uh
I don't know this
They may behead me at the at the
end of the day, but I mean,
we're gonna fix it for everyone,
but if you're a small, small
district, the soil conservation
district. Maybe it's a, it's a
completely different system than
than what you, what you need,
think you need for capital.
Maybe that's, we just, you got
to change, right? And, and, and
it has to happen and so it's
gonna be, have to be completely
different, but in order to audit
some of these.
I mean, I, I can tell you my
chapter houses struggle with the
Navajo Nation and they go out
there every single day and
they'll pile them on a desk, and
no matter how many times you
meet with them, that pile won't
move for.
A year.
And, and that's just the
struggle that I go through, I
mean, you, you give money to
cities and counties and some of
them use it correctly and some
of them bluff us and don't use
it correctly.
Or
Or they build buildings and then
they didn't build them in the
right area and, and we're
looking at the, what's a
forensic building in in Las
Cruces
forensics hospital, which is a
builder at risk.
And the builder at risk.
Came in and said 120 million,
now they're asking for another
120 million for a hospital bed
that we probably can't staff.
Like the veteran center in Tier
C. It was put in the wrong
location, because we can't staff
it.
And so is that really a good
vision for the legislature to
spend money when we can't
provide services to veterans
because we can't get the staff
to move to TRC to do that. We
got to pull them in or we're
gonna sit with a 100 or 69
banquet bed in, in Las Vegas,
New Mexico, and we can't stop.
I mean, at the end of the day,
we want these projects to be
successful, and, but at the end
of the day, we, we got to figure
it out and
That's why builder at risk
projects are doubling and
tripling in costs, cause they're
building their, their costs in.
Zuni
I don't know anybody in here
that has a 1500 square foot
house, but if you move to Zuni,
you'll have one worth a million
dollars.
A million dollars for 1500
square foot home.
It's almost just
That's fraud and that that's.
It should be illegal.
And, and PSCOC approved that
project.
And and what what's gonna happen
when Representative Lenty needs
teachers at his place, and
there's no money for teachers
because we spend a million
dollars at home.
It, it's a fairness, but.
Let him behead me over this or
let him.
Take me out or whatever. I mean,
I got other things I can do.
But I mean, at, at some point,
somebody has to take in
leadership and say no more,
right? And I think the
legislatures completely
tired of it.
I mean, it's, like I said, it's,
it's the worst thing I'd do is
cause I create winners and
losers.
And
You know, this person gets a
project and that one doesn't.
And, and everybody deserves what
they need.
And they, the exact in my
district is just as guilty.
You know, give $3 million for um
early childhood center, and they
need 7.
And
So they're just as guilty as we
are, if we don't take leadership
in this in the legislature to
fix the $6 billion prom coming
on $7 billion if we do the same
amount this year.
I mean,
He's gonna quit.
The gray haired and
The young man next to him is, is
gonna say I can't do without
Kelly and, and he's gonna quit
and, and he's gonna get
frustrated and leave and
Wesley's sitting back there and
we're gonna look at Wesley like.
How much do we need to pay you
to work for the legislature,
Wesley.
And, and so, but I mean that.
I mean, when we do that, we're,
we're gonna need some strong
ideas.
In the legislature.
And I'm willing to tell you
whatever we come my way, I'm not
gonna improve. I voted against
Rios for the last couple of
years, but it, it, it's, it's
time to set a tone like.
Help us, help you,
i projects that you can complete
that we can
as political people go put
shovels in the ground and
represented Baus doing the
groundbreaking tomorrow.
After about 10 years.
0 20 years. So twenty-year
project and, and that's ARPA
money, I think that's in there.
And so, I mean, there's gotta be
a better way. I mean, and we're,
and let me tell you, so tomorrow
morning I'm gonna try to get
this set up so the committee.
There's a guy that presented on
the workforce pool to us last
week at a at a forum, and it's,
it's not that we don't have
people that don't want to work.
We don't have enough people that
want to work.
People are aging out like me, I
get gray hair, but I do
highlights
but we're, we're grain and we're
in a declining population.
And the workforce is not there
that we raised in Senator Wood's
day and the picture I gave him
on the farm, they created the
workforce, and they kept it
there, and the workforce is not
there and it's declining.
And so, we're not gonna solve
this workforce issue because the
population is aging out or
doesn't want to go into digging
ditches for footings and
construction and so
We're gonna try to get that guy
on the phone so we can go over
some.
Because it's a workforce issue
that we need to talk about in
every agency.
And so
We represent a small and I
chatted on the side and so this
subcommittee for Capital.
Uh
Representative Linte since she
gonna carry capital, uh,
representative Dixon,
represented Baucus, and she's
going to groundbreaking.
And representing Chatfield.
We're gonna put you guys on that
subcommittee, we'll figure out
time frames and per diems to
make it work and figure out on
our site center compost is not
here, sender Shindo, uh, Senator
Woods, and Senator Gallegos.
On capital
And so
Um, we'll figure out time frames
and where we're gonna meet. One
thing, Kelly, could you look for
me and I asked Charles, the NMFA
has a model for a grant dealer.
Grants for design, grants for.
Studies
And, and we look that up and
maybe get back to me that.
Um, Mr. Chery yes, I can give
you some bullets on that.
Um, can I make this?
Two quick points to respond to
your comments and some of other
folks' comments. Um, so I think,
you know,
This committee has long talked
about kind of implementing more
consistent vetting of projects
and putting some boundaries, um,
around the capital
appropriations process to
support successive projects, you
know, that's really not about
like not supporting communities.
It's about trying to make sure
the projects are more
successful, um, at the same
time, you all have also put
things in place recently that,
um, provide an
opportunity to give both you and
executive agencies more tools to
kind of build out and provide a
better support network to
communities that might need it,
um, that can help facilitate
that. So I think, you know, it's
important to keep in mind that
those two things go hand in
hand, and I think you all have
been trying to kind of take up
both and approach that, you
know, in, in some cases it might
to Representative Blunte's point
and to your points like involve
a little bit of tough love, but
at
At the same time you're trying
to provide resources, um, so
that people can meet those
standards and, you know,
ultimately the goal at the end
of the day is to get these
dollars on the ground and to get
the things done in your
communities that um that your
constituents need and would
benefit from.
But the governor didn't the the
exec came out with a letter, and
I can't remember off the top of
my head, she had 3 or 4 things,
get ready, Wesley. 3 or 4 things
that she said, If you're gonna
do capital outlay, these are the
3 or 4 things that I want,
right?
Can you tell us what they are?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, um,
so the first one is uh top 3 on
your ICIP, so the project should
be in in your top 3 on your
ITIP, um, the second one was,
um, fully funding a, a phase or,
or portion of the project that
can be completed. Um, so again,
it goes back to what we've been,
what you all have been talking
about so far, um, another one is
$100,000 or more um to fund
projects that are that are
$100,000 I know that this kind
of goes against.
what Senator Gonzalez was
saying, but I think we're just
trying to make sure that we're
fully funding projects, so
that's why we, we, we had that,
um, that limit. Um, and I don't
have the 4th 1 on the top of my
head, but um there was one other
one as well. But I mean she's
laid out guidelines for her cap
outlay and in ours may be a
little more stringent and she'll
have to abide by ours if she
wants her cut.
That might be a message you need
to deliver back
but I mean she's just as guilty
as we are and I gave you an
example of just being just as
guilty and just as wrong.
Um, and not guilty, but I mean,
just trying to do the right
thing, but it doesn't work out
in underfunding. And Mr. Chair,
just, just to add real quick, I
think, you know, um, any
projects, I know you've been
talking about winners and
losers, and I think, um, if you
do experience that, you do have
losers out of this process
because they don't, they're not
fully funded, right? Um, have
them contact our office. We're
still gonna try to find ways to
fully fund these projects for
them. Um, I know obviously
getting capital year after year
after year, um, doesn't quite do
it, but there are other funding
sources out there through other
federal funds, other state
funds.
And we might be able to help
them with.
What's the 4th 1, Charles?
The 4th item in the governor's
criteria was commitment from the
locals to put their own money,
skin in the game.
And the 5th 1 is Senator
Rodriguez.
I recall seeing on there on the
match. It's not a required, it's
May, uh, if I remember
correctly, so always look for
words like that because it
doesn't always work, you know,
11 size doesn't fit all
situation, so just wanted to
bring that up. Thank you. And
may I interject now that I have
a little bit of time here, is
that, you know, situations like
what Senator Gonzalez brought up
with respect to 25,000, for
example.
Um, uh, in the allocation, you
know, there are situations, for
example, in mind, um, a building
at the waterboard building for a
domestic water association, um,
water board thing here in
Aguria, mutual domestic. They
just need a 25,000 for example,
for the governor to to know this
for, for their building. It's a
small little building. They're
all volunteer members, OK? And
so I had to allocate 50. I went
against the 100,000 which was
supposed to be, and I said, no,
50 at minimum, but
They don't need 50, they just
need 25,000, but I didn't want
it to get veto, so I put in the
entire amount and then they use
the 25,000 and then here we come
with what Senator Munoz, our
chair, says, and you know, he
don't like Rios, so I don't
think neither one of us do, but
what happened there? The
balance, they want to lose the
balance because they could use
it, you know, they always need
money there in Awaria, so they,
we reauthorized the difference.
So without a reauthorization
bill, that money would have been
lost too, and they did use it
for good.
purpose. So I just wanted to, to
bring that up when you have the
veto pen, please take a look at
those things. Thank you.
Senator Gonzalez
for thank you uh Mr. Chairman,
for the, the allowing for the
2nd time.
I, I think something that's
important too.
is to understand the history
that has developed over kept
Waley.
And uh for example, you know,
when I came in,
I would receive like 4 or 5
requests that has changed to
like 140.
I mean, the, the floodgates are
open.
And then it was very fascinating
to me.
That I would have 40-50
requests.
And my colleague Rick Mira would
get 0.
So he was able to put his entire
funding to where he wanted.
And uh Larry La Niero on the
same thing.
You know, so that's just the
difference of the state and the
difference of the areas that we
represent.
You know, so, again, you know,
it's
We're a citizen's legislature
and we're supposed to represent
every part of the state, you
know, not just to.
going to one area or how it
works, but we have to keep that
in mind and we have to respect
that too, and also in uh working
with our tribes, you know, it's
very important.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you. Anything else you
want to add Wesley for me?
Um, just real quick, Mr. Chair,
I think, you know, this with the
new creation of this
infrastructure division, um, you
know, we, we do agree that we
need to get these projects
moving and so our goal is going
to be to try to find projects
that are out there that aren't
moving, um, to help them get
moving, um, as well as to make
sure that we are funding good
projects in the future, so you
have our commitment from our
division that we're going to be
working with you to get all that
done. Um, and I think the first
piece of it is going to start
with looking at projects that
are out there that need more
funding, and so we're going to
do that first.
and then once this next ICIP
cycle hits, um, we're going to
be doing an active approach and
um reviewing those ICIPs and
making sure that um they do have
plans design already, you know,
accounted for and if they don't,
making sure that that's
identified um whenever you all
get your list. So we're gonna
try to do all that as well as
build new systems, new reporting
systems so that we can get
better reports on this as well.
And, and, and on your time frame
that for projects that need more
money.
What time frame do you think
you're looking at to, to do
that? Are you looking at
statewide or local governments
first or how you would, I mean,
I, I don't know how many staff I
know that you and
The young lady there maybe only
stuff over there.
Mr. Chair, I think the piece is
um what we'll do right away is
take the install project list
that Cali has created and try to
get that out there to the
agencies to find out what's
going on with those projects,
um, obviously some of the
responses might be, well, we
need more time and, and we know
that, that, that would be real
and we understand, um, but we'll
try to figure out if that's
really what it is or if it's
other, other things, and then
we'll take um some of the other
ones um through the CPMS report
and start trying to find out um
which projects do need more
funding and and contact them and
find ways.
To give them more funding.
Yeah, and, but how are you gonna
cap that?
If they extend their project
cost in 2023, a million, and you
say, do you need more funding,
they're gonna say, oh yeah, we
need 2 million, well that.
Cost probably didn't double. I
mean, it's the, it's the model
of the Las Vegas hospital.
And so how you control costs at
the same time, well, welcome to
the capital outlay Committee,
Wesley, I guess we'll send the
email to Wayne and say that
You and your staff are now.
And being inclusion of of how to
figure this out.
Mr. Chair, um, you know, part of
the idea, um, with the
infrastructure division, I would
say combined with, you know,
some kind of better vetting and
provision of information to you
all on your requests is that we
could sort of be tackling this
on both ends, like both, there
would be more information and
opportunity for the legislature
before appropriations are made
to identify projects that have a
funding gap that you can
actually capably fill with the
amount of.
capital you have available to
you. And then on the back end,
we would also have resources
through the infrastructure
division when there are projects
after that process that are
still lacking to have more
assistance and being able to
identify all the possible
sources out there to complete
funding for those projects and
help local entities, um, in
securing that funding. We'll
figure it out, but maybe Wesley
is the first stop before they
can apply for capital.
So, uh, no, I'm, I'm serious
cause I mean that would put the
pieces of the puzzle together,
that's just a quick thinking so
thank you guys for your time.
Thank you for your report,
Kelly. Uh make sure you don't
buy him any red ink.
The capital word journalists go
to lunch for an hour and come
back at
140, 1140.
It
