We're OK.
Yeah. Or maybe
All right. Well, let's get
started. Then. First item today
is the our, uh, primer our 101
class on Medicaid. And we have,
uh, Eric Chenier and, uh, Ruby
Esquibel. We're gonna take us
through it and you have a
handout. I believe everybody has
it.
So we'll follow through with
that. Go ahead. All right, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. Uh so I just wanted
to kind of start off. I don't
know if I'm being too loud
there. I don't know. Um
We were asked to come and
present this 101.
Because I know some members on
this committee are
Very experienced with with, uh,
Medicaid and could probably
teach me a thing or two us a
thing or two. But But I also
know that some members are
pretty new at this. And so I
think, um
The point of this is to try to
get everybody kind of on the
same page. Um, and also to look
at this. You know, I, I think,
um, you get a lot of information
from your
Constituents, um, maybe from the
agencies, uh, different places,
and I think this kind of just
helps Look at this from the
legislative perspective, um and
kind of also kind of from the
lfc perspective and the the
financial perspective, And so
that's that's sort of why, uh,
we were wanting to do this today
and and come and talk to you
guys.
So just moving on to the the
second slide Page two. We have
just as an overview. We're gonna
go over Medicaid. Of course,
it's a joint state and health,
uh, care program with certain
national standards.
Sorry.
And latitude for state policy
differences through Medicaid
waivers.
In New Mexico. Medicaid covers
low income individuals,
including elderly, disabled
families, Children, pregnant
women and very low income adults
with without Children.
So we're gonna go over some of
the cost drivers and trends, uh,
within Medicaid.
Uh, some of the major costs.
Um
Barriers to care and behavioral
health services and spending.
And the behavioral health will
do that, Uh, a little bit later.
Yeah.
Sorry.
So some key concepts that I
wanted to just a second E. Um,
it it is being it's in process
of being posted to the website,
and then we'll have it up for
everybody to look at. But I
think Go ahead OK, because in
process could be
Two minutes or an hour. Thank
you.
All right, Mr Chairman members.
And I just wanted to mention
Going up, moving on to page
three.
And I. I failed to put it on
this slide, but everybody should
know and and realize that
HHC A is going through the
transition right now. Right? So
we have the health care
authority. Uh, formally, the
human Services Department. Um,
they're gonna do their full
rebranding. I believe on July
1st and that, you know, we
talked about this a little bit
yesterday. But now the health
care authority will include all
the programs that HSD used to
have, plus the state Health
benefits program from the
General Services Department.
And DDS D.
And, um
The division of health
improvement from, uh, the
Department of Health. And so
it's we're bringing in, uh, more
divisions from, um other state
agencies and I. I think some of
the push around that is to kind
of try and start looking at
health care from a a more
Um, global standpoint, as far as
the way we purchase it, and that
sort of thing, so that's kind of
where that's coming from. So
some of the key Medicaid
concepts um
Number one managed care
organizations. Those are the
those are the organizations that
are states. Um, Medicaid program
pays to manage most of the
population's health, which is
about around 900,000 people
right now that are enrolled in
Medicaid.
To manage the health of, uh all
of those enrollees. We pay them
a per member per month and I'll
go into that, Um
A little bit more in detail. Um
To do provide all the services,
behavioral, health and physical
health services.
Um in New Mexico or managed
care.
Uh, program.
Is known as Centennial Care.
And on July 1st again. We're
gonna be trans. We're gonna be,
um, transitioning to
Uh, turquoise care, which is a
new, um
It's basically taking a lot of
the stuff that we had under, Uh,
Centennial care, which was our
old MC O program, the one that
we're currently under and adding
some new things to that program,
and I'll talk about that a
little bit in a minute. Also
We've also got a group of people
under fee for service. Um,
that's primarily, uh, Indian
health service patients. Um, and
those actually get matched
through Medicaid or through the
federal government at 100% of,
um, their costs, And so there's
there's that, um
And then state plan and, uh, the
waivers, so each state
essentially
Goes to Medicaid and says, uh,
We wanna, you know, try
different things outside of a
regular Medicaid program, and
we're gonna try and do
experimental things. And you
know, whatever, outside of
regular Medicaid, they ask for
permission to do that, and they
come up with a state plan. Um,
they put forward that plan.
Medicaid, the federal government
either approves that or not,
they do negotiations between the
state and the federal
government. As to whether or not
we're allowed to pay for certain
services, different things like
that, and
Eventually we end up with a
state plan a state Medicaid
plan, and, um
That is also a waiver. The state
waiver so we've got our our big
1115 waiver, which is these are
terms that you're going to hear
quite a bit when you're talking
about Medicaid. So you've got
your 1115 waiver section 1115.
That's just a federal law. Um
and that's our centennial care.
It will be moving to turquoise
care soon.
We've got our 1915 C waivers,
which are are developmental
disability, um, waiver or
medically fragile waiver Army
via waiver and our supports
waivers are all under 1915 C.
Moving on to Page four.
Wanted to talk a little bit
about the federal medical
Assistance Percentage. That's
your F map.
So this is the, um We talked
about this a little bit
yesterday. Uh, when we were
going through the budget, this
is
The rate at which the federal
government matches every state
dollar.
For, um
For Medicaid, right? And so
If you look at this table here
on the right hand side, you'll
see that, um
What I've done is I've put
together different cohorts and
looking at the match rate for
those different cohorts, um,
that the federal government is
gonna provide in 2025 and so
For your traditional base
population.
Under, uh, 100% of the federal
poverty level. You get a match
rate of 71.68%, and that's
roughly so out of the 900,000
people in Medicaid. That's
roughly about 600,000 people. Um
and so that's
That's your base population. We
get that, uh, 71.68% match from
the federal government.
Uh, you've got your adult
expansion population so after
the affordable care act was
passed back in what was that
2009 2010.
The federal government allowed
us to expand. Uh
Medicaid to people that have
that are at the 138% level of,
um at the federal poverty level.
And so they match us there at
90%. So we get a pretty good
match. Uh, for those enrollees
in Medicaid.
And that's roughly around
300,000 people.
And then I'm I'm gonna kind of
skip down and so some of these
some of these, uh, population
numbers kind of overlap a little
bit, too. But, um
So as far as all of your
Children in Medicaid, there's
about 300,000 in Medicaid. Um
they all get matched at the
80.18% rate, and then you have
your pregnancy services, which
is, um, up to 250% of the
federal poverty level.
But they are, uh
Um it's kind of a curtailed
services. They don't get
everything out of the out of, um
they don't get all of the
services. It's uh
Smaller amount of services
there.
And then of course you get you.
You have your IHS patients, and
those are the ones that come
under the fee for service, which
I was talking about a second
ago and we get the 100% match
rate from the federal
government. And then, um
One thing I wanted to mention,
and I talked about this a little
bit yesterday, too.
We had when I was going through
the high level we had, uh
An item on there. That was for I
think it was $62 million, and
that was for the changed, Um F
map rate right so that F map
changed by 0.9% Point Point, 9
1%. It went down and that cost
us about $62 Million and so and
that changes every year based on
how well the state is doing, uh
from an economic standpoint,
compared to all of the other
states, Um
And it's based on a per capita
personal income.
Um
Basis.
And then
What what they do is they take
all of these different
populations.
They kind of mix them together,
They weight them, and they come
up with what is called the
department. Does they come up
with what is called a blended
rate.
And that kind of helps us do a
lot of the projections that we
do for Medicaid. Um, it helps us
kind of determine.
Uh, well, it helps with the
projections and it's just that
rate. If you take all those
groups combine them together.
It's 77.71%.
And so
You have all these rates I'm
talking about if you put them
all together, the easiest thing
for I think folks on this
committee to remember the one
thing to get to kind of come
away from this with this whole
discussion is that that blended
rate is kind of key for
everything.
It's got all these different
groups combined.
They're all weighted with the
number of folks that are in each
of these different groups. And
you come up with that 77.1.
77.71%
And that's basically we get
$3.45 back.
For every dollar that we spend
in me.
Mm.
Uh,
Mr Chairman, and, uh, Senator
Yeah, $3.45.
Then under, uh, turquoise chair
so
Again, We're going into
turquoise care. Starting July
1st. This was a new procurement
that we did.
Um, we're going from three
managed care organizations to
for managed care organizations.
Um, we're gonna be adding
Uh, Molina.
For the program and United
Healthcare and then uh, Western
Sky Community health is gonna be
dropped.
Um and the department's adding,
um, services within this with
turquoise care, such as
supportive housing, continuous
eligibility for Children.
Under six years old, Um,
expansion of home, visiting and
evidence based behavioral health
services. Um, and there's a lot
of other stuff under that, too.
Um And then, last of all, uh
Presbyterian is gonna serve as
the, um
MC O for Children in state
custody, So that's Children. Uh,
under CYFD.
That's a That's a new
arrangement. We haven't had a
single MC 04.
Uh, Children in state custody.
And then I just wanted to
mention a little bit about the
data. Um, I'm not gonna go into
too much detail on this.
Um
We didn't update all of the data
in here just because a lot of
this is just meant for
illustration purposes to kind of
show you how much is being spent
in each category. That sort of
thing. Um
A lot of the state is being
reported by HSD and the MC OS
that can change its in a point.
It's one point of time. Um
And I think that's all I wanted
to say on that slide on slide
six.
Uh, moving on to slide seven.
All right. So here we go. So
some of the key cost drivers in
Medicaid, um
Alright. So enrollment
enrollments kind of
Probably the the main
Cost driver in Medicaid.
Uh, as enrollment goes up, Uh,
it went up quite a bit. It
peaked at just over a million.
Enrollees. Uh,
During the pandemic kind of
towards towards the end of the,
um, public health emergency. Uh,
back in. I think that was, uh,
around January. February of
2023. Now we're back down to
about 900,000.
And so
The number of members in
Medicaid.
Drives your cost, right? Um,
because we're paying a per
member per month.
Rate. Um
Uh, to the MC OS for each member
that's in there.
That per member per month is
about $691 combined, uh, in
Centennial care right now.
So for every single member in
Centennial care, we pay about
average out about $691.
Uh, it it changes based on, um,
different changes every year.
It's based on an in an
actuarial analysis that Mercer
does, um
And if you look at this on Page
seven, there's a, uh, graphics
there on the right hand side and
you can kind of see how
This process plays out.
Um
C MS requires HSD to establish
an MC O per member per month.
You might hear people say, PM
PM that's per member per month.
Um
And HSD pays Mercer to conduct
that actuarial analysis to
figure out how much that per
member per month amount is, Uh,
every year.
Um, So you said there's an
average but
Is not each member have a
different rate based on their
age and illnesses, and I think I
think that's important for the
committee to know that it's just
not carte blanche for a seven
year old and um versus uh, 67
year old right there. There are
different groups within that,
um, that's that's the average so
there's the long term care folks
and I'll I'll go into this a
little bit more in detail in a
minute here, um there's the long
Trek term care folks that are
quite a
More. Um, and there's different
cohorts in there different
groupings of the populations
within that 900,000 people that
we serve, Um, that costs more
per month and costs less per
month. That $691 is your average
of all of those groups.
Um
Yeah. Oh, yeah. And then just
I'm not sure if II I said C MS a
minute ago, and that's your
federal government. The centers
for Medicaid and Medicare
services. So just
To keep that there's a lot of,
uh, acronyms in here. I try not
to use them too much. But if I
do, she's here to
please me. You could also say
GOD.
Yeah. There you go.
So HSD gets these rates put
together. Uh, we pay. Um
The CMO that, uh MC OS.
Uh,
For each member.
Within their MC O that per
member per month amount.
And then they contract with your
individual providers who are on
the ground. Um, for a certain
amount, Um, Medicaid, uh, or
state Medicaid program.
Uh, directs the MC OS how much
of a rate to pay to
Each of those providers on the
ground. Um, for different
services. Um, and there's
thousands of different services
that they adjust rates for, um,
I'm not gonna get into that, Um,
we do group them. You know when
we're talking about it, um, at
the legislative level, regroup
all those rates into kind of big
buckets. Um, and when we were
talking about rates at our at
our level, it's um
You know, literally thousands of
different rates that
Uh, the department is adjusting
up and down, whatever. Um we're
just talking about these big
buckets up here, You know, So we
say, maternal child health.
That's
Probably hundreds of different
services that are being offered
within maternal and child
health. Um, that a provider
could bill for.
But we're, um
You know when we do the
appropriation in house, Bill
two. We're just talking about
You know, we we have to kind of
bucket them together because we
can't break all those out into a
bunch of different little pieces
like that. Our house bill two
would probably be like 1000
page.
Eric, I'm just gonna ask you to
to keep the mic close because
sometimes your voice drops at
the end of it. Sure, people on
the Webcast will pick up OK, the
last few words of a sentence.
You all right? So, I, I got into
that, Um MC O rates that's
that's your per member per
month. Um,
Health care prices and
inflation. We're always talking
about that, right? You're always
hearing about that on the news,
Uh, health care, inflation most
of the time, kind of outstrips
inflation overall. And so the
the cost of health care goes up
faster than
Uh, the cost per
Purchasing anything else in the
economy. And so it's it's a
It's a major cost driver, and so
when those things go up, uh, you
know, Mercer comes back. Looks
at that actuarial analysis next
year and includes that in that
691 that $691 per member per
month rate. Um, and so it's
That's another one of those cost
drivers. Um
And then, of course, the rates
that the MC OS pay to the, um
providers, right? So like again,
I was talking about this rate
adjustments that we did this
year. We've done a bunch of them
the last two years. That's going
to drive costs. Right. So when
we say that we're gonna increase
rates, um, provide, you know to
the providers.
Uh then our per member per month
is gonna go up. Our costs are
gonna go up right? And so that's
that's um, that's borne out in
the expenditures. Um
And then, of course fee for
service. That's also you know
the rates that HSD pays directly
to the providers.
Um
Utilization. Uh, this is you
know how much is each member
using the services that we're
paying for? Um, if utilization
goes up if people are using more
services than that, following
year, when Mercer comes to do
that
TM PM calculation. They're gonna
adjust that calculation up
again.
Um
And then how sick is the
population that we're serving?
Um
You know the acuity of the
members? Um, that's another
thing. Uh, if if people are
sicker or costs are gonna go up
if people are more healthy or
costs are gonna go down. This is
why we talk a lot about, um
You know, primary care and and
the need to improve. Um, those
kind of front end services and,
um, not wait until somebody gets
really sick before they actually
get services. And this is why
we're always talking about
access and and improving quality
and all that kind of thing,
Because if our population gets
sicker, it's gonna become more.
Uh And then, of course, the F
map already went into enough
detail on that.
And then moving on to slide
eight.
Medicaid, uh, enrollment,
revenue and expenditures. Um
Approximately, uh 42% of the
state's population is covered,
Uh in Medicaid.
So this is kind of a big,
complicated, uh, table here.
If you look at the and actually
II, I did steal this, Um
This format. I gotta give credit
where credit is due. I did steal
this format from the department
because it's a good it kind of
gives an all encompassing view
of what Medicaid looks like, Uh,
in total anyway, that top um
that top line there, That's your
enrollment. So right now we're
at about 917,000 projected, Um
Actually, that was from the the
January projection. We just got
a new one yesterday, Uh, Friday,
and so I think we're more at
what around 9 904 905,000
Something like that. But, um
You'll see the top dark blue
line. That's your total
expenditure. So, uh, we're
projecting for FY 25 that will
be at about $10.3 billion in
expenditures in Medicaid.
If you see this, this bigger
chunk here of, uh
Of
Light blue. That's your federal,
uh,
Match to the state. And then if
you look at, um and I didn't
realize that it wasn't gonna
print out so great, and I
apologize for that, because it's
hard to see some of these lines
here at the bottom, But, uh, if
you look at the darker blue at
the very bottom, that's mostly
your state dollars. Um, some of
the the kind of middle blue in
there uh, is your, um
6.2 additional F map that we got
6.2% additional F map that we
got during the public health
emergency from the pandemic.
And then you can see. There is
also a small amount of other
expenditures.
Anyway, you can see if you go
back to, um, when we expanded
Medicaid around FY 14 FY 15. You
can see the, um
Population increased quite a
bit. And then after that you
had, uh, an increase in costs,
right? And then, um
And like I said a minute ago,
that's that's your enrollment
driving costs.
And then you can see there
again, uh, during the public
health, emergency or population
or enrollment increase quite a
bit. Uh, because C MS the
federal government allowed us to
Keep a lot of those members.
Um
On Medicaid, not dis enrolling
them, Um
Maintaining their enrollment
even if their circumstances
might might have changed, Uh,
for that period of time, So, uh,
we peaked out at it. Like I said
at about a million
At one point
Um
I think that was about all I
wanted to say on that slide.
And this is kind of some of
that. We were talking about the
PM PM and the different groups
within within Medicaid. This
chart on page nine on the right
hand side, it kind of gives you
It's just an illustration of how
much, Um
You know if you break it down
into the different groups, the
long term care folks versus
basically everybody else, uh,
long term care takes up, uh,
quite a bit larger, um, piece of
piece of that pie right piece of
the expenditures that that we
pay for, Um
Services, right?
Um
I think that was everything I
wanted to say on that. It's just
illustrative of of what we have
there.
And so, of course, the key
financing components and we kind
of sort of kind of saw that on
that table, A couple slides
back. But of course, we have the
general fund amount that gets
matched. Like I said, if you're
looking at the, um
At the combined rate. The, um
it's you know, it gets matched,
but with the federal government
at that 77% rate
We also have county supported
Medicaid. And that comes from,
uh, grocer seats taxes from, uh,
each county. Uh, we have the
tobacco settlement fund and you
know, like we talked about
yesterday, a little bit. Um,
this last year, we changed the
way that we're we're, um
Were distributing that funding
and also how we're, uh,
investing that investing that
funding so that we can, uh
garner a higher rate of return
on that.
Um UN M.
Also gets a, uh, sends an
intergovernmental transfer to
Medicaid. They get it back, uh,
matched, And so that's they get
a a pretty good, uh, rate of
return on that essentially
Um
Other agencies also, um, pay for
Medicaid. There's certain things
in, um do some of their public
health programs have stuff in
there. Um, of course. Already, S
spoke a lot about the federal
funds and the the various
matching rates, um and then in
in the spending categories, Like
I said, you have that fee for
service amount. That's that's
primarily the IHS population. Um
and
Medicaid or state pays for those
services directly to, um
To the providers.
We spoke a lot about managed
care per member per member per
month amount and administration.
Right. Here we go. So on
Slide 11
I just This is just kind of
illustrative of how much
Of our expenditures goes into
each kind of bucket. Um
So total spending in FY 23 and
Medicaid. Uh, so this is the
last year, um was about 9.1
billion
And if you look at that the
managed care amount there, uh,
on the left hand side that
biggest chunk in that pie. Uh,
the $7 billion was the largest
category, right? And then you
can see, um
Medicare was a smaller amount.
You had fee for service, which
was about a billion dollars and
then you had your DD waivers at
about 717,000 million.
And then on the pie chart. Uh,
go ahead.
You just
Why
We spend money on Medicare.
Yes.
Premiums for long term care or
something. What is that
chairman? There's a category of
things.
Mr Chairman. There's a category
of eligibility for Medicare
clients. So we call them, um
dual eligibles, so the terms
that you'll hear people throw
around or Quimby's and slim be,
and also there's a set of those
so and we have to pay that
straight up. 100% also
OK?
Thanks. Sorry. No, you get,
um
And then just so you can see, uh
within the Medicaid MC O
programs. This is our centennial
care gonna change to turquoise
carrot? This is the pie chart on
the right hand side there. Uh,
If you add, um you'll see the ME
physical, The one labeled that
That's actually your expansion.
Um, physical health and then
you'll you'll see the other one
physical health there. You had
those together. That's about
$4.5 billion that we're spending
on physical health within the
Centennial care program. Um, and
then you'll see the long term
care down there at the bottom
About 1.6 billion. Um and then
behavioral health and the
expansion behavioral health
there. Um, and then you have a
SS smaller slice there of
everything else that we spend in
a year.
Then moving to slide, 12.
All right. Uh, so this is just
to kind of illustrate. This
isn't inclusive of everything. I
didn't put everything in here,
but I just wanted to give you
kind of the big buckets. Of
what? Um, we were spending some
of the some of the stuff on so
you can see there. If you look
at that first.
Graph on the left hand side, the
physical health
You can see that we spent about
$1.2 billion on hospital
services, and then you'll if you
go down about halfway on the
right hand side, you'll see
there's hospital services listed
there again.
Um
So about 1.31 $0.4 billion on
hospital services. Like I said
yesterday that
Um SB.
Uh, 17 that we passed.
Um, for the hospital rates.
It's gonna bring in about $1.4
billion, and so, um, if you're
looking at it this way, it's
about doubling the rates that
we're paying to those hospitals
for that, So it's It's a pretty
significant change there.
Um
You know, and then some of the
bigger buckets primary care FQH
CS get about 738 million
Uh, medical supplies. Pharmacy
Pharmacy is a big, another big
cost driver. That's one of the
ones that, um
Really drives up a lot of the
costs that we have. And so
that's one of the kind that
we're going to try to keep an
eye on. We've got that in our
work plan, um, to dive deeper
into that, Um
What else? Um
Yeah, I think that's that's
about it. And you can kind of
just see the the other numbers
in there for yourselves.
So on the horizon.
As I already kind of mentioned
that Senate Bill 17. That's kind
of a big piece. Um
One thing that we have on our
work plan is looking at
Since we're doubling the amount
of money to hospitals,
essentially that Medicaid is
paying
Is there gonna be? Can the state
look at offsets in other places
in terms of costs? And so that's
something that we're gonna want
to look at as far as far as
employee health benefits, maybe
how much the schools are paying,
um, for their health insurance
benefits.
You know, there's been, um
I believe, uh uh, the the theory
is and I. I don't know that this
is actually borne out, right?
But I think one of the theories
is, is that uh, since Medicaid
was always paying at this lower
rate
Those private insurers were kind
of offsetting a lot of the costs
through having higher rates, um
in health insurance, and so is
there something that we can do
to
Look at those rates now that
Medicaid is higher and kind of
slow the growth and in those
private rates, and so I think
that's something that, um
We're wanting to look at their,
um
Uh and it should improve access
to hospital services, hospital
performance and health care
workforce. But what I will say
is money.
Money isn't everything and it's
it's gonna come down to how do
we
Uh, how do we enact this thing?
And how do we
Um, how do we do it on the
ground?
And you know when it comes to
performance measurement and
cause 40% of this money is
actually tied to performance,
you know?
Um
Like I said in the past, you
know, do we want to be here in
five years thinking like a lot
of our hospitals are having
issues with finances and stuff
like that, and not providing
great quality care. And all of
that.
Or do you want to be here in
five years, looking at this
point and saying, like we use
this funding for
Improving the health care in New
Mexico, right? And so I think
this is a big opportunity. Um,
but it's gonna come down to, um,
how do we roll this out and make
it
How do we execute and then on
the horizon continued, so I put
a table on there on your right
hand side and you can see a lot
of the rates. Other rates that
we've done, Um, over the past
two years on page 14.
Uh, so maternal and child
health, you'll see that we've
done quite a bit there. Um,
we've done quite a bit on
hospital rates, maternal health
services.
Um
And I kind of went over a lot of
this yesterday. Um, you know
that you phase three providers,
Um
Maintaining the rates that we
did last year. Uh,
And some other things in there,
and some of that was funded
through the General fund. Most
of it was funded through the
General fund. But we also did
include some funding from the
early childhood education.
Uh, trust fund.
Hm?
And then a few other, uh, non
recurring items that we have,
Uh, included in there was the
rural health delivery grants.
Uh, we did 80 million
During the 2023 session. We did
another 46 million during the
2024 session. Um the 2023 money
is kind of just getting rolled
out. Now it's you know, the the
grants have been made. Um And
they, uh
Looking at that for the rural
health delivery grants, and
then, um
Also we did the hospital one
time funding. So the 45 million
for
Um, struggling hospitals,
subsidies and then another 44
million for various other
hospitals. And we've also got
this on our work plan. Um, I
think Allegra Uh Hernandez, one
of our analysts might have
brought this up to you guys
yesterday. She's working on a
hospital report right now, and
she's gonna come in and talk a
little more about, um
Hospitals at some point, um
Coming up here, so that ought to
be
A pretty useful for you guys.
Um and then
I just wanted to
Remind everybody of an lfc
evaluation. This is a couple of
years old now from back in 2022,
but it's still um, relevant.
Uh,
I'm not gonna go into a ton of
detail on this, but
You know, um, only
Our researchers who did it kind
of a secret shopper survey of
the MC OS to see, uh if they
could get
Appointments with
Providers, you know, in
different parts of the state.
There are 13% of the time they
were able to get timely
appointments with, um,
providers. And so that's that's
an important piece that I think
we need to keep in mind. And you
know this is I think this study
served as a good benchmark, and
with all the funding that we've
put in over the last few years,
you know that this
recommendation recommended
adjusting rates and doing more
to improve access. Um
And so we've done some of that
now and
We're gonna wanna see over the
next few years, improvement in
access and people actually being
able to get appointments, uh,
for services, and so I think
we'll be wanting to look at this
over the next couple of years.
Are people getting
Better care honestly. And then
with that, Mr Chairman, I know I
went on for a while, Um, I'll
stop there. Um, the next slide
starts the behavioral health.
Um, slides, Mr Chair. I don't
know if what how you want to do
this if you want to stop there
and just talk about Medicaid, or
if you wanna Yeah. Let let's
break them in, OK, And let me
also mention something. Are we
gonna be able to do the,
uh, we We didn't put on the
agenda that public comment, but
we will have a public comment
period.
Is there Some is she over here
to sign up for it? There's a
sign of sheets. So if anybody
wants to get on at the end of
the day, we'll we'll We'll have
a public comment period and
we'll have it available to
people online as well.
But in the meantime, let's go to
the committee now for questions,
and so we have Senator
Rodriguez Senator, Uh Hickey.
OK, wait. I got the wrong one
here.
OK?
Kate. Well, let's just do this.
Looks like everybody's gonna
have at least one or two
questions. Uh,
Try to keep your questions.
Pointed and and as quick because
everybody's gonna have one. So
let's just start with you and
we'll move right around the the
table. Yeah, Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Good morning. Uh, Ruby
and, um Eric, as always, very,
very appreciative of all your
work. Thanks for you. You do so
much. And you mentioned earlier,
Eric, that, um, Medicaid. 101 is
something many of us have
already heard And so on. But you
know what? Every time you
present is your mic on Senator.
Yeah. Or get closer to the mic.
Oh, and it's four minutes. OK,
let's see. Is that OK there or
is that too loud? Thank you
Didn't know that. But anyway,
thank you. I'll go straight to
the point Here. Let's go to page
three under a fee for service,
Eric, Um, what happens?
This is a situation where the
state pays directly to
providers. But what happens to
Co-pays, for example, are people
on Medicaid?
Um, responsible for making
Co-pays under this system. I
hope not. And if they are, who
sets them because I remember
seeing them in the budget
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Uh, no. That's the
the fee for service. That's
Medicaid pays for those
services. And then, uh, the
federal government reimburses
100% for those services, and
that's the thank you very much
for that response. And then
quickly, Mr. Um, Chairman, Um,
just, um, I think because of
time I'm gonna wait to, um, to
see you offline for the other
questions, But I do have one
more That just continues to
really, um baffle me and and
concern me and let's go to
Um
Let's see which one of them so I
can narrow down my questions.
OK, let's go to page 15, since
we get like two questions, each,
Um, on the
The the Secret Shopper survey
that FC did a while back to
really determine, um, the
accuracy of the complaints that
we get, uh, where, from Medicaid
patients that it takes forever
to get an appointment. They
can't get a hold of of of
offices. They wait forever on
the line to get an appointment.
And when they do they have to
try six or seven times. Then it
takes, uh on and then only 13%
of the patients or 13% of the
They get an appointment.
And then it takes sometimes 30
days or more. Once they do, get
an appointment it it just like
goes on and on forever, Uh, to
get in. And the question that I
have is, um
Also directories, it says
provider directories are
inaccurate and outdated. That
was a situation several years
ago. Have we done anything about
that? Um, I? I can't imagine
trying to make an appointment
and because you're poor you're
on Medicaid. You can't You have
to go through all these hoops,
additionally, to to be in the
situation you're already in at
is is not good. So tell me your
well, Mr Chairman and Senator.
Uh, yeah. Like I said, this is
gonna be
Be a part of our work, uh, kind
of going forward and and kind
of, you know, like we like I
said, This is a 2022 report. It
hasn't been updated. Um, but I
do think at some point we'll be
looking at maybe not updating
this report, but, uh, but
looking at the
Network adequacy within the MC
OS and determining whether or
not they've got, um
You know, people can actually
get appointments. I think that's
that's one of the big, uh
Drivers of our work plan,
honestly, and so we're gonna be
looking into this more? Yeah, I
would think that it would be,
um, I noticed that one in four
providers are unreachable. That
means that 25%.
Is all people can read one in
four if it happens that way, But
I know you what you mentioned
you're working on it and I. I
hope that de Do you believe that
Maybe sometime this summer
before the end of the year, we
will have an updated report on
this, Eric, Or how does it look?
Mr Chairman?
Mr Chairman. I'm not sure if
we're going to have an updated
report, but we'll have something
to bring back. We'll have some
sort of work work product to
bring back to you on this, OK
and final attached to that, Mr
Chairman, I promise I'm not
going to take much longer. As I
said, I'll see you after on the
others, but the M CS, um, since
the, um made it says your
Medicaid and face significant
bears when barriers when trying
to get care back to what we
talked about. Where are the MC
OS on this? Are they, uh, in
fact,
Trying to to see how we can
ameliorate the situation for the
Medicaid patients they serve
under the contracts.
Yeah, I think they're, um
You know when I look at the
performance metrics, you know
the quarterly performance that
the department, uh, provides to
us? Um, I know they they They
say that they are trying to work
on this. They say that they're
trying to improve their networks
and that sort of thing, Um, you
know,
Um, looking at some of the more
recent data that I've had access
to? I'm not sure. I'm not
entirely certain that that's um
that things are moving in the
right direction. And so I like
again. I think we're gonna try
and take a deeper dive into this
and and get a better
understanding of it.
I think we need to because also,
I asked before Mr Chairman at
one of the committee meetings in
the prior years. Uh what? Um,
what kind of reports are we
getting from MC OS to ensure
that we know how many patients
are getting served, and and are
they getting adequate treatment?
Uh, adequate medical care
because the agreement now,
according to this, and what
we've known all along is that
that we give them a contract,
but then they determine, uh,
it's it's a one time pay.
Year and then they determine
what patients and how much they
get served. What medical care
they get. That doesn't seem like
HSD is involved in this. It
would be the through the
contract, and so are we getting
a report back to know who gets
served. What kind of services
they're getting. And so on. Mr
Chairman, Mr Chairman and
Senator, I You know this is a
great a great topic. Um, I, I
think
We need way better data than we
have right now. Um, we don't get
Great data. Um, I've actually
got somebody that's working for
LFC that's working on, you know,
taking some of the data that we
do get and trying to
Kind of piecemeal it together,
but it's It's very
Incredibly clunky and, um,
doesn't tell us very much,
honestly. And so, um
You know we've been talking
about. I guess we've been
working on the, uh, Medicaid
management Information system
Replacement project, So it's the
big IT project right within
Medicaid. Um
That is supposed to replace all
of their IT needs, uh, kind of
within Medicaid.
Most of them.
And
We've been working on that, uh,
ever since I think 2015
something like that 2014 and I
think we're up to about I think
we're looking at, um, last I
heard about $460 million spent
on that and there's very little,
um, to kind of show for that
program.
Uh, so far or for that, you
know, and we've spent a lot of
money already.
Um
And
It's
This is a big topic going
forward. I think we need better
data. We have to get better
data. Otherwise, we're not gonna
be able to manage our, um our
programs in a way That really
makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. Thank
you. Thank you for that
information, and is it in the
contract to require HM OS to or
MC OS to, uh, submit this data
and information? It's not in the
contract that is a proprietary.
Four minutes is up. Oh, thank
you. I got that questions.
Basically, the issue is is HHC.
Monitoring those contracts to
the extent that we would love to
see them monitor. Yes, Thank
you, Senator CIO Lopez. Thank
you. This question actually
builds on that, Um
It, you know, looking looking at
the FC evaluation. It looked
like it was a access was was
with the focus was what about
other outcomes? Um, like
maternal
Maternal mortality rates. Infant
mortality rates cancer survivor
rates Those kinds of outcomes
are those, Uh, do you have that
data and I would I would think
that would be very important to
compare to people in private
insurance yet, Mr Chair and
Senator, you know, we're going
to be talking about this. These
topics and others. Uh, next
Wednesday, actually, LFC, Um,
we're doing it Aegis stat there
and no, it's it's a It's a real
issue, right? Like the actual
outcomes.
Um
Aren't as great as I think most
of us would want them to be
right on definitely on, you
know, maternal mortality and
and, uh some of those very
important measures like that
right? And so
Um
I
I think we're gonna be putting.
Uh, quite a bit of more of a
spotlight. We're gonna try to
put more of a spotlight on what
can we do to improve some of
those metrics? Um, Medicaid is
our our biggest payer in the
state. Right? Um And so it's
Being that it's our biggest
pair. It's also our biggest
lever.
To
Improve things like that. And
so, um, yeah, we're gonna
I. I think that's um
Pretty important in this next
Wednesday is that the one in
Farmington?
Uh, it's actually out in Gallup.
OK, Um And then this is just a
small question. Um, when you
talked about Presbyterians gonna
be the new plan for Presbyterian
to be the MC O for Children's
state custody Does that include
people? Uh, Children in foster
care? Or is that just people?
Uh, who? Who does that cover?
Um, I. I believe it's Children's
state custody. I haven't had an
update on that one in a while,
Um, I don't know if the
department wants to answer that,
or or not, but I. I think it's
foster care, too. But, um
It's every It's any child who's
been taken into it. Looks like
they're shaking their head. Yes.
And so yeah, I would say yes.
Um, well, because I wonder about
that, because if they're already
on a Medicaid plan, and it's a
different plan, and then they
have to change doctors to go to
Presbyterian, and,
um, I'm just wondering about
whether that's that's wise or
whether it makes more sense to
to keep them because for foster
parents getting these Children
out to healthcare is one of the
biggest hassles they have. And
so
To have to deal with insurance
and changing all of their
doctors and everything all over
again.
Seems problematic.
And so it would be, you know,
and some of these said, probably
are on Medicaid.
And probably a different plant,
you know?
Since Presbyterian is only doing
Children in the state custody.
Very likely, they're on a
different plan.
So this doesn't I don't know why
That decision was made, but it
seems a little
Burden someone foster parents,
You know when, uh, Mr Chair
And senator when when they first
brought this up about a year ago
to us, Um we kind of had a lot
of the same questions.
Um, it might be something to
You know, ask the department to
come in and talk about murder.
Um, and what? They're actually
kind of planning around this.
this? Yeah. They mentioned it
last year to us that they were
moving in that direction
precisely to avoid that
switching back and forth
constantly. All kids in the
state's custody and the foster
care system and in the juvenile
justice system would have 11 MC
O.
No, uh, it it shouldn't be a big
problem.
Except that we still I think,
still allow each individual MC O
to have their own list of
providers instead of saying,
Look, you're a Medicaid
provider. You gotta take any
Medicaid patient that comes to
you. That's ought to be what we
I I've never understood why we
have separate lists. Now we'll
have four separate lists because
we know we have four MC OS, and
it makes little or no sense to
let each one say Oh, well, we
have our providers, but you've
got to go to a different
provider. If you enroll in
Uh, Mo Lineker. I mean, couldn't
could we make Presbyterian take
all all, um, state? You know,
whatever United
Molina.
I. I just I just heard this. You
know, I've just heard Foster
parents getting really
frustrated with ensuring that
their Children the Children in
foster care, um
Getting access and just seems
just by looking at this that
this might be yet another
barrier. Um, so I throw it out
there something also that I'd
suggest is evaluated. Um, you
know what does that do to
Children? Foster care? Do they
have to leave their Molina
doctor, then go to a
Presbyterian doctor and then go
back to Molina if they go back
to their parents.
You know, it just is a concern.
Thank thank you, Mr Chair. I
think I'm within the four
minutes. No, I used up two of
them So OK. Sorry.
I just have a quick question, Mr
Chairman, So you dropped the
western skies community, um,
care care.
Oh, sorry. Um, you dropped
Western skies, Community care,
I. I don't know if you can talk
about it, but I find them to be
the most, um
To have a huge
Outreach in my community. They
are very valuable, so I was just
wondering why it was dropped if
you can. If you can say I don't
If you can't That's OK. Um, just
just a little bit on background
They the department went has to
go through a new procurement
process every few years to bring
in new MC OS, um, kind of
determine which ones are gonna
be the MCO and it's you know,
they have to go through the
request for proposals process
where they get, um
Essentially bids from each of
the M CS and that sort of thing,
Um
There was a little bit of
Uh, controversy around it
because at one point, um
The the procurement was
canceled.
But then
We brought back the procurement
anyway, through that whole
entire process.
That's how they chose the four
MCs that are being picked up now
And, um I guess Western sky, uh,
lost out on that He's being very
polite. The governor blocked the
Procurement and said no, we have
to include, uh uh, any of the
current ones. The courts then
ruled that
That that was not right that you
shouldn't be giving a contract
to Western ski, which was the
lowest ranked but at the top
four would all get it. So that's
how we're gonna have four, which
is
But it was really awkward and
clumsy and poorly handled.
Representative. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you for the
presentation. Um, I'm gonna draw
us back to Page eight. Mr Chair
and
And having just very briefly
talk about the population growth
between population growth
between, uh, 2014 and 15. When
we saw a rise, um, in the need,
And then when we go to 2019 to
2020 20, Of course we know why
that increase. Um, population in
in, um
Those coming on to Medicaid.
What
What we have now see the
continuous rise for need so that
that opened up one of the things
from Covid. It opened up the
conversation for the need and
the gaps and those that weren't
covered. Who needed the cover
and now continuously need that
cover.
So
Which brings us into the
conversation and and what we've
had many times about Medicaid
for all or coverage for all of,
UH, New Mexico and New Mexicans.
Um, you've talked also, Mr. Uh,
Mr Chair about having financial
mechanisms that are being used
to leverage dollars to provide
for those rate increases. Um,
how? How then do we scale up
from all the dollars and those
mechanisms and models to follow
that to follow? Um, what's
already been done legislatively
and by other entities like UN M
to get us to that for
affordability scale.
And you said you have, uh,
you're working on that some
different concepts and
information for us. How? So
That's my question. How do we
scale up using what we are
already using in in, um, policy
wise to get us to a type of
Medicaid for all because
obviously the need is great and
deep, And we have to have that
conversation. Mr Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair and Representative.
What? What I would say, Is that
the department right now is
working on, um, looking at? I
don't I don't know about
Medicare for all but I. I think
they're looking at. Um you know,
how can we consolidate some of
the purchasing that the state
does
Um through state health benefits
and also from the um school
districts through the New Mexico
public School insurance
Authority. Um, and how can we
maybe look at
Improving some of the way that
some of the ways that we
purchase um, health care, um
You know, going all the way to
Medicare for all? I don't know
about that. Um, but I, I think
we can kind of say that we are
sort of headed in the direction
of looking at
Improving the way that we
purchase health care in in a
bigger pool so that we have a
little more leverage.
Mr Chairman, representative. I
let things I'll add just a
little bit more. In addition to
Uh, HC, looking at the
comprehensive purchasing as
opposed to just RFP that we had
in IB. We also of course, have
the health care Affordability
fund and the leveraging that
we're doing there in the state
up to 400% FPL for businesses,
individuals and the uninsured
program, which can also
encompass, um immigrants and
people who aren't covered, So we
have that pot of money and that
group there and then we also
have the study on Medicaid for
all that.
Forthcoming at in this fall, so
we'll hear more about that and
get more data and information.
When that study gets, um,
released, But really, when we
look at this point that you're
raising representative Mr
Chairman, it's incumbent. I
think on to to look at all of
the pieces. You have to look at
it all in its totality. You have
to look at the markets. You have
to look at the providers. You
have to look at the insurance
components, all of it when you
weigh these decisions, So, um
and I'm sure they'll
Bringing that back to us. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Um I just point
out that we've been doing these
studies. We know this
information each of these
insurance groups and others, um
in the private sector and
No. A lot of this information. I
think that the study that we're
doing thanks to our members
here. Um, is this is a very
serious and important one. But
we already have this
information. We're already
moving into policy levels where
we can we continue to to create
more programs and we are looking
at this as a whole. But Mr Chair
if I may just one quick point,
uh, to end my my questions or
points on a good note. I think
the way that we can address some
of our recruitment issues for
our provider ship is by
promoting our our re
Rates because right now, I just
saw that Florida has a $40 per
hour reimbursement rate where
New Mexico has 100 and $40 per
um, per hour rate. I think that
is something we should look at
and and really invest in and how
we can promote for recruitment.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just
had one quick question. Um,
could you all uh, just give us a
status update on the State Plan
amendment Has that been
accepted? The most recent one is
outlets responsible for
turquoise care or if the if the
director wanted to address that,
I'm not sure.
Who the best person is. Thank
you.
It, Uh
Mr Chairman and representative.
Yes, That's the, uh, turquoise
care that we're moving into. And
Yeah, I think that's been
approved there moving headlong
on that they've done all the
Um
Different steps to try to get
that, uh, taken care of, and
My understanding from the
department and they can bring up
more if they want to, But, um,
it you know, it's on track for
Implementation on July 1st.
Mr. Chairman, does that address
joint credentialing director
Mr Chair.
Sure, some clarifications on the
details of the waiver versus the
state plan. The 1115 waiver
still has components that were
negotiating with CFS. Those are
anticipated to be concluded.
Those are anticipated to be
concluded by 630. Then after the
waiver is approved, the next
step would be an implementation
plan also subject to C MS
approval.
And that does go along with
turquoise care.
Which is the waiver that that
you're waiting approval of sure,
some of the components that
we're still negotiating on the
1115 waiver include the justice
involved. Food is medicine for
pregnant individuals, different
housing opportunities. We can
get you a full list as well. But
that's the waiver that's
continuing to be negotiated.
This waiver has been kind of
divided up in a few pieces. They
did approval for us back in
January for some elements, then
we are still negotiating some
and we'll continue to ne
Them thereafter, but the bulk
majority will be complete at
630.
Thank you. I'll follow up with
you to get a little more detail.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I
appreciate the comments and
questions that my colleagues
have made so I won't repeat, but
I wanted just to bring to the
attention of, um the committee,
Mr Chair and our our staff team.
I talked with my hands a lot and
also the secretary and or her
staff. Um, it is last year, Mr
Chair. We had some issues with
some of our FQHC.
Um, namely one first choice in
kind of our area, Um La Familia
in Santa Fe and others who had
some
You know, had to close or
potentially close and those
entities provide a lot of, um
healthcare services. Um, in my
neck of the woods and up here in
Santa Fe and others.
And Mr Mr Chair I just wanted to
ask is how we can strengthen the
oversight.
Of these, um FQH CS in different
communities, because if they go
out of business
Then we are in a serious world
of hurt. I mean, the numbers
show that you know, one in four
just to maybe get an
appointment. I mean, there's a
lot of other issues and if you
don't have a provider in the
community, then where do people
go?
Um so it it's an issue, Mister.
Mister Chair. Um, I think that
we need to look at
Yeah. I've spoken to the state
auditor. We've spoken to the
secretary of Department of
Health. I've done that also, but
also, I think, because Medicaid
quote unquote is also the
provider of money to these
entities. Um, the feds have only
a cursory review of what these
qcs and they don't really look,
I think at the management
business aspect of this, um
Odds are done only just maybe.
Um, just depending it's not a
continual audit. That is, um,
looked at and reviewed by the
state.
Um, So when we have that, Mr
Chair, um
I. I really think that the state
needs to look a little bit more
intensely intently on this,
because even if the board is
following what they're supposed
to be doing, I mean, there's a
lot of accountability, Mr Chair
that I think the state needs to
look at, especially when we talk
about health care delivery.
Um And I'm I'm concerned, Mr
Chair if we had one that was
barely saved and is still I
think, barely hanging on again.
La Familia that had to, um
You know, find where they were
going to provide services for
those families here in the Santa
Fe area. I'm just very
concerned, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Um, that does tie into I think
in my mind, at least to the
issue we were talking about
yesterday of the need for the
state.
Somebody in the state to
exercise oversight over mergers,
acquisitions, the operation of
the provi of the hospital
networks, for example, and of
the primary care clinics, which
are organized as nonprofits, and
which means that ain't nobody in
the state looking at their day
to day operations.
Uh, the contracts have to be
honored, but whether they're
following their own bylaws,
whether they're appointing
relatives to keep physicians
whether they're overpay certain
stuff. None of that is ever
examined by anybody right now.
I. I don't think we see no
evidence of it.
And Mr Chair. I would put it all
in with that thing We were
talking about yesterday about
acquisitions and merger
oversight. Right? So and I
appreciate Mr Charges on your
radar, please. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I wanted to add
something because there's an
important change coming up. So,
um
First of all, I just wanted to
acknowledge what you said,
because it is really concerning
with first choice in law,
Familia and
So I hear what you're saying.
And and, yeah, it does fall sort
of within a gap. Um, we could
ask the Department of Health.
There's an office of you know,
rural primary care there to
maybe step up their efforts. Um,
so perhaps Secretary Allen could
collaborate further with all of
us to try and help and it's so
crucial to maintain that in our
rural state, and it's important
for our safety net. Um, the
change that I wanted to raise to
your attention. Uh, Mister
Chairman, Senator, members of
the committee
Uh, I don't think people of this
is maybe on people's radar
screen so much. We're going to
have a change in primary care
payment. Uh, payment reform it
for value based purchasing, and
that's in the process now, and a
lot of the folks are weighing in
the prime by folks. I mean the
primary care providers, but
that's coming. And so that's
gonna be a big change in how
they do business with their
Medicaid funding, And so
hopefully it'll help them.
That's the goal, I think is to
help and provide better care and
look at
Overall evidence based care and
and provide, you know, holistic
patient care, but it will be a
change and we know that there
are struggles as it is, so I
just wanted to raise that for
the committee's attention.
And I just wanna remind folks
four minutes questions and
answers we haven't had. We're
We're not sticking with it.
Mr T. Just one more thing is the
Department of Health doesn't
have the tools needed.
Yeah, including the authority to
take those steps. So we we
probably need to address that
representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I do
have a couple of questions, and
I kind of wanted to, um, follow
Follow on the, um
Line of questioning that Senator
Lopez raised in terms of QFQHC
SI think that definitely we need
to look at you know their, uh,
reimbursement. Um, but the other
pieces that I think that gets
left out is looking at services
that those, um FQHC provide
around the state not just in the
rural areas, but in the urban
areas as well that they don't
get reimbursed for, so I think
that we need to look at you
know, can we Is there some way
that we can reimburse for those
as well? Not just in the
healthcare side, but also on
Behavioral health side. I think
that would be a A huge help, um
to those centers and to the
communities that they serve. Um
and then the other, um, the
question that I have in terms
of, um, payments to, um MC OS.
So MC OS get payments based on
the number of
I'll call them members in their
particular area, right or in
their particular.
Bucket. Whatever. So what
happens to
To the monies that don't get
paid out for services rendered.
Well, so there's the there's a
thing called the medical loss
ratio. Um, and so we that's
included in that per member per
month amount.
Uh, that's supposed to be, uh, I
believe it's supposed to be
under 10%.
It's now they're 13 right? Is
that the update in the contract?
It's now they're 13 right. Is
that the update in the contracts
We can get you the exact amount,
But that's that's an amount
that's actually included in that
PM PM, and that's meant for, um
Uh, administrative costs and
overhead for the MCs to manage
the the, uh and, yeah,
Manage the, um
The system and their members and
and how much of that is profit?
Good point.
Uh,
I. I don't think we can look at
that separately. I can ask about
that from the department. But,
um, I
I believe it's I believe it is
all kind of lumped together. I'd
have to look at that again.
I. I would. I would love to have
that number. Um and I think that
that's the number that we need
to. Really, Um think about, um,
because I think that's one of
the things that's driving costs.
I know that not everybody who is
on Medicaid goes to the doctor.
Um, and obviously there are
problems in terms of getting in
to see the doctor. So really,
you know, we need to look at
what's happening to that to
those money. And that's
something that the department Mr
Chairman and representative that
the department, um, negotiates
with the managed care.
After that, and I talked about
it a little bit earlier. The
actuarial analysis. That's
something that they negotiate
on.
Then then we should have an idea
of what that Mr Chairman,
representative that so with the
medical loss ratio. Um I think
it's 8614 now. Right in the new
contracts. Yes.
What is it?
9010 So yes, in the remainder
portion, so they get 90 that
they can operate the part the
program 10%, that's profit and
admin and everything else, so
that's
On the high level. Then there's
other components, and this is of
the very high level cursory
level, So there's um what we
call, um, risk quarters so there
there's much more built into
these contracts, and and there
is more management around what
the MC OS can spend. So if
there's some deviation, But like
Eric said, that actuary I'll
analysis if there's some
deviation that comes up within
what we call the risk corridor,
then HSD. The oversight entity
has the ability to claw back.
Additional funds. So, for
example, to get to your
question, and I'll give you a
specific example during the
pandemic, right when we couldn't
pull anybody off, everyone was
enrolled. We couldn't pull
anybody off, but nobody could
get in to see doctors right.
They were closed. So the MCs
were getting all the payment
right. No one could get access.
So they were making all this
profit. So what happened? It was
beyond the set risk quarter. So
we have what was called claw
bags, so the state did claw back
millions of dollars, so there's
the ability
To do that.
OK, so, um, thank you, Mr Chair.
Yeah. So I'd like to this the
specific numbers on all of
those, though. Thank you.
Let's put it this way. Um
Number one.
We, uh, one of the things that
you need to look into in. The
department has to look into and
meet with the MC, OS and the
systems. The payments are not
getting to the to the clinicians
in the systems. I get
complaints all the time. The
additional payments which
Don't hit the
Oh, I'm sorry. I
I, It's just it. It's it's so
It's so frustrating people.
People are getting cuts in some
of the system and their pay
because the systems are having
other issues rather than those
payments getting there so that
needs to be done. Uh to, um,
looking at page 11, I would
invite everyone to look at page
11 and look at the graphs. Look
how little we spend on
behavioral health compared to
physical health. It's miniscule
and all the studies from
Element, and everyone else says
that if you spend substantially
more un stabilizing behavioral
health, you save incredible. Now
it's it's almost a 2 to 31
deterrent return and what you
get back from not spending an
acute exacerbation of chronic
disease.
Number three.
The, uh PB MS and I brought this
up to the secretary. Um and you
can do this now, This is not
something to wait for all the
contracts for the PB MS, uh,
that goes through the MC O
should be terminated. There's
causes to terminate those
contracts. You then should put
out an RFP for PB M that are, uh
More transparent, like press
went to Capitol RX and are
saving millions and millions of
dollars that can be done today.
That could be done today.
And so we would like to hear
back from you. It's your
presentation on what you're
doing to terminate the current.
Uh uh, care market, et cetera.
other contracts and moving to
these so called fiduciary
capital, RX Real RX. There's a
number of them out there. I'm
gonna make available for them to
come in and present to the
department. But you will save
hundreds of millions of dollars.
Uh and and get better service.
The, um
Uh,
For going back to Senator
Rodriguez. There is currently
money at uh, Health Services
Corporation of the Hospital
Association to build the source
of truth, and the source of
truth is a network adequacy
program. It will detail what
Doctor is in. What place? What
County? What? Clinician? What?
Uh, P A when they're there. What
percent time? What health plans
They take.
Individual would be able to call
in and find out or or actually
webbed in and find out if a
doctor is there, and it will
force finally to, uh, will allow
us to enforce the ability of
network adequacy without going
to yellow pages, which is how
it's currently done in the O, SI
and it will be in that program
should be the computer IT, uh,
work rebuilt is going on now
They've got the
For it, and that will give us
the source of truth as to where?
uh, the clinicians are and, um,
the other thing we should look
at is any willing provider. I
know that's in chills through
the health plans, but the fact
is, if you can't get into press,
then press has the contract with
other people who were there and
that should be a law that we
should look at, Uh, at least
starting with Medicaid and maybe
going on to the others, and I'm
done. Thank you.
Senator Pope. Do you have any
questions?
Good.
Don't tell them that they
already have
representative Martinez.
Not at this time, Mr Chair.
All right, Representative Jones.
You better use a lot of time. I
kind of had my th thank you,
mister. Chair and vice chair. Um
I kind of whittled mine down
too. So that I'm not gonna take
too much time. But I do wanna
take a moment just to to say, um
Senator Hickey. I agree with you
about addressing behavioral
health as we move toward doing
that, um, that there's so many
things that start out as a
behavioral health issue, and if
we don't address them, they turn
into physical
Uh, problems and, um so we can.
I think we can Maybe, um, save
some money, Save some people.
Heartaches and improve health by
addressing more behavioral
health, So my quick question is
about Let me see my page number
I think is
Is it? Five? I'm curious about
this move to
Turquoise care.
Yes. Turquoise care versus
Centennial Care on Page five.
Um
Adding benefits such as
supportive housing. Can you tell
me more about that?
How are we doing that?
So, um
Mr Chairman, Representative
Jones. Under the new program,
turquoise Care the and our new
1115 waiver, which you heard
Um, Eric and and the Medicaid
director Speak about, Um, we can
get approval from C MS to add
more.
Services more benefits, so
there's a nationwide change
across the country, so to give a
bigger context, you're seeing a
lot of states moving just to
this issue around support of
housing. So California is a big
mover in that direction. For
example, a lot of the West Coast
states and some of the East
Coast states that are doing
their new waivers they're adding
on the additional what we call
social determinants of health.
We just spoke about behavioral
health. Mr. Tear representative
being such a big driver in Medi,
uh, behavioral health drives
homelessness a lot and they're
all in. We
Well in and enter
interconnected.
And so what This is is we're
adding some additional
supportive type services to our
new turquoise care program. Um,
one of them is the support of
housing. So what we're trying to
do is, uh it's not. It's, uh,
providing the additional
wraparound services to help
people support support them as
their trying to get. Um gainful
housing, and, um
In order to retain the housing,
So say you get a voucher from
HUD, the house housing and Urban
Development you get in. If
you're lucky to find a place
that will take your voucher and
you get in, and maybe you have a
little bit of behavioral health
issues, or or whatever,
struggling with employment
anything. So then if you could,
If you're a Medicaid person, you
can get additional help to
maintain, um to Main to help you
maintain that housing and some
of the other services besides
just supportive housing. Um um,
the Medicaid director
To that we're looking at, um,
providing healthy meals for moms
who have, uh, gestational
diabetes while they're pregnant.
Um, there's a number of services
that were expanding under our
new 1115 waiver that will
support turquoise care.
That's helpful. In fact, I I've
failed to say this is all very
helpful. I'm still trying to get
a picture of how that's actually
implemented, and it just seems
very complicated. How do you
How do you know a person is is
eligible for this kind of these
services, the meals the housing
you had to. You identify those
people. Um, Mr Chairman,
representative that there's um,
eligibility requirements, and
that's done by the income
support division has workers
that's out of the healthcare
authority. So they look and do
the eligibility and then
underneath your package of care,
then they'll they'll have to
work through the department and
through provider
The MC OS will contract with
providers and roll out the
systems and then, as part of the
contracts, they have to have the
these network Atticus adequacy
components and geographical
access requirements. All of
these things are all part of the
program, part of the contracts
and part of the system and then
a
HC does the oversight and review
of that and the eligibility
determination, So we're giving
you a really high level, but
there's all these complex pieces
categories of eligibility, all
of this stuff that underlie all
of these pieces so
That's why you're probably
confused cuz you're there's a
lot of a lot of detail there is
and thank you for that
explanation. I just always wanna
make sure that we're not missing
anything down in my little
corner of New Mexico. So if
there's any way I can help that
be implemented in my community.
I just wanna make sure I
understand that. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Senator Stennis. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Um, thank you for the
presentation. Welcome to the
new, um, leadership in the
department. Uh, I'm gonna ask
all my questions and then they
can respond. I only have a
couple. We all care about people
receiving Medicaid. They are
patients just like we are.
And
We want to make sure that
there's access that there's
quality of care, et cetera.
In the past. We have, uh, had
task forces that looked at every
time somebody had to change a
plan.
That their plan of care would
transmit with them that it
wasn't redone all over again,
especially if you had a
disability. So that's my first
question. How is that being
accommodated? And how do you
plan to evaluate that? And the
second question I have is? We
used to have for all the MC OS
performance measures and
incentive payments. Is that
still occurring?
And are you tracking it?
I'll take the second one first.
Yeah, there's there's definitely
performance measures for M CS.
they report on those. There's
um the he just measures. What is
the health?
Information data system measures
that they report on every
quarter. It's a they were
specifically set up these
measures. They weren't hit us.
So you might need to
investigate. OK, OK, we can look
at Mr Chairman, Senator that
there are additional performance
measures built into the contract
and will be built into the
contracts continuing So from the
LSC perspective.
We would love to get more of
that outcome data. The
performance data that, um, that
are built into the contracts and
that have to Ha have to be
provided quarterly. We we would
love to get more of that. Um,
because we always have a little
bit of a lag in terms of dating,
because a lot of you know the
heat is, uh, measured and stuff.
Yeah, we have to wait for the
audit and all that stuff. Um
The DD was that on any any
patient like if we're
transferring from one plan to a
new one, And there's already a
plan of care, which might
include specific medications.
How does that get accommodated?
And we used to have plans with
for all this? We almost did a
bill for it.
That would require some kind of
transition.
I. I think honestly, this is a
great question for the
department, um, and how they're
overseeing their contracts, and
that sort of thing. This is
something that, um you know, we
can look into
A little further. Um, if if
that's something that, uh, the
committee and our committee kind
of wants to do, Um, but it's
it's a It's definitely a good
question for the department on
how they're gonna oversee. Uh
The patients being transferred
from one MC O to the other.
Well, I think it affects the
number of patients the quality
of care, the death and the
payments to the providers.
Thank you. That's all.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Kates. Uh, thank
you, Chairman and vice chair.
Um I have a a series of feedback
as an analyst Yian and Eric. Uh,
that's what you're here is to
provide data and reports so I
just have a series of feedbacks
and then some questions for the
Medicaid. New leadership. Um,
one is
Yeah. I mean, we're professional
data. I let's not have a graph
in four different shades of
blue. Uh, that was
Challenging, Um, the other is,
um MC. Uh uh uh, the story
you're trying to tell on slide
nine that there's less money
that there's there's less
patience, um, being provided for
more money and long term care,
I. I don't know the I don't
understand the story because
that's what you're doing is
you're telling us you know
you're trying to give us an
overview. I'm trying to figure
out what you're trying to tell
us that I mean, I know surgeries
are more
Expensive than broken bones and
you're going to serve more
broken bones and surgeries and
you will serve
These other things. Long term
care is an expensive care, so
I'm not really sure.
The intent of that slide. And so
that would I would want
clarification on that on how
you're providing feedback. The
other is, um your report to the
LFC. Are you comparing data to
non Medicaid patients, or are
you just pro providing Medicaid
data to the LFC? I would rather
than being compared to non
Medicaid patients, as um, that
would give
More of, uh indication. Um
Of whether or not the type of
medical services are needed.
And, um I very much agree with
all my colleagues, but, uh uh,
Senator Stefanik. The
performance measures for me if
we had a report that listed all
the RFP What? Why are you
picking these people? So here
are the RSP goals And then how
have they achieved them?
How did they achieve them?
compared nationally and how do
they achieve them three years
ago because it if it's an RFP,
then I know it's important goal
for you. And that would give us
an idea of do we really need
that goal? Um, do we want to
modify that goal? And how are we
doing on it? Um, that is more
way. Uh uh, for me to understand
the data the story. You're
telling the questions I have for
leadership is MC OS, um, need to
be held.
And they are classically have
not and this whole dead list of
providers as a business owner
When I am choosing private
insurance, I am looking at their
list of providers, and it can
never be a perfect list. But if
you're calling people up and
saying, Oh, I haven't taken that
insurance for eight years. That
sounds to me like a bait and
switch issue and could be a
liability, a legal liability and
the NCO
Will need to be held accountable
on so many things, but
definitely on that. Um are you,
uh, asking? Are you asking to
balance Are you asking for
private insurance rates to be
lowered and sorry, I have to ask
all my questions before
representative cuts me off, and,
um
And you said that you were
waiting for C MS, uh, is a pre
approval Can you give me the
date of when we submitted to C
MS.
Um, those would be my questions
for for leadership. Thank you.
But I think on the, uh, health
care one we're We're just
looking at whether or not we can
slow the growth, you know, maybe
maybe there's a possibility to
reduce employee state health
benefits costs. Um and other
payer costs, But I think in some
ways it's looking at Can we S
slow the growth of the health
care on the criticism of that
graph that you, uh, brought up
on on Page nine. There? Um you
know it. It's simply just trying
to to show that long term care.
More and it's just it's just
showing that there's different
groups.
Of people within, uh, Medicaid
managed care.
That cost more, and there's
other groups that cost less. And
since this is a Medicaid, 101,
we're just trying to show that
for the folks that don't know a
lot about, uh
A lot about Medicaid. Thank you.
Mr Chair, but I just wanna
clarify your you're asking for
private insurance or state
insurance you're saying
That we go to those companies
and have them lower their rate.
I just wanna make sure that
you're not asking that the
employees start paying a bigger
percentage. And so that's what I
wanted to make sure we want to
clarify representative. OK,
Thank you so much.
Representative Ferrari. Uh,
thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you both for your presentation.
I, um, was wondering, uh why so
many kids have been kicked off
of Medicaid and then told they
would likely be able to reapply
and, um
Uh,
You know, qualify. Um, is that
because of the change from
Centennial to turquoise or
nothing to do with it?
Uh, Mr Chair and representative.
No. That's more related to the
end of the ending of the public
health emergency. And what the
federal government, uh required
at the end.
Well, OK, let's take a step back
during the pandemic. The federal
government allowed, uh
States to not, um, remove
anybody from their roles
Essentially. And so that's why
if you look at that, that graph
that shows the population it it
picked up quite a bit right.
Your enrollment picked up quite
a bit, and then at the end of
the public health emergency, the
the, uh, federal government
required
States to go back and, um, re
evaluate everybody's
eligibility in Medicaid and so
Through that process. Um it's
been pretty messy, honestly and
I. I think the department would
would agree with that. Doing
that re evaluation of everybody.
Um and
Uh, some people have lost their
eligibility. Uh and, you know,
And I. I think they're kind of,
um, projecting that some of them
are are gonna come back. Um,
they did allow for, um
Children, uh, up to age six. I
think you know they they
requested from C MS. Um uh,
Uh, permission to allow for
continuous eligibility. And I
think that goes for another
year until their next
eligibility comes up. Um, but I
think that's that's uh, kind of
the case there.
Um Mr Chair and your they they
up to age six with was there's
something else we could have
done to keep. You know, at the
state level to keep more
Children, you know, so that it
could bend more seamless and
continue if they qualified for,
you know, um
The health care before.
You know again, this is I think
this is a great question for the
department on how they, uh how
this kind of rolled out and, um,
you know, they can give you a
lot more background on how it
kind of
All happened and that kind of
thing, But, um, I think
Right, I. I think it It was kind
of messy. Um, some groups got
Didn't do as well as others. Um,
you know, and
Yeah, Some kids, uh, lost their
Medicaid enrollment.
So we'll have to look at into
that. Thank you.
So thank you So much for your
presentation. Um, so where in
brief brief answers. Where are
we on single credentialing, and
that would really help with the
any willing provider if they're
all credentialed the same
I. I believe it's in the
turquoise care contract.
Yeah, Great. That's good to
hear. And then, um, page 15, the
secret shopper. This should be
like a red flag. A high wind
warning. You know, all of the
above and the fact that it
probably It probably hasn't
changed. A whole lot is really
discouraging. I mean, it's to me
the number one performance
measure should be. Can your
patients get an appointment? I
mean, and we all realize that to
get in to see a cardiologist
On a non emergency. It's not
gonna happen in a week, but
these numbers are disgusting. I
mean, they who who among us is
going to take 10 calls to get a
behavioral health provider. I
mean, I know I had my own issues
with, uh, depression and other
things, and it took all I could
to call one time and if I hadn't
got it at that moment if I
hadn't gotten something I would
have just gone back into the
same pattern. So this is totally
And we have to we I I'm
encouraging us to make that the
number one performance
indicators whether your patients
can get an appointment.
Um And then, um
Let's see, uh, in this. This is
just a story that many of you
have heard before. But, um, on
the tobacco committee we heard
for years and years and still
continue to hear that the MC OS
are giving a PM PM for tobacco
cessation and for years they
didn't use that They sent
everybody to the state funded
one And when the money ran out
there, then people who weren't
on Medicaid couldn't get those
services. And every year we'd
say, you know, let's fix this.
And no one ever fixed it and I.
I still don't think it's fixed,
So those are the kind of things
that we can't just I don't know
what the answer is, but
departments sometimes feel like
Or MCs or whoever feel like we
we as a legislature, part time,
no staff. All that stuff we can
get away with. Just, you know,
putting it up on the shelf and
wait till they come back and win
next year and then we'll put it
back up on the shelf. So I'm
really tired of that, and I
think we need to start acting
like we have some power over the
people that we contract with and
over the agencies. Um so I think
that's it And Mister Chair with
your permission. Uh, could I
have just a minute to talk about
my role?
About what's happening here, So
I'm gonna first ask you if
you're gonna talk have separate
conversations.
I don't want to hear them. I
mean, no, I'm just saying
whisper, people are talking in
their normal voices across three
people, and it's really
distracting for the whole
committee and for the
presenters, So if you're gonna
do a sidebar whisper and put
your hand over your mouth, don't
take phone calls here. Um, all
that kind of stuff. Um, uh, I do
the timers so that we can stay
on and and when you don't
respect the time, Um then, then
I start getting texts from other
members. How
She got two more minutes. You
know how co and I really don't
want that. So I would please
request that you re respect the
timers, You know, I mean, I I'd
like to let you finish your
thought. But if you're gonna go
into a whole another area, and
then I get dirty looks all
around the table if I cut
someone off, cuz you didn't cut
her off, and this is not an easy
position to be in, so please
just try to respect that, Um, in
terms of I get texts all during
meetings. I can't hear someone.
So why is Doctor Hickey pounding
on the table? I mean, so those
things that sound nitpicky. It's
because I get all the feedback
about what that is, so it's not
that I that it it it bothers me
per SE, but it's just that, um,
that
I get all the stuff all the
Webcast isn't working. Can you
make sure that so and so is
speaking into the microphone?
Can you make sure that so and so
isn't you know, talking with
their microphone off? So all
that stuff I'm trying to manage
And I'm just asking for help for
the members. Um and you know, I
can be the tough guy, but I
don't really want to. But you
all know that I can be and I
will come to the point where
Actually when we're out on the
road, we have mics that one
person can turn off. So I'm
gonna ask the chair if I could
have his
And when the time comes up if
people are taking advantage, I
will cut your mic.
So, II. I don't wanna do that.
But
It's It's only fair that
everybody plays by the same
rules. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, Senator Hickey? You You had
an observation before I asked my
question.
They, uh
We all know that rural patients
cost more money because they're
sicker. They don't get access to
care. They come in sicker urban
patients tend to be healthier
because they have easier access
to care.
Is there and I don't believe
there is any differential in the
actuarial formula of of the
payment. The age. Uh
The illness risk, et cetera.
There is no differentiation
between urban and rural. That
sets up a desire on the part of
an MC O, particularly if they're
well versed. I if they're well
staffed in urban areas to be
able to take on a lot more
healthy patients and therefore
have a lot more profitability
than the MC OS, who are more
stuck in the rural areas, and I
just want people to be aware of.
That that has a major factor in
something that needs to be
corrected in the future.
Thank you.
Um, thank you. And, uh, I had a
question that I that somebody
sent me that I think is a good
one would help us to understand.
Uh, an aspect of the Medicaid
program. How is gross receipts
tax?
Handled in the Medicaid
contracts is it is
Are the payments subject to a
gross receipts payments
decapitation rates subject to a
gross release tax, or is it all
done through the providers?
Uh, the the transfer of payments
from, uh
The MC OS Do pay a gross
receipts tax? Yes, the MC OS do
so it's kind of embedded in that
contract that that they that
they must they get the amount
Monthly capitation rate every
month they get and then they
have to pay back a tax or we
just take it out.
OK, Mr Chairman. We do include
grocery seats, T
Sorry. I'm Alisa Walker Moran.
I'm the Medicaid CFO.
And, uh, when we set the
capitation rates we do include
funding for premium tax. Groce
receipts tax as part of that
payment to the MC OS. The idea
is the MC OS should be using
that money to pay the providers,
the grocery seats tax, um, when
they negotiate
Whether the, uh, grocery seats
tax is identified separately or
blended in that is up to the
negotiation with the MC OS and
the providers. Uh, we have made
it clear that we do include
Groce receipts tax in those cap
rates in our fee for service
schedule, so fee for service
schedules on our online and
that's our floor. So the MC OS
cannot pay below that We
actually pay grocery seats on
top of that fee schedule, So we
pay the fee schedule. Then we
pay the provider.
Grocery receipts. On top of
that.
And that is the idea that the
MCs would also pay the
providers. The Groce receipts
tax.
Um, part of that payment
providers pay G RT as well. So
every day we pay
and and is, fee for service
handled differently or how is
that? How is the gross receipts
tax done on fee for service, Mr
Chairman, So FIFA in fee for
service. We pay the providers
directly. It does not go through
the MC OS, so we pay them based
on the fee schedule. Um,
depending on the service that's
provided, and then we depending
on their tax status.
Their nonprofit. There's no Grt,
but if they are a for profit, we
pay grt on top of that fee
schedule, and then
I guess not. All fee for service
is 100%, but a lot of it is for
Native American. Uh, services.
We basically are getting free
money right? The state is using
federal money or or that doesn't
work that way. So, Mr Chairman,
the difference between managed
care and fever service is our
Native American population can
opt in to managed care, but they
can choose to stay in fee for
service so they would get get
the same services they would get
in managed care Except for, um
Sing a facility if they choose
If they receive nursing facility
level of care they have to opt
in to manage care. Otherwise
they pay a fee for service. So
the majority of our fee for
service is either Native
American or partial
beneficiaries. People, uh, who
are only on family planning.
Let's say so. We do have
services in fee for service that
are very similar to managed
care. It's just we work directly
with the providers. So if if
we're paying
For a native American who does
not opt to me managed care. They
it's a fee for service.
We get reimbursed. 100% does
that 100% also include the gross
receipts tax. So we, Mister
Chairman, we get reimbursed
100% if the service is through
IHS if they go to another
provider that's on its side of
HIHS. We do not receive 100%
from the federal government. We
receive regular, a regular
match. But would that include
the tax that they would pay? Uh,
Mr. Yes, we pay the tax on top
of the fee schedule, so
Yes. Ok. Thank you. Uh, thank
you very much. Now. I just had
one final. I had a bunch of
other little questions. None of
them are are crucial. I just
wanted to make a point about
medical loss ratio.
When? When Duke Rodriguez
Lunched.
New Mexico.
What did he call it? New Mexico,
New Mexico.
Uh, he was the first managed
care Medicaid director.
And he launched it, and there
was a whole debate. Would any HM
OS?
Even bid on it. Because you
clearly you're not gonna make
money on Medicaid.
And so there was this big and I
think the first time around,
they had two, maybe three
companies bid on it. One was the
UN M. You bid on it? Uh uh not
not. You know, it was it. It
turned out to be such a gold
mine that this last time I think
there were seven companies that
bid and it's clear that you can
make big bucks in Medicaid
managed care.
Duke Rodriguez, who now is, um
A name familiar to you? Who by a
medical marijuana.
Uh, he's the head of ultra
health now, uh in three states.
He said the biggest mistake he
ever made in his life was
putting Medicaid into managed
care.
Because it is incredibly
Difficult for the state to
monitor what the HM OS are
doing. And one little just the
example. I'll give you right
now.
We say medical loss ratio has to
be. I thought it was 13%.
Apparently it's 10.
They can only They have to pay
out at least 90% of what they
get in that capitation rate has
to go back out the door in
services rendered
But
What they call a services
rendered can be very difficult
to ascertain. For example, PV
MS.
And we we we saw last summer in
the hearings we had on
Pharmacy benefit managers have
that looks like its service is
being paid out services being
paid, but a lot of those being
skimmed by the same company.
That created the PB M who turned
out to be the HMO.
So they they they These
companies are so much smarter.
No, they're not smarter than
they just have so much more time
on their hands than state
employees
And that's where they get the
time. They have all this extra
stuff and lawyers.
And lawyers are very clever. I
think some of you who know
lawyers will admit that lawyers
can be very clever and
accountants who are even
cleverer than lawyers at hiding
things, so I don't think we have
any idea how much money you can
make on a Medicaid managed care
contract. But the HM OS
certainly do because they all
bid on them now.
You play out a bid for a managed
care contract for Medicaid and
no company in their right mind
is gonna say we couldn't make
any money on that. We better not
do. They all did. And they all
make a lot of money, and we
should not be worried about the
fact that we're asking them to
do more.
Because there's they'll figure
out a way to manipulate it and
to make more money and this
capitation thing is when we
first heard it, it was. Oh, this
is great because this will put
the incentive on preventive
care. They'll want to do
preventive care, but we brought
up home visitation as an
incredible preventive care and
none of them wanted to do it.
Because they're not interested
in preventive care. They're
interested in cash this quarter.
The fact that 10 years from now
a kid that got home visitation
won't be a big drain has no
bearing on their profit and loss
statement this quarter they're
not interested in in preventive
care. They want cash on the
barrel head now and they get it
by demanding capitation and not
by providing preventive care. So
we've lost the whole point of
Manisha.
So that's my little spiel about
capitation and managed care. And
how if you have enough time on
your hands or you can hire
enough attorneys and
accountants, you'll figure out a
way around whatever we can come
up with. Yeah, Connecticut is
done away with managed care.
And they see and that is the
home of Aetna and all these
other big insurance companies,
they know better than to
contract with an insurance
company to run their health care
system.
So, uh, those of you who are
lobbyists for managed care
companies. It's nothing
personal. It's just, you know,
After 20 years of watching this
circus, it's pretty clear that
there is no way that a managed
care company is gonna lose
money.
And even Western skies, which
just bombed out and couldn't
attract enough cup business to
really provide care.
And even tried to get a contract
through the governor's office
after their score was so abysmal
Even they made money on this
last contract, you know they
made money.
So
With that we'll turn now to
behavioral health and another
And other cheery subjects.
That's right. So are you. You're
gonna do this one Rubia.
Um, I'll try and make up some
time here. Just, uh
Um, real quickly and your, uh,
post session. I wanted to point
out Well, I was thinking about
it a couple of graphs for or
tables for you. So on page
94 since Madam chair raised this
tobacco funding and and we'll be
presenting the Tith rock. Um,
Tobacco Settlement Committee in
June, but, um, for those of you
who are interested, the tobacco
funds are listed in here. And
what got you know where we were
over the last three years, so
wanted to point that out, and
then the other, uh, chart I
wanted to point out in your post
session. Your LFC process is on
page 101.
We have here, the opioid
settlement and what was funded
with that. So these are some
good, uh, tools to look at. Um
so just wanted to point those
out really quickly. So on slide
16 of, uh, the same
presentation what we wanted to
cover and again. This is 101
high level. Um so we wanna talk
about the collaborative
behavioral health funding and
about Children's behavioral
health and Mister Chairman. I
just wanted to point out one
thing.
It's not listed here since there
were multiple questions about
this, and it was a whole
outcomes piece. Um, the
Legislative Finance Committee
does do the report cards on the
major largest agencies. We, of
course, do want on the
healthcare authority and on
Department of Health. Those are
available on, um, the LFC
website so you can see those
quarter by quarter. We do them
quarterly. Um, what I did wanna
say Mr term on that is the
points you are all raising are
totally
Spot on, um our outcomes.
On most of these areas are not
where we would like to see and I
I believe. Forget who it was.
Someone had asked about, um,
maternal mortality, and we know
that the Medicaid program, uh,
covers about 80% of births in
New Mexico, which is huge, so
it's really hugely important
that we're monitoring these
maternal and child health
outcomes because it's such a big
player for maternal and child
health. And the only other thing
now is we transition into
behavioral health is the secret
shopper comp.
That we talked about in that
study that that's not in here
and just because you all had
asked about it, and I just
wanted to bring your attention
to that they they looked at
behavioral health also, and we
found that, um for behavioral
health. The weights are even
longer and that, um, also that
there's a lot of the providers
that they called that weren't
seen Medicaid clients so much.
So what does that tell us? That
tells us that we have some room
some capacity in our system to
leverage these Medicaid?
Providers and maybe pay them a
little bit more raise the rates,
which we did last year in FY 24.
We targeted primary care we
targeted MC, H, maternal and
child health, and we targeted
behavioral health up to 100 and
20% in Medicare. And then now
for FY 25. We looked at those.
We didn't do behavioral health
so much, but we looked at the
others and went up to 100 and
50%. So what we're trying to do
is inform where we're targeting
the money to the areas where we
get the biggest bang for the
buck. Well, behavioral health is
an area
Where we have some more room
because they could take more
Medicaid clients and what we
need to maybe make the pot a
little sweeter so they'll take
more Medicaid clients, So I just
wanted to bring that up because
it's not in these slides and
just throw that out. So, um um,
manager I I'll try and go
through some of this stuff just
quickly. I think a lot of you
know this stuff. So what is
behavioral Health on slide 17.
We just basically I'm not gonna
read this. This is the terms we
throw out are like Samsung.
The substance, the federal
substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration,
So we have definitions laid out
here People talk about, um,
behavioral health being the
umbrella. Not only for it's all
of behavior Hall, so we have a
one side people tend to segment
substance use disorder, so SUD
and now we hear so much about
fentanyl, and then I forget the
proper name for T that we're
seeing. Unfortunately now in our
state and I'll, but, um
So we have this whole right
Alcohol. Alcohol is a big thing
for New Mexico. We often don't
talk about alcohol. Alcohol is
something we really need to put
a lot of attention and look at
our outcomes and do a lot of,
um, intervention and tobacco. I
know Senator Hickey's talked
about that as well. Tobacco is a
gateway drug for, um really all
of these. So, um, you hear that?
a lot from UN M Health Sciences
Center and T Rock hears that a
lot so we have the whole
substance uses to or Su as they
say, And then we have the other
area of of
Mental illness or SM serious
mental illness. Um, so all of
those together form um
behavioral health, and then you
can have co co occurring both of
them together, oftentimes, uh,
people self medicate.
So
Next slide. Uh, the behavioral
health Collaborative, So the
behavioral health Collaborative,
uh, was, um
Born out of a needs and gaps,
Analysis. That was done, Uh,
late nineties early. 2000
Secretary Hyde worked on this.
She then Pam Hy became, um, the
secretary of the Human Services
Department and then was
appointed by President Obama to
be the head of Samsa. Um, so she
actually worked on this knees
and gaps. Study analysis, which
was the most comprehensive one
we really have ever had done in
the state. And th This is so
important, really. For all of
the work, we do, whether it's in
health care, Medicaid,
behavioral health care.
All of it. You know, where are
we with our needs and our gap.
So this is something that we're
always trying to find ways to
gauge And, uh this study was was
very seminal in in our work. And
so what did it find It found?
Basically what we all kind of
intuitively know, um there's
insufficient access to evidence
based care. So when you hear us
throw out that term, which you
hear us, say a lot evidence
based care. What does that mean?
It's looking at care that has
been or services on some level
that have been
Analyze we like to do are there
our gold standard is the
randomized study. We talk about
that a lot at LFC. How do we
really do this and do randomized
studies? But I'm trying to look
at that. And see are the
outcomes really sufficient? Do
we have a good return on
investment? You hear that a lot,
Roi. So, um, these are terms you
hear thrown out a lot, So that's
what we mean. Um, there's an
there. We it's found that there
was a confusing array of
uncoordinated providers and
agencies.
We still talk about that? Right?
The no wrong door where you can
apply and get help. We've made a
lot of advancements on that. But
we still know we have a long
ways to go. So, um, that was
Found back then still an issue
and also, um, focus on managing
people's problems rather than
helping them lead and, um,
productive lives. So this is an
area where you're hearing a lot
when I just talked about primary
care and the value based
purchasing and
Ostensibly the good side of
quote. Managed care is trying to
help overall provide services
overall address social
determinants of health Now
that's what we're trying to look
at. Provide the whole person
care. So that's
Does that happen? No, not
enough. Is that where we're
trying to move systems towards?
I think yes, I think you see it
everywhere across the country
and definitely in different
spots as well in New Mexico and
Medicaid and behavioral health.
But are we there? No, we have a
ways to go.
OK?
Um, the behavioral health
collaborative was put into
statute in 2004. And why we're
talking about this is because
it's this issue of somebody said
yesterday we have funding all
over the place for behavioral
health. And you were right. We
do have funding all over the
place. And is that a bad thing?
No, because we need to have F
funding all over and touch
people all over and and these
issues are touches everywhere.
Courts Department of Health
Medica
Everywhere, so that's not
necessarily a bad thing.
However do we need to coordinate
it? Yes. Do we need to look at
the amounts altogether? Do we
look that we're all pulling in
the same direction and moving
towards the same outcomes? Yes.
So this entity was created in
2004 by statute to do that, Um,
the intent was to form a virtual
department and to braid some of
the state levels of revenues.
Not all the federal Medicaid and
those were pulled out. So that
was the intent In there. It was
to be led by a CEO and
Um, when? In 2020 22. There was
about 200 million in services
that were contracted out through
DOH the Children, youth and
family. But most of the money is
you saw those graphs earlier.
Most of the money for behavioral
health state money is all pretty
much in the Medicaid program.
That's the big big bucks.
Um, but
So OK, Let me just go through
these slides really quickly, OK,
the strategic goals that were
So OK, Let me just go through
these slides really quickly, OK,
the strategic goals that we
identified last year were
strengthening. Um, from the
Behavioral Health Collaborative.
We're strengthening the
behavioral health workforce, so
workforce and access. You will
hear us say that repeatedly,
workforce and access. These are
huge critical issues. Um,
developing community based
mental health services for
Children and families. Uh, we
know we need to to to to do
that. You all just mentioned
home visiting. We wish
We had more uptake with home
visiting. It's a great program.
We're trying to incentivize
that.
Um, effectively addressing
substance use disorder. Um all
see that in your everyday life.
And addressing behavioral health
needs of justice involved
individuals. We're working on
the Medicaid, the new Medicaid
contracts, turquoise care, one
of the new services that we're
adding on is to expand, um,
services from, you know, 30 to
90 days. Um, pre pre release to
try and get, uh those folks
ready so that they can move
seamlessly into care, hopefully
provide more map medication
assisted treatment in in the
facilities all of these things,
and I know you all talk about a
lot over the years here.
Um, we're trying to do more of
that fun. More of that through
Medicaid. Um
And then I wanted to mention
there's another component of
this, um, Behavioral health
Collaborative, and I just put
here it's the what we call the
administrative Services
organization, A SO and, um
We've been working with them a
lot. Basically, you know we had
the incident.
Or the situation where we, uh
there was the potential fraud
with the behavioral health
providers some years ago, and
that disrupted the system and
you all know about that. So one
of the things one of the
problems really, What was
Identify is just difficulty in
building Medicaid. Uh, you know
you maybe you're not trying to
commit fraud. But you make
mistakes right? Because it's
complex, and these people don't
have a lot of staff and all. So
one of the things this as O, the
ministry service organization as
they do a lot of training and
help to provide help all these
behavioral health providers with
their billing, and so that's a
good thing. And so they try and
work and they do the billing and
this is not Medicaid. Though
this is just for the non
Medicaid funding. So that's
that's the
Differentiation there. Um, but
falling colors is the
administrative services
organization under the
Behavioral Health Collaborative,
and we're hoping that the
department will collaborate
with, um the LSCL AJ staff to,
uh, work with us more. We'd work
with them for years, two years
trying to beef up the the data
and all and collaborate with us,
So we're hoping we get a shared
data with them. I'm putting a
plug.
Here. Um, and some that we list
out some of the key
responsibilities and, uh,
there's a reason why I have this
slide in here, so it's the
ongoing needs and gaps.
Analysis. These are this
responsibility. The behavioral
Health Collaborative, then the
contract for service delivery
and setting system standards.
Um, submitting a separate budget
request to LO CD FA and
submitting quarterly performance
reports. So why we put this here
is because currently so gave you
all that background. We don't
curly.
We have a CEO of the behavioral
Health Collaborative, and
basically, we haven't had a
meeting of the Behavioral Health
Collaborative for quite some
time. It's been really over a
year.
Does the LSC go to the, uh, when
they're when there are
behavioral health collaborative
meetings. Do you go? I mean, is
it Is it open to you all Mr
Chairman? Yes, it's open to the
public and the collaborative
members speak and all that and
but they allow public comment
and stuff also, and yes, we do
attend, but they haven't had a
meeting. There hasn't been a
meeting on
And Bryce. Well, the the CEO
left, Um
Basically right last year, right
before you say there hasn't been
a person since then. So and then
we still are trying to get the
the budget request information
that comprehensive, um
information and data, so we're
still trying to get that data
and collaboration with the
department and, um, we do get
quarterly performance measures.
Um, but we just wanted to raise
this to your attention, and and
you know, this isn't to to be
any sort of got you. You know,
it's hard to hire everywhere.
So, so I know that the
department's actively engaged in
trying to recruit and, uh
individual for that, um,
position it So I. I wanna be
fair. Um, but it's just this is
so important that and we would
so appreciate the collaboration
with them just around data and
around finance and around this
information, So, um, we just
look forward to a new person
coming and the behavioral health
collaborative once again coming
online and providing that
leadership role around all of
these areas.
State government across silos.
So thank you, Mr Chairman. OK
with that I'll jump into some of
the numbers and, um
I'm just gonna hit these sort of
on a high level. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee, um
with that behavioral health
collaborative across the silos.
And FY 21. They spent close to
900 million and FY 22 945
million in FY 24. The request
was over a billion. And I think
you all heard this, Um, session
before last. It was talked about
a lot wow, over a billion
dollars for behavioral health,
and we had never had that those
kinds of numbers in New Mexico,
right? But then you also just
saw the graphs in the other
presentation that when you look
at the overall numbers, you know
when you're talking to 20
billion
1020 billion for Medicaid over
you know, that's not that that
much in terms of that piece of
the pie, but still this is a
watershed number for us. So, um,
just basically pointing that out
on this slide, OK, um Next slide
23.
So for by comparison, the other
behavioral health collaborative
agencies allocated about 320. So
these other agencies, these are
the non Medicaid component
pieces. So you have mortgage
finance authorities, so that's
housing.
On this little little pie. Then
you had Corrections Department
at about 7 Million cfd at about
11 million DOH at about 56
million, and that's primarily
within, um, the facilities and
the behavioral health Institute.
Um, agency. OK, you have the big
piece there. That's all the
Medicaid pieces so
That gives you that idea.
Next slide is determine in 24.
What this is saying here is that
the he health spending reflects
about 12% of all managed care
spending and has grown from 521
Million and 2019 to 626 172
million in 2021. So the the
positive is that it is growing,
so we are spending more and we
as we said for FY 24, we did
increase the rates for in
Medicaid up to 100 and 20% of
Medicare for behavioral health.
So
Hopefully, those are getting
rolled out to the providers. You
all have talked about that
issue, Senator. Yeah, OK.
But that you know, will continue
to monitor that slide. 25
Between 2019 and 2021 spending
for the behavioral health
program, uh, grew by 22% while
spending on the behavioral on
behavioral health for expansion
Adults, uh, grew by 44%. So when
you look at that altogether,
that's an increase of 29% during
that time, enrollment in managed
care grew by 17%. So what that's
telling you is adults were
getting more care under
Medicaid.
Um, the adult expansion
population. There was a little
more take up or penetration if
you will for in behavioral
health, So that's good. So we're
seeing an increase and what was
going on at that time? The
pandemic, so to give you a
little bit of background and
perspective here, too, on this,
So what happened during that
time? What changed and what?
What? How did it affect
behavior? Health and health? You
got it so people could call up
so we've had some conversations
with, um researchers, and we'll
probably bring to this
committee.
Some researchers at UM Health
Sciences Center and others who
will actually looked into this
and it's maybe not what you
would intuitively think so. Um
yes, there was definitely more
take up and more uptake by by
people, um, doing, uh, telephone
calls to receive their
behavioral health. So that's a
good thing. You might think it
was more rural. That was what I
thought initially. Actually, it
wasn't it was urban. The, uh,
increase was more on urban
people using the phone and all
to get their behavioral health
services.
And then we were or maybe I'm
saying it backwards Or was it
rural? I might have it backwards
right now.
Anyway. Uh, I'm trying to think
because they said with
broadband, it was an oh yeah,
the phone. It was direct phone
call versus Zoom. So, uh,
The broadband issue, you would
think maybe would be an issue
for rural the rural folks were
drilling more zoom so not
troubled by broadband. It's
counterintuitive and folks in
urban areas were using straight
up. Phone calls more so I think
they're gonna talk to you some
about this. We're gonna bring
some of these researchers, but
the point is overall, we we got
increased help increased
utilization in behavioral
health. Um, by using these, um
modalities of, um
interconnectivity around
You know, computer Internet
phone, so that's an important
thing as we move forward, and it
is, I do want the committee to
know that, uh, the Medicaid
contracts as we moved into
Turkey are totally still
incentivizing. That kind of
thing. And the rates are
incentivizing that so that's
good.
All right, um
Here on site 26 outpatient
services is the largest spending
category in both the behavioral
health program and the expansion
adult program. This is in
Medicaid again. So, um, we
continue to try and provide
Additional outpatient services
and the whole array of
Wrap around services and
outpatient for individuals for
mothers with kids looking at all
of these populations because we
know that so crucial and you
can't. Um, you you may be
present, uh, in an acute
situation in the ER, which we
are trying to do all these
things around, um, local
enforcement. The lead programs,
Um, first responders who are
trained to deal with, um,
behavioral health incidents so
that we don't have to present
through the ER. We get
Better care, So we're trying to
do better with that. But so
that's all of what we're trying
to do with outpatient and to
provide continued services over
longer periods of time. Step
down services, and that helps
overall to make more effective
outcomes because it used to be
just the standardized model
right and the old
So all days it still happens,
But where you have an acute
incident you present in the air.
There's nowhere else to go. A
cop gets you go to the ER. Then
you're just hurt you maybe do a
detox somewhere, and then you're
just back again. Same same
situation. Housing, So you know,
so we're trying to do better
than that. You've you've heard
that a lot in this committee so
You probably know more of the
modalities than I do, cause you
hear it over and over in this
committee, so, but we just
wanted to provide you some of
the funding and the and how that
looks in terms of Medicaid since
that's the largest pair, um, the
slide 27 is just kind of going
to what I was saying. The old
older ways of how we used to do
it. What changed and where we're
moving. So, um, I'm not gonna
spend a lot of time on it. So,
basically, that's what we are
trying to look at there.
Children's behavioral health.
So slide 28. The system operates
on a continuing care.
From prevention services to
community based interventions to
out of home placement to, um
limited. Uh, you know, uh,
resident residential treatment,
foster care that sort of thing.
This state has been trying to
move away from the residential
out of home placements and
trying to do more around that,
But as we know you have to have
the whole array of services. So,
um, that's what the next ball is
it historically.
State system was weighted
towards, um, the out of home
placements, and we even had the
facilities before we've moved
away from that model, although
there is some ability to to do
that, and we do still have a lot
of those, um so community based
services were weighted towards
Paro professionals delivering
care with some limited evidence
based in home care with licensed
professionals. We are trying to
Still continue the whole array
of services.
So the next slide 29.
behavior Health program spending
for Children, youth and family
department, their kids in town
of kids. This is looking at two
sets of populations here.
And you still see we have, um, a
chunk going for outpatient as
you would expect. There is a
chunk for impatient with the
CYFD and with the TF and then
pharmacy, Of course. Um, And
then, uh, I think it's just
trying to give you a
juxtaposition of the two
different populations, but I
think the important point really
in all of these slides is I'll
just make the 0.1 more time is
that we need to maintain our
safe.
That we need to maintain our
providers. We need to maintain
our families. We need to
maintain our out of home
placements, where necessarily
and maintain those providers as
well. Um, the families and and
providers. So, um, that's
something that we all discuss a
lot and are continuing to look
at. So on slide 30 with the
Medicaid, um MC behavioral
health spending on CYFD clients,
Um, you'll see that, um most of
the funding in the first in 2020
One is for, um There's a lot
that went towards out of home
placements. And then, um
For the out of home. We break it
out for you even further. And
most of that, of course, is
falls in treatment. Foster care.
Um there is some for the
residential care. The
residential treatment is pretty
pretty expensive. And, um, I
believe the chair men Sequoia.
So
On the point we were making
earlier with evidence based and
return on investment and what
are good outcomes. The slide
here, um, slide.
31 is giving you a look at what
some of those look like for
Children and Children's
behavioral health. So there's a
couple of, um green ones listed
here and that's um Nurse Family
partnership, which is one of the
home visiting models and then
also, um
Uh, uh, Another home home, home
based visiting, so we know that
the return on investment here is
really high, you know, $10 or
more for every $1 spent so these
are sort of our gold standards,
But then we have the whole other
ray of yellow ones here. You
know, all of these
interventions, cognitive
behavioral health therapy, um,
reprocessing for child trauma
Multisystem theory therapy, all
of these things that, um are
also so crucial. And then we
list here.
Um you know, a couple in the
red. They have less ro. No, Roi.
Um, but these are a whole array
continuum of services that are
crucial to provide. So, um, some
some, of course, are our gold
standard home visiting. We're
trying to. We're raising the
rent rates on that in Medicaid,
And we're trying to incentivize.
Uh, there's four models now that
were approved for before we were
only approved for two models for
home visiting. Now we're
approved for four and the rates
are going up. So we're hoping we
can
Incentivize that more for for
our families.
So, um
Lastly, Mr Chairman, we list out
here on this slide just
opportunities for Children's
behavioral health. Um, we did
in, um, House Bill two.
Three years ago with the 20
million we put in three years
ago. 20 million to try and work
on expanding our community care
for, um Children, Children's
welfare, Children's behavioral
health, and that money had all
gone initially to CYFD, and it
Took some time to really get
that together and
The money wasn't quite rolled
out. So we had reauthorized it
and then we reauthorized it
again for FY 25. So now 10
million is going to the Human
Services Department in 10
million to the Children, Youth
and Families Department to
really try and work on this.
This issue of building out the
community, um, community care
for, UM Children's behavioral,
health and Children's welfare.
So that's one set of funding.
Um some of these other things
are looking at increasing
capacity like, uh, by doing
additional providing additional
training costs for providers to
be certified, you know, paying
additional increasing our rates.
Um, looking at all these little
components, um, fees for
implementation monitoring,
Looking at proctors Mentorships,
Um, there's a whole array of
things here that we want to look
at doing and then we list some
Good programs here. Um, Mr
Turner. One last thing that's
not in your pocket that I wanted
to do was just to zip through.
Um, this is a little bit beyond
hair 101, but just to throw out
quickly, some of the things that
we did fund and FY 25 just for
you all to to jog your memories
and stuff. And so just I'm gonna
zip through these really
quickly. So, basically in, um
And the Medicaid program. There
was, uh 1.8 funded and OPO with
opioid Crisis Recovery Fund for
plans that save care navigators
and there was 5.5 million from
opioid funds put in for ongoing
cause associated with opioid
at epidemic, So it gives them
some leeway and finding on how
to spend that. But of course it
has to be around opioid use.
Um, also, we put in for the
Behavioral Health Services
Division, which is housed in the
healthcare Authority. Um
2.8 almost 2.9 million for
opiate crisis recovery funding
for housing assistance for
people with opioid use disorder.
Also 1 million of opioid funds
for behavioral health telehealth
services, which we were just
discussing in the Indian Affairs
Department We put in, um
10. We the Legislature, you all
put in 10 Million to expand
tribal service, Uh, serving
healthcare and behavioral health
services.
So that was put in, um
Aging and long term services
Department. So this is getting
again to the point where the
behavioral Health collaborative
across all these areas, so aging
and long term services
Department 5 million was put in
in the Kiki.
So, Ara, uh, senior dignity fund
for, um, High priority services
for senior citizens, including
transportation, food and
security, physical and
behavioral health in case
management and caregiving.
So from that fun we was put in
again in the Healthcare
Authority department. Uh, 5.9
million for costs associated
with operating the 988 crisis
and access line. We migrated to
that 988 crisis line. I think
it's been three years ago now,
23 years ago, so another almost
6 million and we put in millions
before for that. Um, uh, also
with the age, the Healthcare
Authority Department a million
dollars for
Health services for low income
individuals who do not qualify
for federal behavioral health
assistance. So there's people
who fall through the gap, so a
million dollars was added for
that, um, in the healthcare
Authority Department. $20
million, added that I just spoke
about that 20 million between D
and CYFD for child welfare
services in the community to to
build up to create to seed these
new community based because we
know we need help with start up
costs. That's what this is for,
Um
Also, um, for the Healthcare
Authority department. I'm just
gonna put this out again to
defray the operating losses, um,
for rural regional hospitals,
health clinics, providers and
federally qualified health
centers that are increasing
access for primary care,
Maternal and child Health
behavioral health services, Um,
in a medically underserved
areas, So that was a total of 46
million. So, um, that was
continued from last year. We put
that in. So we're continuing
that funding. Um
Putting that in. We that was put
in for FA 25 Higher Education
Department I talked about, um
Mister Chairman.
Access. You can't have access
without workforce, so we have to
attack behavioral health is such
I think you heard me say
yesterday at the end, there's no
silver bullet right? There's no
easy answers, but we can look at
it from all angles. So in the
higher Education Department, 10
million was added for endowed
faculty teaching positions and
student financial aid, including
scholarships, et cetera, Um and
for degrees in social work,
working with tribal folks,
etcetera around to expand. Um,
uh, to gra to an increase the
number of graduate
Folks able to work in behavioral
health.
Wanted to take note that, um so
grow money just real quickly,
um, grow money. The Healthcare
Authority Department $5 million
for a pilot to expand evidence
based behavioral health
services, including expert
screening, brief intervention
and referral to treatment
experts. Another program that
has good RO I return on
investment evidence base, So,
um, and certified community
behavioral health clinics.
So that one was in, um M, money,
aging and age. Oh, no. In the
healthcare Authority Department
for another 5 million for a
different people. A total of 15
for that, OK, so I won't total
of 15 for that. And then the
last one I just wanted to know
Mister Chairman is 50 million.
Um, in the New Mexico Housing
Trust fund, uh, to look at
helping people with housing, who
have behavioral health needs and
who are victims of domestic
violence.
So
With that we stand for
questions.
Very good. Thank you. Ok, well,
let's go to the committee. We're
gonna start here with the vice
chairman to go around this way
this time.
We don't get dizzy from going
both ways. Uh, Representative
Thompson. We'll start with you.
Thank you, M. Thank you for this
presentation. I know it was
rushed and all of that, so I
don't really have any questions,
but to to look back on page 29
just to suggestion when you when
you look at that, it's like, Oh,
my gosh, We're not spending
anything on, um CYFD
populations. But so I think what
would be helpful is if you
actually have population
numbers The 10th is, you know, a
million people and the CYFD
population is 10.
Or something like that, so that
we can we can compare kind of
per person, as opposed to as a
global budget cause it really
it. The first thing I thought
was like, Whoa, We're not
spending enough on kids, and
then I realized it's because we
have far fewer kids, so just
just some sort of a notation or
even a A maybe an average of
spending per person in that
category would would be helpful.
That's all I have. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and thank you,
Ruby M for going through so much
detail, Um, on
Is it 26? No. 32 where you
mentioned the 20 Million
appropriated to CYFD and HSD,
um for behavioral, health and
child welfare services. Um,
we're trying to get some
programs. Um
Under this that would be funded
for some facilities such as
Saria. And we've been told that,
um it's all went to CYFD. But
you're saying no, it's supposed
to be for both HSD and CYFD. Um
Mr Chairman, representative
Ferrari. It just got changed in,
um House Bill two. So for two
years, it was all just to CYFD.
But then there was some concern,
Mr T, uh, represented about
getting it rolled out.
The doors, So they Y split split
the pot between the two so
that'll start in FY 25.
OK, great. I'm glad to have that
clarified. Um also, I was, um,
wondering, um, Prevention, um
Was, um, included in a few
things, but can you tell me what
kind of prevention for
behavioral health problems like
I know if we can stop kids from,
you know, um, underage drinking,
We could do underage drinking
prevention and also Vaping
prevention are Is there funding
going into any of those, um,
programs or are there programs
for them? Um, Mr Chairman,
Representative for Y'all had
mentioned the piece you
For prevention in in Medicaid
and how maybe some of those
costs get shifted by M CS onto
the state program. The state
program is housed at Department
of Health, So that's tobacco. So
those prevention efforts exist.
are those sufficient. I think
there's debate around that, Um
and then we have, um
What other provincial pro? Well
there's harm, or you could say
it's harm reduction. We have
harm reduction programs in the
state. And those are prevention
to to progressing even further.
so, needle exchange all of those
things, so there's an array of
preventative services and then
you have your your direct
intervention, so counseling et
cetera. There are different
therapies. So all of those are
preventative services. So so,
yes, we do have prevention and
really all of the components. Uh
again, is it sufficient and I
think I think that's Deb.
OK, Thank you and Mr Chair. I
just have one more about, uh,
988. My understanding is that
program at the federal level we
stopped receiving funds for
that. So, um as a state, Are we
stepping up so that we can
continue to have you know our
behavioral health outreach? Mr.
Kman Representative for our we,
the States initially were
receiving over a period of time
as a step down with federal
funds. We were even augmenting
those federal funds.
You know, to a lesser degree, so
Was an inverted bar bar graph.
And then yes, those funds for FY
25 and have ended and so the
state didn't provide the funding
that I mentioned. So, um
Yeah.
Uh, Mr Chairman and
representative, So my
understanding, too, is that when
the federal government first
came out with the 988 there,
they're kind of, uh, plan was to
have states.
Um, change their
telecommunication,
telecommunication relay service,
um, tax, essentially, um, so
that they could raise rates, you
know, basically raise rates and
then fund 988. We haven't done
that in the state. Uh, there
There are other groups that also
get telecommunication relay
service revenue such as, um
Uh, the commission for the deaf
and hard of hearing. And so
that's That's also something to
think about. And that is one
reason why we put um non
reverting.
I'm sorry. Uh, non recurring
money in the 5.6 that she spoke
about earlier, um, to to cover
it for this year. Um, kind of
hoping that the executive branch
or somebody will take kind of
some leadership and try to get
something passed to, um
Uh, change that rate on the
telecommunication relay service.
Mr Chairman, the other entity
that receives the tele, uh,
funding the spin off of the
telecommunications relay service
funding is the 91, the local the
E 911.
OK, thank you, so we need to
increase that it sounds like you
get some funding.
OK, thank you Talk about just on
the issue of prevention to look
up the third from the bottom on
the right list there that good
behavior game that packs good
behavior game.
Look at that. Return on
investment 60 to 1.
That is a prevention program
that's done in classrooms. Wayne
Lindstrom was a big proponent of
that.
That's correct, Mister chairman
and and Mister Doctor. Lindstrom
has just been appointed to be
the head, um, of behavioral
health for the county, Buro
County. And, um, that program,
though, hasn't also like so
many, like home Visiting had
didn't have the
chicken and the penetration that
we would have hoped, but it's
proven to be a very effective
progress. So here's one that's
very effective. It prevents the
problems. We just need to make
sure that somebody's out there.
marketing it, selling it getting
schools to adopt it.
Because when they do adopt it,
60 to 1.
And Mr Chair. Where would we
learn more about it? What it
includes and
What's going on in the
classroom. Mr. Chamber represent
a Ferrari. We can get you some
of that information. Uh, some of
our program evaluators had
looked at this back when and I
think they're pretty familiar
with it.
Thank you.
Senator to Phoenix. Uh, thank
you, Mr Chair and thank you for
the presentation. I'd like to
ask, um, my questions upfront
and then hopefully it won't take
more than a minute. That leaves
you three minutes.
OK, So is business continuing
without a CEO of the behavioral
health Collaborative. Do we
still have regional
Collaboratives?
Um, how many departments are
handling behavioral health in
state government?
And I'd like to get clarified
the role of LFC to this
committee.
Is it only data driven or is it
also programmatic?
Evaluation and
Recommendations.
Those are my four.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Senator
Stefanik. So, yes, Um, business
is continuing. Uh, yes, the
local collaboratives are
operating, maybe at a little
lesser degree, But, yes, they're
still operating. Um, Mr
Chairman, Senator.
How many departments how many
departments over 16. And when
you look at all the component
pieces, the little tiny ones,
everything over 16 and the role
I think the role is
Going to evolve and you know you
wanna. I'm not quite sure what
to say for that.
Well, honestly, I think in some
ways we're still trying to fill
that out. But, you know, we, um
We kind of see our team in LFC,
as, uh, six staff. Uh, so
there's the three that were
already existing. So myself for
the, uh, Human services HC
analyst, the CYFD analyst and
the, um early childhood analyst
Right. And so those are are
three existing. We expanded by
another three.
Um, And so we're hoping that we
can bring different types of
work products to you. In terms
of, um yes. And and
programmatic, are are they gonna
be as a deep dive as program
evaluations from that specific
team? Um, no. But when we do
have C program evaluations, um,
that are related to things that
this committee might wanna hear
about.
We can always come and present.
Uh, those to you at that time,
too. So I think in some ways
it's you know, we've we're gonna
be bringing
Data. We're gonna be bringing
some policy stuff. And then as
it comes up, um more
evaluations.
OK, Thank you. That's all.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you for the presentation
and just a take off on what
Senator Stefanik said, uh, was
addressing. I wanna look at page
20 Current behavioral health.
Collaborative strategic goals.
Number four.
To dress behavioral health needs
of justice involved individuals.
I think one of the things we've
done in the in this last year,
was identified the need to
To, um to treat seriously
mentally ill substance use with
substance use disorder
nonviolent offenders in in a
setting that is, um inpatient.
Because with seriously mentally
ill people who are also
substance, um
Addicted.
They need to be. They often are
homeless. They're often have a
real complicated situation and
currently
There's a large number a large
percentage of the people in our
jails and our our prisons are
seriously mentally ill. And I
don't think we've addressed that
the way it needs to be addressed
because those people are still
at risk when they get out of
jail, So the jail diversion is
is really, um, an issue we need
to look at, I think, and so I
would like to know how we can
influence the collaborative to
To help take the action and and
treating those people perhaps
differently in a different
setting. I know it's huge,
complicated. We need money for
facilities. You can't you can't
take somebody who's been in in
jail and had Matt and had maybe
DW, um, classes or
interventions and expect them to
go out.
Perhaps they don't have housing.
Perhaps they have all of these
needs and and actually be
successful in in the world
unless they're addressed in a in
a setting, that's um, isolated.
That is a facility setting long
term six months 18 months it
takes to get a person person's
mental illness stabilized and
get them to where they they
don't require. Um, those drugs
that they been using and and to
be successful. It was wrap
around, of course.
I do get out of that facility,
but but it's a huge undertaking
to do jail diversion, and I just
I just wanna know how does the
collaborative help with that?
How do we help them?
Mister chairman. I'm
representative gems.
As we spoke earlier. You know,
it's important we believe to
have the whole array of services
really in all these areas.
Physical health, behavioral
health to maintain a raised
service a raise of services
because we know that access is
an issue. You've heard Eric
yesterday and today say, you
know, money isn't just the
answer. Um, we have to maintain
and ensure access and do our
best around that. So, um
Just wanna reiterate that point
providing an array of services
All types is crucial, Uh,
specifically on that issue of,
uh, we're gonna do increased
inpatient or something. Uh,
One thing we did. We talked
about the money that was put
into create new, uh, facilities,
including behavioral health. So
that was in for FY 24 and in for
FY 25. So that's one of the
things we've done. We've seated
we the Legislature, you all have
seated, um, funding to help if
the market uh, wants to come and
do that, so that's been done.
Um, that's one of the things I
think that occurred. And then
additionally, um the whole other
array of services. So, uh,
looking at, like
All of the programs that are
funded in the different
counties. You know, Dona Anna
Bern, Leo Sandoval, Santa Fe,
San Juan are all looking at all
of these lead in different
diversion programs and working
with their populations. Uh,
training. Uh, first responders
all of these things together and
then
Trying to have facilities
locations ways to to to in
places to put people and BH is
another institute, the
Behavioral Health Institute in
Vegas. And how can we work
around that? We've included
sufficient funding and
substantial funding in the
Department of Health budget to
maintain services and staffing
and there at those facilities
and those array of programs,
too. So you see, basically
across the whole system trying
to help support, maintain a a
services and provide
Funding to see new services. So
I think that's a what's being
done at the current time.
OK, thank you very much. I
really would like to stay in
touch with you. I. I need your
card before you leave. Thank you
so much. Thank you, mister
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Jones,
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um two
quick questions.
Um
One of one of the big problems
with a big bureaucracy is with
16 departments providing
services.
How many of those are stove
pipes and not talking to the
other agencies are all 16 of
these departments, part of the
collaborative.
Because if not, we need to
figure out how to get them
talking to each other.
So there's not duplication of
services. There's more
wraparound services, if if
that's the case.
Um, it's important.
I At one time we identified 12
different agencies that were
providing veteran services.
That really bothered me because
nobody would talk to me and I
was the I was the second in
charge of the Veterans
Department.
It wasn't until I had the
governor force them to sit down
with me that we started to
realize. Hey, I'm doing this,
too. Let's work together and it
becomes, uh
You know a lot better for who
you're trying to serve. So I. I
would hope that those 16
departments are talking to each
other. Uh, the other question
that I have is the 90 day. Pre
release very important because I
think, um, this goes to the
issue of recidivism.
We also did a program with, uh,
pilot program.
Identifying veterans that were
in the prison system.
And going in working with them
90 days prior to their release,
and we we had great successes
with that. Can you tell me
First of all, who is providing
this service.
And what services are provided.
Yeah. Um, Mr Chairman
represented Martinez. I remember
when you were doing all that
work with veterans. We'd work
with you. So, um it's good work.
Uh, regarding if all the
agencies are talking that's was
the aegis of the Behavioral
Health Collaborative was to try
and really have a standardized
required format to get them all
talking together. But when we
say those number of agencies
some just have smaller amounts
of funding, But the larger
agencies, you know they're in
cabinet so
The governor's cabinet, so
assume they all talk to each
other.
The larger ones don't make the
assumption anyway. So the
behavioral health collaborative
is, um, is the formalized entity
to to have this occur so
hopefully that will be robust.
In short order. We're hoping so,
Um, then regarding, uh, the 90
day. Uh Mister Chairman,
Representative Martinez. Um, so
that's going to be under the new
turquoise care, um and Medicaid
funded service. It's uh, has to
get approved in our new
1115 waiver that, um um,
Medicaid Director Flannery
discussed And so that will be
your You asked who will do it so
it'll be providers that the MCs
contract with will work through
people who are in the different
incarceration settings. So
that'll be the way it's uh,
rolled out once it gets
approved, and we start the new
turquoise care.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair and and
just to, uh, follow up.
These 16 departments. Do they
report through you to this?
To this committee.
Um there has to be a way to
force them to sit down and talk
to each other.
Because I'm worried that we're
spending a lot of money.
And there's these duplication of
services.
That we could actually get a
better return if we got them all
sitting down together, talking
to each other, which I know is a
huge task.
But I think it the program as a
whole would work better if we
could kind of tell them OK, if
you want this funding, you're
gonna be part of this group and
you're gonna sit down and talk
to each other. Uh, do they
report back to this committee?
Um Mister Chairman,
Representative Martinez, Um, the
formalized structure for getting
them together to all talk and
formalize their goals. And all
that is that behavioral Health
collaborative, which has been,
uh, sort of defunct for a little
over a year. So hopefully
that'll get, uh, reenergized,
which is kind of why we're
bringing it up here too, and
provide that formal setting. And
then the behavioral health
Collaborative CEO. Well, the the
Behavioral Health Services
division director is here. But
The CEO then will that's how it
was done in the past that the
CEO would come and address both
L HHS and LFC. And, um do you
wanna introduce yourself?
Yeah.
Uh, good afternoon. Uh, Nick
Bucs. I am the director for the
Behavioral Health Services
Division at the Healthcare
Authority. Um, thank you, mr
Chair and representative for the
question, just, uh, as a point
of clarification, the last
behavioral health collaborative
meeting was in October of last
year. Um, even though we didn't
have a CEO, I was temporarily
stepping into that position. Um,
the way the collaborative is set
up to answer your question of
representative is not only are
they meeting
Quarterly basis, but there is
what is known as an operations
group with programmatic staff
that meet on a regular basis to
then report out on what progress
they're making on these goals.
Which then is fed up to the
collaborative and shared with
the FC for, um your information
and use so those items are
tracked and we try to have, um
You know, while
All the departments that are
impacted by that goal have been
identified. We try to make sure
that there is the appropriate
representation at those meetings
to speak on what programs
they're working on specific to
those goals. So that is, um most
relevant to you.
Thank thank you, Mr Chair. I did
get my question.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, you
mentioned about folks not taking
advantage of the home visiting
and that program. Um
Could you let us know? You know,
maybe what is the issue? Maybe
on that? Is it information that
is available? Is it you touched
a little bit about workforce. Um
Uh, could you explain that or
maybe what we can do A better
job of, uh, where folks can take
advantage of that program?
Yeah, I think. Um uh, Mr
Chairman and Senator I. I think,
um one thing I want to say is
our analyst that handles this is
not here. Uh, she had just had
to leave a little bit earlier,
So I
Sort of paraphrasing what she
had said yesterday is a lot of
what's happening is Medicaid. Um
You know is
There's kind of a barrier into
getting into being able as a
provider.
To, uh, provide services through
Medicaid, right? And, um, I
think I think that's part of the
issue there. Um, I don't I don't
have a lot of deep knowledge on
this. I can. That's about all I
can give you on that, but I
think that's kind of one of the
barriers to, um, making sure
that early childhood is
Or a home visiting for you and
Mr Chairman.
Center. Another issue is
It's also just, uh
Making sure that people know
that you all had talked about
the car program yesterday, and
there's X amount of hospitals.
There's X amount of places also
where, you know, uh women are
delivering that sort of thing.
So making sure that we connect
and we as a state, you know,
connect with them and make sure
that they know about it and then
reducing. Um Kelly said that
yesterday, reducing the stigma
around the program because
people might be a little
reticent, You know, to have
someone come into their home,
and but then once I think
You learn about it and get
going. You're like, Wow, This is
really awesome. So, um, I think
there's multiple components like
that. What Eric said with the
providers struggling to get more
providers and then also with the
nurse Family partnership model,
You know, we have limited
nurses. And all too. Um, um,
We're increasing the rate so
we're trying to make that more
lucrative and incentivize more.
Um, and then just stigma and,
um, selling the program like so
and so just getting out there
and and let
People now and selling their
program.
Thank you And thank you, Mr
Chair, and I think that's part
of the problem sometimes, uh
You know, I still run into
people who don't even know we
have an opportunity Scholarship.
I run into people that don't
know we have a law against hair
discrimination that we passed in
21. So, um, just getting this
information out so folks can
actually take advantage of a
great program like this. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Care and thank you for a great
presentation again. Have my time
around, So I'm gonna go quickly
through observations. Um, the,
uh, the first is that my
experience in working with, uh,
the executive branch, uh, great
individuals and and divisions.
They don't talk.
Or they talk, but they don't
collaborate. It just doesn't
happen, and I would urge the LFC
to look at the effectiveness of
the collaborative and probably
get rid of it rather organize
around specific issues and
requires through statutes that
the departments meet and provide
a structure. But I think you
need to evaluate the
collaborative. Uh, I know the
last head of the collaborative
was pretty, um
I leave it at that. Um, I wanna
refer back to something I heard
in the hall yesterday at LFC
Very, very insightful that David
Abby, I guess used to say to
you, Um, Basically, the budget
is we've got 100 buildings on
fire, and we have 100 buckets of
water. And, um so we throw one
bucket and we don't really get
much of anywhere. Um, we we have
to prioritize. There's some
things we can do and some things
that we're not, and with all
Kind of wonderful little things
that we're doing. We're we're
putting a symbol on the core
issues and behavioral health.
Um, start with the fact that it
takes particularly addiction. It
takes 18 months to achieve
sobriety. And in that 18 months,
there must be constant contact
with the individual by other
individuals. Usually it's uh,
six months of
RT C six months of sober living.
six months of a A continuing
What if you don't do that?
Everything recycles all these
independent outpatient programs
are just kind of some of them
help, but a lot of them. Don't
you've got that's got to be the
structure.
Um we have very little in
detection 11 years from the
onset of symptoms is serious.
diag. Diagnosis of serious
mental health disease. Um, we
need to do look at be looking
for aces Number three. We don't
have an infrastructure. Um, you
know, we wanted to do the, um
The meeting in July, Uh for, uh,
compliance. Uh, we have no
nothing to refer people to and
then underlying that is
What? We even have people We
don't feel because we don't pay.
And so you don't have a staff,
So I'm I'm I'm yes, I'm Debbie
Downer here, but we don't have a
plan. We get nowhere. It's only
getting worse and somehow it's
got to be structured around a
fundamental plan. Pre,
particularly the addiction. Um
The uh uh, last point
Is. There are so many things
that need to be looking into,
And I'm just I'm hearing again
and again and again and again
that we passed legislation and
then the departments are not
acting on it. And in their
defense, the pay is terrible.
They can't attract the people
they need to be able to
implement those things. So a
again going to the core of the
issue. We've got to staff up to
the department so that they're
able to
Um, get there and then L MC I I
said yesterday and I'll say it
again. You've got six. You need
18. Why do you need 18? We can't
do the oversight.
And we should do like Congress
does empower committee staff to
if necessary under subpoena to
bring departments in to hold
hearings to learn what's going
on. And why not? And what we can
do about it. Thank you. My time
is up.
Now we'll swing over to this
side and we'll start with the
senator Sergio Lopez. Thank you.
And thank you for both of you
for the presentation. There's so
informative, um, appreciated
them. Um, have you given any
thought to the to, um
If we end up passing the
legislation that the governor is
suggesting, um, which would
affect civil commitments, and,
um
More detention of individuals
who who, uh, lacked confidence
to assist in their trials.
Have you thought about what? Um,
whether
We
Given everything you've
presented whether we have the
resources to deal with the
potential increase.
Mr Chairman, Uh, Senator CIA,
Lopez. Um, we mentioned those
two pots of money for new start
ups. So that was were for FY 24
and fy 25.
So those exist in our
substantial is is that
sufficient? I think that that'll
probably be a question that'll
be looked at during the special
and I'm sure continuing onward.
Um so I think that's probably
will merit discussion because
the the two start ups. Um I
didn't hear that There was AAA,
um, unexpected.
Like the number of beds that
would increase or what, what
that would do. And, um and of
course, we don't have an
estimate of of seems like a
small population of people who
are civilly committed and
Um, and people who aren't who
Will be detained instead of set
free if they're not competent
enough to
Assist with their trial.
Yeah. Um, Mr Chairman, Senator,
I think when we see the actual
bills and what's introduced and
all then we'll have to look at
some of those things in the
fiscal impact report regarding
the the pots of the last year,
the FY 24 pot of funding and
where we were just whispering.
We don't know.
Don't have the answer for that
on the number of additional beds
that were added, and of course,
this isn't just behavioral
health. That's across, you know,
MC H also obstetrical. All kinds
of things were added, so some
were just services. But there
were beds as well. But we don't
have that number so we may need
to get that for you. OK, thank
you. And then I just have, um,
I always
Well, this is focusing back
again on outcomes.
I always wanna know what the
outcomes that we're looking for.
And I know you did it. Um, you
did this on page where the
return on investment. The second
to the last page is how, um how?
I guess LFC was analyzing it.
Uh, like cogni cognitive
behavioral therapy for a child.
The return on investment would
be $8. How is that calculated?
And how is that related to
To
positive, Mr. Chair, Senator.
So, um, over the past few years,
I think it's gosh, it's probably
been like 10 years now, you
know, starting with Pew and the
results, first Initiative, um
Uh, doing result. Uh, basically,
what they did was they took
All this information from all of
the all over the country. All
this research on what programs
actually work. What programs
don't work. They compiled it all
into, um, a database or a, um
Um, a data. You know, a data
warehouse where you can go in
and look up. Um, which program
might have
What amount of return on
investment. It also gives you a
better idea of like, you know,
has this, um
Program had, um, value, you
know? Has it been studied? Does
you know? Does it work? Does it
not work? And so that's that's
kind of the, um
Crux of that table there is
trying to give you an idea of of
that right? And so that's from a
national level. And the reason I
asked that question is because I
I used to run um, elastic
commun. I was the director and,
um
And we started a behavioral. Um,
I mean a batter's intervention
program.
And, um
I remember there was an analysis
of it and they said, Oh, you
know, recidivism is very
problematic and that wasn't the
outcome we were seeking. The
outcome we were seeking is to
make sure that our that the
client that the victim was safe
during the period of time that
they were in the batter's
intervention program, so it was
like AAA.
We didn't. We weren't on the
same page with regard to
outcomes, so I'm always
interested in what
What the outcomes you're looking
for. Is it a better sense of
well being if you're dealing
with gender dysphoria are are.
Are you looking? You know what?
What is the outcome of the
clients that were actually
assisting? And how are we doing
with regard to
Those outcomes. You know, that's
time, OK?
Sorry. Can they respond? Just
briefly.
A real brief and I and I and I
know that program specifically
and I know I know that, um back
then, At one point, there was a
negative It showed it actually a
negative impact on
Um whether or not they would go.
go back. I know that there has
been some evaluations done since
then. Um and more recent time,
and it's shown that it's um
You know, it's it's It's got
kind of mixed results on it. As
far as I know, Um, but, yeah,
II. I guess I would just be
interested when we're measuring
in seeing what the outcomes are.
The goals are. Thank you.
Sorry, Senator Rodriguez. Did
you have a question? OK, Uh,
representative, SOA
Representative Lujan. Do you
have a question? Yes, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Sorry. I stepped out
for a bit. Uh, I wanted to kind
of go back to page 20. When
you're looking at your goals for
the current behavioral health.
Uh, collaborative strategic
goals and a SO. Uh, I really
appreciate you giving us those
those goals and a list of them.
one thing, mister C that I would
Account for if it hasn't already
been mentioned is and what I'm
hearing back from advocates and
and in the behavioral health
system is the disconnect with
our courts. Our family courts
are, um
Our judicial system. As we know,
um, is being and again I'll
bring it up again, bringing it
through the the executive's
office. And and as we're
approaching, um
A special session. I would add
that to your goal list because
this is something essential. I
understand. And I know that a O
is part of the the
collaborative. Um and Mr Chair.
I just wanted to bring up last
year. We had some great
discussions around the the
current behavioral, uh, Health
Collaborative. And maybe looking
how? Looking at how we can, um
Adjusted or change it or have
some some, uh
Different constructs with it,
Um in the legislative policy,
way, and I would say, uh,
representative Herndon and I
really looked at this and others
as well. It was part of our
list, and we were putting our
post its up and talking about,
um, some of the the things
around behavioral health, and I
would I would propose that, um,
we continue that discussion, and
I know that that's something I'm
I'm seriously looking at policy
wise and kind of looking at the
models that have been developed
in Colorado.
So that that is an initiative
for that. I, um
Would be myself be looking at as
well as and talking with the
representative Herndon and
others about this because it is
it is necessary to to re
evaluate what the collaborative
is is doing and how they are
functioning. And where those
gaps and where we need to change
some things that looks like
you're taking a big step into
this and I if you, um, world so
to speak, so thank you. I just
wanted to add that, um, my other
Point of of reference or
discussion would be on the
opioid settlement fund and those
dollars that we're spending
there. Um, so I was looking back
at in the spiral that you gave
us page 101. And just looking
at, um how much of those dollars
are going to some of the these
agencies for behavioral health?
Um
Needs. And so I do think that,
uh, we'd like I would like more,
uh, in depth presentation on
that. And maybe some of the
agencies and some of the new
asks and where they'd like to to
follow those dollars as well, Mr
Chair. Uh, we've talked about
this. Also in this committee,
um, there are there are some
changes made, but
Again. I don't see a lot going.
Into our courts, Uh, system at
all. And I'd say that this is
something we really need to look
at. Because that is such a big
disconnect and something that we
are going to be looking at
policy driven, um, initiatives.
And if you
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that. And I think
that the fuller discussion is
working with our local
government. Be in this area in
this on the settlement fund and
resources because there is a lot
of overlap. There are a lot of
dollars out there and as you
mentioned before, we've spent a
billion dollars in this, um this
last year and then in our
budgets and spread all over the
place. A collaborative was
supposed to kind of administer a
kind of
From my reference of
understanding. Keep an eye on
all those those different, um,
expenditures and needs for our
state in regards to behavioral
health. I think we need to do,
um
We need to look at, uh, where we
can help them and refocus if you
will, or, um
Come up with a similar but
different model so that we are
not missing the gaps. I have
attended some of those those
meeting the quarterly meetings
and, uh, doctors Grace when he
was our secretary, That is not
my time. Thank you. And I think
I appreciate the time. Thank
you.
Representative Sinsky.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, uh,
going back to the chairman's
point about network adequacy.
Um
I was looking through the 2022
secret shopper survey that C
did, Um, do you have a sense of
you know, it seems like we are
investing in a lot of
Really promising practices,
evidence based practices but
some of the basics are missing
in terms of
How does a person find an
appointment? You know, how do
you access the system? Um, I
talk regularly with parents who
are trying to find care for
their kids, and they they have
no idea who to call or how to
how to start. Um, is there it
does the falling colors contract
or
Um, the 988 hotline. Is there
any entity in the state that is
charged with referring people to
resource statewide for Medicaid
or or just for general
population?
We're debating here, Mr.
Chairman, Um, Eric just said,
Well, you know, care
coordinations. So you do have
the care coordinations with the
MC L. So when you're a member
and all but then 988 you can
call and they do referrals as
well. Um, but I think your point
was well taken, and I think the
secret shoppers survey bore out
just your point. Um, is it easy?
Um,
IM, Mister chairman. I think
it's hard. I mean, just all of
us are even in our own
experience, right? Um, so there
are different ways through our
MC OS through care coordinations
through 988 through agency, you
know, But, um, is that
Sufficient. Probably. We need to
beef it up more. Um, go ahead.
Yeah, And I would I would just
say, you know, as we're you
know, we we've done all these
rate adjustments. We've done all
this stuff to try to bring in
more providers. Right and I, I
would say as we're doing that we
need to make sure that those new
providers, those new services
are evidence based and quality
and that they're not just
something that's you know, um
That we have no idea what it is
right. And so I. I think that's
kind of the thing, too, is as we
build out our networks. We have
to make sure that it's It's a
good network. Right. And so
that's that's part of it. Also.
And Mr Chairman. One more thing.
Um, Eric earlier had mentioned
that the Medicaid management
information system and referral
replacement system and that's
also gonna be trying. One of the
things that that's trying to do
is look it helping bringing the
clients from all over kind of no
wrong door and also
standardizing information
Coordinating con, You know,
funding Bill all of that stuff
also, so as we build that out
and get it up and running, it's
some of the
There is to address several of
these issues that have been
raised here as well. Um, you
know, I've been looking at some
other states models for
behavioral health care. Um, and
in particular, there have been a
couple of states that have
instituted a statewide referral
hotline. Um, that is, uh, side
by side with 988. So 988 then
representing sort of a crisis
management.
Expertise and then a statewide I
need some kind of care. I need
access to an appointment. Kind
of hotline. Um, and it just
strikes me that that is
something that I think our
communities would greatly
benefit from, Um, the other
question I would just ask is of
the recommendations from that,
Uh, Secret Shopper survey
specific to behavioral health.
It has there been progress made
in terms of
More frequent audits of the
provider network. Adequacy, um
by the M CS or by HSD, Um
The accuracy of the provider
network directories at the MC
OS, Um, is there and I'm also
curious. Do we have a sense of
how many providers do not accept
Medicaid at all? Um, in those in
those audits, because that's
part of network adequacy, right?
How? How easy are we making it
for providers to be able to
access? Um, credentialing for
the MC O system.
Yeah. Uh, Mr Chairman,
representative.
So they are requirements in the
MC contracts for network out of
adequacy and geo adequacy,
Geographic adequacy. So, um
Those are in place. Those are
monitored. Those are standards
that are required.
Think regarding the access to
appointments we have seen here
and you've heard that that's an
an issue. I think it continues
to be an issue. Uh, Mr Chairman,
representative, uh, one of the
ways we were trying to deal
with. That is like we've said,
is to look at the behavioral
health rates and I think you
heard me say earlier when we
were being this audit this the,
uh, program evaluation in the
secret shopper. We saw that
there were, uh
What compared with physical
health, like many of them will
take Medicaid. But then there
were more behavioral health that
weren't taking as many
medicates. So it seems like
there's more opportunity in the
behavioral health arena to
incentivize more providers to
take Medicaid clients. So how do
you do that? Most likely just as
you alluded to Mr Term
Representative, you know, make
it easier. Decrease the red
tape, right credentialing, et
cetera. That's 11 side. The
other side is to make it more
lucrative, right so
Um
Sorry. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
Did you ever comment about the
report? You could answer that
question quickly.
The Mr Chairman. The guide House
reports that approximately 50%
do not take, uh, Medicaid. Uh,
but I will also note that the
Medicaid now is significantly a
better payer than, uh,
commercial insurance and
behavioral health, and it is
getting better. Um, but again,
uh, we've got five symbols
filling an empty bucket so far,
so it's getting better, But we
About 50%.
And I'll I'll have that report.
We'll get it to the committee.
They? They did. They 50 they
They did the secret shopper
report.
For us.
And and, of course, there's no
requirement that physicians, for
example, have to accept Medicaid
patients.
But it can't be listed in the
network as being available if
they don't so that that that
would somebody needs to
Monitor that.
Of Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair, and I
think in line with what?
Representative Lujan, um, was
stating when we looked, you
know, we created the the
collaborative over 20 about 20
years ago.
And I think it's always an
opportunity for us to revisit.
What we've created is a
generation that's already
passed and maybe we need to
update and add a few more. Take
away a few things from that. So
I'm hoping in our conversations
that we have the center Mr Chair
that you know some of our
legislation that we had
introduced back in another
decade or two decades ago can be
revisited just to updates if
needed. Just wanted to mention
that thank you.
So thank you, Mr Chair. Um
I do have a couple of questions
and, um, hopefully we can get
through.
Through them. Um So on page 20,
You're talk about behavioral
health, strengthening the
behavioral health workforce. Um,
I'd like to know.
You know? What does that mean?
What does that look like? Who's
responsible for that?
Um And then the other piece is
on. My other question is on on
page 28. Where you, um, talk
about the Children's behavioral
health system. Um, I think that
there's some real gaps in the
system, um, specifically at a
place out of home placement and
treatment. Foster care,
especially for teenagers, and I
think that that's evidenced by
the number of kids who continue
to who are continually sleeping
in offices at CYFD. Um and so
what?
Plan in terms of, uh, filling
those gaps. I know that the
behavioral health system was
really destroyed, you know, many
years ago, but that's been what
eight years now, um and 11 years
and so really, what have we done
in those 11 years? Um, to build
it back up, It seems like we're
taking steps backwards. Um, and
then my other concern that I
wanted to mention is, you know
the the idea of sort of re, um
Allocating money to CF Do you
mentioned that they had 20
million in the beginning,
reallocate it and then now
reallocate it again and split,
Um, split it up. So that cfd
gets, um 10 million or community
care for a behavioral health and
I. I just, you know, have a
question about in terms of who's
gonna Who's responsible for that
at CYFD. And are there some time
frames in terms of them being
able to complete that task or be
being able to, um, you know,
spend that money and get
behavioral health up and
running.
OK, Um, Mr Chairman represented
Chavez, Um, regarding behavioral
health workforce. I think this
is one of those where we are
trying to as a state approach it
from many different levels so it
can be the pipeline from, um,
trying to introduce you know the
programs that, um, you know,
middle school high school all
around, Um, allied health
professionals, and there's
programs that do that to
Even just the opportunities. You
know a lot, helping to pro to
provide funding for people in
the state to attend institutions
of higher education to the
specific targeted programs. I
mentioned somewhere we actually
targeting, you know, uh, social
work masters in social work that
kind of thing to and the next
levels where, uh, we're doing,
um, the GM graduate magic
medical education programs and,
uh, leveraging that in primary
care and psychiatry.
Um, in rural areas through the
Medicaid program. Uh,
Trying to beef up the preceptor
ships and mentorships. All of
those things eliminate the
barriers in, uh credentialing
and reciprocity, working
reciprocity across states.
There's any number of things
that we can do as a state. Um,
you know, bring in providers
from other states from out of
country, et cetera. So I think
all of those things are being
looked at and who has the
responsibility. I think the
responsibility across multiple
areas so
Kind of a quick high level.
Answer on that, Um
CYFD thing. I think that's a
good question for the
department. You asked a lot of
questions there around CYFD What
you know what are. What are they
doing? What are what's the
organization there? What? How
are they going to be addressing
sufficient TFC treatment, foster
care families and all that kind
of thing? So I think those are
questions really for the
department regarding the funding
that the 20 million that was
broken into to the two pots of
money, the time frame on that to
spend that it it's appropriated,
uh, for FY 25, so there's a year
to do that and that seed money
Start up new services building
out community services for
Children's welfare Children's
behavioral health, Children's
welfare.
Thank you. That's time. Thank
you very much. I was very
succinct. Um, I had a couple of
questions or comments first, uh,
slide 26.
Were you showing what they're
spending the money on now? The
MC OS for Medicaid, behavioral
health spending.
I. I just I guess I
I thought we required higher
spending for value added
services in this
That seemed like a tiny I mean,
it's doesn't even show up on the
On the pie chart. If you were
passing out slices of pie that
small you'd be accused of
Starving your clients.
You know?
Uh, don't we have a fixed
percentage of for value added
things that they they have to
provide to the community.
It just seems so small.
Yeah. I mean, it's something
that we can look into more. I
mean, these these numbers come
from their MC O reports, um,
that come in. And, um, yeah,
it's it's a very small slice of
that pie. So
Then on on slide 31. I had a
question about
Um, on that yellow chart, which
didn't include the the, uh, good
behavior games by the way.
Did it unless I'm missing it,
which I thought should have
shown up on that chart.
But, uh, it does show something
called seeking safety, which has
a $33, The best return on
investment is seeking safety.
What is that?
You know, I'd have to look into
that. Mr. Chairman, Do you know
Nick with seeking safety is OK?
Well, our folks that we ought to
do more of it
seems like it's really
effective.
Our experts who know that aren't
here. Yeah, I'm sure somebody
will.
And then, uh,
No on slide 32 you talk about,
uh some of these things. Did the
money get out the door? Did they
actually get the that contracted
money for expanded behavioral
services out the door? I was in
a conference call earlier this
week and or last week, I guess
And there they said, Oh, yeah,
We just got the con contracts
out. Did they actually get out?
I guess he went over to see YFD.
No, We don't know if they got
this. OK, Mr Chairman, as far as
I know, and we've been tracking
this for what three years now.
And it's It's been extremely
slow rolling out, and I think
there might be a million
dollars. It's been encumbered on
it and not even spent. And so
it's um you know, I haven't
looked at it for probably 23
months, but that's about where
it was.
23 months ago. Um yeah, And it's
You know, the I think the plans
have gone back and forth. We've
heard multiple plans over the
three years. Um,
it's it's kind of just
languishing honestly.
11. Quick question for you. How
does it How is it determined?
Which, well, let me there may be
a prior question.
When they when we're talking
about capitation
His behavioral health built into
every client or just those who
get behavioral health services.
I. I believe it's built into
every client. So it's part of
every client. Yeah.
Well.
My question really had to do
then with who gets to build for
behavioral health services.
Kind of can a physician's
assistant
At a FQHC federally qualified
health center.
Who sees a man comes in.
With depression.
And the
Physician's assistant.
Gets a
Antidepressant prescribed for
them does that then?
In any way change what
decapitation rate for that
client would be from there on
it's all part of it, So the
incentive really is to
To provide the services as
inexpensively as possible, Mr
Chairman.
So the behavioral health is
included. And I think one of the
things that you're sort of
indirectly referencing is
patients that are patient
centered medical home member. We
talked about that a lot where
you would go. We were moving
towards that where you would go
and present and that we didn't
want to separate out the he
health from physical health, so
that's connected. They get the
cap. The M CS have the the per
member per month the capitated
rate that's set on the whole
actuarial analysis. Now what I
think you're getting to is
utilization, and at least it
just came and whispered that in
Because the the the client, the
the the presenting person, um
may or may not utilize the
behavioral health services, and
then it can be. It can be built
in a different way, You know is
it Is this right bill for this
or that, but it's all included
in the capitated rate. There's
billing. There's claims there's
utilization and acuity. Some of
those cost drivers that Eric
talked about earlier.
And and and and that
That particular transaction for
a physician's assistant. Got a
client, Uh, antidepressant
that'll be picked up as a
behavioral health expenditure in
our in those reports that you
you're giving us the totals.
Yes, that's true.
They just whispered And this is
I was just gonna say it depends
how they code it, cause Yeah,
It's like everything coding
coding. So if it's um, a primary
diagnosis, that's what I'm
director of. Flannery just said.
If it's primary Di
Then it would be picked up, so
there's nuances right to all of
this, OK? Yeah, it gets very
complicated. Well, thank you.
Oh, yes.
Senator Rodriguez. You do have a
question. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. You did ask me
earlier, and I knew I had I
couldn't find it. But now I do.
Uh, I know we've talked quite a
bit about the need to have more
data. Because this way we get
have we can make better informed
decisions as we know, But, um,
you know, I can't help but to
comment on page 21, Ruby and
Eric, We spoke about earlier.
uh, about the need to have
information We were talking
about MC OS. Um and how I asked
whether we could have reports or
so on.
And, um, in this case here we
have it very clearly. Uh, how
the we are requiring, uh, the
submittal of quarterly
performance reports on an annual
report on progress implementing
the Master plan, plan,
performance and information on
spending and services. So it's a
here is a comprehensive request.
Um, in this case, but I would
understand why, and you don't
have to answer this. I'm pretty
much venting here again because
I don't understand why we can't
do the same thing with MC, OS
and
In general, uh, for the
contract. Uh, delivery that we,
uh
We offer, so or we pay for, so
that's all I wanted to say,
Mister chairman. I don't even
need a response at this point,
because I know you mentioned
earlier that it's about the HHC
monitoring the, uh, the delivery
of services. So thank you,
mister Chairman.
Well, thank you. Thanks for the
for the the the, uh, basic
information on these two
Incredibly important programs
will have a similar presentation
in June on CYFD on their
programs, Uh, from the LFC
staff, giving us an overview.
Um, there's there's an issue I
want to bring up before we go to
public comment.
Um we said yesterday we were
gonna meet in Espanola in
September. Santa Fe. Uh, the
first day was a joint meeting
with rest step with the revenue
Stabilization and Tax policy
Committee to talk about.
Alcohol taxes generally and
whether some reform of them
might not be called for.
They don't want to meet with us.
They've indicated that they
don't see the point of having a
A. They have other priorities.
And apparently, that one is not
one. At least we haven't been
able to persuade them yet.
So I'm gonna call the the
chairman and talk to him
directly and see if there's some
way of figuring out how we get a
discussion of that on the table.
Uh, whether it it might be that
that they would put us on the
agenda, although not at a joint
meeting.
But at a separate meeting, and
then we could have members of
this committee go to that
meeting as our one of our wild
cards, Something like that. But
if they won't put it on their
agenda, we we really aren't in a
position to force them to. We
can't we can ask, But I will
discuss it with, uh I guess the
representative Lente, still the
chairman this year.
Yeah. And
Um
yeah, uh
She can't be the vice chair of
has to be a senator. But yeah,
yeah.
Um, Senator Steve, You have a
suggestion on that topic. Um, Mr
Chair. We haven't even had our
organizational meeting.
Oh, we did. It's coming up.
It's coming up May 31st at which
time we will discuss, Um, the
work plan.
And they take come from
everybody, Um, not just the
voting members.
So if there are people attending
that we all need to just speak
up and say we want it on the
agenda.
OK, That's a good point. And I
will. I will talk to Senator
Sino as well. The the I think is
the vice chairman and see if if
there's some way, even if it's
not a joint meeting of the two
committees.
Uh, to talk about
This issue.
If they could at least put it on
their agenda, and we could then
have a large number of our
members who are concerned about
that show up and participate on
the committee as a as guest
members that day.
Uh, that means that
That being the case we don't
need to meet in Santa Fe.
And Espanola and we we have
nothing in the southern part of
the state. So I was gonna ask
the committee. Where would you
rather go for your summer
vacation?
To Silver City.
Or Las Cruces.
September. It's actually
September. Not not not not. Uh
Yeah. We were in Las Cruces the
last couple of years. But
what do you mean? Give up? It's
not our decision.
Well, we can't have a joint
meeting with the committee that
doesn't want a joint meeting and
I'm one of those designated
members or whatever. So I'm
going to make it a point to try
to show up to to to put it, But
I'm just saying as if you move
this meeting to or to, Yeah, we
have to move ahead.
We? I mean, he has to report on
a work plan Monday.
We? We? We can't sit around
waiting to try to persuade we
can always change it later. If
we have to if they if they
agree, because I mean, I just
spoke with representative CAA on
Monday, and she said that they
had indicated
That they would want to meet
with us, so I'm really confused.
That's not the message. We're
getting back when we when we who
is who is it, or is it
Representative Lente is the
chairman, representative of a
Senator schendel vice chairman.
Because that is not the vice
chairman. She's the vice
chairman of the House Tax
Committee. She just voluntarily
told me I didn't even ask her.
She
She mentioned it, so I don't
Yeah, Representative Kate I. I
appreciate your position. Uh,
chair. Uh, I would respectfully
ask those members of the health
committee that also go to
taxation.
To request on the agenda. Just
an alcohol tax agenda that we as
a health care committee may be
able to provide a report. I know
that Senator Hickey talked about
how it means that there's a
national information on how to,
um
Uh, uh. Structure. Uh, alcohol
tax from other sta, Uh, states
that can also be presentation.
Possibly that, um, could inform
them and so that that would be
an A G. Not a joint. Maybe, but
at least to have it on the
agenda. Alcohol tax. Thanks.
And
And if if, if, if they have a
discussion of it, we can also
schedule a discussion in one of
our committees at the same
topic, achieving the same
purpose.
But
It's kind of up to them to set
their agenda and you know, we've
We've approached other
committees in the past, and
they've said no, that doesn't
really fit our plan this year.
Uh, twice again next year.
So I think that's where we
stand. But in the meantime, it
sounds like people are leaning
more toward Silver City for
September.
Then Las Cruces. What do you
think?
What do you think
she likes less because she's
from Les because she likes the
show of hand.
OK, let's say let's do a show of
hands. So those of you who want
Las Cruces raise your hands.
23 Silver City. Oh,
And Silver City.
Every season.
Yeah, Mr. Chair. I go with
Silver City. I don't think
they've seen one of my suits, so
I need to go down.
Mr Chair just in terms of the
alcohol tax. I mean, it is
incredibly important, but I
worry about us trying to
schedule meetings with other
committees based on one bill,
because then everybody, it's
like, well, my bill is really
important. Can we, You know, Can
we be on LFC? Uh, joint meeting
I. I just don't wanna go down
that road where everybody thinks
that they have to have a job and
I. I totally understand and I'm
totally behind it. But I think
We just need to be careful about
trying to make that a precedent
that that if we have a bill,
that we You know what? That we
we could also talk about, for
example, um, tobacco taxes, You
know, I think it could be
something.
I. I understand that, but I'm
saying that's not a precedent we
wanna set if you've got you know
every everybody here has at
least two issues that are that
are heartfelt. And if we try to
start having, um combined
meetings with people to on
somebody's heartfelt bill and
this I'm I'm not saying that's
what this is, but we don't wanna
start that chain.
And I'll go either. Good.
Whatever you decide.
It. It seemed to me that the
majority
Silver plurality favored Silver
City. Uh, although
I would rather not go anywhere.
It was the second. Uh, yeah,
yeah, September or September,
Uh, 21st through 2020 23rd to
25th meeting.
It's a three day meeting.
The last of our three day
meeting.
The last two or 40 minutes,
OK, public comment any public
comment? Not her. Some of her, I
guess.
Anybody out there for public
con?
Uh, OK. All right. Uh, ju?
Uh, you didn't You didn't sign
in, though, So I'm sorry. Our
policies did you sign in and
last night by 6 p.m. and and
register by registered mail.
Yeah, OK, go ahead.
That's true.
That was horrifying. Sorry, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee, I get the pleasure of
representing the new Mexico
Behavioral Health Provider
Association. So I just want to
thank you for the topic today. A
couple of things that a few of
you said that really resonate.
One is that in 2013, we moved to
an MC O system when we did that,
Uh, a few things happened with
nonprofit organizations that
they were not prepared for one
is negotiating contracts with MC
OS.
And the other is billing. MC OS
getting rejections and denials
and chasing M CS for payments.
So, um, we need to invest in the
infrastructure of behavioral
health provider associations. I
really appreciate the increases
in Medicaid reimbursement rates.
I think that will help. But
these folks are ready to expand.
They're ready to add new
behavioral help providers. The
providers are there, they need
to be competitive with the
wages.
To hire those folks and to be
able to compete with hiring
behavioral health providers with
higher salaries that exist in
MC, OS and and healthcare
institutions. I see Senator
Hickey shaking his head. Yes,
because he knows very well what
I'm talking about. And then the
second thing is, um, let's let's
help and support the higher
education department and getting
out those grants and RFPS for
clinical supervision.
I'll put in $3 million last and
the 2023 legislative session
that have not been issued yet,
and we have another 3 million
that will start July 1 in order
for our for those behavioral
health providers to expand
services. We all want them to.
We need those things to happen.
We have to invest in
infrastructure. We have to get
those clinical supervision
grants out. We have to increase
the Medicaid reimbursement
rates absolutely and huge.
Cut to everybody in this room
that's really focusing on where
are the behavioral health
dollars going? How can we
maximize what we already have?
We we really don't need anything
bright and shiny and new. We
need to invest in what we have.
Thank you.
Um by supporting higher ed and
doing that, You mean nag is that
the I would never use that word?
Because I know our state
agencies are under a tremendous
amount of pressure. Thank you
for that clarification.
Is the is another issue because
we haven't heard about it
lately, but we used to hear
about it A lot recoupment. Is
that issue still coming up? If
you're if you're such just
seemed mind boggling to me. I
mean, it's one thing for a
hospital with a $20 million a
year budget to have to go back
and repay a a one year old bill,
But for a private mental health
practitioner who's maybe making
$18,000 a year? Uh uh uh.
I have to go back last year
because of something they built
last year. That's right. That's
right, and that's what I'm
talking about with
infrastructure when we move to
an MC O system, which chairman
you talk a lot about we require.
We moved to a system where
behavioral health providers have
had to hire 1 to 3 full time
staff 1 to 3 for each of these
small
Ish behavioral health providers
to hire 1 to 3 full time staff
at chase after payments and
that's the way of the world. You
know, for each of us with our
own health care insurance. We
chase after, um getting a denial
and trying again, so we know
that but we haven't ever
invested in the infrastructure
to compensate for that.
Representative case Cum you. I'm
so sorry, but, um, we've talked
about how you talk about in the,
uh, investing in infrastructure
We talked about requiring the MC
OS to have a limited part of the
part of the the, uh, having to
chase down the recoupment is
there are
8000 different things you can
check Mark for services and for
the NCO if they can identify
it's these 200, it would
actually reduce errors in
billings drastically. Um uh, we
we don't need to have
I don't know. Compound fracture
in the Iceland under the water,
which is basically how some of
these are done. And if we could
shorten the options for our
billing that would also reduce
errors. Um, so I think that's a
rule change. Not necessarily a
legislative, Mr Chairman and
absolutely a lot of this can be
handled in the MC O contract
process and what Medicaid is
Acquiring of those M CS and I
just want to give a shout out to
Nick Bs because he has been
wonderfully collaborative in all
of this. We look forward. We've
asked for a meeting with the new
Medicaid director, and we look
forward to having those
conversations. Thank you. Rep.
Luhan for that. Also the head
nodding. Um, one last thing
y'all have had, um, an expert
from the behavioral health world
sit in front of you and say
there are gaps in those Medicaid
reimbursements, substance use.
And treatment. Um, centers.
You've had that information
brought to you. We have spoken
and met with Secretary A Miho,
who's also been fabulous and we
have to get at those gaps. So
when Senator Hickey says, Yes,
170 for 5% of Medicare, Yes,
Yes, yes, but there are maybe 10
rights that don't have a
Medicare equivalent, and those
are falling through the cracks,
And those are substance Use
rates. You don't want substance
use.
Treatment to fall through the
cracks. None of us do so we we
have just, uh we have a little,
um, tweaking and a little
massaging to do and I. I do
wanna say like HSD Healthcare
Authority Department secretary
and staff have been awesome. So
if you're looking for folks to
give kudos to they're sitting
right here. Thanks, Y'all.
Mister I. I just was not in it.
I was just thinking our special
session should focus on
behavioral health because that
is the the root of I mean of
everything rather than you know,
picking this and that actually
addressing our behavioral health
system.
OK, and next comment is from Nat
Dean. And then we have one on
zoom from, uh Patsy Romero.
Mr. Chair, Madam, Vice chair.
members of the committee members
of the public in different
various agencies that are
present today. Um
Did I just say my name? You said
my name. Um I'm a person with
multiple disabilities, and I'm a
disability advocate. And I'm
gonna just try to quickly go
through my bullet list and I
will not override the time that
was just taken. But I will take
this time because I think it's
important. Um
So there's realistic
expectations versus unreal
unrealistic expectations.
expecting someone to walk
without legs and not supply the
wheels of a wheelchair is
unrealistic. Let's be realistic.
Um
Utilizing the, uh, fabulous
research done by the
epidemiology injury prevention
resources that come out of, um
you, you, you and him will be
very valuable. It's quite
valuable to our root work groups
on injury prevention and suicide
prevention, which I serve on
Um
A
Work group and also a coalition.
Um, someone was an eviction
history may be very unable to
secure housing, even if they,
uh, obtain a voucher and
evictions often occur because
the person or family does not
know what programs are
available. If you don't know
about the program, you can't
utilize the program and I'll
bring this up again, and waivers
are only for Medicaid people who
are on Medicaid.
Waiver services are not
available to those who are not
receiving Medicaid and I am
someone who have utilized
alternative programs that were
available to me earlier on in my
disability diagnosis, which is
not I'm now. 40 years, um from
my first traumatic brain injury,
so I turn programs might be
something like the Brain Service
fund, which, if you are eligible
for Medicaid, that's an O. You
get Medicaid because the
philosophy was that the brain
injury service fund replicated
services on Medicaid.
Every time someone is in an
intake for the brain Injury
service fund. The intake is also
helps, uh, does an application
or Medicaid.
Um, but I not eligible for
Medicaid. I have Medicare and a
supplemental plan. Um, Doctor.
Google is not credentialed very
well. And oftentimes folks will
get the referrals but they lose
them.
Or they say, Oh, I'm writing
that down, but they're not
writing it down and part of
them, not writing it down might
be parkinsonian syndrome, where
you begin writing and then it
gets smaller and smaller and
your hand becomes less and less
able. And so they go to doctor
Google and are looking at a
whole other list. It is accurate
that 988 will do referrals, but
they have to limit the referrals
very carefully that they have to
do. Three.
Because it has to be a non
Competitive environment. Um,
Medicaid, um, long term services
or long term care in Medicaid
requires niff lock nursing
facility level of of care. Um,
there is one pace program, which
is I forget what the P stands
for, but it's all inclusive care
for the elderly. One is in some
zip codes, too. Um
Or um, Albuquerque area, but
that's it. They are on San Santa
Fe. There are two places that
will take Medicaid and if lock
institutional living, um and
their not
They're not.
They're not in places. Um, care
coordinators do not
Necessarily provide incentive
case management.
For a care coordinator. You get
a phone call one month a phone
call the second month an in
person visit the third month and
that repeats, so you're
essentially getting nine. Phone
updates for one hour and three
in person visits. If you're
lucky, that's not intensive case
management and oftentimes
there's misinformation provided
that that can be very deadly
consequences, such as someone
who may not be very well
informed in states that Medicare
I know you same time, but it was
a little bit more.
I'm gonna break a little bit of
the rule here. I apologize. Um
That, um, sorry. I was saying,
um
I got completely derailed. Oh,
misinformation. Medicare. I
believe it's just the advantage
Plans have a six month pre
existing condition clause, but
only six months. It's not
forever. So when someone hears
that Medicare has exclusions for
pre-existing conditions, and
then they just don't sign up.
That's misinformation that leads
to a lack of care. Um
Medicaid should not always be
the goal to stay on it or get on
it, and a lot of people will
continue to falsify information.
Although there may be an
alternative plan that has a
lesser cost, Um
It's not able to stay on it and
I have had so many people tell
me I'm just not gonna tell him
what I have, because then I
won't get any health insurance.
Um
But I'll pick it up La Familia,
Save it very important. Um, it's
me is not that rural, But we
really, really need it. Um
Some people who work the system.
The system needs to work better
for them. Uh, M DC is an
example. Someone who comes in
and says
I need a wheelchair. I need a
walker. But they only need it
while they're there, and then
they leave with it and it goes
into storage. You have a lot of
Very expensive doorsteps. Um,
thank you. I will take time. Um,
guardianship rep Pay self
determination. Thank you so much
and great community resources.
During CC and J. Thank you so
much. Mr Chair, Madam Chair. I
apologize.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Patsy, Can
you hear us?
OK, go ahead and begin Patsy.
Patsy. She said she was also
doing another meeting so she may
be isn't available.
Get to
I just
Can you hear me? Mr Chair? Yes.
Yeah. No, we can go ahead.
OK, Uh, Mr Chair and Madam vice
chair members of the committee.
My name is Patsy Romero. I'm the
president CEO of Santa Maria
Elmira to Mr Chair. This is just
a little bit off topic, but I
wanted to bring you up to date
and thank those of you who
supported our request on the
eligibility issues that so many
of our clients were having they
were being denied their
Medicaid eligibility. It was
over.
That people weren't getting
their benefits paid people
couldn't get their oxygen people
couldn't get their wheelchairs
and it was a pretty, uh, serious
situation not only for
individuals in the developmental
disability community, but mental
health, the nursing home
industry. It was quite, uh, a
serious issue. And what happened
is that, uh, I did reach out to
several of you.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Uh, Representative Compson, Uh,
Senators, Stefanik. Be Lopez.
Uh, Senator Rodriguez, Uh,
Representative, uh, Kate.
Representative and
representative Brown to assist
us in reaching out to Secretary
Kerry Rho in order to try to get
the ISD issues resolved because
it was becoming a crisis, and I
just wanted to update you, Mr
Chair and members of the
committee that your support and
your advocacy on our behalf has
really, really helped. So we are
seeing
Positive movement. Uh, Secretary
Aijo has been, uh, visiting with
me. Uh, almost weekly. Uh,
making sure that all of the
issues that are that all of us
are facing is being addressed.
She's implemented some processes
whereby we can meet with
representatives of the health
care authority. Uh, we were able
to look at the waivers that New
Mexico was given to ensure that
Vulnerable populations were able
to continue with their benefits.
uh as established and requested
by the state of New Mexico, So
there was a lot a bit of a
chaos.
Uh, within the health care
authority. Uh, we're still
working through that chaos. But
I did feel like I wanted to
present to you, Mister Chair
today and all of those, uh,
representatives sitting in in in
the committee today and I, I
forgot to mention, uh, Senator
Hickey as well. Uh, thank you
for reaching out to rep to
Secretary or Miho. Thank you for
listening to your constituents
with regard to how they were. ST
To get their eligibility issues
resolved. And I would like for
you Mr Chair to stay on top of
all of this because it can cause
extensive harm to the most
vulnerable populations. So I do
wanna thank the administration.
Uh, particularly Secretary
Armijo for
Stepping up listening to us and
working with us, but I
especially want to thank each
and every one of you for for
supporting us and listening to
these, uh, issues that we were
having, uh, it it went a long
way to resolve a very serious
issue that we were facing in New
Mexico.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Patsy, And I'm just a
reminder to committee members
that that comment was mostly
directed at the Medicaid
director, and she wasn't able to
listen. So if you need to talk
with someone, try and make sure
that it's not when the public is
trying to talk to them as well.
Um, Next is the Karen Kushner on
online.
So, Mr Chair. Thank you for
having me Madam vice chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
just wanted to talk to you.
While the year is early. It's
may. Um I try to come every year
and listen and talk to you about
some of the concerns. I'm a
member of the spina bifida
community here in New Mexico,
And in the last few years we've
gotten a school of public
health. We've gotten a movement
center for those with MS.
He got a dental clinic last
year, and I just want to put out
there that it's time now for a
comprehensive care clinic that
specializes in wrap around, um,
care and specialized clinicians.
We, um, do not have that for
those of us with, um, extreme
disabilities in this state. Um,
we don't have that for those who
are basically straddling a care
cliff where they've aged out of
There. Um
Care clinics in the hospitals
They become 21 or 2526. Whatever
the age is, and they have
nowhere to go.
So we need to really fill that
gap so that the people that have
multiple disabilities have
Access and and I'll emphasize
that access to the care that
they need to the specialist.
They need to the wraparound care
they need, because if we could
do that, and we could emphasize,
uh, the continuing care and not
just emergency care, we would
keep this population so much
healthier than they are now and
I also want to point out like
one of your speakers did that
not all persons with
disabilities.
Fall under your ID DD category,
They don't qualify for the
special programming they don't
qualify for Medicaid, but we
still need providers and we
still need to have the services
and I would hope that this is
the year that we can finally get
a comprehensive care center for
all of those that need it in the
state. Thank you very much for
your time. Thank you very much,
Karen. Um
Anybody else? Members of what
Thank of representative Loja.
You had something Just just an
announcement. Mr Chair if I may,
um
Here in Santa Fe on the 18th of
May at 9 A.m. NAMI in the realm
of behavior. Health, uh, is
having their, uh, the call NAMI
walk to bring attention to
behavioral health concerns, and
I think they're they're having
walks across the state. But on a
Saturday the 18th at nine
o'clock at Alto Park in Santa
Fe, we're having a walk. Thank
you, mister Chair.
Thank you, representative And
with that, unless there's some
issue lingering, we are
adjourned until, uh, our meeting
in Albuquerque in three weeks.
