afternoon to have the
opportunity to share a few
thoughts with you on the
profound demographic changes
that our nation, every region
and every state in our nation,
including the great state of New
Mexico is experiencing the kinds
of changes we find ourselves in
the midst of, you're going to
have to buckle your seat belt to
deal with them, um, because, uh,
they're gonna profoundly
transform the workforce,
workplaces, consumer markets and
all of our social, economic, and
political institutions. When we
were on lockdown during the
pandemic.
The US Census Bureau, the
federal agency responsible for
collecting and monitoring
demographic change in our nation
released two important sources
of demographic data. The first
was the 2020 census, as you
know, every 10 years we conduct
a full enumeration or account of
the US population. That 2020
census was released when we were
on lockdown and more recently,
The Census Bureau has released 3
years of post 2020
population estimates for our
community and nation, uh, and
what I would like to do in the
time allotted me this afternoon
is share with you what we
learned from the 2020 census and
what we've learned in addition
of of demographic about
demographic changes for the
period April 1st, 2020 through
July 1st, 20.
23 and I want to talk about what
we've learned under this theme
of gale force demographic wind
gusts. There are a set of forces
that are out there that are are
gonna profoundly change our
institutions as I've already
noted, and the way my key
takeaway is the way you as a
state, uh, and, and all of us as
a nation manage these
demographic changes will be the
key to our ability to thrive.
Prosper and compete in a hyper
competitive global economy
moving forward where the new
normal is a certain uncertainty,
and we can I'll loop back to
that issue at the end and my
concluding remarks.
How did we, what did we learn
from the 2020 census and uh the.
Oops, you muted yourself.
I'm mute. What did we learn? Uh,
let's just see, hold here, I'm
having difficulty moving
forward.
Three big demographic drivers of
change are post 2020 our
population has been moving post
2010, our population has been
moving and grooving, browning
and graying disappearing and
rebelling. I want to talk about
each one of these uh shifts and
then talk about what it means
for our ability to thrive and
prosper and compete. Let's talk
about moving and grooving first.
Moving and grooving is about the
profound redistribution of
population in our nation at the
regional level, and the key
takeaway here is the South rises
again. This is about a major
shift in population or
redistribution to the Southern
United States, uh, the way the
Census Bureau defines the South,
uh, the states that appear in
red on this graphic to your
left, you know the history of
our country, and I'm sure you
know the history of the Southern
United States, you know, for
much of its history, it was an
economically backwards a region.
It had all kinds
a racial problems and as a
consequence of that, for much of
its history, it was the place to
leave as opposed to the place to
move to or migrate to.
You can see that in the right
hand side of this graphic cause,
cause what you will note there
is that between 1910 and about
1970, the South only captured
about 30% of net national
population growth during that
period. And the reason for that
was, it was the place to leave.
We had two great ways of out
migration, one in and around
World War 1 and the second one
in and around World War II. And
so to the extent that the region
grew during this period, it was
Largely due to an excess of
births over deaths, you can grow
two ways, more births than
deaths or more people moving in
than moving out.
During this period, the South
was a major exporter of
population and thus had very,
very slow growth, about 30% of
net national growth during this
period. And then around 1970
something profound occurred in
our country that continues to to
the present, and every decade
since 1970, the South has
captured about half of net
national population growth in
this this this this era.
In every decade, about 50% of
net growth in the South. The
South has gone from a region
that I always say we speak two
languages, English and bad
English, to one the day where we
speak well over 350 different
languages, demographically the
South has become the nation's
cat meow in terms of destination
selection. It is the only region
of the country that is
experiencing net in migration
from every other region of the
country, whether it's the
No, at these, the Midwest or the
west, we are here in the South,
a net importer of population
from those regions.
And if you ask the question,
who's moving to the south, to
the right hand of of this
graphic, what you will notice,
the answer is everybody is
moving to the south. It's the
only region that is experiencing
net in migration for about for
just about every demographic
group, whether we're talking
about whites, whether we're
talking about blacks, Asians,
Hispanics, the elderly, the
native born, the foreign born,
all of those groups are moving
to the south and larger numbers
than they're leaving. No other
region.
has that distinction. If you
look at the West region during
this period, the only group that
were moving there in larger
numbers than were leaving was
the Asian population.
If you go to the Midwest, the
only group moving there in
larger numbers than we're
leaving was the Hispanic
population, and if you look at
the Northeast, it was kind of
like when the last person
leaves, please turn off the
lights if there's still any on
we're talking about a profound
redistribution of population at
the regional level, that's
dramatically transforming the
composition of the population in
the region.
So if you look at the last
decade, 2010 to 2020, what you
will see is the nation grew by
about 7.4%, slow growth in the
Northeast, slow growth in the
Midwest at 43% respectively, the
South, the leading uh most
attractive destination at 10.2%.
The West was growing at about
9.2%, but you will see in just a
minute, that was largely due to
natural population change, not
migration, uh, but
This, this movement is not
really about the South in
general. It's about 5 states
within the South, particularly
during the the 2010 to 2020
period. This movement was about
Texas. It was about Florida, it
was about Georgia, North
Carolina and Virginia about when
you look at those five states,
they captured about 79% of the
net gain of 11.7 million people
in the region, 2010 to 2020. It
doesn't mean the other southern
states weren't growing, they
were, but they only
collectively captured about 20%
of that growth. So in larger
national demographic terms and
regional terms, we talk about
migration magnet states, two of
them immigrant gateways, Texas
and Florida. The other three
kind of newly emerging migration
magnets, uh.
In the 2010, 20 period, uh,
Georgia, North Carolina, and
Virginia, profound kinds of
changes in their communities.
What happened during the post
2020 period between 2020 April
1st, 2020, and July 1st, 2023,
when we were all supposed to be
on lockdown during the pandemic.
What happened? The South gained
another 3.8 million people
during this period, uh, 27,
30-month period, Northeast
630,000 people in the Midwest
lost 78,000. Yes, the West grew
by about 301, 302,000 people,
but if you, you will see just a
moment. That was all natural
population change because it's
the West region was experiencing
net out migration during this
period as well.
And the migration magnet states
changed a little bit during this
period, uh, Virginia dropped out
as a migration magnet state, uh,
and what was added to Texas,
Florida, North Carolina, and
Georgia with South Carolina and
Tennessee. When you look at
those six states, what you see,
they captured about 94% of that
net growth during the, during
the pandemic era, let's just say
the other Southern states
captured about 6% of that growth
during the period.
Uh
Profound kinds of of change this
was driven largely by migration.
We call the people moving during
this era. April 1st, 2020,
certainly to July 1st, 2022, the
height of the pandemic, we call
them pandemic refugees, and if
you look, you see that the
migration magnet states that
much of their growth, if not all
of it, was driven by
Migration, but you will also
note some states on this list
that weren't, uh, didn't have a
history of rapid uh
migration-driven growth, uh,
places like Utah, places like
Oklahoma, uh, Alabama and
Montana. These were all places
that had amenity rich
communities with broadband
connections and many of the
pandemic refugees that were
fleeing major urban centers are
sought out destinations in these
communities and thus you saw the
kind of growth that is
it in this graphic. To give you
some sense of how profound the
kinds of changes of population
were during the pandemic. If you
look to the right, you will see
that Florida every day, 7 days a
week from April 1st, 2020 to
July 1st, 2022, received about
985 newcomers every day. Texas
got 789 newcomers every day.
Here in North Carolina where I
am and where I live most of the
time. We got
37 newcomers every day. South
Carolina got 223. Georgia got
205 everyday Tennessee got 195,
places like Idaho that was
growing dramatically got 113
people every day. Where were
they coming from? To the
left-hand side of this graphic.
California was losing 864 people
every day. New York about 687
people every day, Illinois, 294
people every day.
To be sure, uh, these pandemic
refugees are in most cases had a
lot of money, uh, and the impact
of moving to uh these
destination communities was to
drive up the cost of housing in
a profound kind of way in such a
way that it created a major
housing affordability crisis, to
give you an example of what was
like here in North Carolina. I
live in the 5th most rapidly
growing county in the state, and
in my neighborhood.
One of my neighbors were in was
uh walking her dog during the
pandemic and she's said to me, I
was standing in the yard with my
dog, and she said,
Uh, we're leaving, we're moving
to Florida. Her husband was an
assistant coach of football at
Carolina, and he took a job as a
football coach at the University
of Florida. She says, we're
leaving. She said, we put our
house on the market yesterday
morning at 9 a.m. and at 9:15
a.m. we had 5 full price offers
for the house, and one of the
suitors noticed that they were
scheduled to have an open house
the next day, and they called
and offered them an additional
$50,000 cash, not to have the
open house the next day. The
consequence of this kind of
rapid growth, uh, and, uh, you
know, people moving with larger
sums of money that could they
could invest in the housing
market. The consequence was that
this major housing affordability
crisis created a situation where
the very people who are hired to
protect public health and
safety, educate our kids, uh,
the first responders and the
like, in many instances cannot
afford.
afford to live in the very
places that they're supposed to
do their work. It's a major
issue. So the pan, the
redistribution of population
during the pandemic was a
double-edged sword. Yes, those
people moving in.
had a major impact on the tax
base of communities and through
that consumer purchasing power,
uh, and the like, but at the
same time it it adversely
impacted the very people who
were hired to protect public
health and safety and educate
our kids in life. And so during
the during uh the pandemic era,
post 2020, when the nation was
growing at about 1.1% of the
Northeast continue to lose
population. The Midwest
continued to lose population.
And you know that the South grew
by 3.1%, adding 3.8 million
people, modest growth, net
growth in the West, about 4/10
of 1%, uh, and if you look at
what was driving that growth,
you will see that in the South,
it was mostly net migration and
out west, uh, you, uh, it had
net made out migration to the
extent that the West was
growing, it was an excess of
births over deaths that was
driving change.
Uh, because again, large numbers
of people, about 201,000 of them
were fleeing the region during
that period.
And if you look at the sources
of migration, uh, for the, for
the South, it was uh about 2 to
1 in favor of domestic migrants,
but a substantial influx of
international migrants. If you
look at the growth out west or
the population loss you will see
that that domestic out migration
from the West region of about
close to 800,000 people. Uh,
some of that loss was offset by
international migration, but you
had net population
lost because more people
domestically were leaving then
were arriving internationally in
the community. What happened in
your great state of of New
Mexico during this period, 2010
to 2023, when the nation was
growing at 7.4%.
New Mexico was growing at about
2.8%. You all added about 58,000
people net to your population
during the 2010, 2020 decade,
uh and uh if you look at
The percent change, uh, you lost
about 1/10 of 1% of your
population and that absolute
loss, uh, during the pandemic of
about 3000 people, uh, you're,
your trajectory was more
analogous to the Northeast and
the Midwest than it was of uh
the South region in terms of
population change, uh, and the
source of your uh population,
you did have some net migration,
more people.
moving in and leaving, but that
net migration was offset by uh
more deaths than births uh in
your community. So, uh, when you
have more deaths than births
offsetting migration
demographically, you are a
biologically declining community
resulting in net uh absolute
population loss of about 3000
people, uh, during the pandemic
or post 2020 based on the Census
Bureau's population.
estimates. And if you look at
the source of your migration,
you had domestic out migration,
that was offset by international
migrants moving in, uh, of about
close to 12,000 people
offsetting the next 6000 people
who left for a net gain of
migrants of 5810 people are
doing.
The post the pandemic period.
And so, uh, moving and grooving,
uh, New Mexico growing uh
population declining, uh,
migration not as great as uh
other regions of the country,
particularly the South, uh, uh,
sort of characterizing your
community. At the same time that
our population was uh shifting
demographically at the regional
level. Uh, we also were
experiencing compositional
changes in our.
population and they're two
colorful demographic processes
undergirding that compositional
change. One is what we call the
browning of America and the
other one is what we call the
graying of America and both of
those demographic processes are
occurring simultaneously. I want
to talk about them in
individually and then bring them
back together for you, uh, uh,
combined them at the end of the
discussion here. The browning of
America is about
immigration-driven population
change in our country.
If you uh look at the right-hand
side of this graphic, what you
will see is, which is depicts
immigration or immigrant
population from 1900 to about
2018, what you will see in that
graphic is that we kept uh
international migration or
immigration pretty low uh until
around the 19th 1970, and then
you see this huge uptick in the
number of foreign born residents
in our communities, in our
nation, uh after 1970, 1965.
is a very, very important year
in our immigration history
because prior to 1965, we had an
immigration law that says if we
were going to invite the farm
boy to move into the United
States. It was important that
the people who entered the
country, it was important that
they not upset the existing
racial and ethnic balance of our
country as it existed at the
turn of the 20th century. So we
had an express preference for
People who could come to
America, go through the
assimilation process and this
thing called a melting pot was
supposed to work. In other
words, we operated on a quota
system that was geographically
discriminatory against people
from certain regions of the
world. In fact, if you go back
to the 1880s, what you will
notice codified into law,
something called the Chinese
Exclusion Law. Uh, they
shouldn't be allowed to come to
America because it would be
quote unquote difficult to
assimilate into mainstream
society.
If you fast forward to the first
decade of the 20th century, it
became the Chinese uh uh the
Asiatic barrier region, uh, that
included Japan. They shouldn't
be allowed to come to America
because it would be quote
unquote difficult to assimilate
into American or mainstream
society, and we justified those
laws based on a series of racist
theories about cultural
inferiority.
That all changed in 1965.
Coincidence with the civil
rights movement and domestic
life, we liberalized our
immigration law in that year via
something called the Heart
Seller Act of 1965. Put a pin in
it because it's one of the most
profound pieces of legislation
in our history that is literally
responsible for the diversity of
our population as we know it
today.
What you would, what happened
with the uh heart seller A is
number one, we increased the
number of immigrants who were
allowed to enter our country.
Prior to 1965, we're only
allowed about 200,000 legal
immigrants to enter the country
on an annual basis after 1965,
initially, we increased it to
about 500,000 people annually
subsequently to about 800,000
and right before the pandemic
about a million people
Invited to enter the country
through legal challenges, all
contributing to the growing
diversity of our population.
Secondly, because
We changed and opened up our
country to people who heretofore
had not been allowed to come.
Basically we moved uh the entry
preferences from just European
societies to Asia, Latin America
and the Middle East, these are
all people of color. They are
phenotypically different from
the Anglo-Saxon model, so that's
takeaway number 2, in the, uh,
immigration uh shift during this
period and the fact that these
newcomers, the new immigrants
are phenotypically different.
They're people of color. Yes,
they can go through the
assimilation process, but you
will always know that they're
different because they're
phenotype is different from the
Anglo-Saxon model. So takeaways,
undergir and Browning of
America, number one, fundamental
shift in geographic origin. 2
fundamental shift in the number
of people entering number 3
fundamental shift in phenotype,
such that by 2018 we had 44.7
million immigrants.
So foreign born population in
the United States. Who were
they? 44% of them were Hispanic,
as you can see in this graphic,
you will note that the 2nd
largest share of the population
at 27% were Asian. You will note
that the non-Hispanic white
share, which would be equivalent
to the
O Emigrants that are down to
prior to 1965, accounted for
about 18% of the composition of
the US foreign born population
in 2018. If you looked at these
numbers prior to 1965, they
would have been the reverse, the
majority of the newcomers would
have been uh uh white alone and
very small shares of Hispanic or
Asians because of the way the
immigration law was written. If
we move forward, uh, with this
notion of browning Hispanic
and Asians, other people of
color, uh, is what undergirs the
browning of our population. You
could see the impact of the
shift in the immigration.
Law, uh, in the, at the
beginning of the new millennium
2000 to 2010 when we added 27
million people to our population
during that decade. You will
note the bottom row yellow line
that 15.2 million of that 27
million people were Hispanic.
You'll note that the
non-Hispanic white share of net
gain was 2.3 million people, the
white population grew by 1.2%
when the Hispanic population was
growing by 42%.
But between those two yellow
lines and inclusive of the
bottom yellow line. Those are
all people of color and you'll
note double digit growth and all
of them except American Indians,
Alaskan natives, they were
growing at about 9%. When I talk
about the browning of America.
I'm talking about the source of
growth in our country, and it is
uh occurring primarily among
people of color, uh, that's what
we mean by the browning of
America, a little bit closer to
home, 2010 to 2017. You'll note
that the US
population grew by 5.6% during
that period.
Far left on this graphic, the
non-Hispanic white population
grew by 4/10 of 1%. Where did
all of our growth for most of it
occurred to the right of that
purple bar among uh groups of
color in particular, uh, Pacific
Islanders, Hispanic Asian
population growing uh pretty
rapidly during this period.
That's what I'm talking about
when I talk about the browning
of America is where growth is
occurring. It is occurring among
people of color and for the
first time,
uh,
in history, the 2020, 2010, 2020
census showed that for the first
time in history, the
non-Hispanic white population
actually declined in this
country by 5.1 million people,
or about 2.6%, and it doesn't
matter what region of the
country you, you look at,
including the Southern United
States, we experienced white
population loss in the the 2010,
2020 decade.
35 states lost white population
during this period, including
New Mexico, only 15 states plus
the District of Columbia had any
white uh population growth
during uh the 2010, 2020, uh,
period. When you have white
population loss and your
population grows by 22.7 million
people, what that means is, is
that all of the net growth in
our population was driven by no
non-whites, the non-white
population accounted for 100% of
net growth, Hispanics accounted
for about 51% of that net growth
during the last decade. That's
what I'm talking about when I
talk about the browning of
America in the South. It's about
100% of net growth driven by
people of color, about 50, 47%.
Driven by people of color.
That's what I mean by the
browning of America. The other
thing that's changing the
complexion of our population is
a fundamental shift in marriage
patterns in our country, as all
of you know, until 1967, it was
illegal for blacks and whites to
marry in our country. That all
changed in that year, and you
can see the impact in this
graphic that out marriage or
intermarriage means you marry
someone of a different racial or
ethnic group.
And you belong to that
population grew among newlyweds
from about 3% of marriages to
about 17% between 1967 and 2015.
A little bit later data between
for all married people from
about 3% in the late 70s to
about 10% in 2015. If you ask
the question, who the heck is
doing all this hooking up in
strange ways. The answer is
about 42% of those marriages are
between Hispanics and whites,
about
15% of them are between Asians
and whites in about 14% of the
cases, both marriage partners
are non-white, Asian and black,
black and Hispanic. Uh, note
that blacks uh share of the
marriages the smallest share
about 11%. There's this other
group, I don't know who the heck
they are, but they're hooking up
and they're having fun doing it.
The consequence of this shift in
marriage patterns is a rapid
growth in a multiracial
population, an increase of 276%.
between 2010 and 2020, a total
of about 33.8 million people who
are of mixed race background in
our country. Why is this
important? It is important
because all of the research
shows or much of it shows that a
substantial share of the mixed
race population feel like they
are invisible and that their
history and all the other kinds
of things that are very, very
important in our society, very,
very important in our workforce.
They feel like they don't
belong.
This is something that uh we
need to embrace if we're going
to win the war for talent moving
forward. I'll come back to that
notion, just a minute. That
notion of white population loss
continued during the pandemic or
post 2020 between July 1st,
between April 1st 2020 and July
1st, 2023. The white population
in this country declined by
another 2.1 million. So when our
population grew by 3.5 million
during that period, all of that
growth was driven.
by people of color, basically
all of the groups that appear in
yellow in this slide, and you
see the mixed race population
grew by about 8% during that
period, the Hispanic population
by about 5.1. You see where the
growth is, that's what I'm
talking about, when I'm talking
about the browning of America,
uh, in this country. What
happened in your state?
Uh, 2010 to 2020, white
population loss of about 4.3%,
so that means of the 58,000
population gained at 2.8%. You
see the sources in the, in the
brown or orange color, all of
those groups had growth, that's
where your growth, that's what's
driving growth in your state, is
that non-white that non-white
group, those non-white groups
are driving growth, uh, to the
extent that you had growth, uh,
2020 to 2023, you had
population loss, 1/10 of 1% of
about 3100 people, uh, but you
see major white population loss
not unlike during the uh last
decade and a foreshadowing that
it may be accelerating because
in a 3 year period you lost
24,000 whites in a decade, you
lost 36,000 in the previous
decade, uh, the other the other
population that has spent some
uh loss was the uh American
Indian, Alaska native
population, 2/10 of 1%.
Growth in all of the other
groups, that is, uh, to the
extent, uh, your population loss
would have been even greater if
you didn't have people of color
that were growing uh at this
particular point in time in your
population.
So Browning, immigration driven,
intermarriage driven,
transforming the complexion of
society at the same time that
our population has been
browning. It is also been
graying, whereas browning is
immigration driven, graying is
about the aging of our native
born population. Uh, and I often
get the question, well, how do I
know if we, I'm part of the
graying of America. Uh, there
are 3 ways. One, if you have
difficulty seeing this.
screen, you're probably part of
the graying of America too, if
you have to go to the restroom 3
times during this presentation.
You're part of the graying of
America and 3, if you fall
asleep during this presentation,
it's just an old kai, it's not
my fault. You're part of the
grading of America. The graying
of America is about 3 things.
It's about changes in longevity.
It's about declining fertility
and it's about a group of us
born between 1946 and 1964,
where the boomer generation.
Quickly at each one of these
things. We
living much longer today than we
ever envisioned in our history
when we introduced Social
Security in America in 1935, the
average person turning 65 that
year, was gonna live another uh
12.7 years. That same person
turning 65 today is going to
live another 18.7 years, and we
now think living to 100 on a
routine basis as well within
reach, and there's one school of
thought that says the person who
lived to 130 has already been
born. Why?
We have major uh health, uh, you
know, innovations that are
extending our lives. We're
eating better some of the time,
we're exercising better some of
the time. And then there's this
thing called regenerative
medicine. We have, we have here
in North Carolina, a scientist
that has regenerated a bladder.
So if your bladder wear out, we
can sell you another one. You
just tell me what color you
want. And we're working on body
part around the world today, we
have these longevity hotspots.
Where people live forever and
we've been studying them to
understand uh the science of
longevity, uh, this is one of
the hottest topics in
entrepreneurship today of how do
we uh uh uh enable people to age
with dignity and grace, uh, and
living as long and as healthy
lives as they can possible.
Google several years ago
developed a company called
Calico and the purpose of the
company is to defeat.
death by extend extending life.
We have these profound kinds of
innovations now that help people
age in place and age with
dignity and the like. Uh.
And you can see the impact of
extended longevity by 2016, we
had about 82,000 centenarians
here uh in the United States.
We're forecasting that there
will be about 5,089,000 by uh
2060 globally, we had about 35,
34,000 centarians in 1950 today
or 2020, there were about 573
74,000 centenarians.
collective of this notion of
longevity in our society. The
other thing that's driving the
graying of America is a decline
in fertility.
You know, when women entered the
labor force and became career
oriented. It had an adverse in
fact, uh, not an adverse, it had
an impact on fertility rates
because uh when ladies enter the
labor market, the aged marriage
went up, and when the age of
marriage goes up, that means the
age at first childbirth goes up
and when those two things go up
in consonant with one another,
that reduces or has an impact on
the biological clock of
by reducing the number of years
that is safe to have children.
So, uh, the increasing
participation of women in the
labor market and career-oriented
resulted in women delaying
childbearing, uh, and reducing
those child, those years that is
safe to have children. All you
have to do is look at your own
family and go back and look at
your great grandmother. I
guarantee you she had 2000
children, your grandma had 200,
your mom had 3 or 4 and then
there is the, the women of the
day that are below.
replacement level.
And then we have women, about
20% of women historically that
opt not to have any children
whatsoever. They're called the
voluntary childless, and then
there's something in demography
called completed fertility. I
don't have time to give you the
great theory, but I'll give you
the pop version of it completed
fertility occurs when women tell
their husbands, go take out the
trash. Ain't nothing else
happening here. Completed
fertility for women occurs
between the ages of 40 and 44.
There's this precipit
just drop in fertility in those
years, demographically in our
population, there are a growing
number of women in the 40 to 44
year age range that have either
not had children or not had
enough children to replace
themselves if they're in a
couple, uh, to, to maintain or
to grow our population. When
you're not adding uh
Population on the front end of
the life course, the top end of
the life course gets older, and
so.
Declining fertility is one of
the drivers that's responsible
for an aging population. And
it's not just what happens to
women. On the other hand,
there's some developments in the
in the male population that also
having an impact on
Fertility rates and thus the
aging of our population. We
believe that there is a
worldwide decline in the male
sperm count. It has to do with
stress and exposure to
environmental contaminants and a
whole range of other things that
are reducing that sperm count,
but the big thing today, the
most recent data shows that
there has been an increase in
the vasectomy rate among
privately insured men aged 16 to
44, uh, between 2.
14 and 2021. Where's that
vasectomy rate, the greatest
among men with no children,
among men with a wife of
advanced maternal age among men
who are single and among males
aged 18 to 24. When you don't
have that fertility at that
level, it when you don't have
The kinds of activities that
lead to to childbirth and the
like and that aging, it too is a
contributor to uh the aging of
our population, uh, in, in the
country. Uh, and then there are
a group of us who were born
between 1946 and 1964. We are
the
Products of the post-World War
II hormonal rush. Our fathers
went off to World War 2 and came
back home and got busy. They got
busy to the tune of producing 81
million of us. We're the boomer
generation, and if you look at
the left-hand side of this
graphic, we were between the
ages of 45 and 64 in 2010.
On, on January 1st of 2011, the
first baby boomer born in
America, turned 65 and became
eligible for literally
everything. Most people say
Social Security and Medicare and
all those things, but no,
everything you see that, that 81
million people increased by 31%
of the boomer population
increased by 31% during the
decade 2000 to 2010. You'll note
that the second most rapidly
growing population.
During that decade was the 65
plus population. Why? Because
the people turning 65 have
longevity, they're living much
longer than they have in the
past. When you put together that
population 45 to 64 and the 65
plus population. That's what is
known as the silver tsunami. Is
that age that large segment of
our population that's aging and
many of whom are aging out of
the workforce and the like. The
problem is you will
note that what happened to the
25 to 44 year old population, it
actually declined during this
period and you'll note that the
under 25 population is growing
much slower than the boomer
population and the pre-boomer
population. That is your labor
force challenge moving forward.
And the way you think about the
challenges on the right hand
side of this graphic.
You need to unpack your 65+
population into the youngest old
65 to 74. The middle old 75 to
84 and the oldest of the old,
the 85 plus population. If you
look at 2010 to 2019 on the
right-hand side of this graphic,
you will see an interesting
dynamic. The 85 plus population
increasing by 20%, growing more
rapidly than the 45 to 64, more
rapidly than
the 25 to 44 and the under 25
population actually declined.
That is your workforce
challenge. That's the challenge
that you're gonna have to deal
with moving forward, that we're
gonna have to deal with at a
nation, you can see it here,
looking at the US population
change by age, uh,
The, the 65 plus population last
decade grew by 35%. The working
age population 18 to 64, 4.6%,
the under 18 population actually
declined by about almost 1%.
2010, 2020 to 2022 growth among
The 65 plus or elderly
population, lost in the working
age population lost in the
pre-working age pops in the
under 18 population. That's what
we have to deal with and
thinking about these challenges.
If you look at New Mexico during
this period, uh, 2010 to 2020,
you had lost across all of those
age pops, I've broken it out
further. You had loss in your
preschool age population loss in
your school age population and
loss in your working age
population, the only
population that grew was a 65+
population of older adults at
about 41% last decade, the trend
continued 2020 to 2023, loss
across all age groups except the
older 65 plus population, uh,
with that decline, that's your
workforce challenge, uh, moving
forward.
Uh, because of the decline among
both preschool, school age, and
a working age population.
Basically what has happened
because of the browning and
graying of America. We have 5
generations in the workplace and
because and as a function of the
challenges that you have in your
working age population and the
preschool and school age
population, it's gonna have to
be all hands on deck across all
five generations that are in the
workplace. Everybody from those
pre
performers who are most familiar
in love with the rotary dial
phone to the Gen Z that waltz is
in the work at 10:30 in the
morning if they show up at all,
uh, you know, and
You know
Boomer, boomers, uh, we arrive
at 5:30 in the morning because
that's the way we roll. We look
at Gen Z, so that's a bad work
ethic, you come rolling up in
here at 10:30 in the morning, if
you show up at all and the
pre-boomers still trying to get
the first rotary dial call out
at 10:30 in the morning, uh, and
we are losing about $30 million
in lost work productivity
because we don't build uh HR
systems that are embracing all
of these.
operations, but given the
demographic shift, given the
aging of our population. We're
gonna need all hands on deck.
You're gonna need all hands on
deck across all of those
generations, uh, to survive,
thrive, and prosper moving
forward.
Two things are gonna be really
important. Uh, some of those
people have to age and I have to
leave the, the, the, the
workforce, so succession
planning is gonna be really,
really important. And the second
thing is, uh, childcare won't be
your big issue. I didn't say it
won't be an issue, it won't be
your big issue or major issue,
what will be your big issue in
terms of workforce dynamics will
be elder care because you will
have more and more people who
have responsibility for taking
care of aging love.
ones, uh, and, and MochaR
systems are not ready and
designed to do that, but we're
gonna have to go through those
accommodations if we're going to
win the war for talent moving
forward. So we've been browning,
we're moving and grooving
browning and gray. Our
population is also disappearing
and rebelling.
We talk about this really
quickly. Look at the left-hand
side of this graphic. It it is a
depiction of the rates of
population growth in our country
from on a on a decade by decade
basis between 1920 and 2020.
What you will note in this
graphic is that in terms of the
rate of population growth by
decade, we peaked in terms of
rapid growth in 1960 when our
population grew at 18.5% during
that decade.
you will note in every decade
since 1960, we have experienced
slower population growth in
every decade.
My per some perturbations from
year from decade to decade, but
at a slower rate than in 1960,
such that by 2020 when our
population grew during that
decade was 7.4%. Good people,
that was the 2nd slowest rate of
growth in our nation's.
history. When was the slowest
rate of growth, it was during
the Great Depression when our
population grew at 7.3%. We are
in an era of slowing total
population growth. And if you
look at the right hand side of
this graphic, you will see the
projections. We are projected to
continue to grow at a slower and
slower rate of uh
Population growth annual
population growth, uh uh well
into, uh, uh, post 2050, uh,
this graphic goes out to 2058 uh
here, so this slowing population
growth is one of those gale
force demographic wind gusts
that we have to deal with. You
could see it coming.
Look at the left-hand side of
this graph in the 1990s, our
population grew by 13% during
the 202,010 period we grew by
9.7%, uh, in the last decade we
grew by 7.4%. Part of the
driving force with slowing
growth as we become very
draconian on immigrants of the
foreign born population. Look at
the right-hand side of this
graphic. In the 90s, our foreign
born population grew by 57%
during the 2000.
new first decade of new
millennium grew, dropped to 24%,
2010 to 2019, our immigrant
population grew by 13.7% and
during the first Trump
administration, the immigrant
population grew by 2.7%.
Understand that when you have
slowing total growth, declining
fertility and the like. If
you're going to thrive and
prosper, we're gonna have to
think about a sound immigration
policy and understand that the
other factor that's driving
slowing growth is declining
white population, uh, uh, a
declining white population. I've
showed it to you earlier, we
could see it coming, uh, again
in the 1990s, the white
population grew by 3.4%, uh,
2000 to 20.
10 by 1.2% last decade as I
indicated earlier, for the first
time in history, non-Hispanic
white population declined by
2.6%. So in the nineties, whites
contributed 20% to growth in the
2008%, 2010 to 2020, 0 because
the population declined uh to
the extent that we grew, it was
driven by people of color, every
region lost white population. I
show I've shown you this graphic
before and and post 2020, we
White population continued to
decline by 1.2% of about 2.1
million people. So when we grew
by 3.4 million people. It is all
driven by people of color.
At the same time, there's some
profound developments that are
impacting men in our society
that uh give cause for concern.
The good news first, around
2010, what we noticed was that
women were about to surpass men
in the numerical majority in the
paid workforce in America. The
operative term is paid
workforce. Women have been
working all their lives, but
they were about to surpass men
as the numerical majority and
the paid workforce, but ladies,
this was not because we tried
to, we were trying to treat you
all fairly because there's still
a huge gender wage gap out
there.
Some research shows us about 80
cents on the dollar, uh, this
reality was because men are
doing so poorly in American
society today. All men. Why?
Why, what's happening with? We
got selective withdrawal of men
from the labor market, why are
they withdrawing skills
mismatches, they're disabled or
they're incarcerated, if at that
median wage, particularly of men
with less than a college
education has dropped by about
20% after control.
ro ll ing for inflation since
1969, the opposite is true for
men with a college degree, but
the big thing for all of us is
this last bullet on the graphic
is this sex ratio imbalance in
college enrollment, a profound
shift in education. If you look
at the history of enrollment
left-hand side of this graphic
from 1947 to about 2019, the
yellow.
Or whatever color that is, uh,
graphic uh bar is uh for men,
male enrollment, the green is
for female enrollment. So if you
look at 1947, college enrollment
was about 70% male, 30% female.
If you march over time, what you
will see and notice is that
those two curves began to grow
together and they coalesce in
1979 were college enrollment was
about
50/50 male female, and then
those two curves flipped.
And just about every decade
since 1979 or 1980, the sex
ratio and higher education has
been about 60% female, 40% male.
I assure you at birth, the sex
ratio is not 60/40. It's more
like fifty-fifty, where are the
men? Where are the boys? The
answer is we have a whole
generation of men that have
given up on college, where the
sex ratio for almost
4 decades has been 60% female,
40% male, and it doesn't matter
what region of the country you
look at, that male enrollment
hovers in the low 40s.
In terms of college enrollment
across the country. I don't have
data for the state of New
Mexico, but I'm gonna share data
for you on the state of North
Carolina and our UNC system. We
have about 16 campuses in the
system. You will note that this
is enrollment in the fall of
2022, 239, almost 240,000
students, the section, it was
40%, 41% male, the predominantly
white institutions were about
42%.
male, the minority serving
institutions with 37% male to
HBCUs were about 33% male, uh, a
couple of years ago, we had one
school in the system that was
8020, 80% female, 20% male. When
you have that kind of data on
enrollment, it translates to,
uh, you know, graduation rates
and if you look at the latest
data we have, for 5-year period,
2017, 2018 to 20.
21, 22, we granted in the UNC
system of about 301,000 degrees,
you will note, uh, in this
graphic that 59% of those uh
degrees went to women.
In essence, we granted 56,000
more degrees to women than we
did to men. 1.5 degrees to
females for everyone to males,
uh, and if you go down the list
you'll see in some of the
schools, we granted 2 degrees to
women for every one male. This
has enormous implications for
everything in our society. For
women who get degrees and want
to marry at a comparable
education level, it becomes very
very difficult when you look at
the enormous sex ratio
imbalance. It has implications
for dual or in a households for
uh for for for family formation,
child rearing, a whole range of
things. This is a serious,
serious issue, and then uh
minority institutions, if you
look at black students, it's uh
it's, uh, you know,
22 to 1, uh, female, male
graduation ratio, this again, in
terms of family formation,
career orientation, a whole
range of things. That's a real
problem. And that, that issue
with males gets translated into
the labor force. Look at
The last 2015 to 2021 in the 20
to 24 year old male population,
both the population itself and
the decline in the number of
those males in the workforce.
Uh, if you look at this graphic
very carefully, what you will
notice is that just about all of
the growth in the male workforce
and the male population is
occurring 55 or older in terms
of rapid growth, in terms of the
change. This is a huge
workforce issue for us, uh, the
declining status of males in the
population. And the other thing
that is part of the demographic
uh
When Gus is that declining
fertility that I talked to you
about earlier.
The statistic for declining
fertility is something called
the total fertility rate. If you
are a couple, you need to have
2.1 kids to replace yourself.
That's the, that's just the
maintain the population. That's
not to grow, that's to maintain
a stable population, the
fertility rate has to be 2. You
have to have 2.1 children as a
couple. What you will note in
this graphic is, is that our
fertility rate is about 1.6. We
only have
One group in our population that
has above replacement level
fertility, and that is the
native Hawaiian Pacific Islander
women have uh an above
replacement level fertility and
so we're not even, again, adding
to the front end of the life
course, we have this declining
fertility across, uh, just about
all groups, and if you look at
the latest data, uh, on births
that we have for the year 2022
to 2023, the only group of women
that had
children during the pandemic
were in their final years of
fertility in their their early
to mid-40s, uh, every other age
group had declining fertility.
Those women were having their
first child and because they're
in their late fertility years,
it is unlikely that they're
gonna have more children, and it
doesn't matter what group you
look at.
The only group that had any
absolute growth and fertility
during uh the 2022, 23 period
was the Hispanic population and
it had a net gain of 6,536
births, less than 1%, uh, so
we're in this era of declining
fertility, which means that
we're on the cusp of a major
enrollment cliff in both K-12
and higher education, uh, when
you have decline
fertility, that means oftentimes
that death succeed births in
your community and those blue
states in this graphic and all
of them, there were more deaths
than there were births uh
between April 1st, 2020 and July
1st, 2021, that has continued. I
don't have the latest uh graphic
to show you, but that, that
notion of the of more deaths
than births, uh, as has been uh
characteristic for quite some
time and New Mexico is one of
those places where
that is the issue. The other
thing that is complicating
slowing growth is the, are these
depths of despair and declining
life expectancy. What I mean by
depths of despair. Deaths due to
suicide, alcohol, drug abuse,
and
Coronavirus or COVID-19 deaths,
and these deaths are creating a
demographic depression in our
population. Uh, if you look at
the drug overdose crisis, uh,
particularly the opioid crisis
started in the late 1990s. This
graphic looks at uh 1999 drug
overdose deaths by counting per
100,000 people. Fast forward to
2014 on the right. That's what
the graphic, that's what the map
looked like, uh, about 15
years later in terms of the drug
overdose crisis. The numbers we
lost 159,000 people in the
1990s, we lost 339,000 people,
2000 to 2009, 2010 to 2019, we
lost 613,000 people to substance
abuse disorders, and on the
right hand side you can't say
it, but that green line of
opioid deaths, most of this is
opioids, uh, accelerated.
The deaths, uh, due to
Substance abuse disorders, uh,
and
During the pandemic, it went off
the tracks. The first year in
2020, we lost 90,000 people to
drug overdoses, about 21,000
more than the previous year.
People are on lockdown, they
couldn't get to their
counseling. They, they, they,
they had little interaction and
it proved to be pretty lethal
and the and the following year,
another 100,000 deaths of
despair. This is a huge
workforce challenge issue for us
in societal challenge for us
because if you look at those
peaks of where the
fears. These are young people,
prime working age people that
you want to be working every day
and paying into the system, when
somebody tells you that Social
Security is a pay as you go
system. What that means is that
there are those of us in our
late, I'm 70 years old, I'm
paying in the system, but
somebody else is spending my
money in order for me to get
something out of the system.
These younger people need to be
living, they need to be healthy,
and they need to be working.
every day, but you see, we're
losing them prematurely these
premature deaths, uh, and COVID
is uh has reduced life
expectancy but for by about 1.1
years, about 7/10 of a year for
whites, 3 years for Latinos, and
2 years for for blacks because
of the inequitable exposure
rates based on occupation and
living arrangements and the
like, but all of this has an
impact on the viability of our
social safety nets.
Systems, uh, and, and, uh, it's
a, it's a real challenge for us.
So the final kind of challenge
here is that of that, you know,
uh, disappearing and uh
rebelling, we're seeing glow and
labor activism post COVID or
during COVID and post COVID, uh,
activism that we haven't
witnessed since the 50s in this
country. Walkouts, strikes,
resignation, silent quitting,
pushed back on mandatory uh
return to office policies, and
there's this new thing.
I didn't even have time to put
it on the graphic called
Conscious Quitting, where people
are quitting jobs because they
don't agree with the core values
of the companies that they are
considering working for or
already working for and they're
voting with their feet from
those places and these return to
office mandates, I always tell
people be careful in issuing a
mandatory return to office, uh,
policy or strategy because there
are 3 disadvantaged groups out
there that can't do it. Women
with young children.
because they bore the brunt of
the pandemic and they don't have
childcare, that's a real
problem. We got people with
serious physical and mental
health disabilities post COVID.
That's a real problem. And as
the housing affordability crisis
set in during the pandemic, you
have people who have economic
housing limitations, they've
been pushed further and further
from where they work. They
become super commuters and then
when you factor in what kind of
wages they're earning.
Sometimes the money gets funny
and it doesn't work for them,
and that creates a whole
challenge, workforce challenge
for us.
So moving forward, uh, with
these innovation, these uh
disruptive trends, uh we need
some innovations uh that help us
respond to these demographic
gale force winds. What are they
slowing total and farm
population growth, white
population declined, declining
fertility. It's not just the US,
it's worldwide. These depths of
despair and the declining labor
force participation that I've
just covered. Uh, what do we do?
What do you have to do? I think
we're gonna have to figure out,
you're gonna have
to figure out how to manage the
simultaneous browning and
graying of America. You got to
look at them in consonant in in
in conjunction and collaboration
with one another. You gotta
prepare for a major enrollment
cliff in both K-12 and higher
education, has enormous
implications because of
declining fertility.
I think you have a propitious
opportunity given the growth of
your aging population to embrace
population aging as a a business
opportunity. Why? Because
everything in your built
environment has to change to
accommodate an aging population,
and we're looking every day for
innovations to help people ag in
place with dignity and to be
able to live out there our lives
with uh it is healthy and as
long a period as humanly
possible. We got to figure out
how to aggressively
address these depths of despair.
We have far too many, uh,
premature births among prime
working age individuals. I quite
frankly don't see how we
survive, thrive, and prosper
without a sound and solid
immigration reform policy
because we're aging, because of
declining fertility, we need the
workers and we have to figure
out how to do that.
And to retain the existing
workforce we have, we're gonna
have to leverage uh people
analytics in the workforce and
workforce recruitment and
retention. What do I mean by
people analytics that goes
something like this with your
workers, you have to say, I
don't mean to be in your
business, but I need to
understand your business to be
able to build the accommodations
that are required for uh you to
retain and stay and feel like
you belong in this workplace.
The first thing you gotta do
once you understand what the
challenges
About your people face is to
practice empathy and compassion,
uh, implementing family business
friendly business policies, and
you gotta attack the childcare
crisis head on because those 2
million women who got pushed out
of the labor market, won't be
able to come back without uh
safe.
Accessible, affordable,
culturally appropriate
childcare, that it can be a game
changer in this whole
marketplace and given your
declining population, I think
the other thing that you might
consider in New Mexico is a
bring back your own strategy for
talent.
People and states all the time
provide incentives for companies
to come. You have a propitious
opportunity given an aging
population because everybody is
aging probably has uh children
and grandchildren someplace else
that got serious skills, uh, and
connections and the like. We
need to figure out how to incent
those people to come back home.
You have locationspecific
capital that you can build on
and a lot of states that are
slow.
experiencing population decline,
population loss, and slow growth
are implementing these kinds of
policies and providing all kinds
of incentives for people to come
back home.
And I think that that's
something that's worth
considering. We're in a phase of
a new new normal. I call it
certain uncertainty, uh, and if
you're going to win the war for
talent, talent acquisition,
retention and challenges. You
got two boxes, you got those
disruptive demographic trends to
the left that we've just been
talking about, but you're also
in a pretty volatile
geopolitical climate and the
like. And so the question
becomes, how do I navigate these
disruptive
when we have enormous political
uncertainty and polarization. I
think there are two solutions,
Iceberg demographics and impact
investing, uh, that can be uh
deployed in this setting. We
don't have time to talk about
them today, but I want to
mention them because I think
that they're the key to creating
a, a world-class workforce where
everybody feels like they
belong, where everybody wants to
work for you where everybody
wants to live in your state and
no.
Nobody wants to leave. That's
both a challenge and a
propitious opportunity for you
moving forward. I'll stop there,
uh, and answer any questions
that you might have.
Any questions?
And
Senator Steinler.
Thank you, sir. That was a lot.
Um, you gave us a lot to think
about.
Um, thank you very much for that
presentation.
And all that great data. I have
a question about immigration,
because clearly kind of the
revelatory thing here is
Just as you look at declining
birth rates, growing senior
populations kind of an inherent
labor issue that that presents
that, you know, we hear a lot of
things.
About immigration, right? And
you, you address immigration as
being something to really look
at, but I, I didn't, I guess I
wanted you to elaborate more on
the specifics of
The role and the benefits of
immigration and kind of the
necessity of from a labor
standpoint of how to view that
from that standpoint. Thank,
thanks so much. It's a it's a
very important question. Uh,
first and foremost, what we have
to, I think, be serious about is
debunking myths about
immigration and that immigrants
cost more than they contribute,
uh, and what you have to
understand is that argument is
about fiscal impact. It's not
What about economic impact.
First and foremost, uh,
immigration is an age selective
process. Far more young people
immigrate and migrate and older
people.
And you often hear that
immigrants are a burden on the
healthcare system. The median
age of an immigrant is about 30
years old.
The median age of a native born
person is about 45 years old,
and you're in your late twenties
and your early 30s, you don't
have major health problems. But
when you get in your 40s, that's
when the chronic conditions
occur. And so, you know, you
have to understand there are
many immigrants, particularly
those who are here unauthorized
and the like. This is not an
advocate for unauthorized
immigration, but they pay their
way through the healthcare
system because that's the only
way that they can, can be here.
And so, when you look at the age
for the other thing is, when you
hear people say that immigrants
don't pay taxes.
Every time you drive up to the
gas station, you're paying
taxes. Every time you walk into
Walmart and buy something,
you're paying taxes. Even if you
are a renter in the housing
market, you are paying property
taxes because any landlord
that's got any sense is gonna
pass part of that cost onto you
and in the rent. And so if you
take these people out of the
economy.
And all of the occupations that
they occupy, we're gonna be in
deep yogurt.
Because it's gonna collapse.
It's gonna collapse.
We've done one of the few
studies of the cost of uh uh
versus benefits of immigrants
here in North Carolina and I
work, what we found is for every
$1 the state spends for K-12
education, healthcare and
corrections, they get $11 back
in business revenue and taxes,
and every day.
We've done that for the state of
Arkansas, uh, twice, and we've
done it twice in North Carolina,
and there's some other states
that have found that when you
look at and distinguish fiscal
impact from economic impact.
Thank you. That's all I.
Any other questions?
See, Doctor Johnson, thank you
for your time. I, I, I, senior
in Nashville was this is an
important presentation of of
where we're really headed in the
workforce and, and, and what's
changing that we don't see.
Demographically, right?
And, and we got to figure it
out, uh, and we got to figure
out out migration and
immigration into Mexico, so we
appreciate your time. Thank you
for joining us today. Thank you.
Happy holidays to all of you.
Merry Christmas.
Yeah.
We'll send you some tamales.
Gina, are you ready?
Be careful that Wayne left
something in that chair.
Mhm
Or ready, ready when you are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Gina De
Blasi. I'm the interim cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Health and at the table is uh
Leanne Barnes, the deputy
cabinet secretary and Shawny
Romo, who's the CFO. We're a
relatively new group of leaders
sitting in front of you. I'm 2
weeks in, um, I believe Leanne
has been in her role since April
and Shawie probably maybe 30
days, if even that. Um, I have
my leader
ship team here, uh, from the
Department of Health to answer
any specific questions that I
won't be able to answer for you,
but I thank you for your time
and um I appreciate this
opportunity, we're gonna do is
I'm gonna give you a high level
um overview of the budget
submission for the Department of
Health, um, that was done on
September 1st. A lot has changed
since September 1st, including
the cabinet secretary position.
Um, so with that being said,
we're gonna go ahead and dive
right.
in. Thank you.
Yes.
OK, so the Department of Health
is the largest agency in state
government, um, we have 33,5018
employees, um, of which we, um,
that are funded for of which
we've got we've got 2,562
employees within the agency and
running about a 27% vacancy
rate, uh, the majority of those,
uh, vacancies are roughly in our
epidemiology.
ology group, the scientific lab
in our facilities.
Um, we have 4 divisions, 6
centers, we operate 7
facilities, roughly 8 if you
include Meadows at uh New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute,
which is really the long term
care facility it's licensed
under um behavioral Health
Institute, and we have 56 uh
public health offices across the
state of New Mexico, one in each
of the counties and 33 of the
counties, and we collaborate
with 24 Native American piss and
nations as well.
On slide 3,
the FY 26 um request came in
roughly about $244 million the
fiscal year 25 operating budget
was 205 million, so that, uh,
the increase in the request was
42.8 million or 21.3%. Again,
this is the agency submission on
September 1st. We broke these
these categories of requesting
to 3 different buckets, 1, the
rising cost of doing business.
Um, for the Department of
Health, the public health
division, and it's required
needs, and then the facilities
request themselves.
I'm gonna dive a little bit
deeper into some of the um and
highlight some of the agency
requests. So the cost of doing
business agency-wide, the
additional request is $2.9
million and you can see that we
demonstrated for you on this
presentation, the rising costs
that the department is
experiencing and just um, you
know, doing their business from,
you know, the food in the
facilities and so on and so
forth.
On page 5, we have an
agency-wide request for salaries
and equitable placement, 7.7
million in unfunded salary
increases. Many of the
Department of Health employees
are funded by federal grants by
which the increases that have
been mandated or pushed forth
that we've pushed through our um
employees, we don't get that
same level of increase coming
from the grants themselves, so
we got 7.
a million dollars in there and
then appropriate placement of
$5.2 million for newly
established established, excuse
me, salary schedules.
That we have not seen any
accompanied any additional
budget allocations in the on
page 6, we have a $9.9 million
increase in the public health
division, um, we have the
details identified for you in
this, on this slide, um, I'll
just do very high level 2.5
million for Wick and senior
Farmers' market that helps with
the food instability that we are
experiencing across the state,
particularly within our senior
population and thenI
you know, those moms and babies,
uh, 2.4 million in the
Department of Health hotline.
Uh, we have an expanded, we've
expanded the hotline as a single
source and resource for New
Mexicans across the state.
Um, we've got 5 new mobile
public health units that go
across the state, when $2.3
million for staff and also um
additional funds to keep the
units maintained and functional.
Um, we need a $670,000 state
general fund for and it's
required for the federal match
on the Alpayer claims database.
And then, um,
Not to minimize the, the
remainder here, but $525,000 for
a clinical service to treat
syphilis and other uh sexually
transmitted diseases, the
funding in fiscal year 25 was a
special at 500,000.
Um, we need to, uh, maintain 3
emergency response positions and
then $1.1 million for the
healthy climate to develop a
program and respond to the
health concerns related to the
fire and heat that we're
experiencing across the state.
Uh, we want to improve the
health surveillance systems and
higher 6 epidemiologists to do
that.
Um
Slide 7 as it relates to
facilities, uh, we're
experiencing a $10.8 million
deficit, 4.3 from our Los Linas
community program and 6.5
million for domeso Behavioral
Health Institute. What does this
mean? Um, you know, it's the
billable revenues versus what
it, what the cost of the
operation is for these
facilities, that being said,
however, we do have some
opportunities. We're looking at
the revenue cycle management
across all of our facility.
are also looking to increase
senses, and then uh looking at
staffing um agency versus
employed because those agenency
staff are are um extremely
expensive.
The summaries that we have for
for specials and supplementals,
um,
are called out here on slide
number 8, public education and
outreach initiatives at 2.3
million. We got a lot of
leadership development and
actually workforce development
going on in the agency, um,
looking for 400,000. And then
public health division special
requests. Again, I'm not gonna
read through all of these, but
um, you know, they're, they're
pretty specific to the programs,
but they total roughly about
$8.1 million. Uh, we have 1.5
million
for facility infrastructure
maintenance and repair, and then
supplemental request, um, and
roughly 2.3 million or $2.4
million.
Uh, for the agency. So by 2
weeks, um, into the, into the
agents can tell you what our
media to focus is, and also my
time working in the governor's
office as the uh uh uh health
policy advisor. Um, I, I would
sit in with uh the Department of
Health and also with the LFC
staff and reviewing the
financials and looking at the
projections and um media focus
uh for us right now.
now is in the facilities is
really looking at that revenue
cycle management. Um, what are
we, what is the, what is the
billing look like? What does
that process look like, um,
there's current negotiations
going on with the payers to
increase rates, looking at how
many days in accounts
receivable, we have outstanding
what our collection rates, um, I
think that's really important.
Uh, we want to increase census.
We're not fully utilizing our
facilities.
as you all know, um, so we're
looking at, um, what we can do
there. Definitely um looking at
improving quality.
Um, and by that we want to hire
a chief nurse to help provide
some clinical support and
compliance, um, across our
facilities.
There's also been a deep dive
for a process improvement,
particularly um in our financial
areas, we're looking at contract
timeliness. We know as those
contracts get delayed, New
Mexicans don't get served. Um,
we can't have that, um, looking
at the purchase order completion
and um the accuracy of our um
financial projections are really
important for us and important
for the budget overall. We want
a renewed focus on customer
service for the citizens of New
Mexico.
Um, and that's a, that's all
across the agency and
particularly in our public
health offices, not only what
are we doing for clinical
service delivery within our
public health offices, but how
are we connecting New Mexicans
to services, uh, whether we're
not providing them in our own
office, but what are we doing
in, in supporting the community
and New Mexicans and connecting
them to healthcare services
within their community.
Um, through our epidemiology
group, timely reporting of
health data to better serve
communities and then again, it
continued enhancement of
clinical service delivery
through the public health
infrastructure we've seen some
um recent um probably within the
last year of focus and we need
to continue this on uh being
more of a provider of services
out of our public health office.
Um, so with that, I want to make
one other comment, you know,
this role, I don't take lightly,
um, we, if the Department of
Health Service a very vulnerable
populations, whether it's
through our facilities or what
we're doing within the public
health office and we're a, a
resource for New Mexicans across
the state. So with that, I want
you to know that I am the
leadership team will lead with
uh humility and 100%
accountability.
So with that, I stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
Secretary designate. I'm gonna
go first to Representative Baca,
then we have Senator Rodriguez,
and we'll keep going from there.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
So, um,
Out of all the communities in
the state.
You named Lawson, which I
represent 2/3 of Los Sonos.
Um, so in a few, you know, words
in a few minutes. Tell me what's
going on in Los Unos that has
caused that deficit, and what
types of services and or for our
community members.
are impacted by that.
was.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Baca, thank you for that
question. Um, in my
conversations and listening in
on the agency in previous, uh,
budget reviews and projections.
I think that, um, you know, the
Los Lunas community program is
that is not a census issue. It's
pretty full. It gets a revenue,
uh, management issue and um in
conversations with uh Kelly from
the staff and, and
director Soli, we're really
looking at um Medicaid rates.
Um, also, there's a
And I don't know what this
utilization is, but I can get it
back to you. But how much are we
using agency staff to support
the individuals that are, are
living within those facilities
and um if there's anything
additional that you would want
to ask, I could turn it over to
our CFO or I'm happy to um
engage with uh Mr. Morgan, who's
a leadership within our
facilities.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and I, I'm not gonna go in
depth cause I'm very respectful
of my colleagues time, but
I did ask the question about
what types of services, I mean,
are impacted with, you know,
cause I, if we talk about those,
uh, you know, what, what type of
services are, are being impacted
by this deficit. Are we talking
about, you know, as far as in
food, are we talking about
facilities to help with their
needs or one of the other things
that has come up time and time
again in our presentations.
Was the lack of health care
providers in our community, all
the other areas around the metro
are, you know, OK, I'm come to
Valencia County, we're in the
red. So can you just in a couple
of minutes, talk about it and
then I do want to touch base
with you offline to make sure
that I understand how I can
advocate and support my
community, but can you highlight
just sort of high-level points,
um,
About the services, what's going
on.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, absolutely, so the last
lud this community program are a
group of facilities that the
Department of Health operates,
that predominantly services
individuals with developmental
disabilities, right? group
homes. So when you talk about
the impact and what is that
within the community, we need
this additional um budgetary
support because we're running
deficits in that deficit is
coming from.
You know, the amount of of
collected revenue versus the
expense, and it's, it's all of
the above. It's the staff that
we're having to pay to provide
that level of support within
those, um, within those
facilities, it's, it's the
meals, um, it's the supports
that are needed. We're taking uh
those individuals that are
residing within the within um
those homes out in this
community for recreational
support. It's, it's all of the
above that goes into taking.
care for those individuals with
developmental disabilities.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
have lots more questions, but
I'm gonna touch base with you
offline so we can figure out how
we can serve my community mayor
our colleague's community here.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Buck. We're gonna
go to Senator Rodriguez, then
Representative Sareana. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, Gina and staff.
Everyone, thanks for your work.
Thank you for taking on the
helm. Gosh, what a job. Can't
even imagine. Uh, let me just
ask a quick question. The health
councils, let's talk about that
for a minute. Um, if it's
any different by now, please let
me know because I understand
that uh for the county and
tribal health councils, we don't
have a request from the
Department of Health and truly,
Gina, if that's the case, we
have been talking about this all
the time, I think almost every
meeting I bring it up and others
do too, um, and, um, I hear that
there may be a supplemental
request, but that, I mean, it's
good, they don't help them for
next year, they need to stay on
board, they provide critical
services and
We must keep him above, um, you
know, just as high as we can in
preventing the uh the delay of
the services. So tell me a
little bit.
Sure, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, so, uh, what we have
in the budget for the health
councils is $3 million. It's a
special.
One time, it's not a recurring
request.
In the budget. As a matter of
fact, I believe that a meeting
um with the Alliance tomorrow
afternoon. I talk about the
scope of the contracts that we
currently have with them looking
at those deliverables, but there
is money in the budget, $3
million for fiscal year 26 as a
one time. OK, thank you very
much. Now let me ask you this,
what's the rationale behind
doing a non-recurring for these
services that require recurring
ongoing uh provision. Uh, is
there maybe I'm missing
something, uh.
Why can't we do recurring
request, even if they got some
non-recurring Gina and maybe
some recurring, it would help
them, but they need to get
established. They need to get a
level playing field here, so
tell me a little bit, is there
something that one reason why we
can't do recurring.
Senator, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, I think that um I'm
not gonna, I can't speak for the
previous secretary, um, however,
um,
I believe it's probably a
balance of
Uh, the general fund request
versus what's available for
one-time funding, um, so, but,
but again, you know, we're
gonna, we're continuing to have
conversations with them, we
didn't completely, the agency
didn't completely leave them
out, and again, a lot has
changed since September 1st. The
other thing we want to
understand in the conversations
with them is any additional
funding that they receive.
Um, because I know that perhaps
there might be some local public
body support. I'm not, I'm not
quite sure about that, maybe in
a couple of areas, so I think we
need to just completely
understand what their funding
looks like, um, definitely from
a tribal perspective, want to
engage more, um, and also want
to look at what other supports
are needed because I think that
um
Each council is probably in a
little different place about,
you know, the ability to kind of
get that money out, so I, I also
want to understand that as well,
so I'm coming into this eyes
wide open, want to learn more,
and um, you know, asking some,
in my opinion, very relevant
questions. Yes, thank you very
much for that. I'm happy that
you have an open mind because
truly we do have to see them
from a different lens through a
different lens, I should say
they've been underfunded ever
since I came in, and that's 2.
9 years ago, I think, and um,
you know, during COVID, I recall
if it hadn't been for the health
councils, we'd be in real sad
shape. Um, it was bad as it was,
but uh without the health
counsels, he would have been
much worse. So um I'm happy
you're meeting with them and
hopefully you will um look at
making a request for some uh
recurring appropriations to get
them on a level playing field
here to continue to provide the
critical services they do. Thank
you so much. Thanks for all your
work again.
And my gosh, you know, when you,
when you mentioned you're the
largest department, I just
thought it's clear. Thank you
very much. All right. Thank you,
Senator Rodriguez. Next, we're
going to go to Representative
Saana, then Representative
Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, um, for your
presentation interim secretary
de Blasi, right? OK. Um, so you,
in your, in your pamphlet, you
said you have you.
If services to 33 counties in
Clamber 24 Native American
tribes, right? So, um, I know
you have a database that the
state paid for, and I just want
to know how do we, how do, what
is the process to access general
information or statistics from
that database, like something
like Albuquerque, we have a hub,
we have an area that's got a lot
of pollution. So if I wanted to
say, um, tell me the health of
the kids in the South Valley,
what, who has asthma, who has
cancer, or how many have asthma
cancer? How do I get that data?
Representative Serana, um, Mr.
Chair, um, you know, that would
be a request to our public
health office, um.
And, you know, just submitting a
request. I believe that we would
Then just provide with you with
that information.
OK, is there a specific person,
Mr. Chairman?
You could always reach out
either to myself or Doctor
Costa. OK. OK. Right, that,
that's it.
OK. Thank you.
Thank you very much for. Next
we're going to represent Allison
and Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I've also got questions on the
Health councils. I've been in
the legislature for 6 years now,
and I've seen my share of
secretaries come and go. Each
one of them.
Establishes a goal as to what
they're going to accomplish.
And some of the goals that the
Department of Health and the new
Health Council Authority.
Some of the goals that they have
listed is already being done.
by the Health councils. I know
because I've been working with
them for the past 6 years.
The Health council has always
been underfoot, underfunded or
over a decade.
And uh if we do not put them
under a recurring funding.
You're gonna lose the services
of over 100.
Coordinators. Do we really want
to do that.
The Health councils are very
critical.
Public health organization,
especially in the rural areas
and in the native communities.
The health councils are the only
ones that really understand the
root problems in the rural and
the native communities. So to
say that we are not gonna give
them non-recurring funding is
kind of like saying with this
fundamental, we're gonna cure
all illnesses, all diseases.
So we don't have to fund them
anymore.
The diseases and everything that
we experience in the native
communities and the rural
communities are always
recurring.
So, so why not fight?
The diseases and everything in
the rural areas by recurring
funding establish it for them,
and use the services of the
existing health councils, just
merge with them on your slide 8.
You indicate your
Uh, allocating 3 million to it,
and then there's other
Um, there's another 5 bullets as
to where you're gonna distribute
some money.
I can tell you that the health
councils are going to do all the
rest of the 5 bullets that you
have.
If you're gonna make a
supplemental, why not combine
all of that, the 8 million, and
give that to the health councils
and let them address it for you,
because what you have outlined
is what we experience in the
rural and the native
communities. The health councils
can be your lifesaver.
Let's make them your lifesaver.
Let's give them recurring
funding instead of
non-recurring.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you,
Representative Allison. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Chatfield and uh
representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, you can look at how
many counties I represent and
know that I represent a very
rural area in New Mexico. And I
just wanna echo Representative
Allison's, uh, concerns about
the health councils, they
perform a very important
function out where we live, and
they've been there a while and,
and uh sure like to keep them. I
think they do a good job and I
encourage you to, to do, give
them the support that they need.
Second, uh
Well, actually, first question,
the second item. Uh, for a good
while, we've been dealing with
the public employee health
benefits fund. It was managed by
GSD.
Uh, it was upside down.
Which it shouldn't
Um
So
was put forth a plan to
gradually increase.
Premiums.
Uh, and put that.
back in order.
Just turned over to your agency,
which is a much larger agency, a
bigger umbrella.
And uh we were told that it
probably would be.
Basically sound within.
3 years.
Are are we on track for that,
Mr. Chair Representative
Chapfield the um public employee
benefit was moved to the
healthcare authority, and there
will be in front of you tomorrow
morning. OK, so it's not you.
No, it's not that same question.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Sheffield. Next,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
One
question um is uh what is the
reimbursement rate, uh, that the
state receives um at the
state-run nursing facilities.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
that's gonna vary. It's going to
be dependent on who the payer
is, so if they're, if it, it
would be Medicaid rate that's
been established for that
facility if um it is um at the
veterans facility with the
veterans are paying, so it's
just gonna be dependent on. I'm
happy to to provide a schedule
for your representative and, and
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um.
Thank you, um,
Secretary designate, um, I think
that would be helpful because
I'm concerned that um our
private
To non-state run, uh, nursing
facilities have a much lower
reimbursement, Medicaid or
Yeah, Medicaid reimbursement
rate. Um, and so I'd just like
to see uh what the disparity is.
Thank you.
Uh, any, uh, go to
Representative Garcia. And, and
do you, you, you'll be getting
that data back to the committee.
Mr. Chadis. Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
ma'am, uh, you mentioned the uh.
Nursing home for the veterans
and, you know what I'm talking
about the TRC. How, how are we
doing there? Cause I know there
was issues.
I'm getting help and so forth.
What are we doing to address
that because, you know, uh, we
spend like $65 million to build
that facility up that I was
really interested instrumental
on, and I'm very concerned about
what's going on with that.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
actually, um, the facility is
doing pretty well. Just had a
survey, there are a couple
deficiencies from a clinical and
quality perspective that we will
be putting forth a plan of
correction, um, census is
increased at the vet's home.
Today we're serving 106106
veterans. If you make a visit
and you see the new small homes,
and you speak to the veterans
that are placed there, they are
extremely happy.
Um, so it's, it's doing well.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and secretary, you know,
When we first started this on
the new home that all veterans,
uh, place was a disaster.
You know, I walked in there one
day and I said, geez, this is
not right, you know, and it's
been a process and it's still a
little bit of a process because
of uh staffing, I think, and you
know, um my
on the suggestion, just the
thought of how we can improve.
The people that are working
there, you know, if you come to
us and if you need funding or
whatever, you know, I'm all
about veterans.
And if I can do anything to
prove that, I, I should do it,
so please reach out to me and
uh.
You know, I'm, I'm gonna be out
of office here, this be my last
meetings, but that doesn't mean
that I do not care for veterans.
I really do care for him and we
need to keep up.
What we've been doing so far for
our veterans. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garcia. Thank you
for your incredible leadership
across the board for veterans.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
Senator Sindo. Oh, thank you,
Chairman. Thank you for the
presentation. I do just want to
echo, uh these sentiments of uh
Senator Rodriguez,
Representative Allison, and, and
Representative Chap through and
then I also want to acknowledge
uh Senator Ortiz, who really
have been champions of uh of the
uh
The health councils and uh of
course they're all retiring, and
I think those of us are gonna be
stepping forward to kind of
carry on that work because I
represent Senate District 22 and
it's all entire rule 2 Navajo
chapters about all of the
patation, I got 7 pueblos and
many of those uh communities are
also part of the health council,
so I just want to echo that
thought because uh this is very
important. There's a lot of
duplication, you know, that, you
know, I've seen and I think as a
representative Alison.
A lot of that work could be
carried out, but these
individuals are on the ground,
uh, uh, Mr. Chairman, and uh we
need to invest because they do
play a critical role in our
community, so thank you Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much, Senator
Santo. OK, uh, I have a couple
of quick questions, um,
secretary designate first, can
you commit to sharing the all
claims pair database with LFC
and with the legislature.
Mr. Chair, um, I have, it's my
understanding that the agency
was working with uh legislative
finance staff, and looking at
perhaps a memoranda memorandum
of understanding or a business
associate agreement. Um, I
haven't had a chance to look at
that, but I will, and I'm happy
to get back to you if I have any
um
I need any additional
information or further follow
up. OK. But it sounds like you,
you, so you support sharing the
database continuing with the MOU
process and you're gonna sort of
uh, come back with your
understanding of where that
process is within sort of the
organization that you've
recently been tasked with taking
over.
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna review the
MOU and the BAA. I'm gonna go
back and look at the statute as
well. So there's, there's some
homework that I need to do on my
end before I can say yep,
absolutely we're gonna, we're in
turn so but I'm not, I'll be
working with, with the LFC staff
on that. Got it. OK. And I know,
uh, I, uh, Kelly is here, um.
It, I, I appreciate that and I
think it's, you know, you're
being super accurate given in in
transparent given sort of the
speed with which you've had to
take over the organization. You
don't want to overcommit, which
I appreciate. Um,
Also, there may be need for uh
updates, perhaps statute
changes, um, maybe not.
That data is, I think, essential
for our staff and for the
oversight and future investment
responsibility cause, you know,
it's final two years of the
administration that are coming
up, we were facing a number of
challenges, uh, huge cost
overruns projected uh at the
Behavioral Health Institute and
some of these other parts,
challenges and staffing, um,
very significant and also, I
guess, uh
Secretary designate, um, one of
the, I think the core challenges
that we and our staff perceive
is around accuracy from
facilities and their finances.
We had the chance to meet
recently with then Secretary
Allen.
He, he said that that like
there'd been a number of steps
taken to address that.
That's um, that, that leads to
the deficiencies and other
challenges. Where are we as it
regards sort of the accurate
accounting from facilities.
Mr. Chas demonstrated in my
immediate focus. That's what I'm
currently gonna do a deep dive,
working with the new CFO and
with each of the facilities and
to ensure that we've got some
accurate financial reporting,
additionally that we've got some
um
Fiscal acumen around um running
those facilities as well,
looking at the billing process,
the collections, looking at
agency staff versus employed.
What are we doing from a
recruitment and retention
perspective, um, I'm not 100% in
a complete agreement that
because a lot of our facilities
are in rural areas that we can't
bring staff, that we can't hire
staff. I think we need to
So it's, it's gonna be a full
deep dive. I'm committed to
doing that, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, uh, Secretary designate and
and that's obviously a
wheelhouse that you bring, so
that's great to hear your focus.
Do you have a timetable for a
sense because I, I know one of
the challenges I can foresee
going into HAFC next year soon
is wanting to very much
understand where we are and then
be able to have robust
discussions about what, you
know, sort of how we want to
approach the fight.
this next 2 years. So what are
the timelines to get all of that
in order.
Um, Mr. Cherubs and smiled in
order to get it all in order. I
can't commit to having that done
before the session, but what I
can commit to doing is having a
better understanding and where
I, where I think we need
increased focus or additional
funding and working with the
facilities, and I'm happy to
share that information with you.
That great. Thank you for that.
Um, wanna move briefly, you
know, um, obviously you've heard
from a number of committee
members. We were very proud and
again HAFC last year to dedicate
funding for uh tribal health
councils, uh, or for, um for
health councils.
It seems like maybe there's a
similar challenge in that
different health councils are
approaching their
responsibilities in their
communities in different ways,
perhaps health councils in more
rural areas have more
responsibility, would you say
that that's
there are differences in health
councils, their
responsibilities, perhaps their
level of, um, you know, out, you
know, as you mentioned, sort of
different braided funding that
might exist, capacity, it seems
like there's a number of
differences between different
health councils, or there could
be around the state.
Mr. Chair Representative Small,
yes.
Can you help me think through
how we then approach
Funding for health councils
understanding, hearing the
members, and I think what we've
heard a a very uh strong focus,
particularly as it relates to
tribal health councils and rural
areas. Does it maybe make sense
for us to focus there and not
sort of say, you know, every
health council around the state
is doing the exact same job.
Perhaps there are greater
responsibilities in more rural
areas, potentially.
culturally as well.
Maybe it makes sense for us to
prioritize rural and especially
tribal health councils more
given sort of what we're hearing
in the feedback.
Mr. Chair Representative Small.
What you're seeing is my
assumption, and I believe that
is accurate. However, I'm having
a meeting with them tomorrow to
understand more the funding
that's that's being dispersed
the same amount for every
council. I'm not so sure, is
probably the best way to
approach this. I think we need
to understand the um scope and
out of the contracts, what it is
that we're requesting for each
council and then make a
determination of how much
funding for for
Each council, but just to say
each council gets 10 amount of
dollars. I'm not so sure that's
the best approach and Madam
Secretary designate, I find
myself frankly agreeing with
you, and I think the, you know,
in the same way that we want to
really get, uh, and you're gonna
really help bring that accurate
facility accounting under DOH
responsibility and then a
clarity about where we're moving
seems to make perfect sense that
there's a clear accounting of
what our health councils are
doing now.
And then a very clear
understanding of what's, you
know, what that contracts moving
forward is in commensurate
funding to support those goals.
So thank you for that.
Um, Mr. Cha,
Senator Steinborn, and I guess
I'll turn back to you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
secretary doesn't it? Good to
see you today. Um, I just had a
finally an opportunity to look
at it because it's an email I
just received like yesterday or
the day before, regarding um a
plan to increase substance use
treatment here in the state of
New Mexico.
And this was a report.
Done by
University of New Mexico Center
on alcohol substance use and
addictions, and it was
contracted by your department.
Um, in response to funding, we
got several years ago and we
attempted a study that was kind
of a bust and it was redone, in
essence. This is the redone one,
and there's a list of about 10
recommendations, and I'm just
curious if you've had an
opportunity to see that.
And if any of those
recommendations have made their
way into
The budget requests or
supplemental or on your radar to
pursue this session.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinhorn, I
have not yet had opportunity to
review that. If there's somebody
from the team that might want to
respond, um,
No, I guess not. So, um, I
definitely will follow up.
Thank you. I appreciate it, and
Mr. Chair, it was contracted by
the Department of Health. Um,
so, um, and I apologize to Nick
because he sent it to me and
said, hey, reach out to me if
you want to talk about it, but I
just had a chance to look at it.
I thought I'd ask you about it
because you were sitting here.
But um,
There's a lot of talk about
increasing funding for
behavioral health and some very
big ideas about throwing a lot
of money out there, but
ultimately that would translate
into a set of initiatives, these
are some developed.
And an effort contracted again
by DOH, so I'd be very curious
to hear your thoughts and let's
follow it through and see if
there's some actionable things
here that we could do.
This session because I know this
legislature is very interested
in it, I know, um, let's say
finance committee, very
interested in you know there's
different things going on, but
more we can be doing and some of
them, I've heard have been
endorsed by LHHS like increasing
Naloxone, I'm saying that right?
Um, and some other forms of
street medicine, which is a new
term. I hadn't heard that
before, but that's kind of cool.
Um, some other things, so you
know I'll leave it at that and
we can follow up on that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I think that's it. I'll say
my questions unless you want me
to go through my laundry list I
made up.
I think I'm good, Gina, thank
you for your time today. We
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. We'll be in touch to
make sure we get access so we
don't have to run a legislation.
Should be on our desk by 8 a.m.,
right? Just a signature.
We're here for budget cuts the
rest of the day, right?
Mar, you couldn't wear a pink
tie either.
thought about it.
The longer you talk, the more
the cuts come. Go ahead.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
uh, my name is Rob Black. I'm
the cabinet secretary designee
for the New Mexico Economic
Development Department. It is an
honor to be here with you today
with, with a number of my team
members, um, that I'd love to
introduce, um, this is my 2nd
time, 2nd time before this body
in this role. The first time I
think it was my 2nd day in the
job. So hopefully I can answer a
few more of your questions
today, uh, and provide some some
information.
about what we've been doing at
the department and, uh, a little
bit about our team and then our
requests. So the first I'd like
to do is introduce uh Isaac
Romero, who's our deputy cabinet
secretary. Um, many of you know
him from his time at the LFC,
uh, but also his time um working
with Senator Munoz, uh, in the
last 7 or 8 years, Isaac's been
working in the private sector,
uh, doing commercial real
estate. We've been a great
addition to the team, he brings
both the private sector.
as well as the public sector,
um, but I'd like to allow Isaac
an opportunity to also introduce
some of our team members who are
in the audience, in case there's
questions that the two of us
rookies are not able to answer.
We have a strong team behind us
to help us do that.
Thanks, doctor Black. Yeah,
first, I just wanted to
introduce our team. They're the
folks behind the scenes who are
making everything happen, uh, in
reality, they make robber I look
good. So starting over here, um,
if you're on the economic
development staff, we just stand
up so we can uh show the
committee where our members are.
Um, so starting up front, we
have Nora Socket. She's our, uh,
the, the, the leader of the OSST
Office of Strategy, Technology
and science, science and
technology. Steve Graham, New
Mexico Film Office director.
Uh, Rochelle Bussy, she's in the
film office as well. If Daniel,
who's in our uh Main Streets
program, Shawnee Harvey, she is
our director of creative
industries.
We have Keyla. She helps with
our just transition, uh,
she's our economist, and we are
seeking a new economist, so if
you know anybody, please let us
know.
Uh, we have Jamie Chester, she
helps with our, uh, healthy food
financing. So Guterres, she's
the deputy director of the
Economic division, uh Mark
Roper's out of uh town this
week, and she's stepping in for
the, for the week. We
We have uh IV vehicle. She's the
director of our ASD division and
Karina Armijo, who's the
director of our outdoor
recreation division. So I just
want to make sure everyone had a
chance to see the faces that are
helping make these programs
possible. Thank you all.
Thank you, Isaac. And I think
with that starts to set the
framework of is we have a big
tent, we have a lot of different
divisions and activities that we
have undertaken at EDD, um, many
of those at the request of the
legislature, um, that have given
us new opportunities and
responsibilities on behalf of
the, the citizens of New Mexico.
Um,
And we also are the
administrative and budget
support for the Spaceport
Authority, the Border Authority,
as well as the Office of
Military Base and Planning.
Um
Uh, Isaac just through running
through the staff gives you a
good sense of the, the scope and
scale of the different, uh,
again, divisions and programs
that we operate, we'll go
through a quick review of, of
those for you and then hit on
the request on the budget.
So the first slide here is
around the local Economic
Development Act, our LED
program, a quick summary for
Lita, uh, they're targeted
incentives provided under the
under the local Economic
Development Act, really for
closing and expansion deals
since 2019, uh, over 13,000 jobs
have been supported across the
state with economic output
expected to be around 40 billion
over the over a 10 year period.
The fiscal impact of these 68
active programs that we have
today where we have projected
participation agreements in
place, we see a return on
investment of tax dollars to the
state of more than 600% on those
investments. We'll move on to
JTI.
The job training incentive
program, this is a very well
recognized program nationally.
Uh, it's been around since I
think 1972 or 1973, um, it is a
very successful training
program, just since 2019, the
program has assisted 221
companies with hiring and
training for an hour, an average
hourly wage of over $24 per
employee per hour.
Our Office of Strategy, Science
and Technology. Uh, this is a,
has recently made a more
strategic focus in part as a
result of your input and
direction, uh, lawmakers who
recognize New Mexico's long
history of science and what is
to better to be better at
leveraging those assets. Um,
this, this particular slide
provides a summary of how EDD
has deployed uh targeted funding
that has been invested into the
department, uh, and we have
moved those, those funds out.
Of the department and into the
community. Most recent grant
announcement went out on Friday,
uh, and it was regarding quantum
computing, um, and we seek to
develop and grow, continue to
grow quantum and technologies in
the state.
Um, I will say as well, you'll
see there's 22 reports there,
the analysis of New Mexico's
comparative advantage and
advanced synergy, as well as an
analysis of science and tech
sector strength and
opportunities. We're looking to,
again, as we continue to think
about how we utilize the
strategic plan that the state
created in 2021. These are
efforts to really back those
decisions and those investments
up by research looking at where
are we most competitive? How can
we best use the taxpayer
dollars to invest in New Mexico
to create uh more opportunity
for our citizens.
Next, uh, we'll move on to the
outdoor recreation division, uh,
which was signed into law in 29
April 2019, 1 of the first
initiatives of the new
administration, uh, led by
Senator Steinborn and other
lawmakers who saw this as an
opportunity for economic
diversification, especially for
our rural and tribal
communities. New Mexico's
outdoor economy is growing
faster than the rest of the
country, uh, within this sector,
we now have over 29,000 people
working in some aspect of the
industry.
with 3.2 billion in overall
state GDP impacted.
Next, we'll talk, talk briefly
about the New Mexico Film
Office, um.
The message that we hear from
film and television production
in the state is that
predictability that we've really
led with predictability and
bipartisanship. The industry
appreciates and the business
community appreciates the state
that the state has shown
long-term commitment to
developing the film and
television sector sector, which
in turn has driven private
sector investment into the
state.
Investments helped create strong
partnerships, good paying jobs,
and with higher wages. Other
states are noticing and making
their own investments to compete
with us, but with a stable
regulatory and business
environment, we remain
competitive and would like to
continue to be so.
Again, created um the creative
industries division.
This is another legislative
effort to build a more
diversified economy by investing
and growing are strong existing
assets. The $2 million that the
legislature invested in this
initiative was a special
appropriation has been allocated
and is now helping to build
creative entrepreneurial
ecosystem throughout the state.
And this slide outlines where
those dollars have gone and the
types of investments we've we've
made with those funds.
Next, we'll go to the Mexico
Healthy Food Program and
financing program. Uh, this is a
newly created initiative is a
priority for the governor, as
well as many lawmakers who saw
the impacts of the COVID
pandemic and made a commitment
to build a more resilient food
and agricultural supply supply
chain.
Uh, the first two rounds of
grants, uh, EDD has awarded
rewarded 30, 33 grants from 152
applications. So those, that was
in the 1st 2 years.
Um
In the newest round, we had 109
submittals with $6 million in
requested funds, uh, we, we have
a quarter of a million dollars,
which we in award money, um, our
budget request for the upcoming
year for the Healthy foods
program is a request for an
increase to better match the the
needs in the community and that
request is for $3.2 million.
Next is the Main Street Capital
Outlay program. Uh, this has
been a very well supported by
the legislature, and, and I
think many of you see those.
impacts in your communities
around the state. Um, and your
main streets, and I want to
thank you for those that
continued support and
engagement.
This past year, you appropriated
$10 million over the past 4
years total, we've been, we've
seen Main Street investments
leverage $224 million in private
sector dollars for
rehabilitation of 11,331
buildings.
These investments help support
almost 2400 jobs and vital
commercial centers in our small
communities all around New
Mexico.
Of note, EDD has helped
communities prioritize
shovel-ready projects so we can
get the best use of taxpayer
money.
In the coming year, we are
taking a pause, and we are not
requesting Main Street Capitol
outlay, because we don't have
identified projects that are
ready to go, that are shovel
ready.
We will use this pause to
redouble our commitment to work
closely with Main Street
partners for FY 2027. This is
again, we've heard your concerns
about capital outlay that does
not get spent. We want to make
sure that when we're doing it,
we have shovel-ready programs.
And then where we want to go and
building on the success that
we've talked about today.
We want to continue to
Improve our regulatory and data
transparency here in as a state,
uh, we'll be working with you to
hopefully run some legislation
to help support that effort, um,
looking to build a site
readiness strategy uh for New
Mexico, where we will identify
and support.
Opportunities for economic
investment with our
Counties, cities, economic
development organizations are
tribal partners so that we can
identify sites that are ready
for infrastructure or that uh
are ready for other types of,
of of development investment.
And make those more commercially
available and viable, so that
we're more competitive with our
sister states.
Um, as part of that is an
initiative that will be
supporting around the making it
easier to pre-deploy utility
infrastructure in New Mexico,
whether that's electrical
infrastructure, water,
wastewater, broadband.
Um, we want to sharpen, as, as I
mentioned, sharpen the focus on
the economic strategy, so
looking at research, other
efforts to make sure that those
sectors where we can be most
competitive is where we're,
we're spending our attention and
our tax dollars, really advanced
and broaden and diversify the
economy.
Finally, doing that in a way
where we're aligning that these
strategies with long term goals
and tying those goals to metrics
so that we can be held
accountable, uh, for the work
that we do. And, and we're we're
not meeting up to standards, we
can understand how do we need to
pivot, how do we make sure that
the programs we're doing are
meeting the goals that have been
set by the legislature and the
executive.
Finally, on our resources, there
are many places and I have many.
Documents here that I'm happy to
share with from our, our new
toolbox, which has a list of the
incentives and programs that the
department supports to our
outdoor recreation business
guide, um, to a variety of other
resources that we provide as a,
as a department.
Um, we have a weekly newsletter,
uh, we have a variety of and,
and, and we not only from the
main department, we also have a
newsletter that comes out from
our outdoor recreation division,
which is very well subscribed
and and frankly has an open rate
that is probably 30% better than
industry average, uh, from a
private sector side, so they're,
they're creating really
important content for the
community. Um, so,
Those are just a few of those
resources, but the real
resources, frankly, are the
people who are sitting behind me
and who are sitting all over the
state, uh, who run our local
offices for our economic
development departments, and so,
uh, we encourage you, if you, if
there's anything that we can be
doing in your community, uh,
whether that's again on Main
Street, whether that's on, um
economic development
opportunities, we're here to
help.
And next, I'm gonna turn over to
uh the deputy secretary to walk
us through our, our budget
requests. This is my opportunity
to play good cop, bad cop, I get
to be the good cop and talk
about all the good things and
Isaac gets to ask for money.
Uh, thank you, uh, Secretary
Black.
So, uh, as you can see, this is
a a a single slide that breaks
down our agency requests as it
comes forward with um our
increased request. So as you can
see here, the first item is a
million dollars for GTIP. This
would increase the recurring
allotment to that program in our
base budget, a million dollars
to the offices of the secretary
for the partnership, um, to
increase that contract to 1.9
million.
112,000 this would fund the
entrepreneur specialist in the
Office of Strategy, Science and
Technology.
95,000 to fund the marketing
coordinator in the outdoor
recreation division, and then
general increases to the
Based budget for operating
purposes.
And this slide shows a breakdown
of what that looks like by
division.
primarily in the economic
development division and the
program support is where those
are housed, the rest of our
divisions, uh, were requesting a
very simple
cost, cost fixing or adjustments
to uh to inflation purposes.
And the final slide is our
request for special
appropriations, as you can see
hereE program, which is one of
the more successful programs
that we operate, uh, 3 million
for Lita, 10 million for JTI.
1.5 million for the Media
Academy operations, 3 million to
the outdoor equity fund, 500,000
for the underrepresented voices
filmmaker Fund of New Mexico,
and as Rob mentioned earlier,
3.2 million for the healthy food
financing initiative, which has
seen great success over the past
several years.
And with that, we'll um open it
up for any questions from the
committee.
Thank you. We'll start off with
a Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to both of you.
Um
On page 4.
On your interns.
The 292 are actual interns that
have been placed in.
FTEs.
Uh, I'm sorry, Senator, will you
please repeat the question. Let
me get this a little closer.
This morning it was too
sensitive now.
Um
In reference to page 4 on um on
the interns.
292 have actually uh be placed.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, that's
correct.
So they've gone in through it as
an intern, and they were placed
in permanent jobs.
So then the number of interns is
a lot higher than 292.
292 are the ones that actually
have been placed.
That is correct, sir.
Yeah
Oh, that's really outstanding,
you know, that's really.
Uh, to see that.
The other part that um.
under the outdoor.
Uh, you know, at some point, um.
I know that um in working with
our uh public education K-12,
but uh in somehow coordinating
and um uh what I would really
vision is to see um.
A curriculum that would be scope
and sequence at our schools.
And within that, the same thing
developing into everything that
you offer here, but at the same
time, uh providing an education
program, and I really feel
strong that um an initiative of
this.
would really enhance um
To assist with the absentee rate
that we have on uh.
On schools.
And um it needs to be proven,
you know, some uh some of the
teachers that have worked with
this, that when they engage on
that, you know, their attendance
is way higher.
Versus being in the classroom,
so that's something that, um,
you know, we can still continue
working with and talking to.
And um the last part that I
have, Mr. Chairman, is um
I can find it.
I was on the
Media um.
I said marketing, media.
Page 15.
Well, anyway, if you could just
tell us a little bit more about
that.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, uh,
I may be speaking about the
Media Academy operations, that's
it, um, so that is the media
arts collective, which was an
investment, I believe, maybe 2
or 3 years ago that the
legislature made to create a
school, a program of excellence
for film and television and
digital arts in New Mexico.
We're uh rehabilitating the old.
Train station, rail station in
Albuquerque, uh, where the main
campus will, will be located.
There is a sister campus that
will be based down in, in
Arrowhead Center, um, in Las
Cruces, uh, and they will, the,
the variety of community
colleges and universities will
feed into that program to really
train folks up on the future
digital media arts.
Uh, space. So those are the
operation, but that that funding
that was received by the
legislature was for those
capital expenses. So these are
the operating expenses.
Mr. Chairman, on that note, um,
He's back, um, the Albuquerque
Academy had done a lot of work
on that.
You know, and again, bringing
this into the schools.
And uh it went on for several
years. I haven't followed up to
see where it's at now.
And, but it's been more like a
hit and miss thing as far as the
Component for the schools, and
that would be another one that
would be really nice to
strengthen that part.
You know, I'm bringing it to the
to the school districts.
Thank you, Senator, and one
thing I should, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator, that I should also, I
should have mentioned in
describing the, the
the
Media arts collective is that it
is a partnership with the city
or the city of Albuquerque for
the Albuquerque campus as well
as CNM, which we are
collaborating with on, on the
curriculum.
Very well, thank you, John.
Thank you.
Represent
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation,
um, I've kind of made a note or
said before in this committee.
That what I'm looking for is an
investment and activities are
going to bring families
together.
We, we, it's we, we talk about
creating that situation where we
get our, rather than being our
devices of this, that, that's
gonna be an important thing and
not just in the metro area but
around the state. So I, I think
that's gonna be
So can you like in in just a
minute or two.
Talk to me about some of those
activities.
Or things that can be done that
will help us cause the that will
not just help economic
development, but it will also
help with some of our other
issues that we've been faced
with as far as, um, you know,
lack of supervision, crime,
otherwise, so, um, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I love
that question. I think there's a
couple of ways I would want to
talk about it. One is with the
outdoor recreation division. Uh,
two aspects of that program are
grant programs that the
legislature funds, or it's
called our outdoor equity grant
program, which funds um a lot of
the monies go to the youth
programs where young people have
a hard time getting outdoors or
don't have, whether it's, they
don't have the the the family
support or adult supervision or
or the resources to get outdoors
and enjoy that aspect of what is
so amazing about New Mexico. So
it provides funds to help, uh,
local community grants, um, and
also our tribal, a lot of tribal
grants, uh, and support to get
young people outside. So great
kind of family engagement
opportunities there. They also
fund our trails Plus program,
which helps rehabilitate trails
uh throughout New Mexico, really
concentrating again in rural
communities that allow
access to uh to the outdoors.
Uh, the other one I think that
may not come as a natural, but
that's our main street program.
Um, one of the things that I
think people miss is the
importance for community of
small businesses, and the role
they play, um, communities built
in that coffee shop on Main
Street. It's not built in your,
in your living room.
And where we rehabilitate those
communal places where people
gather, those small businesses
and support those small
businesses along our main
streets, create family friendly
environments, whether that's
rehabilitating the movie theater
that draws people downtown, uh,
or those other small businesses.
So I think those are some areas
that we specifically think help
support that sort of family
engagement.
That he was chairman, the other,
the other thing I want to, and
it's gonna be a stretch, but I
also think that when we
Great and tie in with a hired to
our athletic programs as well.
I'm talking as, you know, when
we have more people attending
our games, whether there be
You know, um, you know, football
or basketball or any of the
sports, we also have to realize
that these folks, if they, they
have this time, they see that as
a viable. These people are
spending money in our
restaurants. They're staying
there. So has there been any
collaboration or talk about.
collaborating or working with
some of our
Folks are to really get that as
a draw.
To get our folks attending
because that's also a good, you
know, more than just a game,
it's gonna be an experience, and
I think that's an important part
of what I really want to do is,
you know, we just saw that.
For many of our state schools in
New Mexico State and UNM. We're
gonna have difficulty competing.
If we continue to have the NIL
stuff, but with more attendance
and with more people coming in
there and having that
experience, it's not going to
just support that, but it's also
going to support the local
businesses, and you could say it
could be art shows, car, I don't
care.
But I really do think that we
need to be bringing more folks
and have more things for our
family to spend time together,
the chairman.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, secretary and, and Deputy
secretary. Um,
a couple of questions on page um
On the outdoor recreation page
in the presentation, I noticed
that you, um, let us know that
in 2023, New Mexico's outdoor
economy contributed 2.4% or 3.2
billion to the GDP, um.
And I was wondering if you have
that statistic available for the
other 8 sectors that were
identified, um, in the 2021
report.
Uh, from SRI.
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, we don't have that off
the top of our heads. This is
based off of, uh, I believe it
was based off of a national
survey that didn't broke down by
state level, um, so it was
something that we did not
produce in-house as that
numbers. I don't, I don't think
we have it by sector. It's
something we could look at and
see what we could provide,
however.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. I would be very
interested in um getting a
better understanding of uh the
contributions of the nine
sectors to the state's GDP
currently, um, and then along
with that, um, what the
anticipated, um, I believe that
Cumulative annual growth rate
for those sectors looks like.
Because I know that there are,
you know, some of the sectors
that were identified in the
strategic plan, like aerospace
or quantum, um, are expected to
have very high.
Growth rates over the next
several years. And so I would be
really interested um in having
both of those figures, um, just
to then be able to compare with
the states and investments in
those areas.
Um, and then, um, chairman and
secretary, I think this is sort
of along the same lines, but um
I noticed in the presentation
that um the department prepares
quarterly summaries by county,
um, and I'm wondering if, uh,
that is something that is done
or could be done by sex.
Good afternoon. I'm Taiwan. I'm
an economist with the Economic
Development department for the
county reports we are providing
such a industry grows, or the
match text for grocereceipts of
the sector and like the their
proportion for each county and
we see like how they grew over
time or or they decline of.
So, Mr. Chair, and um,
We could then uh compile that so
we would know statewide what the
um
You know, how each of the
sectors are performing.
Yes, and we do provide state
level, um, economic summaries.
Where we provide the same
information.
Thank you very much. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, and secretary, um, in
the budget request, there's uh a
request for $1 million for
recurring funding for uh JTIP,
and I was just wondering if you
could elaborate a little bit on
um specifically what that would
do.
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Dixon. uh, so
effectively what that does is it
Increases the opportunity of
those J-tip dollars in our base
budget, instead of them coming
from a special appropriation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Deputy. Um,
Two questions remaining. Um,
How is the um economic
development department as a
share.
Uh, of let's say the state
budget.
Do you happen to know, Mr.
Secretary, how it compares with
some of our regional
competitors.
Um, so the question is, is New
Mexico investing in economic
development at a comparable
level to our neighbors and
competitors.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um, I would, I would hesitate
to, to guess on that. Um, in my,
my past life where I was working
at the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, um, it was certainly
our my appreciation at that time
that, that at least at the at
the
Net level kind of the full
amount level, not the net level,
the gross level of investment. I
mean, we're not even close to
Texas or Arizona. Um, how that
pencils out to a per capita.
I'm, or how that relates vis a
vis the um
against the full budget, I, I
would not be able to answer that
question at this time. We can
certainly look into that. Um,
but when you look at the closing
fund that Texas has, and their
ability to close deals. Um, it
is a very large amount of money.
Um, so,
I think in that regard, just on
a compare apples to apples, um,
it's not nearly as much, but we
do have a much smaller
population.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. I actually want to
just follow up quickly on that.
Do you, um,
Could you also look to see um
what a um states are doing in
terms of investing in um
innovation campuses or
innovation hubs, um, that
provides sort of the holistic
support for um sector
development.
Mr. Chairman, Madam, uh,
Representative, absolutely, we
can look into that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Secretary.
OK, and the last question is,
um about um the request for
additional funds for um New
Mexico partnership and so my
question is, um, along the same
lines, but why is it important
to market New Mexico.
Um, as a place for
Individuals to move to work here
or companies to relocate, um,
and similarly, why is it
important that
New Mexico.
Um, sectors.
Uh, through the New Mexico
Partnership, for instance,
attend trade shows. If you could
elaborate, I would very much
appreciate that so that we
understand what the value of
those funds are.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
and I think the
The importance of marketing,
frankly, and telling the story
about why New Mexico is a
uniquely uniquely well
positioned for certain sectors,
uh, but also just for economic
development opportunities and
growth for a company is really,
really important. We've done a
great job of telling the story
about New Mexico True, as a
place New Mexico is a place to
visit, uh, with your family and
do tourism activities.
We do not invest in telling the
story about bringing your
company here, about coming here
to work and to build a family
here.
And, and I think it's that it's
a different type of story we
need to tell.
Um, and then when we think about
why trade shows or why
representing New Mexico around
the country or around the world
is important. We are uniquely
positioned for uh advanced
energy companies. We are for
water treatment companies for
various types of technology,
because of the, our, uh, the
quality of our universities, the
laboratories, those sort of
assets, we need to be able to
tell the story about these
amazing assets that New Mexico.
has, our history of science and
technology combined with our
history of arts and culture,
make a really unique space that
I think when we tell that story,
it starts to create a narrative
of innovation.
That is unique in the US. We
don't tell that story in any
meaningful way, and I think
that's why these sort of
marketing dollars, the
opportunity to meet with people
directly is so important. Um,
our film office is another
example of a place where we need
to be talking to folks to remind
them that New Mexico is
consistently rated one of the
best places to make films, uh,
and television shows. We have
great incentives to do that, and
we have a great strong workforce
who can support those efforts.
We need to be telling those
stories to get those to make
sure that we're not just a
flyover state, um, but that
we're a, we're a focused state
where people want to want to
visit, but also where they want
to build their businesses.
Thank you, Secretary, thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair. I would like, if
possible, to get um follow up
information on uh how many trade
shows, national and
international, uh,
The economic development would
be able to support with the
requested amount of funds, um,
you know, there's currently,
let's say around 1 million and
then requesting another million,
so a little less than 2 million
I think total. And because my
concern, and I'd like to have
the data on this, is that $2
million across 9 strategic
sectors doesn't actually go very
far at all. Um, so I just really
like to see some figures on
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Woods, you
guys need water cause there's a
long list.
Um, we got a question or two on
the leader.
A year requesting $38 million on
Lita, Mr. Chair, and, and, uh,
I don't know my figures, I've
got, you've got $60 million
right now in that account, not
spent.
So tell me,
Why you need 38 more million.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thanks for
that question. Uh, so one of the
things that about this fund and
we're working on making some
adjustments here from the
accounting standpoint is at the
end of a fiscal year, we have to
disencumber any funds that have
not been distributed, but we
have agreements for. And so that
brings the balance back up.
The other thing we're looking at
is the fiscal ended uh this past
June. And so that's a process to
disencumber and then re-encumber
those funds. And so right now,
we have, I think where our staff
is working on re-encumbering
those and we have about another
12 million.
Another 12 million that will be
re-encumbered in the next month
or so.
From previous projects. So this
is clawbacks.
No, no, sir. Uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, effectively
what it is, is
Projects that have already been
expended.
And their money out is going out
the door, but for accounting
purposes.
We have to go through a
logistical process to, uh,
Make those funds available and
then send them out the door
again. Why don't you write that
out for me. Yes, sir.
And send it to me. I guess you,
I'll get you a simplified
version, um, with a model that,
uh, I'm pretty simple-minded, so
I have to have it explained
pretty easy. So I appreciate
that.
Yes.
All right, don't we have an
Albuquerque Film Academy.
Or do we not?
Or is that a private academy or?
Or do we, does anybody know?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I don't
believe there is an Albuquerque
Film Academy that I that we're
aware of. There's a, there's an
Albuquerque film office, so they
have a
Uh, the city of Albuquerque has
an office that helps, uh, and
that they primarily do
permitting, uh, and closing of
streets to to allow for some
outdoor film shooting. OK. Uh,
so the, the 15 1.5 million.
For the media, academy
operations, that is for Las
Cruces.
My apologies if if I, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, if I, if I
misunderstood the question, um,
we are building the, the media
arts collective in, in
Albuquerque, uh, that, that was
funds dedicated by the
legislature to do that. They
just started doing training this
year, but the building is still
being built, so it's the
training is in partnership with
CNN, uh, it's some of it's
virtual, um, but we're also
Finishing the construction, the
construction of the facility at
the rail yards should be done
spring of 2026. Um, but, but the
operations of building that out
and continuing to to do the
programming aspect is what those
funds are for. And that, that 40
million is for that.
Yes, sir.
So we're not, we're not building
anything in Las Cruces here.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, the
40 million was the allocation
was for both, but the, the
Albuquerque venue also has
contributions from CNN as well
as the city of Albuquerque to
support that development.
So what is the 1.5 million.
For operations, where does that
go? So that is the, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, that is the
actual operations of staffing
that as opposed to the, the
physical.
Construction.
Where are they working out of?
There working out of, out of uh
the partnership again with CNN.
We've got a variety of programs
that are happening right now
around set gun safety around
OSHA requirements, uh, things
like that. So those sort of
programming aspects that they're
training folks on, uh, because
we wanted to start building out
the curriculum and instituting
that and didn't want to wait
until uh 2026 to start this
program at seeing here.
It
It's, it's, it is in partnership
with CNN, but it is also a lot
of that is, is virtual, um, but
we're working with, um, a
variety of our educational
institutions to support those
training programs, those will
roll out.
In southern New Mexico, uh, I
believe next year, the, the, the
training programs.
1.5 million is for
Seeing here. It it's, it's for
the operations to, to, for the
media arts collective and
Academy right now.
Because there is, that is under
you as a lion, Adam.
Yes, sir.
So they will go into your
budget, and you will do that out
as those types, those.
Classes are taught or whatever.
Mr. Chairman,
Senator you are hiring the
people to do that. We were
hiring the people who then also
do the contracting work to
support that the hiring of the
teachers.
Um
OK. Tell me whether this is a
true statement or not.
The film production tax credit
is approaching.
$200 million this year.
Could you repeat the statement
film production tax credits.
are approaching $200 million
this year.
Chair, Senator Steve Graham,
director of the film office. Um,
we have, uh,
There's a cap on uh on the
incentive per year, and I
apologize, I think it's at 1:40
at the moment, uh, and then we
also have our film partner
agreements that are uncapped, so
the possibility is that it could
be that high. However, we're
currently in, uh, we just had a
strike, uh, about a year ago,
and production is down
significantly. Um, we had to
spend the direct spend in the
state of about $700 million last
fiscal year, I'm sorry, $750
million last fiscal, where
had about 183 currently. So our
projections that we're going to
be significantly down, uh, in
production this year based on
both the strike and sort of an
industry-wide contraction. So as
a result, the um I don't expect
that we're going to be anywhere
near uh the cap. So, uh,
I don't know what's um.
It'd be in the neighborhood of
uh of 180 million, but I
shouldn't be quoted on that.
Who could have that figure. We
can get that for you. We can
look into that for sure. I
would,
I would like we have that figure
and that's exactly right, 18.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, secret, um,
You just got me and thought,
Mister Char no when you're gonna
call me, um, so I have a
question about the
So we get our information as
well as the creative industries
division. So the $2 million that
was appropriated last um session
was a non-recurring amounts and
I'm looking, I'm trying to find,
are you asking for an additional
amount of money for the the
creative industries division,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, the, I
think what you're referring to
is a special appropriation that
we'd received, but right, right,
but right now, uh, I don't
believe that we have any.
No, no requests for special
appropriations, um, but this
creative industries division is
now a permanent program.
And so we're using, we're we're
funding that via the uh section
4.
OK, Mr. Chair, I'm just trying
to look at
What that where that is in the
budget, but um, I'll get back to
that, I was just getting into
that with our own.
Uh, budget summary here, um, OK,
so then the next section I want
to go is the New Mexico healthy
food financing fund.
It looks like you're doing just
a really incredible job and
you're asking for $3.2 million.
I wanted to say I support that,
and is, is that
Um
I think that that's by the work
and what I'm seeing in the
measures that we have on all
that this is you're doing a
really good job and I just wanna
say thank you for all the work
that you have and continue to
do, um, this is, this is an
important part of our budget
that I've been really looking at
and, and just really looking at
the measures and following out
throughout the interim, Mr.
Chair, I think that
You know, I'd just like to
support what their, what is uh
being requested here, but um,
Is there any other requests
related to um the food financing
fund or this is
So we're looking at, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, as far
as I, as far as I know, as far
as our agency is concerned, this
is the one mechanism.
All right. Thank you so much,
uh, the next question I have is
regarding the outdoor
recreation, uh, division you
have. You are funded for 4 FTEs.
Is that correct, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Sherpresentative, that's
correct. And $95,000 that you're
asking it in this budget request
you have in front of us.
Um, is that for one of those 4
positions, Mr. Chair.
Representative, yes, uh, that.
Let me confirm that I'm gonna
this statement is true.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, so currently that is one of
our FTE is grant funded, so this
would effectively make that
general. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
that, that answers my question
there why you're asking for that
is so the grant is no longer
available, I would assume, Mr.
Chair.
OK. And then the next question
really quickly, Office of
strategy, Science and
Technology.
Um
Let's see, the pilot technology
demonstration projects in water
treatment advanced energy
technologies, uh, to $2.4
million. Uh, can you explain
what those uh pilot took
technologies are and are you
looking for growth uh funding
for this, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative of Nora
Sackett. Hi, um, so for that
item, uh, we had an RFP, um, uh,
looking for proposals for pilot
projects in advanced energy or
water technologies. Um, there
were, there was a, there were
many proposals received. There
was an extensive, um, evaluation
process conducted with input
from the economic development
department as well as the
energy, minerals, Natural
Resources Department, the
Environment department, the
Office of the State Engineer,
um, and
And there are 2 projects being
awarded, um, those are getting
underway. Um, one, we, uh, there
will be an announcement coming
out as soon as all the uh T's
are crossed, um, but one is, uh,
both are concerning water, um,
technologies, so both are
piloting proprietary technology
for water treatment that they
have developed, um, and one is
also uh related to energy
development with that water um
purification.
Um,
so those are, we're pilot uh
plants to demonstrate a
technology that has previously
been proven at bench scale, but
not yet enacted at at larger
scale.
Thank you. Sure, so, are you at
liberty to say where those
projects will be developed. I'm
sorry, are you at liberty to
tell us where in in our state
those projects will be
developed. Mr. Chair
Representative, yes, they are
both in the
Southeast, I believe one for
sure is in the southeast.
I may have to double check on
the 2nd 1.
Mr. Chair, so do those RFPs will
all that $2.4 million be um
used, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes. OK, good. And so where Mr.
Chair, are you looking to
further those pilot, uh,
technologies. Uh, are you asking
for where in your budget are you
asking for more money for these
type of projects, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative, uh,
at the, at the moment, we don't
have an additional request for
for those funds.
I,
uh, OK, great, uh, good to know.
I'm just trying to figure out
like who the specials and
everything and kind of uh
looking to where we are with all
that, um, and I think that is
all I have. I may speak with you
offline because I think that if
we are, um, I know that there
were many RFPs for that
specific, uh, this pilot
program, and I know many didn't
get um funded.
Uh, there may be considered but
not funded, so that tells me
that we have more to do. And one
of those areas, Mr. Chair, my
concern was in waste management.
And looking at as we are
building out our green economy
and our renewable energy
industry, where are we doing
with the waste management aspect
of that and when I didn't hear
when I heard that one of these,
these projects did not make the
process, um, I have some
concerns and like to just have
some outside conversations about
that because if we're gonna have
a market, we're seeing a market
return on the industry. We know
we have the investment we need
to have a full um.
Circle of investment for it, for
it to be.
Uh, fully developed. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. That's all I have.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Garrett and then Representative
Herndon and then Represented
Daniel Cruz then representing
small
so, uh, can you keep your answer
shorter and your question is
shorter too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 2
questions.
I'm an out of state person. I've
heard New Mexico is a great
place to start a business. What
website do I go to?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
I'm sorry, I'm, I'm having a
hard time hearing. There's a,
there's a feedback, so I could
not understand the question.
Could you repeat it, please?
What is the website if it
already exists where we can
refer people to who
Don't just need state services.
They want to know about our
state. They want to do this
stuff, the building success
product identification,
development, investment
opportunities, relocation.
What's the best website to tell
people?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
uh, the New Mexico Economic
Development website. Uh, we have
our toolbox there. It's just
been updated, it was republished
in September. It has all of the
various uh uh as references to
other organizations that provide
support, um, whether that's a
small business administration or
other resources, but it is a
really a central place for
people to go to understand uh
both and it provides contact
information for our field team
members who can work directly
with them.
Um, but that's really the best
place.
Thank you. And my second and
last question is one of the most
powerful economic experiences I
had as a legislator was visiting
the film site of Honey Dome.
Ethan Cohen has done 4 movies
here, but what struck me was the
number of New Mexicans who have
returned permanently to live in
the state, and the number of
people who have relocated here,
who weren't native New Mexicans,
along with um Representative
Dixon's 9 sectors. What I'd like
to see.
And it might take time and it
might involve other departments
is in this time when we really
want people, we want to bring
back our youth. We want to bring
back our adults to the state. If
we can track how many people
return and relocate in these
sectors, so we can, because we
have some incredibly creative,
robust opportunities, whether
it's outdoor film, quantum,
whatever it is, but if
We can start tracking that and
see how it's bringing people
power back. Um, that's what I
would like to see included in
statistics, uh, starting with
the economic department.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
we'll see what we can do on
that. I'll, I'll say a great
example of that is Mr. Steve
Graham, uh, our new film, uh,
division director. He is, he's a
kid from Lovington, uh, but
spent many years in Hollywood
making films and television, uh,
and then returned to make films
and television now in the role.
So he is one of those boomerangs
you're talking about.
Thank you.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have 3
quick questions. The first one,
Mr. Secretary, today I went to
El Dorado High School and I
talked to students and they
talked a lot about their mental
health and how no one is really
listening to them and addressing
their mental health. In that
regard, I want you to know that
the students at the New Mexico
Academy for the Media arts have
been working on a documentary
for um talking about the mental
health of students, and it's
called Here Our Voice, and they
want to show it.
on January 10th. Who on your
staff can help them in marketing
that a documentary that they've
been working on and helping them
find the location.
I, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
would point them to to Mr.
Graham.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Graham, we will
be in touch with you. The second
question is with respect to your
uh page regarding the $500,000
for under representative voices
in the filmmaking, so there are
students at the in Taos is that
they're called the TK kids along
with the New Mexico Academy for
the Media Arts. Will they be
able to access
this fun, and are they the
unheard bosses that you're
talking about.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um,
I will
I don't know their criteria for
the off the top of my head, for
who would qualify and I wouldn't
know if those individual
organizations would meet that
specific criteria. So I, I would
have to get back to you one to
see um what sort of
organizations they are, and then
and and then verify with you
what the criteria are for those
applications, because they
wouldn't want to misrepresent
that without that information.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Secretary, for your
information, the TK kids are
high school kids who are
studying film and, and the
media, and then the New Mexico
Academy for the Media Arts is a
charter school in Albuquerque,
where they're studying film and
media. And then my final and
last question is, we talked
about, you talked about um
telling the story of New Mexico.
One of the things that we're
lacking here is we need more
doctors, and I would like for
you to think about telling that
story.
of New Mexico that you send that
film or that documentary or
whatever you're gonna create to
law to medical schools around
the state, around the country,
so that people will say, that's
where I wanna go work as a
doctor. We want you to market
New Mexico to the medical
community and in that regard
you'll be helping President
Garnett Stokes who came before
the the uh legislative Health
and Human Services Committee and
she says, I'm creating a
stronger medical school.
for New Mexico. So it will be
the premier medical school in
the country. So that is a that
is a task that you can take on
as a part of helping to tell the
story of New Mexico. Is that
something you will do?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um, we are, uh, that would take
money, um, I'll just be very
frank, you know, we, we've, we
require marketing dollars, and,
and the $2 million for um that
were requested are the
additional million dollars for
the Mexico partnership is not
going to be something that would
help deliver that, um, those
sort of marketing efforts are,
would need to be dedicated
resources and a commitment from
the legislature, if that's what
you would like us to.
do. Um, you know, we certainly
can want to support whatever it
is that this legislature and and
is signed into law as far as the
budget goes, and we will stand
ready to execute that as the
will of the legislature, but
that would require additional
funds.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Secretary.
Representative Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just
briefly, can we revisit the idea
of promotions and marketing.
What
not being too loud.
What amount was expended this
year to promote New Mexico
outside of New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, are you, are
you, is the question in regards
to um
Businesses to locate in New
Mexico and or workers to
relocate to New Mexico or is it
in regards to also including
tourism and other types of
things, specifically for
businesses to locate in New
Mexico.
The Mr. Chairman, representative
of the New Mexico Partnership
had uh the, the, the
$900,000 committed from the
legislature to support the next
partnership, the economic
development department added an
additional $100,000. So we,
that's really about a million
dollars that we had to really
promote. There was some small
amount that the, the film office
had to attend some some industry
conferences to promote the
state, um, but
Very marginal amount.
Where, where did this, this
happen?
In in in the country.
So, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative, I know that we
took a delegation of a variety
of
Local economic development
organizations, uh, staff, as
well as some business leaders to
Chicago, uh, for a broader
economic development
conference, um, we were recently
in the film office was in Las
Vegas, uh, promoting at a, at a
media conference there, uh,
about a week or about a month
ago, 1 month and a half ago, um,
I can't, I'd have to get the
full list of where um the
In particular, the partnership
represented the the state and
and I I just don't have that off
the top of my head, but I'm
happy to get you that
information, Mr. Chairman, we're
internationally did you promote?
New Mexico.
That is a good question, um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, um,
Over the last year, uh, there
has been a variety of different
initiatives, um.
Mark Roper on my team is
currently in Taiwan right now.
There have been previous
missions to Taiwan that have
resulted in uh companies
relocating there, especially in
Santa Teresa area, um, we're
continuing those efforts. I, uh,
in a, in a previous role, uh,
accompanying the governor to
missions in uh in Australia as
well as to the Netherlands
regarding advanced energy and
hydrogen, uh,
Conferences, um, that have did
result in agreements for um
Companies to relocate here in
New Mexico and we're excited
about those efforts, um, there
was also an initiative that I
know that the that the governor
went on prior to me coming into
the role, um, I think uh Norris
I got on my team and come in the
governor to India as another
effort to again focus on
bringing New Mexico or
investment into New Mexico. Um,
there were probably others, but
I don't have that off the top of
my head, but I'm happy to do my
best to get you that
information, Mr. Chairman, I
would encourage
that you also seek out
international fairs where
countries, well our states.
Our country, other countries
congregate so that people are
aware of the assets and
opportunities are available for
other countries' businesses to,
to invest in, I would really
encourage that, the ones that
you've described are important
as well. They tend to be pretty
focused, but sometimes you just
need to let the world know who
and what you are and what you
have available.
And I think if we don't do that,
we're missing an opportunity.
There is a reason, Mr. Chairman,
that people spend millions of
dollars at one fair alone.
To promote their country.
And they don't do it because
they're just throwing their
money away. They're doing it
because they know it's necessary
for the world to know what their
assets and opportunities are.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Just don't take that first class
flight, represents small.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and thank you, uh, thank
you, Secretary. Thanks to your
team. Um, first question.
There's been, well, um,
appreciate the breakdown of the
new recurring funding, uh, very
excited about a number of those
pieces uh in particular, um,
Sort of the pilot technology
demonstrations and do it, it's
looks like from this slide that
that will be sort of a recurring
and ongoing um
tool that we have as a state,
uh, is that sort of the, your
sense that that obviously using
this first time around, but that
building in this as a, as a
recurring tool for the state,
uh, as we're in this really
important time, Mr. Chairman, uh
Chairman Small, uh, yes, uh, the
legislature was kind enough to
give us an additional base
budget, uh, those, what you're
seeing is how we've utilize
those funds.
Uh, with the intent that we,
that we thought we heard from
the legislature and the
leadership here. Um, so our
intent is to continue to do that
sort of work with those funds.
Great. Uh thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I
think it's great that, you know,
there's sort of show and tell.
This is really um showing
everyone that New Mexico is a
great place to come and partner
and that we're uh we're, we're
in that space. So I really, and
a number of these different uh
Is show that, so glad we made
that investment.
Second question, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, are there additional
tools that you're thinking about
and pursuing, uh, I think this
is clearly a new set of tools
that we provided last year, are
there additional tools uh that
you and your team are pursuing
and looking at this year that
it's good for us to be thinking
about, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, I, yes, I think
some of the areas that we are
we think are, are very
important.
Um, is, is the site readiness
work that we'll be bringing
forward in the legislature, uh,
this coming 60 day session. Um,
I think it, I would argue that
if, if we can create an electron
and we can create a molecule of
water, people are gonna want to
use it.
And we need to figure out how we
can do that efficiently and
effectively and in a way that um
reduces that carbon intensity to
do that work, but if we can
compete on on infrastructure
side.
Um, we can get, there are so
many investments and, and people
who want to be here in New
Mexico, but we need to be able
to move quickly. So part of that
is, is our site readiness work,
identifying those locations all
around the state of New Mexico
where um we've done the site
characterization work and we
say, we can say to to you.
With capital outlay, if we put
this amount of money into this
site, it could be ready for this
type of development.
And it makes us much then it
allows you to do that
strategically with the best
impact for that local community,
wherever that might be.
And then it makes it easier for
us to market that, uh, to a
company who wants to come to New
Mexico, and we can say, we can
have you in the ground and ready
to go in a year or 18 months
instead of 3 to 5 years, because
when it's 3 to 5 years, we're
just not competitive.
And so uh we will also be
bringing forward a utility
predeployment bill which would
allow us to de-risk, uh,
deploying that infrastructure,
utility infrastructure prior to
a specific customer being
identified on strategic uh
economic development sites.
Again, we think that's gonna
create opportunities, whether
you're talking about
biosciences, intelligent
manufacturing, other types of
economic activity. If you've got
those sites identified and
have the utility infrastructure
ready to go. It's gonna make it
much easier to deploy capital in
New Mexico. Good. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
And ensuring that that we have
reliability in our grid. Um, I
think, and then we're creating
high paying jobs. Um, if you
look at the economic impact
that, and I'm sure this has been
discussed here with this
committee that um Meta
Facebook's data center has had
to the county just on tax
revenue alone, uh, on GRT. It is
I think something like 8 or 9
fold.
Uh, for that county, uh, just
from the data center because
they have to replace the
computers every 3 years. So
those sort of infrastructures,
um, while energy intensive, um,
can pay benefits and both on
directly to the state on on
revenue side, but also on
creating really important
economic activity. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Um, the, uh,
Talked a little bit about, uh,
well, you emphasize outdoor
recreation. I know we're uh
going a little past time, but
appreciate the focus on uh both
the trails Plus and uh with the
outdoor equity fund. Both of
those have been sort of fully
subscribed, is that your, I
mean, we've seen challenges and
we hear about challenges all the
time about um
you know, not getting money out.
Money is set aside, dedicated by
the legislature. It doesn't flow
to where it's intended for
whatever reason, both of those
have been fully subscribed and
in the case of the outdoor
equity fund, I think that's been
oversubscribed. Is that your
understanding, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, that is correct.
OK. And so it sounds like that's
a very high priority for you. I
know there are advocates who are
here, uh, increasing that
funding to $3 million seems like
it's a very high priority for
the department as you look at
going into this upcoming
session.
That's great. I think it's, you
know, there, um,
Yeah
We look forward to hearing more
and I think seeing how that's
impacted youth all across the
state. Uh, and the connection
between what the outdoor
recreation division is doing
building businesses and
essentially training your
training workforce in a lot of
ways there and, and beginning a
workforce, um.
Is there a strong workforce
connection on the outdoor equity
fund in your opinion?
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
think it, it, it helps create
access, which does create the
opportunity both, I think around
STEM education, around cultural,
like a lot of the outdoor equity
and and and those funds have
gone towards cultural education
in the Navajo community uh and
some of our other native
communities, um, it is where
it's worked with, within the
urban communities, it's allowed
young people who may not be able
to get outside and and
experience the outdoors, the
ability to do that, and I think
that starts to open.
on their minds to what are the
opportunities? I take to heart
the comments that were also made
earlier around aligning uh with
our our.
Higher education curriculum to
better support that sort of
workforce pipeline uh into those
sectors, uh, whether that's on a
skilled trade side or or forest
management side. So I, I think
it's an area that we should, we
should be thinking about how we
best collaborate with higher
education and, and our, uh,
PED on how we do that. Got it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
finally, um, something I really
look to, and we'll, we'll have
workforce solutions soon, but
the workforce component.
Of the economic growth that
you're and you, you know, you
are squarely tasked with, how is
that, or, or how does that work
with Workforce Solutions going?
Are there additional uh pieces
that we need to support their,
um, is that more of sort of
workforce solutions following
what EDD is doing? Is it EGD,
um, partnering with Workforce
Solutions. How do we think about
that, particularly
earlier, we heard, uh, we're
number 5 when it comes to pro
rata job openings, but we don't
have enough people who are
applying for those jobs, or at
least who have maybe the right
skill set for those jobs.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I,
I want to start with saying the
investments that this
legislature has made over the
last
4 years, 5 years in workforce
development is amazing, and it
has uh it's transforming, I
think the process and
opportunities. We talked about
the the role of internships that
then translate into jobs, those
funded internships, those that
work-based learning
opportunities as was raised by
Senator Gonzalez around if you
have those, your graduation
rates and your attendance rates
are much higher. It's the
investments that this
legislature has made in those
sorts of pathways and workforce
that I think is really having
impact last year, you put $60
million into the fund, 20
million a year to help support
certifications that are not tied
to a tool or 4-year program,
giving flexibility to employers
to work with local community
colleges on how they design
those programs to help upskill
and get folks into the economy
quickly and jobs that will
really improve their economic
well-being. So I would say
continue to invest in those sort
of programs that create
flexibility.
an employer can work closely
with an educational institution,
uh, to, to build that pathway,
and, you know, one of the best
programs there is for that is
JTEP and and I think continued
investment in that is is part of
how you do that. Got it. OK.
Thank you very much. Uh, really
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Let me wrap up here.
I'm gonna wrap up real quickly.
I don't know, you know, there's
a lot of things to do in
economic development, right?
But the one thing is you want to
create real jobs and real
growth.
And I just haven't seen that in
economic development in a while.
We talk about going to Thailand
or where we're going, right? And
we got these contracts, but
How many of those on the last
trips that the governor and
you've been on have really
brought anything back to New
Mexico other than a piece of
paper saying, we're gonna do
something.
Mr. Chairman, um, I think
that's, that's a point well
taken. Um, we need to be, we do,
we have to do more than a press
release. We have to do shovels
in the ground.
And our job is to make sure that
those happen. Um, I was pleased
to see, as you probably read,
Maxion did sign an agreement,
uh, that they're in, they're in
development with a uh at the old
Hewlett-Packard facility and not
and not Hewlett Packard, um.
Honeywell facility in
Albuquerque, um, so that is, I
think, good news towards, you
know, we're starting to see
those things actually happening.
They had the the Orisco, um, am
I mispronouncing that the, the
wind turbine manufacturing
facility, uh, in central New
Mexico, that is functioning and
happening. So we are seeing
successes, but I, I take to
heart your admonition. We need
to do more than a piece of
paperback. We need to make sure
that we're getting uh shovels.
the dirt and people in jobs and
uh we're committed to doing
that.
Um
You know, I, I mean,
You could be a jack of all
trades, but not good at
anything, right?
And and so is this agency's
growing over the last 3 or 4
years, right?
Well, things change, so we need
to change with them. But you
still have one main focus and
goal in
I, I, I don't really see that
being target in here other than
give us more money for Lita.
And, and
So Mr. Chairman, uh, what I, my,
my, I guess how I would respond
to that is, is
This committee and the
legislature has made significant
investments in economic
development. Uh, we've been able
to add additional staff in the
field, so going from one field
rep to 2 around the state in all
of our different divisions. Um,
we have and we are asking for
additional, you know, the
baseline 3% increase, but we've
got the staff now that that it
can execute that in the field.
We are looking at some of the
more targeted areas, so our, our
science and technology.
Uh, office and and strategy
office, we do think those are
uniquely competitive places for
New Mexico because of the labs,
because of our oil and gas
sector, our history and energy
production. Um, so we are again
trying to get more focused on
how we
Target sectors so that we can
get the largest impact to to our
communities.
In, in, I mean, Jay tips another
one and you had how many workers
come back into JTI out of the
292 interns transitioned to
full-time jobs, but that's over
a five-year period, right?
That's less than about 60 jobs a
year.
Yes, sir. Those are, those are
for the internships. That's not
for the actual jobs themselves.
But that's what the internships
transitioned into, I mean,
otherwise we're just subsidizing
payroll until they get on their
feet. I mean, that's what J tip
is, is a payroll subsidy until
they get on their feet and they
become operational and
profitable.
But the transition from
Part time in in interns in the
full time is what really makes a
difference cause those interns
are probably all from New
Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, that, that's
correct. I think everything
you've said is, is accurate. Um,
the, the core function of JTI is
not really the internship part
though, so.
So we threw that in as an
additional, you know, support
area, but I do think that um
Part of what you're gonna see
with internships, right? Some of
it is, especially when you're
talking about high school kids,
they may go into then a welding
program, but not directly into
that job, or they may decide,
I'm gonna go study this in
college. So it may not be a
direct correlation, but there
still could be a lot of value
for that work-based learning
experience. Yeah.
So let me ask you about Lita.
Um,
How many projects are in the
pipeline for Leda right now, I
mean, we have an $80 million
balance.
And you guys, not you, but maybe
you've always done this to us,
so we get the session, we have
only have $10 million and then
you look in March and you back
up to 110, and we chase this
lead of thing forever and ever.
And, and I don't know what what
we need to do. I mean, I've
always said we need to go buy
hired a headhunter and let him
go shop for us and spend a
million bucks.
in developing stuff in New
Mexico.
A full-time guy and bring us
back deals.
But Lita is kind of been, oh,
let's, it's kinda like Calali.
Turn on the sprinkler and it
gets green, but nothing ever
really grows.
And, and we need to figure out
how we're gonna win in New
Mexico.
And how we're going to win big.
And
How does, how do these companies
react when they say you only
have 4.1% vacancy in your market
to hire these laborers or
whoever they are.
Where are they gonna get that
labor pool. It's 4 4.1% is
pretty minimal in the skills
that's probably not there for
whatever it is. What are their
comments when you say we got 10
million lita, but you don't have
the workforce in New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chairman, that is rarely
my pitch. Um, uh, what, what I
would say is, I think there, we
do have one of the highest
skilled workforces, whether
you're, you're talking about the
number of doctorates uh per
capita, uh, in the state, um, we
had certain sectors where we
have sufficient workforce, uh,
construction is not one of them,
and, and you know better than
most, but it is an area where we
have, uh, again, through the
legislature made significant
investments to create those
paths.
Was for folks, um,
we're investing and that's why
we're working on the media arts
collective from the film side,
we need to continue to grow that
workforce, so that when we've
got more than 2 or 3 productions
happening at once we can staff
that with New Mexicans, and
we're not importing those folks.
A large part of the workforce
that are building those wind
turbines in eastern New Mexico
are out of state construction
workers. We're working, I mean,
I know that through uh DWS
they're working to make sure
those become New Mexico jobs.
Um, but it will be a process,
but I think
I, I applaud this legislature
for investing in those pathways
from, from the work-based
learning to the internships to
the support of uh career
certifications to help us get
there, but it is workforce is a
challenge for everyone, um, as
you also know, we've got more
people sitting on the sidelines
of our economy than most states,
so that's another area where the
hope is, as we continue to
create
Easier ways to get into the
economy through those career
certification types of
initiatives, um, that we can get
more of those folks off the
sidelines and into the
workforce. And if we can get, if
we could do 3% of that, it would
make a huge difference on our
overall workforce.
while talking about the media
academy.
Eric Witt.
To, uh, me and Senator want this
one time.
The best place for a film school
between LA and Austin is in Las
Cruces.
That was 4 years ago.
And they still haven't built
that trade program.
4 years ago with capital and
funding and everything, and
we're gonna build this media
center and we're gonna do this,
and we still haven't got
accomplished. I mean, I think
this is the year we're gonna
hold people's feet to the fire.
So if you don't accomplish stuff
in the time frame.
And you really want to do this
in New Mexico.
Universities it's gonna be short
term. I can go create a welder
in like 30 days.
I can and and I can create a
carpenter or framer and.
Weeks
And
But the state can't do that and
we're going to quit sitting
around on the sidelines if you
want to create this stuff and
get it done.
And, and that's gonna be very
important to me to see over the
next 30 days.
But the universities say they
got in place.
What we're gonna build and what
time frame?
Because in
4 years since COVID, we put 40
million in those media
academies.
And they still don't exist.
I mean, 4 years, $40 million and
they don't exist. Mr. Chairman,
the, what I would say is they
are under construction, um, they
are being built, um, the, the
choice to build uh the first
media arts collective in
downtown Albuquerque in a
historic train depot, um,
It's gonna be awesome, but it's
been a challenge. Uh, it's
required the floor of that
facility, the concrete floor,
you would think that was holding
trains could support the
infrastructure, it, it couldn't,
it was crumbling, so we had to
build pillars. So it's, it's,
it's, it's those sort of things
and you know construction as
well as anybody, um, it's, it,
but I, I, I hear what you're
saying. We need to be
accountable when, when you've
given us money and the
taxpayers, uh, and we're
spending taxpayer dollars, we
need to make sure we're
delivering.
Um, I would say, and, and I
would, I appreciate the
represent represented Small's
comments, we, I think as a as a
department.
When you give us funds to get
out through a grant program to
other sorts of programs. We try
to be very diligent in doing
that in a timely fashion so that
it's impacting the community as
quickly as possible, whether
again that's through the
mainstream program through uh
these, these various grant
programs or others, so, um,
It's very appropriate for you to
hold us accountable to deliver
on that.
Yeah, you should be with grant
programs and watch that, right?
But at some point,
You have Mesa del Sol, which is
state land, and already has
movie studios over there.
And common sense will tell you
if you're gonna build a media
cavity, why don't you build it
where all the other media
academies, all the other media's
going on.
That's common sense. I don't
know what happened, but I mean,
we're gonna watch and
That thing better get rolling,
otherwise they're gonna
It's gonna change.
And uh
Let me ask you, do you oversee
the border authority team. They
are administratively attached to
us, so we support them through
uh uh
Through accounting and other
sort of support, but they don't
necessarily direct, they don't,
they're not direct reports to
me. And, and what about the
spaceport? Are you on the board
or how, how's that being
handled, Mr. Chairman, that is
correct. I am the chair of the
board for the Spaceport
Authority, uh, by very virtue of
my new role. You and I and the
land commissioner in the
spaceport are gonna have a
meeting this week and we're
gonna figure out that, that
lease issue down there and
resolve that this week.
I am, I am with you. I will be
happy to be there. Adrian's got
some scheduled and if you're the
chair, then you need to be
there, but we need to resolve
that issue.
Uh, so they can get some
stability and see where we're
gonna go.
Thank you, sir. I appreciate
your leadership on that.
I just think we need to keep
moving forward.
Good luck. I wanna see some real
vision and not just give us
money and we'll see what happens
in 4 years from now, so, Mr.
Chairman, to that point, uh, I
had my first spaceport board of
board meeting last Thursday.
Um, and then the following day,
we hosted the head of uh UTEP.
Uh, the head of New Mexico State
and the engineering division for
Mexico Tech, as well as variety
of the elected officials from
each of those three entities.
Uh, thinking about how do we
build that as a more of a
regional hub and, and those
three entities being that
workforce driver for the
spaceport and for our
space-related technologies and,
and companies. So I hear your,
your admonition, and I think um
we're well positioned to be, to
help support that.
They weren't down here
recruiting the coach for, oh
that was Utah
I just wanna make sure. Thank
you guys for your presentation
and your time. Thank you.
Thanks.
Scott, you're gonna give us a
short presentation.
it.
We're just hearing from you,
Scott, right?
Mm
OK.
All right, good afternoon, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Scott
Sanchez, I'm filling in for
Austin Davidson today. Um, right
now we're gonna be looking at
the, uh, budget for the
Environment department. Um,
you'll find this, uh, agency
code 667 uh towards the back of
the section you guys can kind of
move out of here quietly so we
can wrap up. Thank you.
So once again, it's the
environment department agency
code 667. You can find this
towards the back of the section
behind tab 6, in the audience
today, our Deputy Secretary John
Rodrick and Deputy Secretary
Daniel Gillam.
The Environment department's
operating budget has
historically been funded by
revenue from special revenue
funds, federal funds, and the
state general fund, uh, special
revenue funds and federal funds
are the agency's largest source
of revenue, accounting for 165.2
million or 83% of the agency's
budget in FY 25.
The Environment department's
general fund request for FY 26
is flat compared to set by 25
operating budget. However, it
does reflect a $48.1 million
dollar decrease in federal funds
and uh large decrease in
transfers. Overall, this
represents a decrease in the
agency's budget of 19.4%.
The base budget includes a
request to shift about $3.2
million for the establishment of
a new compliance and enforcement
division.
Where the agency plans to house
the staff who will be
responsible for the enforcement
of permits and regulations,
which up until now has been a
function of the same workforces
that handle permitting for
various industries that the
Environment Department is
required to regulate.
The staff this new division, the
agency is requesting 74 new
permanent staff physicians and a
reduction of 16 term FTE.
Notably to align with federal
guidelines, the uh requirement
to separate permitting and
compliance functions within the
department will be accomplished
by their request.
The agency's request, um, also
highlights evidence of the fact
that they received a record
amount of penalty money that
they reverted to the general
fund in fiscal year 24.
Significantly separate from the
operating budget, the agency is
requesting $218 million in
special appropriations and plans
to seek statutory changes to
increase flexibility in how it
uses these revenue funds.
Including money which would
expand what they're currently
doing in their base budget while
they wait to increase fees.
And that's pretty much the high
level overview. I'm happy to
answer any questions. And again,
we've got several members of
their staff, a couple of deputy
secretaries here to help answer
questions.
OK.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Stein.
Thank you, and uh saving one of
the best for the last, so I'm
sorry that, you know, we, we
can't have a full-throated
presentation, maybe with the
time remaining, but first of
all, I want to thank the
Environment Department for all
you do and all the challenges
you're dealing with across the
state. I am particularly happy
to see you go on the offensive
on neglected, contaminated sites
in the state, including a
banning uranium mine sites, of
which we have 1000 and other
abandoned neglected contamin
sites which include like old dry
cleaners and just about every
one of our towns in New Mexico
having being the vice chair of
the radioactive and hazardous
Materials Committee, you put
together a presentation showing
us a map of where those are
located. Um,
You know, we have New Mexico
whether you realize it or not.
Has like a lot of places, uh
legacy of contamination among a
lot of other legacies, um, back
in days before we had.
Um
You know, funds required for
remediation. Um, we just did
business a lot differently in
some states still do business
very unprotectively, but um,
We have a lot of sites and, and
probably would cost billions of
dollars to clean up. But now
that we have
The amount of new money that we
have.
Um, I hope that
We can um chart out a path to
begin going on the offensive
against these contaminated sites
before we wake up the next day
and read about the next polluted
water supply.
And the next Superfund site. I
mean, you, you have an
opportunity to catch some of
that pollution while it's
migrating before.
You know, it contaminates our,
uh our water and our natural
resources, so.
Look forward to having more
conversations about in the 2
years left of this
administration, how we would be
able to spend resources to be
able to create a good plan and
start to remediate sites. So I,
you know, we don't really have
time for, uh,
For questions or answers, I
don't know, you know, a big
debate about it other than to
thank the department for having
this on your radar and caring
enough to deal with it.
Uh, I don't know the
legislature, you know, cause
we're having a like, you know,
fund everything across state
government, and I think we tend
to look at all things being
equal and you just can't make
that kind of a comparison. Some
things are, you know, red lights
on the dashboard that you got to
deal with when you're given an
opportunity, and this is one of
those issues, so.
I'll leave it at that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I wish the
secretary was here to answer
your questions, but I can tell
you I think he's flying to
Washington DC fighting for
funding for uh for the state and
dealing with really important
stuff, so first class, I bet.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Deputy Secretary John, yeah, I
just want to say thank you for
all you've done to help smaller
communities where all the
problems you're facing with the
water and and sewage and all
that stuff, you know, in my
district we weren't working with
uh Bluewater quite a bit, and
I've known, um, Mr. Chairman,
you've been working with other
communities, and I really
appreciate that cause these
people really need to help, and
if you hadn't stepped up to the
plate, it'd be a different game.
Thank you.
They
Center would
I notice in here, in your little
handout you have uh
20 million
The rural infrastructure
programs provide low-interest
loans.
And I've got a special problem.
Well, maybe not a special
problem, but I got a problem
over my cannon Air Force Base.
I've got
I've got a whole line of people
over there that were on private
wells that we need to
Run a water line to.
And uh I'm hoping very much that
Some of that money can get that
direction in order to do that.
Uh, I don't know exactly what
it's gonna take to do that, but
I'm hoping
I like to say, some of that
money would, would go that
direction.
And I don't know whether y'all
would have any information on
that. Have you got a particular
place that
We're talking about spending
that money. Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh appreciate that and
I'd like to speak to it, you
know, we're very much aware of
the issue over there, and I've
in fact met with
Uh, Curry County and the
The town of Texaco on these
issues and I'm aware that we've
got some people that are on
private wells that would like to
connect or willing to connect to
the, the water system. So we're
also working closely with EPO,
all the entities over there. We
actually just signed uh uh $2
million agreement with the
county through this rural
infrastructure program, and this
is important because this is a
very agile funding source for
us. It is state money, so we
don't have to meet all of the
federal requirements that
sometimes
these projects.
We're able to get this money out
the door quickly, which is why
we're back asking for more
because the 10 million that the
legislature funded us a session
ago, we've already got.
In place and earmarks. So yes,
we are actively working with
that, uh, just brought on board
a new construction programs
bureau, uh, chief, who is very
well versed in, in the programs
and we're actively pursuing
getting this money on the
ground.
Well, the county, you know, to
the county's advantage, I don't
know if anybody in the room
thinks about it, but it's to the
county's advantage.
To keep those homes, most
country homes viable to keep
them on the tax roll. They're
actually worth nothing if they
don't have water.
So there's some way that we can
get that done.
It would be a great help in that
part of the world.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. John, let me ask you
something in the news over the
last week.
The feds came out and said
they're gonna ban um lead pipes
in in the US and and everybody
has to like 2050 to replace
them.
And they put
I think 7 billion or something
in there.
Have you guys, you guys keep a
record of where the lead pipes
are in New Mexico and what the
effects are or where they're
located and what that's gonna
look like.
7 billion probably doesn't even
do Chicago. Mr. Chairman, thank
you for that. I appreciate it.
Um, unfortunately, very few
states in the US kept any kind
of an inventory on lead pipes,
and so the first phase of what's
going on is requiring
communities to go do an
inventory and figure out what
they're dealing with.
Um, so far in New Mexico, we're
looking pretty good. We're not
seeing a lot of lead pipe in the
ground.
Um, you know, we've been
involved with uh for several
years doing lead sampling in
schools and daycares to check
for lead in the water which
comes from those piping systems.
And of all of them that we've
done, we've not identified any
that are having full blown
piping problems where their
service piping is an issue, what
we find is they have a
A, a water cooler, they have a
particular faucet that they have
to replace to to be compliant.
So we're cautiously optimistic
that New Mexico is going to be
in good shape, but we're
actively engaged with
communities now to get those
inventories done and then
determine the path forward.
OK. Thank you.
And what's just quickly, I
noticed that your audit had some
pretty big deficiencies on it.
So,
You know, our problem is
whenever we, we fund
Capital
Those audits need to be squeaky
clean.
And do we need to hold you guys
to the same major as we do local
government and
So that is wanted to bring that
up. I know that it's, it's not
your wheelhouse, but
It is a, a problem with me, so.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I
appreciate that. And I'm
actually gonna defer that to
Deputy Cabinet Secretary
Gilliam, who does handle our
financial side.
This is always an awkward way to
speak, but, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, we are actively working
through finalizing our
understanding of those audit
findings and going through those
with a fine tooth comb. Overall,
our audits have actually
improved over the last two
years, but I believe I know
exactly what you're referencing
and I'm, I'll be happy to follow
up if you would like. Please do.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Deputy secretaries,
and thank you, Mr. Sanchez. um,
Mr. Chair, uh, first, I just,
uh, a big thank you to NMED, uh,
as you point out in the
presentation, um, the money
returned to the general fund
from protecting the Mexicans'
health and safety and the
regulatory and the fine
component actually was larger
than what we gave in general
fund. Do you see that sort of
of continuing being able to do
robust enforcement across the
state, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Small, yes, we do, uh, that's
actually one of the reasons
we're standing at the compliance
and enforcement section is to be
able to.
Focus even more on enforcement.
Now, I will tell you that doing
enforcement means we're trying
to work ourselves out of a job,
right? Because if we get
everybody compliant, then we're
not going to collect it.
We have a long way to go. Sure.
And Mr. Chair, I think, you
know, the, the, as you point
out, the, the goal is
compliance. The goal is a clean,
healthy and safe environment and
being a welcoming place for uh
the private sector to, to do
really good and innovative and
necessary, you know, local,
national and global work, which
they do. Um.
So I, I appreciate the sort of
the point that it's about public
health and safety and
compliance. It's not about a
certain level of fine, that's a
tool not always used, but when
it's appropriate to use, it,
it's there. um, Mr. Chair and
Deputy secretaries as it relates
to another part of that, um,
really being a welcoming,
innovative, uh, strong private
sector partner, it seems like
that's a place where
uh, something like the strategic
water supply is a component that
we're better enforcing the rules
and regulations to help protect
the citizens of our state. We're
also working to be the best
place, uh, to, you know, partner
with the private sector and to
address the water scarcity
challenges that we have.
Is that how you see the
strategic water supply, uh,
Yes or no, I guess.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and, and
Representative yes, um, the
strategic water supply.
I see is another tool in our
toolbox to be able to number
one.
Protect our water supplies in
the state, and
I have to admit I get some
pushback on that, right? But
here's the issue.
It's not just enough to protect
them from being contaminated. We
need to protect them from being
used up. Otherwise,
None of us are gonna be here to
worry about it. So, any
opportunity, any mechanism that
we can employ to achieve that
goal of protecting the quality
of the water and protecting the
quantity of the water is
absolutely necessary. Mr. Chair,
I think that, that really, you
said it incredibly well there
and I couldn't agree more, and
it brings me to sort of the last
area which is um surface water
permitting and protection, you
know, an area where federal
protections were stripped away,
uh
Recently, there are sort of what
we can imagine to be mounting
challenges in that area, the
legislature dedicated a start to
that last year is surface water
protection, a big part of what
uh enemy D will be focusing on
in this upcoming session.
Mr. Chair and and represented a
small, yes, you will see.
statutory requirements requests
coming forward to give us the
authority to pursue primacy over
the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System stuff that's
currently handled by EPA. We're
moving forward conjunctively
with regulatory changes.
To be able to support that, you
know, as, as I think we've
explained, where it's a two-part
process for us. We need to stand
up a state program.
Along with taking on primacy,
the state program fills those
gaps so that it really doesn't
matter how they decide to define
waters of the US. Our program
shifts to cover everything.
OK? And so, yeah, this session
will be coming forward to, to
get the approvals and the
authorizations from the
legislature to move forward with
the primacy piece as we move
forward with the, with the rules
and regulations as well. Great.
And Mr. Chair, uh, Deputy
Secretary, briefly on that, you
know, we did allocate uh past
funding around $10 million
there. Uh, we just had this
conversation in the presentation
before, has enemyD been able to
sort of move on starting to
uh implement some of that
funding that was set aside
recently.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
small, yes, we've uh taken the
funding that was provided and
allocated it, laid it out,
planned it out over 3 years to
bring on staff, to bring on
additional contractors to assist
with further rulemaking and
training of staff and
development.
Um, we've brought staff on as
well. We're actively engaged in,
in development and
implementation of the database
that we have to have to
implement the program that's
with a couple of funding pieces
that have come prior.
Um, so we're actually really
engaged in that, um, to, to
spend all that funding over the
next 3 years, which is the time
frame to roll this program out.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Deputy secretaries and Mr.
Sanchez and I think that it
helps again illustrate how all
of these components fit
together, and the really strong
increases the legislature is
dedicated, I think are bearing
fruit, um, and, and being
utilized actually fairly well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, you know what John,
you know.
Uh
When are we going to get the ros
promulgated on brackish water
and produced water.
I'm about to sing the 12 Days of
Christmas, so you guys can get
it done before the holidays.
And, and I mean 5 years you've
been waiting on that. We funded
it.
And we still haven't got it.
And that's key to, to, to all
the water that you're talking
about, right?
It's the reserve, how we, how we
move water, what happens
forward, brackish water. If
those rules aren't in place.
Then why are we going to run
pieces of legislation if we
don't have the rules.
And and I think that's key for
the environment department to
get that done. Do you know how
quickly they're gonna get that
done. Mr. Chairman, thank you
for that. Um, we, as I believe
you're aware, our first round
with the reuse rules, which
include a section on produced
water.
Um, we've gone before the WQCC
been through all the hearings,
we're waiting to hear their
final.
Call on that, what happens.
Um, that's been slower than we
had wanted it to be, but I will
say that in the background while
we haven't been able to to
engage in the public process.
We've been actively working on
the additional rules that need
to go along with that, that will
include brackish water, direct
and indirect potable reuse, all
the different types of reuse, so
that once we get past this first
step, we're ready to roll the
next one out in the, uh, we're
looking at, I think early summer
to mid-summer of 25. They get
the rulemaking package.
In place. We're engaged with the
universities, um, deeply digging
into the brackish water, looking
at how we're going to treat it,
what the feasibility is, uh, in
my shoes examining the cost
effectiveness, you know, what
does it take to do this?
Um, where is anxious, I think,
Senator, as you are to get these
things out the door and get them
in place. We've got a lot of
work to do and not a lot of time
to do it. Yeah, we just need
clarity as we move forward, I
mean, we want to spend last year
was 500 million, this year it's
about 75 million.
And, and we got to know what
we're gonna do.
And that's key. The other thing,
I mean, you know, everybody
should be in compliance, right?
And, and it shouldn't be an
issue that the environment
department has to go, say, oh,
you're out of compliance, right?
You as me as an operator, I
mean, you guys show up in my
yard one time and I was out of
compliance one time cause I had
one bucket without a lid on it.
Right.
It'll happen.
But you should always try to be
in compliance, but when they're
not in compliance, and then you
have to go bring them in
compliance or find them to get
into compliance. That's a
completely different story.
And, and so do you, do you
regularly send stuff out to, to
gas companies and say, hey, show
us your compliance list and, and
if you're compliant or not
complying and see what happens,
or do you just wait for some
whistleblower to call and say,
hey.
They did this or they did that,
and
And you guys got to go
investigate.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
an excellent question. The
answer to that is we're actively
engaged in going out and
monitoring for noncompliance. We
need about 5 times the people
that we've got to do that, and,
and I'm, I need to put a plug in
here and say thank you to the
legislature for the funding from
last session, because it has
made a difference for us.
Um, we are experiencing
Probably the lowest vacancy rate
in the state right now as far as
state agencies. We went from not
being able to get people to
apply for our jobs to do a a
rapid hiring back in October, we
had 63 jobs, we had
Over 200 people apply.
Which is a big change for us. So
we're actively trying to gear
up, we're looking at new
technology to, to do some of
this monitoring with, to do this
enforcement. It's not
It's not doing our job the right
way if we're waiting for it to
become a major problem before we
can step in. We recognize we're
steps behind, but we're working
to get back up to speed on it.
Yeah, well, it wasn't the late
la's fault that the the payroll
system wasn't working correctly.
That, that was a man in charge
in the legislature fixed that so
we can get that fixed. So
that's, I'm glad to hear that
things have turned around cause
that's very important. The
employees are happy and, and
they're in the right pay grades
and, and we got that fixed.
Representative, just real quick,
in water committee last two
weeks ago, Secretary Kenny said
30% of the industry was in
compliance with emissions. That
means 70% were not, so I don't
know where this compliance game
is, but they're not, they're not
following what they're supposed
to. But have you checked 100%.
So if there's a 100% in 70 or
not. How do you know 70 or not
if 30% or 80.
That's a guessing game.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, and
Representative, I think that's
true. Um, the reality is we
don't have the staff to get out
and inspect every facility.
On an ongoing basis. Um, we want
to, but we're literally years
behind being able to get that
done. And so that's one of the
goals is how do we improve that?
and how do we bring the
additional staff on, how are we
able to use additional ways to
monitor these, and we're looking
at satellite monitoring, we're
looking at drone use, we're
looking at
Trying to find the tools to get
in the toolbox to get this
right. OK.
That's our job.
Right, to give them what they
need. That's our job to give
them what they need, right? They
didn't ask for anything else in
their budget, so they got what
they need.
Mr. Chair, I can just promise
you we'll be back
Well, we got some coal for
Christmas coming.
Thank you, guys. I appreciate
your time.
Thank you. We'll see you 30
days. Merry Christmas.
Representative Garcia, did you
go to, to out there and get some
coal for we can put in their
stockings.
