and right in the foothills of
the beautiful Sacramento
Mountains, so great to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. All right,
Representative Senna. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I am Debbie
Serannao represent House
District 21 in Bernallio County.
It's good to be back in the
school. I've been retired for 2
years. Um, and great to be in
Los Alamos. Thank you.
All right, and Figueroa. Good
morning. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is great to be here, to drive
up was absolutely spectacular. I
am Natalie Figueroa. I represent
the House District 30 in the
Northeast heights of Albuquerque
and very happy to be here. Not
yet retired like my friend, but
look forward to it someday.
All right, Represent Guerrera.
Good morning, everybody. Good to
be here. Always great to be in
Los Alamos, um, worked many
years up here as uh executive
director of the Lana Foundation.
I now, um, uh, represent Rio
Riba Sandoval, uh, Santa Fe,
mostly Riorebo, a little bit of
those other three counties, uh,
but Los Alamos always, always
remains a special um part of me.
So good to be with all of you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Harold Pope Junior and the
Senate Majority Caucus chair
Senator representing District 23
Northwest Albuquerque and happy
to be here once again. I have
some friends up here as well and
I'm sure I'll have to figure out
which ones I visit and which
ones I can't see how upset they
are when I have to leave.
Thanks.
Yeah, Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Hi, I'm
State Representative Joe Garrett
from, where am I from? Northwest
Berlio County, home of the
Petroglyph National Monument and
the future Mesa Film studios. It
is great to be here. Um, I
didn't get to drive, but Natalie
has to drive home so I can take
the view in. But thank you for
hosting us.
Right, Senator Holt. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'm Bill Sols, state
senator from Las Cruces,
everybody talks about our
beautiful areas, the beautiful
Oregon Mountain Desert Peaks
National Monument Area is right
in my backyard and part of my
district. Uh, very nice to be up
here where it's nice and cool.
All right. And I'm
representative Andres Romero. I
represent House District 10,
which is the far South Valley in
Burn Leo County and parts of
southeast Albuquerque. Um,
certainly happy to be here in
Los Alamos this morning, so
thank you all for hosting us.
Um, director Preo Ornament, you
want to introduce yourself along
with the staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Uh, thank you to
Community of Los Alamos where
are um very excited and happy to
be here. Uh, my name is Gwen
Perea Ornament. I'm the director
for the legislative Education
Study Committee, uh, a wonderful
staff, uh, that supports, uh,
this committee. Deputy Director
John Senna standing up back
there. Um, and then I'll go, uh,
from right to left, uh, Mary
Andrews, Mark Montoya, Natasha
Davalos, Jessica Hathaway.
And Mannyriego and then we have
a tosa with us this summer. We
have 2 that we are, um, we have
a paid internship. It's the
teacher on special assignment or
TOSA, and this is Tara, and she
is actually an educator in
Albuquerque and working with us
over the summer to understand
policy.
Thank you. So, like I said,
we'll hold off on the minutes
and the approval of the agenda,
but we'll go ahead,
Superintendent, school board
president. Good morning. Thank
you again for hosting us.
Good morning. Members of the
Legislative Education Study
Committee. Welcome to Los
Alamos. It's an honor and a
privilege to welcome you to our,
our little town here. Your visit
is a testament to your
dedication to the advancement of
education in New Mexico.
We're deeply grateful for the
opportunity to showcase our
achievements and our challenge
and share our challenges and
engage in meaningful dialogue
about the future of our
education system. Over the past
few years, we in Los Alamos have
made significant strides in
enhancing the quality of
education we provide, and these
efforts have paid off just this
past year, the College Board
named Los Alamos, the small
district, the AP small district
of the year.
Just last week, our own Chamisa
Elementary School was named the
most innovative school in the
state for uh early literacy and
math teaching, and we get to
boast that we have the highest
graduation rate in the state as
well. So things are going well
in Los Alamos, and this is as a
result of the dedication and the
very hard work of our teachers
and staff, as I'm sure you are
well aware.
Our teachers work timeless,
tirelessly to inspire and
educate our students to ensure
they're equipped with the skills
and the knowledge that's needed
to excel in this ever changing
world we find ourselves in.
This also shows that our
teachers and staff are committed
to our 100% goal. You may have
heard of this. Our goal here in
Los Alamos is that 100% of our
students will achieve or exceed
expectations in three
categories, academic excellence,
social-emotional well-being, as
well as um civic responsibility.
So, once again, things are going
well as we work towards this
goal, but as with any school
district, as I'm sure you all
know, we face challenges that
require thoughtful consideration
and collaborative solutions.
Issues such as funding
disparities, teacher retention,
and teacher recruitment are at
the forefront of our concerns
here in Los Alamos.
We recognize that these
challenges are not unique to Los
Alamos, but are shared across
the state and indeed the nation.
So it's through partnerships and
open dialogue with esteemed
bodies like yourselves that we
can hope to address these issues
effectively.
Your presence here today is a
very clear indication of your
commitment to understanding the
realities of our educational
landscape.
In a moment, Superintendent Guy
will share with you the
innovative programs and
initiatives we've put into
place, as well as areas where we
seek your input, your support,
and your guidance. Together we
can work towards solutions that
will serve all of our students
equitably and prepare them for a
successful future.
So in closing, I'd like to
express our deep gratitude for
your visit and for your ongoing
efforts to support education in
New Mexico were eager to
collaborate with you, to learn
from your insights and
contribute to our collective
goal of providing the best
possible education for our
children. So once again, thank
you for coming and welcome to
Los Alamos.
Thank you. Good morning,
everyone. Just a couple of quick
housekeeping things, uh, first
I'm Jennifer Guy, superintendent
for Los Alamos schools. If you
need restroom facilities are
behind this wall. Also, if you
go right out this door into the
main building, there's um
several restroom facilities and
other rooms in case you need to
make a private call or anything
like that. So just so you know
where those things are at, um,
Melanie may need to get up and
leave. She may have to go teach
a class, but as long as she's
here, she'll be here.
I wanted to just share a little
bit. I'm really excited about
the upcoming school year. I, um,
like lost sleep the night before
principals came back because I'm
really excited. We've been
working really hard in Los
Alamos, especially over the last
18 months. On really taking a
look at all the things we've
been doing.
Because
The world's changing and the
things that we were doing for
many years where we had lots of
success, aren't working as well
anymore.
And we were seeing our scores
start to slip and we're seeing
our students start to struggle
and, um, some of our students
that have always struggled are
struggling more. And so we
really kind of dug in and taken
some time to take a look at
what's not working. What do we
need to do differently? How do
we need to adjust our
instructional practices so that
we can really do good work for
every single kid. And you know,
the most common thing we hear
when, um, we say, OK, 100%, is
everybody kind of does.
The eye roll and oh you're never
gonna get there. But I'll tell
you, we're gonna get there
because we're super dedicated to
that and I'm really passionate
about that, because if we don't
get to 100%, who are we leaving
out? You know, you look around
at yourselves and if we don't
want 100% of you to enjoy your
work on this committee and the
work you're doing for the state.
Well, which one of you, who are
we going to leave out, right? So
we, we, we're not gonna approach
things with that attitude. So
Today, um, one of the places we
got, um, I, I did bring a
presentation, but I'm not gonna
take you through all of it. I
wanted you really to have it as
reference. But, um, one of the
things that we found is we had
some great programs globally,
um, that work for most kids.
But we have some things that
weren't working for some kids,
and we have kids that aren't
successful.
And so you're gonna see you got
a brick.
And we've been giving bricks out
to our leadership team as they
came back and staff and so
please don't throw them at each
other, at least this early in
the morning. So hold on that a
little bit. Um, but that is to
remind everyone that, and I
think it's important for your
work that we really in education
here in Los Alamos and in New
Mexico have to focus on the
foundation and building brick by
brick student by student and not
leaving anybody behind and
really building
those solid foundations. So
we're working with teachers to
really take a look at all those
kids in their class, and if
they've got 24 kids in their
class, are all 24 of them
successful and looking
individually at what each kid
needs. So I'm going to try to
move through the presentation,
um.
If I can figure it out, there
you go. So as Mrs. Colgan
touched on 100% we want, 100% of
our students to meet or exceed
grade level expectations and we
identified what we started with,
we, we spent
Tons of focus group time and
meetings and meetings and hours
and hours with staff, with
students, and it was interesting
because the three things that
really rose to the surface as
top priorities for our community
and our staff were academic
excellence, social emotional
well-being, and civic
responsibility.
And when we look at those, we
know that it's kind of like that
three-legged stool. There's not
one thing that's more important
than the other, they all require
each other to be successful. Um,
our school boards committed to
being accountable for every
child, addressing the root cause
of every issue, staying
meaningfully engaged, um,
ensuring that students have
voice in the processes that we
do and filtering all of the
decisions through the lens of
the whole person.
So the next parts of the
presentation, I'm not going to
dig into deeply, but, um, I
wanted you to have some data on
Los Alamos, and the data that
you've got in in front of you is
kind of where are we now?
Because I think it's important
to know you often hear about
global statewide data. We often
look at lots of different data
in our district, but we knew if
we're going to get to 100%, we
had to really take a understand
clearly where are we now?
And so, um, you'll see that our
early literacy scores overall as
a district. Last year, 60% of
our students were proficient.
And you know, we had people all
over congratulating me and we
were celebrating that and
honestly, I thought it made my
stomach hurt. It stresses me out
to think that 40% of our kids
weren't proficient.
And so I think that that's
really the hard data we need to
look at.
Um, 68% of our kids in 3rd
through 6th grade, which is
great, but that's not all of
them. 64% in reading, 7th and
8th grade. Again, we still
aren't to 100%.
Um, 11th grade reading.
It's a great job with our 11th
graders, but we're going to talk
about 11th graders in a minute.
Um, they're reading 70% of our
students were sick proficient.
Um, when we look at math, uh,
math's an area that we have seen
a decline in our scores. Um, 68%
in 3rd through 6th grade.
62%, 7th through 8th grade. Look
at our 11th grade math.
This, um, Doctor Fogel, who's
here today, I think she called
me at like 11 o'clock at night
and then I didn't sleep all
night. That scares me that 55%
of our 11th graders weren't
where they need to be in math
this last year.
So that's something that we're
taking a serious look at, and we
are looking at which, who are
those 55% kids by name and what
interventions do we need to do
for those students?
67% of our kids in science were
proficient.
We're very proud of our
graduation rites and that they
continue to increase. 97% of our
students graduated, um, this
past year. That's still not
100%, so that's what you're
going to see next from us, um,
because we are determined to do
that. We're also looking at
social emotional well-being. So
I wanted you to have just a
couple of examples of some of
the ways this is a little bit
harder because some of the
conversations we've had or how
do we really gather data? How do
we know how they're doing, um,
socially and emotionally.
So we're looking at different
ways that we can gather data.
One of the things that we have
appreciated is that the state
has provided panorama this year.
Um, and so that's been an
important tool for us to be able
to take a look at how are the
kids responding at different
points in the year. It's great
that we can drill down to
student level data and identify
and cross-reference. For the
first time we really have a
consistent platform that we can
take a look at how students are
doing academically.
And then take a look. OK, well,
what does the data show us about
how they feel about school? And
so those are just some things
that we're beginning to look at.
Um, we're also pulling some
items. These are just a couple
of examples for, um, civic
responsibility.
The thing I really, so I'm gonna
let you, I I know I did that
really fast and I'm happy to
answer any questions, but I just
wanted you to kind of know where
we're at as a district as far as
the data goes.
We've seen some really good
growth in some things. And as
we've been looking at things, we
know there are some great things
happening in Los Alamos. We also
know there's some great things
that are working well, and
they're working well from some
of the work that you've done,
some of the work that the
state's done. So I wanted to
share some examples. The
structured literacy support. Um,
the state bringing in letters
and having a clear plan of
action and required steps for
every teacher.
Around structured literacy is
going to change our world in Los
Alamos and in New Mexico that
has been huge. We at this point,
all of our kindergarten through
5th grade students, teachers
have been trained. Any new ones
coming in for the first time in
literacy instruction we're all
speaking the same language, and
that's a big deal, right?
Because before we had kids,
teachers that were coming from
alternative programs. I started
my career in Las Cruces and
back.
35 years ago, we were doing
whole language and didn't teach
and then I moved to Hobbs, New
Mexico, where everything was
phonics and like as a state and
as teachers individually, we've
kind of been all over the place.
And so that is such an important
initiative that it's, it's worth
the time and energy and money
in, in our opinion in this
district. Um, one of the things
that we had this great
opportunity to participate is we
had one school, so Mrs. Colgan
mentioned Chamisa Elementary
School being recognized.
They were picked as a structured
literacy school.
So, oh my gosh, it's been
awesome. That school got extra
support, extra funding, and a
literacy coach. So a highly
trained specialist that was
coming in, going into
classrooms, co-teaching with
teachers, digging out their
curriculum, like I saw one time
go into a teacher's room, she
went over her shelf, she was
like digging out the curriculum
and opening the pages and
helping those teachers make this
shift. So that has been so huge
for us, and we saw huge growth
at that school.
Unfortunately, we applied to do
it at all of the schools this
year, but we weren't selected.
So we're going to figure out how
to duplicate that on our own,
but that's been a highly
valuable process, um, having
curriculum that supports the
science of reading has been
huge. Um, some other things that
we're really, really proud of is
Mr. Smith Colgan mentioned like
the AP being recognized, we were
blown away by that because when
you look at they were looking at
schools across the United States
and Canada. And when they called
us up, we were like, what?
And one of the reasons we were
selected was because of the
diversity in our students that
are taking AP courses. So it
wasn't just about scores. It was
really about them looking at the
student population that's
participating.
Um, so we're really proud of
that.
Other thing that we've done that
we're very proud of is I've got
math is fun up there. We, as
we're looking at math
instruction, we decided, you
know what, we need to take a
different approach. And when you
ask most kids and teachers, do
they like math?
What do you think they say?
Yeah, most of, most of them were
saying no, right? They were
like, no, they'd hate math. Um,
we were surprised at how many
teachers would say, oh, I hate
math.
And so if they don't love
something, they're not teaching
with it. So we thought, you know
what, we really need to lay some
foundation and change some
mindset. So this year our school
board supported us in giving us
some extra funding. Um, last
year was the first year we did
it, but we put a math class,
kind of a math special, so kind
of like art, music, PE, all the
kids go to a separate math class
each week, K through 6 in their
schools that is devoted to, and
we told the teachers their goal
is to teach math content
standards.
In a fun, hands-on way. And so
their primary directive is to
have math be fun. And they're
doing some amazing work. They're
having fun with kids. We're
seeing those attitudes shift. I
had kids in schools now tell me
that that's their favorite
class. And so when you've got
kids telling you they want to go
to math and it's more fun than
PE or it's more fun than art.
Like that's a huge win. So we're
gonna continue with that. We've
put in some intervention and
some poor support at the middle
school and we're gonna try to
take it up to the
High school this year, um, we
also shifted up our the way
we're, um, look for our
administrative team a little
bit, and we hired a director of
inclusive schools.
Miss Andrea Determan, who was a
long time, she was a
educator of the year, one year
for New Mexico, and she's been a
longtime teacher. She retired.
We talked her into coming back
to work. Um, and then because we
love return to work, which I'll
talk about later.
Um, but keep that return to
work. I love that. It's my
favorite thing. We've also, we
had a Native American liaison,
but we added another um director
level position that specializes
in Native American student
support, um, so that we can do a
better job with some of our
Native American students.
Oops, hold on.
There I go. Um, social emotional
support really quickly some of
the things that we've found
effective are panorama, um,
being able to get consistent
data in our community, one of
the things that really helps us
be successful with social
emotional support, and other
things. Our our partnerships
with Los Alamos County, they
weren't able to be here this
morning, but you'll see them
this evening, but they spend a
lot of time and energy. They
show up at things, so they
don't, they give us money and
financial support, but they also
So are there for us. They meet
with us regularly. They support
the programs that we're doing.
This year they paid for us to
have an elementary prevention
specialist, which is going to be
huge for us, um, and important.
So we're really grateful for
that partnership.
Um.
Other cool thing that we've done
are through strategic planning,
we were getting lots of
information and doing lots of
focus groups. And we thought,
you know what, we need to do
this regularly all the time with
students. So we've been having
student-led student run focus
groups on different topics. And
it's been pretty amazing to see
the information we get back from
students, and they're brutally
honest and very real. And so,
um, it's made us get, you know,
take a really hard look at some
of the things that we thought
were going great.
That hey, the students are
telling us, hey, that is not
going great and some of the
behaviors and some of the things
that were going on and are going
on in campuses. They've talked
about racism, they've talked
about bullying, they've talked
about, um, engagement and their
engagement in classrooms and
teachers. So there's a lot that
we're getting back, we're going
to continue those and take those
down all the way to the
elementary school level.
Um, in addition to that, um, we
have appreciated the more
consistent support from the
public education department, um,
through identify resources to
identify and respond to racism
and bullying. The new social
studies standards and
instructional scopes. I know you
guys talked a lot about that,
but Gwen for sure talked
probably more than she wanted to
about that. But you know what,
we have found those as one of
our key valuable pieces. So I
just wanted to
say that out loud that really in
practice, they have, there are
so many things through those
standards that align for civic
responsibility and social
emotional well-being and
financial literacy and many,
many things. So those have been
really valuable to us. The
universal meal program for
students, people often think,
oh, it's Los Alamos. We have
very few students that qualify
for free lunch, but we also have
a lot of students that can't
afford lunch. And so they're
kind of that middle, middle of
the road that their
Families are really struggling
more than they want anybody to
know. And so we're feeding kids
better, and that's paying off.
Um, also, we've had a long time
commitment to safe and civil
schools for the last 7 years and
we've really seen that fully
embedded.
So, I'm gonna wrap it up. But
some things that I, um, feel
that are opportunities for
growth for our district that I
think that what I wanted you to
be aware of is, oh my gosh, if I
had a wish.
Um, it would be that the
structured literacy support
school model.
was duplicated for every school,
and it wasn't a competitive
process. Like if we know that
works and that's been successful
across the state. Why can't we
have that level of support for
every school, for every kid. And
that's something that perplexes
me a little bit. It was
disappointing that we didn't
qualify, um, it's, it's
something that I think that
would benefit not only us but
everybody. If it's a model, we
know it's working. Let's
duplicate it. Let's put the
money behind it. Having that
literacy
Coach in so I'm skipping one,
but having that literacy coach
in that school made a big
difference. We firmly believe
that having a math and literacy
specialist available to every
student is one of the key things
that we need in education right
now and it's because we have
more kids that are struggling.
Across the state, teachers have
had different programs and
they're coming out. It's hard to
teach. It is so much better when
there is somebody that's a true
expert in math that they can
walk down the hall and say, hey,
can you come into my room and
help me. And that's going to
benefit kids. And so that's
something that we feel very
strongly about. I was excited to
see math on your agenda because
I hope one of our greatest
wishes also is that the state
duplicates what they've done for
reading and
Construction with math
instruction. We need some solid
training for teachers that's
consistent that we can put
teachers in very much like
letters that builds foundational
skills around numeracy, um, just
basic math skills, and we need
it would, it would make a
difference, we know for sure.
Um, it's interesting when we dig
deeply into our test data. I'm
gonna wrap it up, I promise.
When I dig deeply into our test
data. So a lot of times our kids
do it, it's just like we saw
with reading.
Our kids would score pretty high
on things like reading
comprehension and and and some
advanced reading skills, but
then they would score really low
on like fanatics and just basic
skills. We see the same thing
with math. Sometimes our kids
score really high on some of the
higher level skills, but they
struggle with just basic math
concepts, and I think that's
because either we've gone too
fast or the teachers think, oh,
they can do that, or the
teachers lack that basic
understanding on the critical
nature of that. So we
I want to be able to build
Those skills.
Um.
I was
Thrilled
I talked about it for months,
um, when we heard that special
education teachers were getting
incentive pay because we can't
fill special ed positions. I was
begging 3 potential special ed
teachers yesterday and
interviewed one last night at 7
o'clock begging, please come
teach, um, special eds
impossibles first to fill.
Disappointingly, it sounds like
that that's going to be a
competitive process. We're
probably not going to qualify,
which we're very concerned that
that means that our special
Teachers we do have are going to
go to Paa or Espanola or
someplace else that does
qualify. Um, and so I hope that
someone will take a look at that
and realize that we need to
provide that compensation for
all special ed teachers if we're
going to fairly make a
difference. Um, ensuring
competitive pay is something
that's important.
Last thing I'll say.
Ultimately, our biggest focus
this year comes back to that
brick by brick and each
individual student, student
engagement is the most important
critical thing that we can do.
Um, and it doesn't matter what
program you're looking at, what
successful author you talked to,
what school you go to, um, a
bunch of the leaders just got
back from Ron Clark Academy, not
all of those things underneath
it.
It's all about student
engagement. And so whatever
program it is, things that are
successful, whatever school you
look at that's successful, I am
positive that when you really
kind of dig into what are they
doing? It's about how they
engage their students. And so
that's going to be our top
priority as we're moving
forward, um, and we're really
excited, so I'm excited that
you're here. We're happy to
answer any questions.
We're also happy to stop
talking.
All right. Well, don't get too
comfortable because they do have
some questions. So
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Superintendent for a very
engaging presentation. It wasn't
too long. Um, I have a question.
Do you have inclusion classrooms
throughout your district at all
grade levels, and if so, are
there assigned special ed
teachers when they exist that
permanently are in those
classrooms or our special ed
teachers covering multiple
classrooms for inclusion.
Both, and our special ed
directors here and she could do
a much better job, but I'm going
to.
to that. So what I'll say is it
comes down to a gin at the
individual student. So we have
both. We have some standalone
inclusion classrooms for
students spend the majority of
their time. We have some really
high level, um, living skills
type classrooms where that's
where students are most of their
time, but most of our other
students are at least in their
general ed classroom for most of
the day, and then they're pulled
out for reading support or mouth
support or whatever it is that
they're IEP dictates. So we do
have a little bit
Both our special ed teachers,
yes, are often pushing into
multiple classrooms. Sometimes
they're in their room and, you
know, pull students to them, but
definitely they're all servicing
multiple grade levels and kind
of multitasking in that way. So
they'll all have a caseload
sometimes that spans.
A wide range of grade levels and
then looking at the students on
their caseload and what do they
need. So we have a few students,
not very many, that are just in
a self-contained, uh, a pull-out
place all day, but then most of
the kids are in a different, in
the general ed setting, rotating
classes and getting support from
the special ed teacher either
through push and model or
through a pullout small group
model.
Thank you, because Mr. Chair,
I'm just, I was a general ad
inclusion teacher and I
understand in many districts
now.
They're doing all inclusion for
often D level included, and but
the special ed teacher isn't
always there, so it means,
especially when we start talking
about stipends, it means general
ed teachers are often teaching a
load with many special ed
students, but not having any
support for that. So thank you
for your clarification. That's
my only question. OK, thank you.
Other folks with questions
No, I don't go to mine, um.
Thank you all again for hosting
us and for the presentation. Um,
I was wondering what your
thoughts are on the disconnect
between the proficiency rates,
you see like the 11th grade
proficiency rates and the
graduation rates. Um, you know,
we've looked at that a lot,
especially with our we were
surprised by our 11th grade
math. We expected it to be 60,
about 60%, as it has been in the
past. Looking at those
individual students, um, we see,
we've seen several different
things. There is a little bit of
disconnect.
We have some students that had
come in new. We have some
students that we know were more
greatly impacted. I hate to say
it aloud as where I was never
saying it out loud, but by COVID
and by the education that they
had in some of their core math
and we're seeing that hit, um,
so we believe that that's it.
Um, also, we had some transition
in math teachers, but it, it's
not any one of those things. I
think to make a change.
And I think we'll see a change
this year, but I think to make a
change, we've really had to
literally print the list of
students student by student, and
look at obviously this student
needs more intervention than
we're providing. This student
needs something different than
they're getting, um, and we know
that we need to provide more
individualized instruction, um,
then we have in years past. So
in years past we could put them
through general curriculum and
most of them went up. Right now,
we're needing, kids that need.
support either through tutoring
or math lab or some, some
different types of things for
sure. And I think that that's
what it is, is just down to
particular students.
And I guess that was gonna be my
question is this individualized
instruction, do you feel like
your district is staffed well
enough and has the expertise in
order to to work why, well,
first, it seems like a pretty
heavy lift to like go through
and sift through all the data of
these students, but then also to
provide those services to
students? Do you feel like your
district's equipped to do that,
that's going to be our biggest
challenge. So, so again, it kind
of comes back to, I think, you
know, certainly more
Have more specialized staff, but
honestly we just had a full
turnover of our math department
at the high school. We lost all
four of our mouth or 5 of our
math teachers. They were, they
retired or moved, and so we
have, we've been lucky enough to
get new staff, but they're all
brand new and a couple are
alternative license, um, and so
we're a little bit nervous. I'm
sure they're going to be great,
but if we had more specialized
support that was in the school
long term that's helping guide
that instruction because right
now we're relying on principals
getting in and doing that, or
they
Teachers. So I think that that's
a challenge. I think just having
enough support or someone that's
highly skilled to provide that
tutoring. One thing that I'm
very, very concerned about is
that we have been fortunate to
have, um, we were receiving the
out of school time funding. So
we got $400,000 last year that
we were able to use for
after-school opportunities we
funded a lot of the programs we
don't have that this year. We
don't have money for summer
school this year, you know, this
coming year. So
A lot of the funding that we
used for those things has
disappeared. So we're struggling
on how are we going to regroup
around that. So that's a long
answer, but to your question,
but really the answer is no, and
we have an entirely figured it
out yet.
And then, and then I guess my
next question was about um we
have the changes in the
graduation requirements, and I
was wondering what the process
looks like for you all. What
sort of changes you all as a
district are looking to make
within graduation requirements.
We're really just beginning that
process, so we're bringing
together, um, we've put together
some groups of, um,
administrators, teachers, um,
lots of teachers to really start
looking at that will expand to
students, we have a student
focus group that's going
Look at that and I'm pulling in
some community members, but
really starting one of the
places we've started last spring
was pulling the math department
together and getting their
feedback, looking at data,
talking about what do they think
it needs to look like as we've
got this opportunity to move
forward. We're really looking at
how are we expanding our CTE
programs and do we have the math
programs in place to support
those work skills, um, so we
probably won't be a district
that lets go of algebra 2. We
have
Kids that need that. We have
kids that, um, you know, we're,
we've looked at moving our
calculus to the college, you
know, and, and so how do we
leverage all those things and
make sure that we have got
enough selection for kids to
move forward. We're really
digging in with our social
studies departments and looking
at the standards, a lot of our,
we, we've talked a lot about
financial literacy and we
actually offer financial
literacy at our high school, but
do we need to make it required?
We're looking at where is it
covered in our standards? Where
is it covered?
In other classes and right now
that's one of the things that
social studies standards do a
really good job of. And so we're
beginning to look at all of
those things and over the course
of the fall we'll be ready to
make some recommendations to our
school board on what we believe
we should adjust with graduation
requirements, but we're still
really just getting started with
that.
Yeah, no, I appreciate that. I
mean, um, it's, it's fresh on my
mind because the day before I go
back to school next Wednesday as
I give a talk to the preliminary
group that's working in
Albuquerque Public schools on
that graduation requirements and
I'm a social studies teacher, so
we have social studies, um,
standards, but then also the
shift to, you know, what grade
level are we gonna have
particular classes, um, is it
gonna change from the the
sequence of classes that
students take now and.
Things like that, so it's kind
of at the forefront of my mind.
Absolutely we're also, you know,
looking at, OK, well, if we want
to do something with financial
literacy differently than we're
doing now is that social
studies, is that math, or is
that, you know, hybrid and um
we've heard from some of our
community partners are that are
hiring our students from our CTE
programs that what they really
need is some direct math that
kind of reviews some basic math,
um, so they don't necessarily
need algebra 2, but they really
want them to have some direct
math that reviews.
basic algebra skills and those
kind of career-specific
calculation skills that they're
going to need. And so how do we
embed that? And so those are
some of the things we're
grappling with a little bit. Oh,
that sounds like the grappling
that's going on in my head about
my economics class and what
skills students can utilize and
use Excel spreadsheets to teach
them the basics of it on how to
do accounting, basic accounting,
and stuff like that. So, um, I
certainly appreciate that. Um,
any questions that Represent
Verrera?
Please.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you so much for your
presentation. I'm just curious,
I'm just curious about the
enrollment here. How, how much,
um, what, what is the enrollment
in all your schools and your
elementary schools and then how
many out of district students,
do you have who come up the hill
every day to That's a great
question. We have about 3800
students. We've seen gradual
increase. We are a growing
district. Um, if you were coming
into town, you may have seen,
depending on which way you've
come in, but several new
housing, there's a big
Apartment complex that's our
condominiums kind of going in
near the hospital. There's some
more up the road here. There's
some on the other side of town,
um, big housing in White Rock
that's come in. So we've seen
especially our White Rock
schools have just exploded. Um,
I'm struggling today because
we've got 28, 29 kids and some
of our classes at Pinon
Elementary, which we can't do,
you know, so we're, we're trying
to figure that out, so we're
definitely a growing district,
um, typically about 10 to 12% of
our population.
are coming in from off the hill.
Sometimes that edges up to about
15% and it just really depends
on the total number of
in-district students we have,
um, an available seats that we
have at the time.
Um, thank you for that and thank
you, Mr. Chair. I, I guess how,
what is the expected hiring for
next year at the lab and I'm
sure you look at that and try to
calculate how many, you know,
kids are gonna come with those
families. So it's interesting we
had the lab had done a big
hiring uptick, and then last
year we thought they were going
to come down a little bit and
that was kind of the trajectory.
And then all of a sudden we were
in meetings and they said, oh
no, we're going to increase. And
so it went from this trajectory
to this.
So they're expecting a big
hiring influx as well as some of
the other local companies. So we
expected that that's probably if
it holds true to pattern and get
it infect affect our enrollment
by about 200 to 250 students
each year, um, for the next 3 to
5 years. And so ultimately, we
think we will grow over the next
5, maybe 5 to 7 years by about
1000 students by about 1000
kids. Wow, that's that's huge.
Yes. And of course that depends
on.
If the lab's hiring stays, we
see the housing coming in and we
already see an impact. And so
we're, you know, we're still
really looking at that. Um, for
us to be able to accommodate the
students in our elementary
schools, we would really need to
move our 6th grade to the middle
school, which was we would need
to build, we have plans for a
6th grade wing that wasn't
constructed. Otherwise, we don't
have space to absorb that kind
of growth. If we do that and we
have our sixth graders, we
believe we can absorb the
growth.
And whether we would be in good
shape for the next 10 years.
That's interesting. So you'll
have, you can do 6th, 7th, 8th,
and then the high school starts
at 9. That's yes, ma'am. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much. Certainly, thank
you. You represents.
Just real quick, thank you,
thank you for your presentation.
I'm kind of building off of
Representative Herreras, um,
once you do get the kids in,
what's your mobility like? Do
you have a mobility is
relatively low, um, so typically
once they come in, they're
pretty steady. We have some
mobility, but definitely not as
high as many other districts.
And one of the things that kind
of impacts that um moving from
school to school, a lot of other
districts and the districts I've
been in in the past, um,
definitely we had a lot of kids
who changed from one school to
the other and.
Um, our schools are so close
together. It's such a small
community that often even when
they move homes, they'll
continue in their current
school. And so they don't switch
schools quite as frequently, so
our mobility rate is a little
bit lower than you'll see in
other places. Thank you. Thank
you.
Like questions, folks. I did
have one more, um, so we have a
group that is currently working
on middle school redesign, so
we've worked on high school, um,
working on middle school and
hopefully have um some
recommendations and, um,
possible legislation to go for
the 60 days, so I was just
wondering to put you on the spot
a little bit. Um, what your
thoughts are on where we should
be going in with middle school.
I'm so glad you asked. So here's
what I'll say in our middle
school principal West here is
Julie raise your hands in the
air, Jill. Fabulous, fabulous
principal. She's got the key to
it, so you should reach out to
her. Here's the thing, I think
that's the most important age
important work you can do math,
math support, middle school
redesign, um, and the key is
engagement, uh, for sure,
because that's such a vulnerable
age. And so for us here in in.
Salamo all of our middle
schooler, you know, come
together, go through one school.
Oh my gosh, we have seen such a
change since we, Ms. Gonzalez
got there because they're
focused on student engagement
And middle schoolers, if we
don't have curriculum and
opportunities that engage them
and make them want to be at
school and excited about what
they're learning. They're middle
schoolers. Like we can't compete
with social media. I, I mean, so
we really, that is.
I think such important work and
really bringing some of the
engaging CTE stuff down to the
middle school more, creating
just different structure,
different opportunities, I
believe is hugely important
work. One of, again, our
challenges, which I hate to, you
know, talk about our challenges,
but a lot of the fun, the middle
school has a really strong
commitment to what they call
plus one so everyone has their
core academics, but their goal
is for every student to have an
additional thing.
That they're engaged in.
Um, so whether it's band,
whether it's sports, whether
it's crochet club, whether it's
an out of school activity,
whatever, but everybody is
engaged in something else
besides just core academics, and
that makes a difference.
Unfortunately, we were paying
for all those plus one things
out of our out of school
learning time funding and out of
our ESR funding. And so we're
regrouping and trying to figure
out with those things, but I
throw that out there because I
think as as you guys are looking
at middle school redesign,
understand
that supporting some of those
alternative opportunities for
kids and those engagement
opportunities are just as
critical as supporting math and
reading. Um, so that's my two
cents. But good, that's awesome
work.
Definitely, we're certainly
excited about it and certainly
excited to work with you all and
everybody else around our state
to uh make this happen. So thank
you very much. We really
appreciate it and we're excited
for the next 3 days. Thank you.
We appreciate it. Let us know if
you need anything and don't
throw bricks at each other.
Yeah, thank you for greeting us
as well this morning. Um, all
right, so we're a little bit
early for next, um,
presentations, so we'll give it
some time. We'll come back at
10:15 um for our next
presentations. So the folks that
came in, there's coffee, food in
the back, so enjoy, we'll come
back at 10:50.
