I
All right, good morning, folks.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started, so we're gonna start on
item 6, which is the next item
up on our list, CTE programming,
so just go whenever you're
ready, please.
Good morning.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
excited to be here with you this
morning and talk about career
and technical education. Uh, my
name is Jessica Hathaway and I
am a senior policy analyst for
all of you covering the
students' success part of our
research agenda as a team. What
that means, um, is a lot of
things, but it's really a focus
on our middle and high school
students. So some of our
priority items in our student
success part of our research
agenda this interim include
attendance, our middle school
study that we're really excited
is actually going to be starting
next week. We'll be having our
first meeting.
And then also career in
technical education.
So this morning I'll be
presenting a report that's a
review of CTE programs,
pathways, and funding with a
particular focus on the funding
part of all of this.
I am really grateful to be
joined by Breezy Gutierrez,
who's the director of the
College and Career Readiness
Bureau at the Public Education
Department and Director
Gutierrez will provide more of
an introduction um after I
finished my remarks.
But our report today provides an
initial review of CT funding
enrollment data, and it is part
of an ongoing evaluation of
career technical education
within the context of expanded
student success metrics that
we're going to be working on as
part of our Harvard strategic
data project work and that we
have planned for you all through
May 2025.
You can find this report behind
tab 6 in your binders, and I
don't have slides today. We'll
just be working from the report,
so feel free to just take a look
at that.
So let's start on page one, and
we'll begin by grounding
ourselves in a shared definition
of career and technical
education.
So modern CTE is an educational
pathway that's designed to equip
students with practical skills,
technical knowledge, and applied
learning experiences.
As I write in the report, CTE
really contextualizes academic
content by employing hands-on
learning that enables students
to gain both foundational
knowledge and specialized
skills.
This approach is a really
significant departure from
previously known vocational
education, which has a much
more, um, involved history with
some tracking of students and
that is not what we're talking
about whenever we talk about
modern CTE.
Modern CTE spans various
industries from healthcare and
technology to also those more
traditionally thought of fields
like construction or auto
mechanics. But the key
distinction is in that applied
and contextualized learning.
Which makes modern CTE really
critical in bridging the gap
between classroom learning,
excuse me, and future career
success. It's really a
fundamental part of secondary
education nationally right now.
And it really helps to prepare
students for lifelong
achievement and that long-term
college career and civic
success.
So in this report, as you can
see on page one, we focus on
three primary questions. The
first is what CTE programs are
being funded by legislative
appropriations.
The second is what local
education agencies are receiving
CTE funds and are there gaps in
access across New Mexico?
And the third is, where are our
CTE concentrators and
concentrators are students who
are taking two connected courses
in a single cluster or career
pathway, and what career
pathways do we see those
concentrators studying.
So by the end of my time with
you all, um, we hope that you
all have answers to those three
questions in particular.
Before we get into the findings,
we're going to turn to page 2
where I've provided a very, very
brief summary of national
research and some background
information on how states tend
to fund CTE programs. For your
context and consideration.
So national research has
consistently shown that CTE
programs have positive impacts
on students.
And a systematic review, um,
actually of causal research,
which is really exciting because
that's been a gap in CTE
research that was just released
in April of this year by the CTE
Research Network, um, found
statistically significant
positive impacts on outcomes,
including academic achievement,
employability skills, high
school graduation rates and
readiness for college
environments.
Um, in terms of funding models,
uh, CTE programs are funded
through a mix of local, state,
and federal funding. And that's
true in New Mexico, but also
across the entire country.
So a 2014 report by the Federal
Department of Education notes
that CTE costs may actually be
20 to 40% higher than costs for
traditional academic offerings.
And that's thought to be due to
factors such as potentially the
need for smaller class sizes. So
think of a welding class or a
culinary class where it wouldn't
be practical to have 20 plus
students in that environment,
but also specialized classroom
materials, potentially modified
classroom physical spaces and
what the buildings actually look
like.
And the cost of hiring
additional CTE instructors.
That same CTE research network
that's working on causal
research, um, in the 2023 report
also notes that there are other
complex costs associated with
CTE, such as accounting for
teacher and professional
learning time, particularly for
CTE teachers to be working with
core academic instructors,
employer and partner time,
especially if CTE is offered in
partnership with Workforce or
higher education, which it often
is. Transportation costs, for
example, if a student might be
moving to an internship for
part of their day and coming
back to the school for other
parts of the day.
Insurance and safety costs,
career planning and
co-curricular activities such as
career technical education
student organizations. And
really high quality modern CT
programs often encompass a lot
of those factors into their cost
amounts.
To cover these costs, these
potentially increased costs,
states really adopt a variety of
funding models. So the education
mission of the states
categorizes states into 4
primary options. We've
summarized those for you in the
colorful box at the bottom of
page 2.
These include student-based
models, resource-based models,
cost-based models, and hybrid
models. And ECS um categorizes
New Mexico as a cost-based
state, according to their
review.
Um, we note, and let me actually
tell you what that cost base
means. So in a cost-based model,
um, ECS notes that states
allocate funding based on the
actual cost of CTE programs,
often by reimbursement, um, and
costs may or may not be capped
in local education agencies may
have to cover resources beyond
their awards.
So we note that we are
cost-based in the sense, um,
that we are providing for the
cost of programs and LEAs can
exceed those. However,
Uh, school districts in New
Mexico and charter schools as
well don't have to wait for
reimbursement. That's where it
is a little bit different. Um,
Breezy will cover this. Director
Gutierrez will cover this a
little bit more, um, but
oftentimes it's made through a
grant in the summer before. So
we are cost-based, but it's not
on a reimbursement model
entirely.
Moving to page 3, we'll now
transition to a discussion of
legislative actions that have
been taken to support CTE by all
of you.
So the legislature's investments
in CTE have been both
programmatic and financial.
So on the programmatic side, in
2019, the legislature created
the NextGen CTE pilot project.
In this pilot project was
created to fund CTE programs at
the state level. Prior to 2019,
didn't mean that we didn't have
CTE programs, but we didn't have
set aside funding particularly
for this. So schools would often
use their SEG allocations or
other forms of funding, um,
particularly federal Perkins
funding for this, but beginning
in 2019, this pilot was set up
and it has a focus on rigorous
academics, relevant technical
instruction and pathways to
post-secondary education.
Um, we note on page 3 there, the
bullet pointed parts of your
reports, those are allowable
costs of uh the next gen CT
pilot project, um, from the PED
who is operationalized it. And a
couple of those, for example,
are guided career exploration,
um, employability skills
training, but also teacher
preparation for existing CT
instructors, work-based learning
experiences for students.
So lots of things are happening
under the NextGen CT pilot
project. However, it is just
that, a pilot project, since it
was created in 2019. It is set
to expire in 2026.
And on the funding side, you all
as a legislative body have
significantly increased
appropriations for career
technical education,
particularly over the last 3
fiscal years.
So while funding for CT in New
Mexico mirrors national trends
and that a variety of funding
sources are used against state
appropriations, federal funds,
SCG allocations, but it can also
be grants, in-kind donations or
private funds. Um, in New
Mexico, state appropriations are
really notable part of that
puzzle because of the amount
that you all have contributed.
As shown in chart 1 on page 3,
CTE funding in the legislature
has steadily increased from 10
million in fiscal year 23 to 45
million for the current fiscal
year. And this increase again
demonstrates that strong
commitment to expanding and
enhancing CTE programs that you
all have, have decided.
Um, turning now to page 4.
As we write at the very top of
this, um, in fiscal year 2021
and 22, um, you all had created
an actual CT fund alongside the
pilot project, but beginning
after those fiscal years you all
departed from appropriating to
that fund specifically, and
actually chose to appropriate to
PED more broadly, which allowed
for support of the NextGen CT
pilot project, but also
additional flexibility that
allowed PED to create what it's
called its innovation.
I initiative and support CTE
more, more, um, comprehensively.
So while this report does focus
more so on the nextgen CT pilot,
we do include a summary of
innovation zone amounts and as
we've presented to you all
previously, innovation zone
covers a broader set of
activities related to career
technical education that's
focused on transforming the high
school experience. It includes
activities such as developing
graduate profiles, supporting CT
initiatives, but also social and
emotional learning supports,
capstone projects and other
programs aligned with core
academics that prepare students
for college and career.
Success.
So in addition to state funds,
um, again, $45 million for the
current fiscal year, which
includes that 40 million for CT
and additional $5 million for
work-based learning. Um, we do
also receive federal funding for
CTE.
It's not a major part of this
report, but at the bottom of
page 4 we do include a paragraph
on it for you all and a chart so
you can see those amounts.
And federal contributions to CTE
actually date back to 1917 with
the Smith-Hughes Act, which
provided secondary education
funding for those vocational
fields at the time, agriculture,
homemaking, trade and industrial
education.
This has evolved substantially,
as we already noted in federal
funding is now offered under
what's called the Strengthening
CTE for 21st Century Act, but
it's much more commonly known as
Perkins. So when we say Perkins,
you can e with the federal
funding we're getting.
And under Perkins, a federal
formula is used to disperse CTE
funds to all states, um,
population being a huge driver
in the amounts that states get.
So for fiscal year 24, New
Mexico will receive $10.5
million in federal funding,
funding, excuse me, and these
funds do lag by one fiscal year,
so we have fiscal year 24
numbers, not 25 yet. And while
this is still a really healthy
amount of funding, the state
contribution of $45 million is
more than 4 times the amount of
federal.
funding that we're getting.
Turning now to page 5.
Uh, we're going to move into
that funding review.
And in our funding review of CTE
programs, we found that since
the legislatures here really
significant increase in CT
investments. Um, both access and
funding are increasing across
the state.
So we're going to take a look at
table one on page 5, 1st.
So this has a state funding of
CTE awards for both NextGen and
Innovation Zone. And we're going
to focus primarily on Nextgen,
and those are the items in the
turquoise header for you all.
So you can see in fiscal year
23, that was the year you all
appropriated $10,000. There were
$4 million in NextGen CT pilot
project awards made to 62 local
education agencies. The average
amount for that fiscal year was
about $61,000 with the highest
award being a little over 1
million, um, you can probably
all guess to Albuquerque.
And the lowest award being just
shy of $3000 and that year it
went to Camado schools.
For fiscal year 24, um, this is
whenever you all increase that
appropriation to $400 million a
very large increase, and we saw
awards jumps to about 14.5
million for the NextGen CT pilot
project, and it increased to 106
local education agencies, so
substantially more of those
receiving those funds. You'll
also note that that average
amount jumped as well, to about
$136,000.
For fiscal year 25, um, we
actually just have planning
awards, so these may shift, um,
ever so slightly, but planning
awards are available and we can
see that as of now the
department is planning to
allocate just shy of $13 million
to 135 local education agencies.
So we're seeing again increased
um.
Numbers of those school
districts and charter schools
actually receiving funding
directly.
We also found in our review that
there are a lot of CTE
concentrators in New Mexico, and
again, those are those students
that are taking at least 2
connected courses. And so data
provided by PED shows that in
the 2022 to 2023 school year, we
had 22,444 students enrolled as
CT concentrators across 119
local education agencies in New
Mexico.
The actual participant amounts
are higher. We have usually
around 60 to 65,000
participants, but concentrators
are where we see a lot of
student outcomes shift. So we
wanted to provide those for you
all.
Um, you'll also see starting at
the bottom of page 5 and into
page 6. We've listed the career
clusters that these
concentrators are concentrating
in. And these are actually
federally recognized career
clusters. These are not items
that have been just recognized
in New Mexico. So there's a lot
of alignment across the nation
in the 16, um,
clusters, although PED also does
a New Mexico specific career
clusters guide.
It's available in both English
and Spanish as a resource to um
contextualize what those
clusters look like here.
In table two, on page 6 there,
it shows the distribution of CT
concentrators by career cluster
and you can see that our largest
numbers are in agriculture,
food, and natural resources,
just shy of 4800 students there.
Arts, AV technology and
communications, a little over
2700 students there and
hospitality and tourism. So
about 20.
Just shy of 2200 students there.
But we did include numbers
totaling up to all of those that
we're seeing.
So we're seeing an increase in
concentrators. Um, turning to
page 7, I've also visualized,
uh, this for all of you.
So as can be seen in the maps on
page 7. we're seeing more
coverage of CTE awards directly
to school districts, but also
you can see on the map, there's
an increase in the intensity of
that turquoise color as we move
from fiscal year 23 to fiscal
year 25. And that's telling us
that not only is coverage in
terms of LEA's receiving awards
increasing, but the award
amounts are increasing alongside
that.
That being said, you'll notice
um any of the school districts,
and I will caveat this is
mapping of school districts that
that's what we have the, the fun
shape files to actually map, um.
You'll notice that the ones in
white are the ones that are not
receiving CTE funding directly.
And so there are some that have
not received it directly and
we'll call out a few of those,
um, Mesa Vista, Gel Penasco
Poake Moriarty, Estancia, Krona,
Ridosa Dora Tatum. That being
said, some do receive CT funding
through regional education
cooperatives. However, awards to
regional education cooperatives
have also diminished over time.
And in fiscal year 25, planning
awards indicate that only one
REC REC 2 will receive funding
and that covers the Northwest
school districts, including
Chama Valley, Dulce, Hama
Mountain, and others that have
not received funding directly
yet.
So we, as we're seeing this
spread, um, this also reflects
the complexity and how, uh,
school districts may choose to
fund. So.
As we mentioned, a mix of state,
federal, and local funds are
used, and that may be what's
happening in some of these
districts that they're choosing
to fund their programs directly
in other ways, maybe through
their SCG allocations, maybe
through private funding or
through their federal Perkins
allocations.
So as we see the spread, we see
increased concentrator numbers.
What does it really mean?
In this report, another way that
we wanted to offer some insight
to all of you is to look at what
that funding means on a per
student basis, and that's what
we'll get into next.
So turning now to page 8, we've
included averages and ranges for
CTE awards, and we got to these
by taking enrollment numbers for
fiscal year 23 for just high
school students. Um, that's
generally where your CT funding
goes and very simple division
took the award that they're
receiving divided by the number
of students, um, attending the
high schools in those various
local education agencies to get
to a kind of high school student
amount.
You'll see in fiscal year 23
across all local education
agencies. Nextgen Awards average
$50.36 per student and ranged
from $7.41 per student in fiscal
year 23, that happened to be in
Carlsbad to $145.28 per student.
I happened to be in Magdalena.
Again, that's a, that's the year
that you all increase the
appropriation to 100 million,
but you'll see in fiscal year
24, huge jump in the average,
and this was the year you all
increased overall CT funding to
$40 million.
And in fiscal year 24, Nextgen
Awards averaged an amount of
$888886.71 per student and
ranged from 3397 per student was
in Albuquerque School for
Excellence, a charter school
that year to $9,321 per student
and that happened to be in Vonn.
Uh, for fiscal year 25, planning
awards against those could shift
slightly indicate that across
all LEA's intending to receive
those, um, Nextgen awards could
average out to $745.19 per
student and range from 27, 19
per student to 77,888.
So pretty big ranges there. Um,
we and your attachments, so you
won't see it here, but if you
want to go to your attachments,
we actually have a breakdown by
fiscal year in every single
local education agency with
those enrollment numbers and
funding amounts for you all to
look at.
So averaging next-gen awards on
a per high school student basis
is useful for kind of that
initial examination of what it
actually means on a money front,
um, in terms of what funding may
be reaching students.
That said, um, school district
and charter school approaches to
CTE very dramatically across the
state. Um, some high schools are
implementing whole school CTE
models where every single high
school student is involved in
CTE, for example, Gallup's
Career Academy model.
And others are providing
programs only for specific
students who are enrolled in CT
pathways.
Additionally, school districts
and charter schools also face
pretty significant challenges
with economies of scale.
So the cost to operate a CT
program in a small rural
district, for example, may look
very different than the cost to
operate in a larger urban
district. We think back to all
of the, um, components that go
into funding CTE.
So, um, on page 8, we'll move
there next. Um, we actually also
summarize newly released
graduation rates. I won't spend
too much time on it because I
know that Director Gutierrez
will be covering that, um,
really pretty in depth for you
all. But what we do know is that
CTE concentrators show
exceptionally high graduation
rates. For the 2022 to 2023
cohort of graduates. These
students graduated at a 95.8%
rate compared with a
rate of 76.7%.
And this trend is steady, it's
not a one-off in this cohort in
2022, the CTA concentrated
graduation rate was 97.7% and in
2021, 97.6%. This also isn't
specific to New Mexico. We see
high graduation rates for
concentrators nationally.
Uh, turning now to page 9. I'll
end by letting you know our next
steps is this is kind of one of
our initial funding reports to
you all in the arc of our eval.
And the first is that we intend
to do greater um analysis
specific to New Mexico. To do
that though, we will need to,
um, obtain greater access to
student level data, and we're
working with PED to attain this
because we know that you all
need a nuanced New Mexico
specific research that connects
explicit student outcomes around
graduation rates, attendance,
and academic achievement to
those CT investments to decide
how you all want to support CTE
programs.
Second, we know that, um,
outcomes outside of those
metrics that I just listed,
graduates, attendance,
achievements also matter. So to
that end, we've convened a group
of school districts and charter
schools that will be meeting
with regularly starting this
summer and through next spring.
And that'll include site visits,
advisory opportunities for them
to come to us and help give
feedback. Um, and the
opportunity for us to review
local data alongside the
statewide data.
Um, we have a list of those for
you all, and it's in the second
paragraph under next steps and
recommendations on page 9 if you
want to see, um, the school
districts and charter schools
that have confirmed their
participation so far. You can
let us know if you have any
questions about that too.
Um, we've also included at the
bottom of page 9 our future
questions for investigation, um,
that you all can take a look at.
I only highlight a couple of
them.
So for example, um, we intend to
look at not just how CTE
programs impact student
outcomes, but for what students
do programs have impacts? Are
there certain pathways, for
example, that we're seeing
different outcomes in.
We also intend to look more at
how do CTE teachers enter the
workforce and our specific
strategies needed to recruit and
retain them.
We also intend to look at
something. This is question 7,
what funding mechanisms are most
effective to support CTE in New
Mexico and is funding currently
sufficient to offer CT programs
at the intensity and scale
desired by you all.
Again, you can look at the very
end of your report for a
detailed appendices on
concentrator counts, funding
amounts, and all of that, but I
will turn the time over to
director Gutierrez at this
point. Thank you all.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Um,
members of the committee, I have
a teacher voice, so if you think
I'm too loud, I can turn it off,
um, thank you for having me here
today, um.
Mayammoes Prizi Gutierrez errera
de la Mercer Anton Chico.
My name is Breezy Gutierrez and
I am an heir of the Anton Chico
land grant. Furthermore, I
acknowledge that before that was
a land grant, that was the land
of the Garia and Mescalero
Apache.
So,
I just want to give a brief
introduction of myself, um, so
that you know where I am.
Uh, where I'm going, what I
would like to do and why I'm
passionate about where I'm at.
Um, I was born in, I was not
born in Anton Chico, but I am a
native New Mexican reared in the
Anton Chico schools, which are
part of the Santa Rosa
Consolidated School District. So
if you know that, uh, we go to
school until 8th grade and then
we are bussed to
Two schools of our choice, we
can go to Santa Rosa High School
or we can go to West Las Vegas
High School. Um, the pro to that
going to Santa Rosa High School
is their transportation route
will pick you up at designated
bus stops, um, in comparison to
the West Las Vegas school where
you have to drive to US 84 to
get picked up at the cattle
guard by the bus. Um, so I went
to Santa Rosa High School,
graduated from there, 2nd in my
class, which was detrimental.
To me because I wanted to be
first, um, but you know, 9/10 of
a point it's still kills you
later on, but it's all right,
um.
I went to New Mexico Highlands
University, um,
I
was pre-med. I wanted to go to
medical school. I ended up, uh,
graduating. I wanted two degrees
from there because I had enough
credits when I did a credit
check, but the university would
not let me. They said I had to
choose between a bachelor of
Arts or a bachelor of Science.
So I took Bachelor of Science,
um, and so my majors were
biology, chemistry, human
performance, and sporting
coaching, um, and my minors were
math, health, athletic training,
um, and coaching.
So I had a lot of um credits as
well as the relevance for why I
needed to learn biology and
chemistry, um.
In a hands-on approach by being
in the PE department as though
they called it, which is
actually the lingo is human
performance in sport, right? So,
um,
I worked at the, uh, I was an
intern for the New Mexico
Department of Transportation for
about 3 years during my college
experience, uh, when I graduated
from college, there was some
issues, you know, I come from a
Poverty household. I didn't know
how I was going to pay for
medical school, um, I had some
opportunities offered to me.
They offered to send me to Cuba,
not Cuba, New Mexico, but Cuba,
the country, um, for free to
earn my medical degree, but
there's stipulations. I had to
leave my 3 year old daughter
home.
And so sacrifices, you know.
Happen and I think growing up in
a rural area, I've made enough
sacrifices in my life, um, with
just commuting to everywhere
that I go and what I do. So.
I ended up in the school system.
Um, I didn't go to be a teacher.
Um, I always say I did not
choose education. Education
chose me and um I went back to
my hometown. I wanted to start a
volleyball program because I
realized that Anton she did not
have a volleyball team. I played
in high school. I had a coaching
degree. I said, hey, let me
start this.
Principal saw my resume that I
submitted and said, oh my God,
why are you not teaching? And I
was like, ah, I don't know. So
starting me as an EA I was an IT
person. I hooked up everybody's
computers. I did networking, um,
moved on to do my licensure, um,
and when I applied for my
license, I had endorsements in
science, math, health, PE, and
during that time I was building
a library in Anton Chicos, so I
got a degree in library science.
So I had all
These endorsements to teach.
Um, as well. So started
teaching, um, continued that
journey, got my master's in
secondary education, um, with
curriculum and instruction
through Eastern New Mexico
University, um, as well as
licensure in educational
leadership from um Eastern New
Mexico University. I am a
licensed EMT. I continue, I do
not practice, but I do continue
to keep my license certified
every 2 years as the requirement
of the state. Um, in addition, I
was going
To leave teaching because I
said, oh my God, I can't handle
this anymore. I'm, I, I want my
kids to be successful and it
really, um, it really brings me
down when I see that kids aren't
meeting these proficiency levels
and other things that happen
within the schools. So during
that time, I was going to go
back to med school and I was
going to go to pharmacy school.
I was looking at applications
and saw that Stanford University
was offering a
Teacher fellowship.
And so I applied for it and
that's what kept me in the
system. Um, I did a two-year
fellowship with them and they
taught me.
Equity, they taught me
culturally and linguistically
responsive teaching and they
taught me the pedagogy of math
and science, and the discourse
that is needed in order for
students to be successful in
math. So,
13 years in the public school
teaching math, science, PE,
health, um,
Volleyball coach, basketball
coach, track coach, Mesa,
mathematics, engineering,
science achievement, um, advisor
and business professionals of
America advisor.
I was gonna start a hosted
chapter before I left and I got
certified to be an EMT because I
wanted to start a program.
I did 2 years as an assistant
principal, um, and then after
that I said.
I think I have more to offer and
saw that there was a position
open at the college and career
readiness and felt that I had
enough experience to um
contribute to the overall
success and, um, providing not
only carrying out the law, but
the technical assistance and um.
Resources that are teachers, uh,
need out in the field.
So with that, I will start my
presentation, um, on the
connections between the
graduation rate and career
technical education.
So,
The collagen cure readiness
Bureau is pleased to see that
the recently released graduation
rate data confirms what we
already knew from national
research.
A that CT is good for students.
It is good for businesses, and
it is good for communities.
B CT high school students are
called and care ready with a 96%
graduating rate from high
school, with most of them
enrolling directly into college.
And see, CTE is a practical best
practice solution to the
nation's projected deficit of
6.5 million skilled workers,
including infrastructure,
healthcare, and manufacturing
workforce shortages. So what
happened was,
The graduation rate data came
in. We looked at it and said,
OK, we see that it's
It's stagnant, I guess you would
say it's level.
But
When we get the data for
graduation rate, we oversee
graduation requirements in my
office, but we also oversee CTE.
So there is correlation between
what is happening and what we
need to do in order to increase
graduation rate. They are not
siloed. A lot of, a lot of
people think, oh, career
technical education, they're
their own, they're their own
thing and academics is their own
thing. It is not. We need to
rebrand and market that idea and
change the mindset that
are all connected and related.
So what we did was we took the
data.
And
We filtered the data, analyzed
the data, and looked at it and
said, OK.
Let's see how many schools and
what their percentage of how
many CT concentrators they have
in their school.
We took that data and then we
looked at what is their
graduation rate. And what we
found with the top 10, was that
their graduation rate.
It was 99 to 100% of those CTE
concentrators that were taking
those courses that were
vertically and horizontally
aligned to a program of study.
In addition, if you look at
We analyzed because
This affects even though people
think.
Perkins is separate, again, that
is funding that can be utilized
to increase quality CTE within,
um, schools, what we looked at,
we analyzed the data because in
light of our new 4 year Perkins
state plan, we have to establish
what are known as state
determined performance level
indicators. We have to show that
these students are graduating.
They are proficient in math.
They are proficient in science.
They are proficient in
English language arts. They're
obtaining an industry
credential.
Or that post-secondary degree.
Um, as well as exposed to and
continuing and completing dual
credit or accelerated, um,
learning.
So, to consider the possible
effects that the new graduation
requirements from House Bill 171
could have on the state
determined performance level
indicators. Under Perkins 5,
states are required to report
this. In January, we um we
complete what is known as a
consolidated annual report to
the federal government, United
States Department, um, office of
Career and adult career
technical.
and adult education. All these
acronyms, right? So we refer
them as octa. So that's what we
refer to them as, um.
We are required to disaggregate
the performance data by factors
which include gender, race,
ethnicity, special population
categories and career clusters.
So,
Perkins 5 is an entitlement
grant, but with that grant is
for is to improve the outcomes
of those students that are
underserved.
So that is the primary
responsibility of what Perkins 5
is supposed to be utilized for.
The new graduation requirements
that could possibly have.
On an impact are the requirement
of a 2 unit pathway in which CTE
is a choice. Um, it can have an
impact on the denominator, which
is the amount of CTE
concentrators and an unknown
impact of what that numerator
is. That means how many of those
CT concentrators graduated.
The removal of
dual credit, AP honors or online
as a requirement.
Allowing a work-based learning
experience to count as a core
academic credit in math, English
language arts and science and
the removal of algebra 2 as a
requirement.
This year when we reported our
data
to octave.
We fell short in the math
proficiency indicator, which was
at a negative 6.29 performance
level for our concentrators in
math. So,
It's not just.
The kids that are taking their
core academics that are
suffering, it is also our CTE
concentrators that are going
down with their proficiencies in
math.
The graduation data also
included
And showed us
Preliminary test scores.
With results in English language
arts, math and science, which
helped to justify and set what
our SDPLs.
Need to be with the federal
government.
So if you look at
The SDPLs, these are our
performance targets.
For the next 4 years within our
Perkins plan.
I have always been a high
achiever in my classroom and set
high expectations for my
students and always said 100% of
you will graduate, 100% of you,
but we have to look at the data
too and set realistic goals too
as well.
So here are some highlights from
our Perkins Five state plan, um,
Perkins was very rigorous and
tight when Perkins 5 was
reauthorized, there was some
flexibility allowed, um, our
state plan wasn't as flexible,
so we reviewed and revised the
state plan this year to allow
for more flexibility, um, so the
flexibility changes included,
um, prior plan we only could
fund.
Regional priorities, um, and so
we have changed that to state,
regional and local priorities
because we understand that local
areas have their own priorities.
The other thing that we looked
at was
It was very rigorous. All the
programs had to be in demand,
high wage and high skill.
But we recognize that there are
some high skill or high demand,
um.
Careers that do not pay high
wage, especially if you're in an
area that doesn't have the
funding to pay that.
Um,
we've never used the reserve
funding, but this year we did
because, um, prior complaints
where we had districts that
said, I am not going to go
through this application and
provide you all of this data for
$300.
So we said, OK, what can we do?
So we looked at our Perkins, um,
law book and said,
OK, we can use the reserve
funding to fill in those gaps
for those students and bring
them up to the minimum level,
which is 15,000. Um, in
addition, what that does too as
well as is before, all of those
schools had to pull their
funding together and they all
had to concentrate on the same
priority. So that has been a
change, um.
The other thing we looked at is
there's a 50/50 split between
post-secondary and secondary
allocations. Uh, we changed that
and it's going to gradually
change to, um,
A 6535 split with most of the
funding going to secondary. In
order to get them um.
You know, bring them in, reel
them in, uh, get them, get them
excited about CTE. We got to
start at an earlier age. My
opinion is we start at pre-K,
but that's a whole other story.
And a whole other uh hearing, I
think so, um, the
Adjustments to the performance
targets are the other things
that we had to look at and so we
had to take our graduation data,
um, we, we were, we had already
asked for an extension through
Octave because we knew that this
data was coming in and they
granted it to us because they
didn't approve our last SDPLs,
um, but I had to provide him the
justification of the changes in
the graduation requirements and
the effect that they are going
to have on our Perkins, um,
grant program.
So CTE is not just about picking
the right course codes and
pathways. Initiatives and best
practices that contributing to
implementing high quality CT
include.
12 elements that, um,
The Association for Career and
Technical Education recommend
and these are the same things
that should be applied or are
applied to core academic
courses.
So these include standards
aligned curriculum.
And that means.
Having partnerships with
businesses so that industry
partners have a role in
determining what skills they
want these students to leave
high school with in order for
them to be successful. Um,
sequencing and articulation.
Is there an industry credential
at tied to this pathway? Are
they going to receive, are we
going to receive that return on
investment, are we, um,
Are we training them in
Fixing typewriters when
typewriters don't exist anymore,
right?
Student assessment, how are we
assessing these students
prepared and effective program
staff.
engaging instructions.
Instruction, access, and equity
facilities, equipment,
technology, and materials.
Business and community
partnerships, student career
development.
Career technical student
organizations.
Work-based learning and data and
program improvement.
Our bureau oversees and supports
many of these initiatives.
Through many of the NMAC and
rule that we have to
Carry out as well as the
programs that we have to carry
out with.
3 grant programs that we have,
Perkins 5.
The dis disability innovation
zone grant, um, fund grant that
we have through the, um,
Department of Special Education.
As well as our pathways to
careers grant that oversees the
development of math curriculum
that correlates to career.
So if you look at all the things
that we do out here, I cannot
bullet those.
But we oversee early college
high school, um, there's
programs in there. We, we use
our funding for near peer
tutoring. We use our funding for
summer enrichment internship
programs, um, we for CTSOs, we
hold the charter as the New
Mexico Public Education
Department for every CTSO and so
we have the responsibility to be
able to fund these, um, all of
these are important.
Aspects of them contribute to
the programs that we carry out.
As well as stand alone to things
such as graduation requirements
or the requirements of opening
an early college high school.
So what some of the things that
we are looking at to, um,
continue this work with the
funding that you all graciously
gave us um within the last two
years is improving our programs
by, um, reviewing and revising
our programs of study to make
sure they are aligned and they
are 21st century meeting the
needs and demands of industry,
as well as a work-based learning
framework, standards and tool.
especially since work-based
learning
can
Um, be substituted for a core
academic course with the
graduation requirements. Um,
Creating pre-apprenticeship, uh,
framework guidance.
And expanding middle school CTE
programs of study.
So this, our office is unique
because we don't just oversee
secondary. We also oversee
post-secondary career technical
education and the funding that
goes to those community colleges
that offer those specific career
technical education
certifications or degrees. So we
have to set performance level
indicators for that too as well.
And so that concludes the
information that I have in
reference to
um the connection between the
graduation rate and the things,
the initiatives that we carry
out within the New Mexico
Department of Public Education,
uh, college and career readiness
Bureau. That's long.
No.
So comments, questions,
committee. Representative Sarao,
please.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation. That
was, I didn't know half of what
you said, so that was amazing
and my parents are from Santa
Rosa, so I had an instant
connection with you. Um, I, I
just have a quick question on,
um, adding programs of study to
the middle school. What are you
looking at for that?
So we
We're looking at what other
states are doing, so our
neighbor, Arizona does some
things very well right now, all
we fund is career exploration at
the middle school level, but
what we need to do, we do have a
couple of courses that align to
um we have middle school career
exploration courses that aligned
to the pathways at the high
school level, but we want to
take that more in depth and
create actually
Kind of like a concentrator
status, um, with middle school.
In addition to exposing students
to, um,
Kind of like when I when I was a
principal we thought like a will
of here here and by the time
they're in 8th grade, they
should probably say like this is
what I wanna do in high school
and, and, and get that choice
down and that decision down a
little bit, um, earlier to the
middle school, especially
because the next step plan is
done at the 8th grade level. So
more courses, I mean, it might,
it might not be able to start
with all the programs of study
that we have are all the 16
career.
investors, but it could possibly
start with a few of them, um,
and what those two core sequence
pathways could look like in
middle school. In addition, I
know that the LESD is doing some
work on that and we, you know,
The collaboration between us
will help us determine, you
know, what that.
What that would look like at
middle school level.
OK, so Mr. Chairman,
if, if, if a high school doesn't
have a strong CTE program, how
would that affect the middle
school?
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for that question. Um,
It's
We want to think it of as feeder
schools, right? Um, I was a
coach, so you almost think
about, you know, a student at an
8th grade level has to choose
what high school they are going
to go to and who they want to
play for, and so they think
about those type of things, so
that
Also is.
The way
Students should think about when
they choose their high school,
um.
Of of choice, right? And so some
students don't have a choice,
um, but
At the end of the day, it's,
it's really fresh, it's, it's.
It's frustrating and it's.
And it's detrimental if, you
know, a school actually has a
great feeder program versus
another school that doesn't have
that great theater program. So
what we can do at the end of the
day is,
We have a career clusters guide
here, here are the guidelines.
Here's the framework for
carrying out these quality
programs of study
and if they can follow that,
then it can lead to, um,
That feeder program, we
Right now that that is an issue
with, uh, Perkins 5, you cannot
do just career exploration at
the middle school level, it has,
you have to.
They have to partner with a high
school that is, um, that has a
program of study that ties to
with that career exploration is.
So right now, it's kind of like
on the on the foundational
level, um, addressed in some
way, but there are some things
that we need to do in order to,
um,
Increase that quality level.
I hope that answered your
question. Yes, thank you Mr.
Chairman, um, I, I, I used to
teach in 8th grade and then high
school, but, um, I remember when
we went up to the high school,
they never spoke about CTEs. And
then when I got up to the high
school, I thought, why, because
it's not a big deal at my at the
high school I taught it, and I
think it would be great for the
kids to be excited about what
they could do at high school,
especially in the CTE area, but
I think this is a great, great,
um, program. Um, I'm a math
teacher, so I was a little bit
concerned on the math. Um, we
were in.
That we talked to the CT, the
kids in CTE programs and, and
they, some of them mentioned
they get a little bit of math
or, and, and I worry about, so
if they start out at this level
and want to be management, will
they have enough math knowledge
to do that so that that's my
only concern with with CTs and
making sure we do have math at
the level they need it and
beyond. But thank you for your
presentation. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Freezy, thank
you so much for telling your
story. I really, really
appreciated that and the land
acknowledgment, um, I think we
can learn a lot from our Navajo
brothers and sisters. I think we
should all, you know, do that,
but thank you.
Um, a couple of issues I have,
my middle, I'm a middle school
teacher, high school teacher.
I've taught everything and we
had the wheel, um, in the South
Valley at Harrison Middle
School. It was very effective 4
courses. One was IT computers,
you know, it was very good, so
I'm glad that you brought it up
and as you know we're looking at
middle school, yay, um, so
really good. Um,
And I myself, um.
took a career in public media
placement and public relations.
Based on my journalism from 8th
to 12th grade. So I, I just want
to remind us that there's,
there's so much importance to
trades, traditional trades, but
there's a lot of, um, when we
look at the qualifications for
teachers, personally, I've
taught, um,
Uh broadcast design, lots of
things that came because before
I was a teacher, I had a career
that directly related.
Um, to some fields where, you
know, I had expertise, but I, I
have two questions, um.
Our community colleges are very
powerful institutions for the
trades.
Now our high schools are making
separate buildings and
facilities. So is there any and
and our some of our early
colleges like at CNM we have um
NACA, the Native American
Community Academy, and we have
an early college and so they
have access to those trades
courses where there's not a
separate high school, but
there's agreements and, and they
worked that out.
Is there any effort by PED to
explore those relationships
because setting up
New buildings and they're very
power I I know CNM, I think, is
working with Rio Rancho on that,
but is there effort to cultivate
that model, so we save money, we
have instructors, can you talk
about that?
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair, Representative.
Yes, we have what is known as a
comprehensive local needs
assessment where we bring in
industry partners, we bring in,
um, the administrators and
teachers from the high schools
as well as the college members
too as well, um, to establish
what these plans are in the
state of New Mexico, um, our, we
have broken up our college and
careergenist bureau into 10
regions within those 10 regions
we call it the geographic.
Area of responsibility. And so
within those gar areas, um,
there are.
certain number of schools, as
well as an REC as well as, um, a
couple of colleges in some
instances. Schools have
memorandums of understanding
that they sign with those
specific schools in order to
carry out their dual credit, um.
In theory, it's easy to to sit
and say, well, why, why aren't
you just sending your kids to do
that program of study there
instead of, um,
You know, um, using your funding
to
To pay somebody for here and so.
That is what we try to express
and we try to, um, but I think
we need to do a better job by
providing guidance, um, or a
tool kit and how to make that
happen. Um, so those efforts are
Being done and there are some
schools that do it very well.
And there are some schools that
do not know how to do it, and
there are schools that are
trying to do it, so we have all
levels of learners, um, in this
learning process that is going
on. So those efforts are being
made, um, through these
comprehensive local needs
assessment meetings that we
facilitate.
Every 2 years, but then during
the rest of the year, we have
our what are known as advisory
committee meetings where we have
these conversations. So getting
Getting
More schools and administrators
and teachers to
Cash in on the um.
The opportunities that are
available and trying to make
them work. I always, I always
make this comment, um,
Are we making it work or we're
just, we're not doing the things
to make it work, right? Are we
tech savvy or are we making
ourselves tech savvy, so.
So I hope that I, I hope that um
answers that question,
that does. You can't communicate
too much,
can you?
I think that is my main
question.
Uh, thank you. Thanks for being
here today and thank you, thank
you both.
Represent Guru.
Thank you, Mr. Sher, and thank
you uh director Gutierrez,
Michelle Gracias presentacion,
um, and I'm gonna borrow your
your phrase about education. You
didn't choose education.
Education chooses you cause I
think it applies for me and I
like it, it's true. I, I used to
call it a different way. I never
thought I was gonna be in
education and I love it.
Um, following some of the
questions that um they, they
have been done here, Mr. Chair,
to, um.
I'm a math teacher, so.
I'm interested in knowing how
with that with that high school
requirements, one of the things
that I really appreciate was the
flexibility. So how is, will it
be possible or what are the
efforts done to take some of the
CT classes, um, as a much credit
for instance. I have seen some
of the trainings for the trades
and when I opened their their,
their teachers or the
instructor, um, guide is is all
the math of physics and
everything. So
That will give students an
option to to learn math and
applied math. And, and that's
what we talk always when we
teach math how students can see
it you so um what do you have
any examples of this?
Yes, Mr. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Yes, at, at this moment there is
an opportunity, um, we have what
is known as a waiver that
schools can apply for in order
to give students credit for a
CTE course in as a math credit.
So for example, um,
If a school wants to substitute.
Medical anatomy and physiology
for a science course, they have
the option to do so, um, with an
application and a crosswalk
showing that those standards
were taught within that, within
that course as well as the
licensure of the teacher, um, is
endorsed in science. So that is
an example of the flexibility
that is already allowed now, um,
this year I've asked my staff to
go through the licensure, um,
List and
look at what CTE courses can be
taught by math teachers, science
teachers, and aligning that so
that they are eligible to do
that. Um, right now,
I
I'm torn. I feel like
we should be able to double dip
with a CTE course counting as a
math course, um.
I, I, I don't, I don't think
it's a huge problem, but we need
to know.
What to do.
With the 4 years.
that these students have.
In public schools. So,
Senior year was my biggest. I
it, it drove me crazy with
seniors, um, because I would see
some seniors just sitting in the
office, being an office aid.
They would come and ask me, can
I be your aide in the classroom?
And I would say, no, go take a
dual credit class,
um.
Or I would say if you're going
to be my age, you're gonna work
and you're gonna learn how to do
stuff, so I had very few
students that wanted to do that.
Um, and it came, it came back to
they didn't know where to place
these students. And so I thought
that the we we were wasting a
12th grade year of students that
should have a more rigorous
experience. So we load 9th
graders.
And we make it so hard for them,
and then by the time they're
12th graders, they're sitting in
the office, um, you know, being
an office aid or at the time it
was called work release. It
wasn't a quality run internship.
So I, I have no problem with
that.
I, um, but we are, we are making
those um.
We are making those adjustments
to make sure that we align, um,
those courses that can be taught
by an endorsed teacher in those
specific core academic areas and
then making sure that those
courses are meeting the
standards that are required um
with biology or chemistry or um
algebra one, geometry, and so
forth. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Sher. Um, I, I have shared here
before that um
My first degree is in
engineering too, so.
When I went to to college, my
classmates who were to CT
classes. They were way better
prepared than me who took all
the calculus and algebra and
trigonometry. They, they were
better prepared than me. So
that's what I believe this is a
good path also, but also I wanna
follow on on onpented God right
here about the apprentice
programs. Uh, many of my
students do not.
Don't see themselves in, in
college or there, they finished
going to the trade programs or
learning on their own and that's
I I just talked to a former
student. He was super excited
and he really wanted to go to
high school and convince
everyone to go to an apprentice
program because he told me and
listed everything on the
benefits, um, and I appreciate
his passion, and I was so proud
of him being so happy and
enjoying that, but I don't want
him to choose in between
finishing high school or go to a
trade program.
And, and CT classes are aligned
and, and sometimes we make
things in school so school like
and applicable in the real world
that it, it, it gets in the way.
Um, I remember one of my first
experiences in middle school
seeing this beautiful chop.
Um, I think it was a grant
before I came, but it was brand
new. The instructor retired
within 3 years, they couldn't
find another instructor because
uh people in trade won't leave
try to go and teach some
sometimes, most times, um, and
ended up in the backyard
spoiled. So it's kind of um um
that's my worry that we do it in
school, uh, and some of these
apprentice programs in the
organizations are ready for,
for, for schools to use it and
they have told me.
They just bring us the students,
we will train them. We will find
the instructor, and we will
train them. Instead of trying to
do something and start something
and.
ended up
Finishing the grad or diploma
the award and ended up in the
backyard and being spoiled. Um,
so that's, that's my concern on
these things, so that's why I'm,
I'm gonna followed Gre here to
collaboration with other other
uh organizations and unions and
colleges on this, but thank you
so much for your detailed
presentation and report and
thank you for being here today.
Thank you.
Senator Solz
There we go
Good morning and thank you. It's
so nice having somebody, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, and, uh, director
that's so knowledgeable about
CTE areas and and passionate
about it, so that certainly
shows through. Uh, please talk
about how important are the
professional organizations in
ensuring that there are
sustainability and good programs
and the, you know, things like
the Josa Mesa, Decca, FFA
educators rising, etc. and how
do we expand those.
Into schools that don't have
them or does that require a
champion at the school to say I
want to do this.
Sorry.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative, for that
question. I'm very passionate
about career and technical
student organizations since I
was a BPA member, um, as well as
the BPA advisor, um, since I
didn't know these other
organizations existed. If Hosa
was available in high school, I
would have been on that track,
and I think I would have been,
um, had a better hands-on
approach to the health
occupation that I wanted to
pursue. So that is the
importance of career technical.
Student organizations, people
think and call them clubs. They
are not clubs, they are
professional development at the
level of high school and middle
school for our students. They
have curriculum, they have
hands-on experience. They have
curriculum that is not only um
the skill that they need to, um,
show their competence in, but
also there are leadership, um,
opportunities for them. They run
to be president of the state.
We can even run at the national
level to be president or um have
a position on the executive
boards as though they're called,
um,
They're, they're very expensive
to carry out, especially because
these students travel in the
state to compete, and they do
travel.
Nationally to compete to as
well, so it can be expensive,
um, they're referred to as
extracurricular activities which
they are not. They are what we
know as intracurricular
activities. When I was in the
system, um, a teacher and
educator, I wanted a BPA class
so bad, but I had to do all of
the BPA stuff after school.
Or I had to find some other way
to do it, but then I was
competing and I was a coach too.
I was competing with the
athletics too as well. So I
would tell kids, you can do
both, we'll work it out, you
know, we'll, we'll, there's some
things for MESA that we can do
for BPA, and there's some things
I would make my um.
Volleyball girls go out and
clean the gym or pick trash or
there would be an event in the
community and I'd say service
learning, service learning,
let's get this done, which are
requirements of these career
technical student organizations.
So with your generous funding
this year, we have been able to
give that funding to each of the
organizations, um, they've got,
they each got a boost of about
$200,000 to carry out the things
that they need to. Um, in
addition, we gave each
organization flow through.
Funding of about $71,000 to help
those local chapters at that
level establish if they need to
pay for stipends for that
teacher to be an advisor if they
need to buy the supplies and
materials that are needed in
order to carry out the
competitions. Um, we have
provided that funding.
Thank you, because it seems
like, you know, they're a
critical link in having the
teacher advisor is the one that
makes that happen, you know, is
you got to have that main
champion for it. Um,
I keep looking to the day when
they are raised to the same
status as the football team or
the basketball team and are
funded by the district and the,
the teachers doing it get
stipends comparable to the extra
time that they're putting in as
the athletic teams and and the
others are, are seen and so
yeah, we've got a ways to go in
that and, uh, certainly one of
the things I ask regularly when
we're hearing about the shortage
of teachers as I push back on
the district, you have an
educator's writing program to
start.
Training your own or in any of
the other areas that that is
very much a first step, um.
An area I'm concerned with all
of this, the data is
overwhelming about the
importance if a student takes 2
courses in a concentrator of the
graduation rates in education,
we've often used that as if
that's cause and effect, and
it's like, oh, we'll make every
student take two classes in a
concentrator, wanna make sure
that we don't do that, that this
stays a choice type of thing so
that we don't fall into the, the
cause and effect trap of
correlation
data that may be because of
self-selecting, uh, director,
talk to me about, you know,
their concerns I know about
farming out too much of the, the
CTE Perkins money out to
nonprofits like Future Focused
education, what's going on with
that? Is that something that
you're concerned about that too
much is helping run the
nonprofit instead of getting
directly to students, or what is
the issue in that area?
Mr. Chair,
Vice Chair, thank you for that
question.
We do have.
Contracts that go out to
nonprofits, um, especially so
they can, they can be, um.
A positive, um, help to our
office, especially, um, I have a
staff of 19 when we're fully
staffed. I have one more
position to fill vacancy and so
I'm very, you know, I'm, I'm
very proud of that and um I, I
always encourage them, please
don't leave, please don't leave,
please don't leave. And so what
can I do, you know, and within
my, my, you know, realms of the
law, how can I keep you here,
keep you happy, and what can we
do? So I have a great staff that
is really dedicated to and
believes in what we do, um.
So
Because of the amount of work
that we have to do, we have to
contract out some of these
things. So for example, um, we
contract out CTSO, um,
overseeing that to state
advisors in other states there's
an actual state advisor that is
at the education department that
oversees that. But I, I don't
have a position to do that, so
we use contracts in order to get
that done. Um,
I am one.
Where I want to see money go
directly to students and their
families. So I always try to get
the funding to flow through as
much as possible within the
realms of what I can do with my
staff and with the money that we
have.
So
If, if
If we didn't complete some of
these contracts.
We would need the funding in
order to hire somebody to
oversee that initiative because
of the amount of work that it
entails.
Thank you. And you,
I know that was a hard question.
I could hear you carefully using
your language, and that's,
that's wonderful, um, people
hear me regularly say we've got
lots of money and we're using
the money one way or the other,
it seems like the more we could
put as far as positions in
PE to fund these directly
instead of having another layer
before it gets down to the
students would be useful. And so
just, you know, if you're
working with, uh, and I know
Greg's taking
Notes that uh the budget for
next year is additional funding
in this area. I think it, you
know, I speak, you know, for
myself, but I think the feeling
of this committee is this is an
area we need to see expansion.
We need to see not pilot
programs, but things done to
scale and it's not going to get
done to scale if we're trying to
do it on the cheap at the top
end where the administration
runs and the money flows
through. And so we want to make
sure that we get you enough
staff and people.
To run it completely, um.
My kind of last question, Mr.
Chair, is
To the community college, I
don't know how to word this
exactly. It seems like we've got
too many people working in silos
that the community colleges are
worried about their funding and
the public schools about their
funding and so dual credit, both
sides are not happy with it and
the space.
For welding at the community
college, but that's not public
school space to go and do that.
How do we go about getting
everybody on the same page, so
they're all working for the same
thing instead of siloing the
money, in which case everybody
runs to their corner to keep
their money flowing.
That's a wide, wide, widening
question. Sorry, Mr. Chair, Vice
Chair, thank you for the
question. I struggle with that
question too is, um, myself, how
do we create these pipelines and
these strong partnerships, and I
think we're starting that. I do
want to let you know that we
have um through the career
technical leadership project, we
have asked them to help us
facilitate and create a career
technical education statewide
advisory board that will be.
by industry partners, which will
connect all of us. You don't
know how many meetings I go to
that, um, I hear the same thing
over and over again and I was
like how do I get these same
people in the room so that I
don't have to say this 200
times, right? I don't mind
saying it 200 times, but how do
I get them all in this room? How
do I, you know, I went to a
meeting and and an industry
partner stated, yeah, if this
could be done at the high school
level and I was like, we are
doing it, we are doing it. How,
how do we get that message out?
How do we market that message?
How do we
How do we get people in the know
to understand that these already
exist, um, a lot of times we get
these nonprofits that come out
and said, do you know what you
should do, you should do this or
we get, you know, policy or we,
um, people who are, are looking
at policy or these, um,
lobbyists saying you should do
this. I'm like, we already do.
It's done this way. So the other
thing that we're looking at too
is, um, this year we are with
that program of steady review,
we are creating a resource hub.
And we have a, we share a
position with the Department of
Workforce Solutions. And so we
are trying to figure out how we
don't reinvent the will. We
don't waste money in, in
creating resources that already
exist, but how we bring those
together. So my idea is this
resource hub that shows, here's
here's our programs of study.
When you're done with this, you
click on DWS. Here are all the
pre-apprenticeships that are
offered. Uh, you click here.
If you want to, um, extend your
college experience in this, um,
area, so that's, that's the work
that we are doing now starting
this year. So I hope that
answers that question.
Yes, and the question was as
much frustration as an outright
question. Mr. Chair, kind of my,
my last.
Point for things is
it always feels like we need
business and industry and the
public pulling as hard as
education is pushing. And right
now, that's not happening
much in southern New Mexico,
there are 2, only 2
apprenticeship programs in
southern New Mexico. We're the
2nd largest community in the
state, and there are only 2
apprenticeships. Is how do we
get all those industry partners
in and feel like they've got a
real say. You can't invite.
them in and then just tell them
what you're gonna get. You've
got to make them real partners.
And I think that's one of the
biggest challenges that we still
have. Certainly if you're
interested in commenting, but
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Represent Figuero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. My
question is actually mostly I
think for Jessica. I want to
clarify some information in the
report on page 33.
And connecting to the page 3,
sorry, page 3, your report's not
that long. Connecting to the
text on page 4, when we have
increased funding, but we've
also created this thing called
the innovation zones. And
according to the text on page 4
that funding is also supposed to
cover grad profiles, social
emotional learning, capstone
projects, other things, and CTE.
So my
is when we as a committee talk
about we are funding CTE with
this much. We don't actually
know.
Do we have any numbers on how
much of that $40 million is
going to those other seven
things so that when we talk
about funding CTE.
Per se, we know actually how
much is going to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Figueroa, um, so
I'll actually refer you to page
5. We do have amounts in that
table under the redheaders there
for the amount of awards that
have gone to innovation zone of
the total appropriations for
fiscal year 23, 24, and 25.
To the more detailed part of
your question in terms of the
accounting for the specific
activities, um, that is not
something that I have
information on the actual, for
example, um, which ones are
using it for grad profiles,
which ones are using it for
work-based learning. We have
visited and collected a lot of
anecdotals. For example, we know
in Cuba they're using it
primarily for work-based
learning to pay for internships,
um, but we, um, actually
Director Gutierrez could
probably speak a little bit more
to the detail of it, but we do
know how much of the overall
appropriation is going and you
can see.
in that table one there on page
5.
Mr. Chair and director, I would
love to hear your answer, but
that I think was my next
question. Look at that chart on
page 5, we don't know in those
red columns, how that money is
being used and whether CTE
programs, the welding classes,
the deca, the culinary arts are
growing at these sites or
whether they're growing other
things with these funds. These
are all good things and we need
to fund them. But if we're
talking about CTE results and
CTE.
Funding, it's not clear and do
we have any way to track it?
Mr. Chair, representative, thank
you for the question.
We are in the same situation of
figuring out how to track um
what is going on within
innovation zones. So this has
been a pilot and this is the 3rd
year of pilot, so we are in the
process of collecting all of
this data to determine where the
funding is going. I can tell
you, um, from the last two
years, most of the funding is
going to work-based learning and
paying students to have that
work-based learning experience,
um, we are
Selecting the grab profiles from
these innovation zones. This
year I asked our contractor to
ensure that every innovation
zone school has a graduate
profile at the end. In addition,
we've put additional funding to
the site. So part of the
contract with innovation zones
is
Initiating or continuing to
build high quality career
technical education, creating
the graduate profile working on
the whole child's
social-emotional learning and um
providing work-based learning
experiences for the students.
So this year,
That contract only helps the
schools that are innovation zone
that have applied and been
accepted to be an innovation
zone. So with the 40 million
that you graciously gave us
again. We put money aside to um.
Push out another.
Contract.
To help the other schools who
are not an innovation zone,
develop their graduate profiles.
I can't tell you how much that
I've put aside for that because
it's gonna be a proposal that
needs to be submitted, so I
can't say amounts here, but
money has been has been set
aside to support that. And in
the process, we will we will be
gathering those graduate
profiles to look at.
What schools think is important
for their student to graduate
from their communities within
those specific high schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Director. Those are good
things and, and we'll look at
that data. Good luck with your
proposal when we talk about
graduation profiles and
SEL Learning projects. My
concern today while we're
talking about CTE is looking at
the page 5 chart. Nextgen
funding is actually down a
little bit and the innovation
zone funding is huge, but we
don't know how much of it is
actually going to CTE. So from
an on the ground perspective, a
school might feel like their CT
funding has actually gone down,
not up, whereas we talk in this
committee like we have just
increased.
KTE funding a huge amount. We
have to be really clear about
where that money is going and
intentional.
Clear, clear about our intention
about where we want it to go.
If that makes sense, Mr. Chair,
and I'd I'd love to see data
from for the CTE programs
themselves.
Are they growing? Are they
shrinking a little? What have we
done?
Zimba.
Thank you.
You get to care those. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you.
I apologize for my tardiness.
I've actually never been to Los
Alamos before, so first time.
um, Mr. Chairman and committee,
I apologize. My, my question
really are, I'm gonna start with
the comment is when we talk
about.
Middle school and high school
and secondary, you know, one of
the things that I think is that
we almost need a seamless
transition, not just for our
academics but also for our CTE.
I do, uh, support the fact that
as we're looking at middle
school reform redesign that CT,
we know that the cost of.
Furnishing these classrooms,
creating these program is great.
So, uh, my question is going to
be, and it's it's more probably
for Sonny, OK.
is as far as when we're talking
about the CTE funds.
Sonny, how do they flow through?
Are they flow through as a
separate or it's below the line
through the SCG because one of
my fears is with the budget
shortfalls that we have.
That some of these funds that we
talked about legislative intent
that were earmarked for their
maybe gobbled up because of uh
budget shortfalls in other
areas.
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you for the question. This $40
million that we've been
discussing, $45 million we've
been discussing today is below
the line funding. So it is
coming through the department as
a grant program to districts and
charters. In the past, the
funding formula did have a
component for CT which was
removed.
Prior to 2000.
And right now you have a single
formula factor for high school.
And, and that's sort of sort of
implied that part of that factor
is paying for your type of CT
programming that you're seeing
within schools at this time, but
that is supplemented by this $45
million grant program through
the department.
And thank you, and I think it
was my colleague uh
Representative Figuero saying is
we talk about legislative
intent, right? So we talk about
we stood here and we appropriate
funds that we assume or or you
know, we're, it's our intent to
be put through legislation that
they end there, um, Mr.
Chairman, and Sonny, the other
question that I have is when
we're talking about the 40
million, does this also include
the money and capital outlay for
CTU programs? Is it the same 40
mil Jessica's shaking your head,
so.
You guys respond to that?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Baca, um, no,
there are different
appropriations for the capital
outlay that come through your
public school capital outlay
fund. This 40 million is below
the line and has been funded
through general funds and public
education reform funds, so they
are separate.
And, and thank you, um.
Along with this, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and I do agree with
Director Guterres is that when
we're looking at CT I think the
earlier we have that exposure, I
think the better and as we're,
as we're moving up to here, uh,
Mr. Chairman, one of the other
things about it is was CT also
certificate programs. I, I mean,
I keep saying about this is
that.
You know, if we're gonna be
looking at high schools, I want
to, or middle schools as well
that we have programs that as a
child or as a student graduates
or exits our system they have
whether it be the certified
nursing, whether they have
welding.
Is there a component within the
programs you're talking about
that support.
The certificate programs and
bring in the community members
and the local businesses to
support that to create those
partnerships.
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you for the question.
Yes, so our funding allows for
these programs to pay for
industry credentials that
students can earn. Right now, my
office is going through an
extensive review of the industry
credentials that are on the
list, um.
As Senator Sol's, um, mentioned
earlier, he talked about
nonprofits, but we also have
vendors in the in the world that
are saying, oh, our industry
credential, use it, it's
recognized and then our students
get that industry credential and
they leave a New Mexico high
school and they go to try to get
a job and an employer says, I
don't know what this is. So we
need to, we need to be, um.
What we're working on is
aligning those industry
credentials that already exist
in New Mexico and the
requirements for them too as
well. So the issue with some of
the industry credentials is some
students cannot, because of the
age limits and the requirements
of the Department of Labor, some
students aren't able to earn an
industry credential until
they're 18. So we have, those
are, those are part of the
resource hub that we're trying
to get across that like, OK, you
can earn an AWS certification if
your instructor.
is AWS certified. So we pay for
that to happen, um, in the
schools for the ag teacher to go
get their AWS certification, so
they're able to certify these
students. So those are some
examples of those things that
are happening with that pipeline
and with that partnership, um,
Again, there's not a manual that
says this is how you do this,
um, so that's what we do. We
collect a lot of best practices
that schools are doing with
that. They have how, how do you
have strong community
partnerships, and that's the
whole idea behind the innovation
zone contract that we have is
for these schools to share those
great things that they are
doing. So, Zuni does capstone
projects. That's a great thing
that they do in order to show,
um, their tribe, the skills that
these students are living with
in um
comparison to their graduate
profile that they have. So these
are some of those best practices
that we're trying to collect so
that we're able to
Communicate those to other
schools that don't, don't know
how to carry that out or are not
carrying that out. I hope that
answered your question.
Um, Mr. Chairman, in fact, like
I said, I'm gonna kind of wrap
it up there. I it does in some
ways because I can tell you like
in the CNA program, I know that
they cannot actually take the
test until they're 18. And if
we're looking at, you know,
really trying to talk about
engagement, which would be my
last point in attendance, right?
I saw it when you talk about
your, you know, concentrators in
your engagement. When we talk
about a 40% actually as far as
students that have attendance
issue or truant. Those things,
that's why we need to really
look at this funding.
Getting that lower grades of
elementary school or something,
but middle schools also, as we
do this and I'll just give a
shout out to my teacher, my 6th
grade teacher that I had to take
home economics because we did a
uh basically an elective wheel.
I still know how to make a basic
stitch. I still eat those little
pizzas that we make out of the
biscuits that, you know, with
pizza sauce. So, the earlier
we're able to export expose our
students and give them
opportunity. I think the better
and we should be backing that up
with funding. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Right, thank you. I can also sew
a button on because of my uh
home ec.
6th grade class, um.
I had a question um Jessica
about um.
Some of the information you
provide in our attachments. I
was just wondering if we have
any information on how school
districts choose programming and
breezy if you've uh any
information for this question,
but, um, how are our school
districts choosing where to
prioritize their money.
Um, in what programming.
He
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
that question. Um, this is one
of those complex factors of some
local control components. So for
next gen, for example, there are
some restrictions on how that
grant funding can be used. Um,
choosing there because it often
has to be aligned for them to
receive that grant, so programs
of study and CT-related
supports, for example, um, are
certainly part of that. Schools,
however, they make other complex
decisions around, for example,
if they're offering an entire
school CTE model, for example,
we did see that whenever we were
in Carlsbad as a committee or in
Gallup, and those are more
decisions made around how they
want to reorient their secondary
school experience.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. I could expand on
that. Um, with Perkins 5
requirements, schools and
districts have to engage in what
is known as a comprehensive
local needs assessment, and they
take the labor market
information provided by the
Department of Workforce
Solutions for their specific
counties in which they are
living and and they
Analyze it to determine what is
the need within that specific
community. And so from there
they make the decision as to
Again, this, this year, is it a
state priority, a regional
priority, or is it a local
priority. So they make that
determination based on the data
that they're given or based on
the specific need that they need
in, um, within their communities
with Nextgen that's a little bit
more flexible, 50% of the next
gen funding has to be for that
regional, state, or local
priority, but they could also
put it aside to something that
is very popular at their
schools, such as the Home Ec
Culinary Arts program.
Right?
So,
There's a little bit more
flexibility with Nextgen in
determining what their programs
are. Um, in addition to with
NextGen, they can use their
funding for career exploration,
dual credit supports, um, and
other.
Career technical student
organization assistance.
Thank you. I, I, I certainly
appreciate that because
As a legislator, I think we find
ourselves obviously working on
statewide issues, but then we
have our own local district
concerns and considerations and
and one that I've had from
constituents because I represent
the far South Valley in Bernelio
County that is semi-rural, and
so we have still a lot of
farmers, uh, folks that raise
livestock, um, in, in these
folks often come to me and talk
about, well, we don't, we don't
qualify for.
Federal funding, some of the
state funding is more sparse
because we're in Albuquerque,
which we usually think of of of
as an urban center, um.
And, and it's frustrating for
them and then I've had other
folks come to me in agriculture
and say, well, there are limited
resources in Albuquerque,
especially around livestock, um,
and it's been a source of
frustration for them that um we
don't necessarily have the
numbers in uh uh for career
technical in Albuquerque and it
hasn't necessarily been that
much of a focus and, and
hopefully it's something that
that could.
Um, because I think in, in the
area that I represent is a
little bit unique in terms of
the Albuquerque area, um.
So, so I was just curious as to
how um the districts are really
making those decisions, so I
appreciate that um and then
Breezy, thank you very much, um,
speak on behalf of the committee
for the additional information
you provided of each of the
snapshots of the programs and
initiatives, we certainly
appreciate that, um, and then
Jessica, thank you so much for
the report and we look forward
to uh more information in these
areas. So thank you all.
Thank you.
You.
Do as you do.
If you're so compelled.
Alright, so we will move on to
item 7. So our update on
Martinez Yazzi.
Going to go up there.
All righty,
All right, folks, when you all
are ready, director.
Deputy director, please.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, members
of the legislative Education
Study Committee, um, the four of
us are going to talk, uh, a
little bit about the
Martineziazi lawsuit, uh, an
update for you. Uh, this
presentation, uh, partially was
presented to the legislative
Finance Committee. Um, it was a
joint effort, uh, from us as
well as Sunny Lou, uh, senior
fiscal and principal fiscal
analyst from the Legislative
Finance.
Committee and then, uh, we'll
then shift to talk a little bit
about the road map that is your
road map, um, for moving forward
to transform and build an
excellent public education
system in New Mexico and then
we'll hear from the public
education department and they
will be presenting on priorities
that are aligned with moving the
system forward.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, uh, my name
is Sonny Lamb the analyst for
LFC on education. I do want to
take a moment to thank Doctor
Perea Ornament for her staff's
collaboration on this report.
And I also want to thank, um, PD
and particularly Greg for their
willingness to share data with
us and work, um, together on
solutions, so, um, just
expressing gratitude for that as
we proceed.
So we'll start with this
presentation before you that has
the LFC and LESC logos.
This presentation was as
director Pereo want to mention
given to LFC last week, so, uh,
kudos to the all of those of you
who were there last week to also
hear this a second time.
Starting on page 2.
We want to highlight the
sentence in the Constitution
that this is all based on.
Just that.
As a state, we must provide a
uniform and sufficient education
for all students. It was the
centerpiece for the court
decision.
And it was a very nuanced order
that the court issued.
5 years ago, this case is 10
years old since its filing, but
5 years old from when the court
issued its order saying that.
The state needed to take
immediate steps to ensure that
all schools have the resources
necessary, but it's really
interesting here that she points
out that.
The resources are necessary to
give at-risk students the
opportunity to obtain this
education that prepares them to
be both college and career
ready.
The court also gave a lot of
deference to you, the
legislature, and the executive
to come up with a plan to
produce a system that gives this
opportunity that meets
constitutional requirements. And
so there are very few explicit
remedies.
But there was a lot of direction
provided in the 600-page ruling,
which will dive a little bit
into in this presentation.
On page 3.
Just a bit of a history that
once again the filing was 10
years ago. The court made their
ruling in 2019 and it was very
interesting because in this
ruling, the court found that
funding and programming were not
adequate.
And it saw that student
outcomes, particularly math,
reading, graduation, college
remediation rates were dismal,
and they made a connection
between those two inputs and
outputs to determine that the
system was insufficient that
funding was not appropriate
levels and that oversight from
the department was lacking.
There is also one additional
order in 2020 when the pandemic
was happening and schools were
closed, where the court asked
the state to immediately provide
access to internet devices and
IT so that at-risk students
could receive their education.
Turning the page for.
There are a whole list of inputs
that the court found to be
inadequate in its.
Review of testimony from school
districts and from
professionals.
And this is just a smattering of
what that 600 page report
covered.
Not exhaustive of the entire
list of things the court
discussed. But what's really
interesting is that the court
was really trying to point
toward programs or structures
that would lead us to those
better outputs. So what actually
gets us to that true north of
improved student outcomes. A lot
of these items listed in that.
court finding were to point
towards how do we get to a
system that improves outcomes
overall.
On page 5.
As injunctive relief, the court
did order the State to provide a
comprehensive plan and a
timetable and a system of
accountability and measurement
to ensure that
These actions were being taken
and that student.
Outcomes were improving. The
court also defined for classes
of student that it deemed at
risk. English language learners,
Native American students
economically disadvantaged
students and students with
disabilities.
In 2018, the legislature.
And the executive.
And schools
Saw this court order coming.
And started mobilizing.
Efforts to produce some remedies
or address some of the
shortcomings found in the
reports.
What's really
Good about this chart, I think,
is it really delineates a little
bit of the responsibilities each
of these parties has, but it
also shows that we all need to
be rowing in a similar
direction, um, to reach the
goals that the court intended
for the state.
You know, mostly as, as the
legislature, you're primary
responsibility is funding the
system and providing that those
guidelines that protect the
rights of students and the
department should be monitoring
and providing technical
assistance and enforcement were
necessary and of course schools
being ultimately the vehicles to
deliver to that educational
opportunity for its students.
Moving on to page 7.
We've sort of broken out some of
the major findings from the
court.
And use that same format on,
what is the legislature done?
What is the executive done? And
what are some local outcomes
that we have been able to at
least report on since the court
order.
And I'll just touch on a few of
these. Happy to go into more
detail on any that you have
questions on, but
The first one, of course, was
that funding was insufficient.
Well, you have seen since fiscal
year 19 and that first column of
legislative action is that
you've increased funding to
schools on a recurring basis by
$1.6 billion. That's about a 58%
increase from when the court
issued its first order. You've
had an executive action to push
for tapping the land grant
permit fund to increase
distributions to schools, but
you've also seen some
implementation issues
Where we've seen reversions from
programs that the legislature
has implemented. You've seen
operational cash reserves rise
as well over that period. And
there are a lot of reasons for
that, but these are some of the
indicators that we've seen since
5 years ago.
The other pieces on that 2nd row
that at-risk students should be
receiving 25% to 50% more
funding than their peers, and
you have responded on multiple
occasions and this committee has
endorsed legislation to raise
that at-risk index and provide
funding for a pilot called the
Family Income Index. You've also
seen the department monitor some
of the spending rates, although
it's very hard to to tell, you
know, how that funding is being
used.
And whether it's leading to
improved outcomes because we are
still seeing very large
achievement gaps for these
at-risk categories, even today.
I'll turn to page 8.
And touch upon a few larger
pieces. One of the largest.
Marquee initiatives, the
legislature has embarked on the
last few years is learning time,
and it's been fraught with a lot
of implementation issues, a lot
of differences and directives.
You've dumped in $312 million on
a recurring basis for this
initiative alone. It's second
only to pay, which was the
largest portion of that $1.6
billion increase. You've raised
instructional hour requirements
and as we
can see schools have actually
added more days to their
calendars, although some of that
has also been days for
professional development as
well.
You've really increased funding
for early childhood.
Um, the last row there, you've
built an early childhood
department. You've stood up a
trust fund for early childhood
distributions, and you've really
expanded services for students
under the age of 4. And as we've
seen pre-K enrollment has
increased since that time and
the department is now moving to
looking at more services at 3
year old and younger ages.
On page 9.
One thing I want to touch on
here that it's also been
exponential growth is early
literacy funding. When the court
ruling came out, you were
providing about $90 for the
science of reading, and now
you've.
Increase that to about $87
million almost tenfold. And
you've also, that includes
funding for things such as the
summer literacy Institute and
secondary training for
educators.
On page
10
The biggest piece of this has
been investments in teacher pay.
Uh, when the court ruling ruling
came out, your average teacher
pay was about 47,000 and you're
4 ranked 4-ninth in the nation
and the latest rankings show
that we're about 22nd and the
nation had an average of 63,000
now.
To keep pace with
competitiveness with our
neighbors. That's gonna be an
ongoing concern, but you have
substantially raised our
competitiveness both on the
regional and national level in
response. You're still seeing
teacher vacancy rates, however,
despite that, so you've really
pumped in a lot of funding to
prepare educators, providing
about $40 million in fiscal year
25 alone for these types of
programs.
Um, I will go ahead and move on
to page.
13 actually. I, I do realize I'm
going a bit slow here, so I will
speed it up a bit, but.
What's really alarming is that
despite changing the assessment
between when the court had its
ruling, which was the park.
And moving to a new assessment,
the the in Mesa, we are still
seeing achievement gaps between
the court of the at-risk
students named in the court. Um,
and, and this has been true for
both reading and math
proficiency rates and so it begs
the question on, you know, what.
What needs to change despite the
including funding as we move
forward in trying to reach that
true north, and I'll turn it
over to John to continue the
presentation from here.
Talking about these
I just.
Getting curveballs thrown at me,
Mr. Chair.
I was gonna go straight to uh to
the possible improvement piece
because I wanted to sound more
positive after Sonny. But, but,
but I got to talk about this
other side of,
uh, otherwise I can't see. Uh,
so I'm going to talk briefly
about some other uh outputs that
we're looking at slide 14 that
we um
Again, these are as as Sunny
mentioned, the court really
emphasized, and we've heard in
this committee, math and
reading, we're also looking at
other outputs as indicators of
progress. So things like chronic
absenteeism, obviously we've
seen um.
Increases in chronic absenteeism
over the last few years,
primarily because of the
pandemic and but those those
rates have stuck around, um.
We haven't talked too much about
proficiency, although we have
seen some overall state uh
improvement in proficiency as
we've implemented structured
literacy, and as you heard
yesterday, of course, math
proficiency rates continue to be
a challenge for the state,
although we have a all hands on
deck approach obviously to try
to address that.
On slide 15, uh, we do have some
good news and we did hear um
we've heard about graduation
rates obviously we heard a
little bit about graduation
rates about with CTE
concentrators, our overall state
graduation rate has remained
relatively stable over the last
few years, haven't haven't seen
decreases or increases. We did
want to highlight a couple of
things. One is in 2022, New
Mexico would have needed 2,344
more high school graduates to
meet the national average.
And I think what that points out
is that if we're able to focus
on those schools that need the
most support, those places where
students are being, uh, where we
don't see as many high school
graduates, uh, if you spread
that number across the state,
that's, that's very reachable,
right? So even though we haven't
seen the kinds of improvements
that we'd like to see, um.
We think that's a that's a very
reachable target. The other
thing we wanted to emphasize
here is the increase in
graduation rates for Native
American students. And if you
look at your, your graph, uh,
the left hand graph there,
you'll see that gray line
indicates Native American
students and you've seen
increases there from about 70%
um in 2021 to nearly 75% in
2023, that last set of data that
we have available.
On slide 16.
You all have seen this graph
before. We thought it was
helpful to bring it to remind
you a little bit about uh the
AIR study that was done in 2008
and from that study was a
recommended funding level where
folks decided that if the state
was able to fund at this level,
you would see schools
essentially have sufficient
funding.
In 2023, 2022, 2023, you see
that you all in your
appropriations have actually
exceeded an inflation-adjusted
number for that recommendation
and even though the court
doesn't didn't necessarily
endorse this methodology. They
didn't say you should as a state
fund at these levels. It's a
really useful measure for us to
to think about how you've
increased funding over the last
few years.
While we've met that mark and
now exceeded it, we also wanted
to point out the
The preceding years. So if you
go back in this chart about 15
years, you see that we
consistently were under that
funding, Mark.
And so while we've, while you
all have appropriated funds to
exceed that now, we want to
remind you that there there's
compounding effects of
underfunding this system and the
need to to maintain and sustain
the level of funding that you've
now appropriated for schools,
um.
Schools now have pretty healthy
school budgets. This year was a
little bit uh interesting based
on some of the other factors
that occurred. But as Sonny
mentioned earlier, we're seeing
pretty substantial cash
balances, your staff will
present you with a report in
September looking more closely
and specifically at that cash
cash balance issue so that you
can understand a little bit more
about why those are happening
and hear from some school
districts potentially about um
why they're important to them,
but also maybe some of the other
issues that are con
to those cash balances.
Starting on page 17.
And going through to page 19.
I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna go
through the entire history of
appropriations over the last 10
years since the filing of the
court case, but I did want to
highlight a couple of things,
and it's sort of a um.
Touching a little bit on what we
just mentioned.
As you look through these years,
you'll see in 2014, 2015, 1617.
Actual decreases, and of course
these are due to economic
downturns and the state's lack
of resources to be able to fund
not just schools, but other
things as well to the level that
they had been funding in the
past. And so you'll see, for
instance, in 2014 2015, 8.275%
sanding. Obviously that's a
decrease in funding for schools
in um 15 $60 million standing
again, these are not these are
necessary because of economic
downturns.
I just want to point out that
through the years, you all have
made adjustments.
I wanted to highlight though,
while you've had to do that
because of the economy, you've
maintained a commitment to
educate salaries, even while we
were having to cut some of those
budgets, you were trying to
ensure that we were supporting
teachers with both salary
increases and increases to
teacher minimums.
And of course, by the time you
get through to page 19.
You've now seen what Sunny
mentioned earlier, a $1.6
billion increase in funding.
You've made substantial
investments in education.
And then lastly on page 20.
We just want to return to that
that first list of things that
Sonny mentioned that were sort
of identified by the court and
some of the things that are
specifically related to the
findings.
We want, we want to say first
that.
We have a lot to be proud of.
You all have not only funded
education substantially over the
last few years. But in doing so,
you've actually addressed a lot
of the issues that the court um
mentioned and have established
um as, as evidenced by the last
presentation, new programs that
are intended to increase student
engagement. They're supposed to
support students named in the
court case. There's a lot to be
proud of in the work that you've
done in the.
Last few years.
But we also bring this list up
to remind you that addressing
the lawsuit isn't an issue of
checking off items, right? It's
not a checklist.
That the that there's still
substantial work to be done both
in maintaining and sustaining
those levels of funding that
you've been able to do.
While also continually
continuing to address the issues
in a comprehensive manner. You
can't do all of these
separately, and even if you did
them all.
If you're not doing that in a in
a comprehensive and planned way,
they may not be as successful as
standalone initiatives. Every
one of the programs and you've
seen this presented from our,
from your staff under the
direction of Dr. Pereawna, all
of these programs are, we have
what we what we think of as a
theory of change for those
programs. And I'll use
structured literacy as an
example of this, and we think
it's important for you to think
of your programs, the programs
that you funded through that
structure, that theory of
change.
Model
If you trained a first grade
teacher in structured literacy.
If they started training 2 years
ago.
As a first grade teacher.
They finished now.
And while they may have been
implementing some of the those,
those, the, the learning that
they've had through those
trainings, they're just now
starting.
To really be able to implement
what they've learned through
that training today, this school
year for instance.
For that to fully take hold in
that classroom is going to take
another 3 to 5 years, just for
that one individual teacher that
started training 2 years ago.
And so for every program that
you funded, there is that theory
of change, and it requires
patience and time to see the
full impacts.
Of those investments.
Right. That doesn't mean that
there aren't benchmarks that we
should be looking for in terms
of progress. There are and will
continue to identify those for
you, but just want to emphasize
that sometimes and, and I can
only imagine the pressure that
you're under specifically the
finance folks and those of you
who sit in the finance
committee, where you're spending
a lot of money and people are
saying we're not seeing results.
Right. We'll continue to
identify those benchmarks, but
we want to emphasize that theory
of change and the time that it
takes.
Quality implementation to
happen, capacity building to
happen.
To the point that we actually
see those, those impacts
manifest in 3 to 5 years
depending on the program. So,
and with that, I'll turn it over
to uh Director Pra Warman.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee, um, thank you,
Mr. Liu and Mr. Senna, um, I
also want to thank, um, Mr. Liu
and, um, uh, Director Silly,
they have been, we're great
partners in um putting together
that, um, overview of where we
stand with the lawsuit. I'm
going to go fairly quickly
through this so that I can then
turn it over to, um, Mr. Frostad
and he can talk a little bit
about the, uh, public education
department.
Um, this is a review an overview
of what you already know as a
committee. Um, it's an
established road map that you
have. It's also published in our
annual report in January, but I
will go over a few particular
highlights, how it relates to
the Martinez Niazi lawsuit, um,
and your direction moving
forward.
Uh, so what I actually want to
do for the first two slides is
just, uh, remember that we had
an initial roadmap that was
published in October of 2022.
Um, this was the first time as a
committee that we looked
comprehensively at the lawsuit
and did some research. Um, we
established that there were some
symptoms and an ineffectual
system. Um, you'll see the 5
there. We also did some initial
research looking at what were
the.
From stakeholders around
suggestions that what could be
done to actually transform or
move the system forward. I'll
name a few of those stakeholders
with the research that we did to
kind of review and look at
particular things that were
coming forward from them. Um, we
looked at, um, policy
suggestions from NML and Mexico
School Boards Association, the
unions, Teach Plus, public
charter Schools Association, the
All Provo Council of Governors,
uh, the tribal remedy framework.
Lionel Foundation, Thornberg,
Think New Mexico had recently
published something that was
helpful in terms of looking at
suggestions, future-focused
education, dual-language New
Mexico, the Chambers of
commerce, the deans and
directors, transformed New
Mexico, New Mexico kids can, uh,
the New Mexico Partnership for
Math and Science Education in
MXL. We have several, several,
um, partners in education across
the state. Uh, this is not
comprehensive, but as
You'll see there are several
themes from this group of
stakeholders that rose to the
top. Um, and they look very
familiar to you in terms of what
are particular things that you
invest in as a legislature that
can move the system forward.
We have no shortage of partners
that are also concerned about
the state of education.
Next part of this roadmap then
dug into some core research that
was national, uh, the work of
this committee in particular was
grounded for quite a while and
then no time to lose report. Uh,
you'll see it linked there, uh,
this committee also participated
in that research um as part of
the National Council of State
Legislators.
There was particular, um,
Uh, suggestions in that report
that you have followed closely,
early childhood is a, um,
significant component of that
and making sure that students
are coming to school ready to
learn. Uh, you also really
supported and have rallied
around career technical
education, which is a second
piece of the No Time to lose
report. A third is a world-class
teaching profession. Uh, we'll
talk about that as well as major
investments on the part of the
legislature, um, and aligned to
this roadmap.
And last but not least, that
there should be a systemic
vision, a cohesive vision moving
forward and we'll talk about
that as well. Um, we also looked
at the Aspen Institute in terms
of, uh, this publishing of what
we are, we are what we teach.
Three components in that
research that really talk about
the foundation or reason for
public education, developing the
sense of self, preparing for
American democracy and civic
life.
And preparing for the world of
work. and reflecting on whether
or not our education system in
New Mexico is substantiating or
is a foundation for those three
things.
Uh, we looked closely at John
Hattie in his work, and then
last but not least, the learning
Policy Institute, and they have
a very robust whole child policy
tool kit that's also a line in
allowing for this road map that
you've created to sort of come
together and all disparate
pieces, uh, as a collective
component um uh framework.
So the, actually, let me go back
real quick. The policy
considerations.
Uh, for last, um, roadmap were
to establish a commission and
that was related to the No Time
to Lose report, as well as, uh,
several of the findings from the
stakeholders. The second was to
invest in the educator
profession and the adults who
serve students, uh, which, as
you know, many, um, suggestions
are many, uh, investments
around, uh, teacher residencies,
the pipeline, educator fellows,
uh, continuing to support, as
you heard from Mr. Lewin, Mr.
Senna.
Uh, pay raises, minimum
salaries, investing in data,
information, and accountability,
um, which may be something that
you would want to circle back to
as well. And then last but not
least, the policy consideration
in that year was to review the
funding formula, uh, which we
then saw a memorial come out of
this committee, uh, to go ahead
and move forward with that.
So the next two slides reflect
the current roadmap of which
there are 4 tenants.
The first is the educator
ecosystem, and what that means
is, um, all of the adults in the
system who serve students. There
are several elements to this
ecosystem. Investments range
from, um, identifying educator
recruitment, particularly
focusing on the diverse
workforce, um, educators rising,
as you heard from the vice chair
earlier, um, educator
preparation programs, what needs
to happen at the breadth of
policy there to support strong
Eucator prep programs as well as
fund faculty, um, educator
retention and rewarding career
ladders.
School leadership, professional
development, and planning time,
which again will recognize the
work of this committee,
particularly even in looking at
House Bill 130 and learning
time, um, and ancillary support
staff.
The 2nd tenet is then academic
design, um, your investments
that are fairly robust and early
literacy, uh, digging into
mathematics over the past couple
of years, um, identifying what
needs to happen for STEM, social
studies, and civics education,
uh, commitments to career
technical education, high
school, um, redesign, uh, or
revision as well as work-based
learning and now middle school
as part of that secondary
innovation.
Culturally and linguistically
responsive education and
bilingual and multilingual
education, uh, really looking at
that as languages. So connecting
the dots between early literacy
and multiliteracy, both of those
two things, there's two sides of
the same coin.
The next two tenants are then
whole child education and those
are the support systems, um,
around.
The core academic design, you'll
see a socio-emotional learning,
behavioral health supports
at-risk student supports
targeted tutoring, community
schools, fine and performing
arts as a big commitment from
this committee, uh, physical
health, education, guidance
counselors, career and
post-secondary supports, um.
And then, um, uh, last but not
least, overarching systems, as
you'll see there, um,
foundational infrastructure
includes a world-class data
system and accountability that
prioritizes continuous
improvement, a responsive and
effective funding formula that
perhaps encourages
outcomes-based budgeting for
schools and school districts.
A governance structure that
provides a functional system of
reciprocal accountability for
excellence, um, related to that
idea of a commission.
Capital outlay, transportation,
broadband, technology, and
school safety systems. That is
your road map, in short, um, Mr.
Chairman, the next slides very
briefly work on behalf of your
staff that aligns with this,
those 5 elements, uh, the
process that we engage in as
your staff are researching the
needs, the gaps related to that
roadmap.
Um, providing support for policy
considerations for you all
initiatives and priorities. Um,
and then priority the policy or
the initiative begins, and that
third uh line there is in
italics, because that's really a
lot of your work rather than our
work as staff, um, where you are
the leaders in the work of
policy, uh, and
Also indicates that sometimes
this is not a such a linear
process.
Um, the 4th would be tracking
the implementation and outcomes
based on a well-developed theory
of change, as Mr. Senna was
describing, um, ensuring that we
are aware of those benchmarks
and those metrics along the way.
Providing information for
members regarding then what
needs to happen if we, um, uh,
are suggesting iterating on
policy, adjusting budget,
ensuring that it is um, um, uh,
you are receiving a return on
investment, and I don't say that
lightly in terms of just
financial, but academic, return
on investment or well-being in a
return on investment for our
students, um, and then scaling
initiatives as well.
Uh, last but not least, I will
talk slightly about possible
policy considerations and the
relationship with, uh, budget
moving forward for you just as
it's related to this, uh, to the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuit and
this road map.
So if for.
Policy considerations there for
you, what they are are actually
4 issues.
So the first is chronic
absenteeism, and we've heard
already as we've traveled the
state and then last year as
you've traveled the state, that
this is maybe one of the most
pervasive, um, endemic issues
facing public education in New
Mexico.
The second issue is, uh,
sustaining the workforce.
Uh, we have, um, we see reports
of still educators who are um
exhausted, burned out, um, you
all hear from your constituents,
educators still, um, feel like
they need some better and
broader support. Um, even
though, and in recognizing
significant salary raises that
you've, uh, um, moved to the
system forward.
The third issue is pervasive
gaps that you saw, um, again,
Mr. Liu and, um, Mr. Senna
pointed those out, not just in
general as a whole state, but
actually even more pervasive are
the achievement gaps between
these uh particular groups that
are named in the lawsuit.
Um, and last but not least, the
issue is an uncoordinated system
that we see as a state, um,
although I, I, I would say that,
um, with great hope, hearing
from the public education
department today that um I feel
like there's some um good
alignment moving forward.
What I have underneath the
bullets underneath these issues
are the actual reverse of the
issue.
And by that what I mean is, as
you approach and look at
investments and policy to
address the issue. It compre
comprehensively means that you
look at the answers to these.
Or the inverse of them.
So for chronic absenteeism to
address that.
It's complex in terms of not
just looking at transportation,
not just looking at a particular
issues that, um, um, may appear
deficit based.
For students in there are
barriers to getting to school.
But also about student
engagement that's happening in
classrooms.
And rigorous instruction, so
that students feel like they are
seen.
And can actually have a pathway
forward in life. It's also about
student well-being and whether
or not students feel safe in the
school system.
Um,
So those investments in
particular in the roadmap that
align with those are career
technical education, work-based
learning, internships,
professional learning time for
educators, because rigorous
instruction relies on is
incumbent upon professional
learning time and planning time
for educators.
Uh, positive behavioral
intervention supports,
behavioral health funding,
restorative justice, at-risk
funding for students.
In sustaining the workforce, I
won't go into that too much
because that's, I think the, the
area that this committee has
been so focused and I would
celebrate you all in terms of,
uh, your investments in
residencies, educator fellows,
to grow your own programs, uh,
minimum salaries as well as, um,
even increasing the EEA
salaries.
A pervasive gaps. Some of the
things that I think are aligned
in terms of the road map and
really identifying those, um,
Connecting the dots again with
structured literacy or major
investments there, and
languages, multiliteracy,
bilingualism, mathematics is
very important, um, extended
learning time programs, summer
programs that are more targeted.
Rather than broad swath because
that's where you will really see
the impact.
Um, and, uh, that may include
out of school time funding as
well.
Uncoordinated systems.
Uh, the commission is something
that I think can still be a very
uh helpful and viable way
forward that aligns uh uh a a uh
a long term vision for what the
state hopes for.
Um, I would say that there's
some complexity and explicit
expectations and shared goals.
We have performance metrics
among the Department of Finance,
the DFA Legislative Finance
Committee, as well as the public
education department. I think
you all as a committee hopes for
particular metrics. We have a
Legistat process, um, and we
also have a theory of change in
terms of return on investment in
particular programs, and that's
all very confusing.
And so all of those shared
expectations need to be named
and made explicit, and that
helps us all and hope deciding
when have we made a benchmark,
when have we met the benchmarks?
And then data systems, um, and
transportation is particular
things as well.
Uh.
Very quickly.
These are things for you to know
as we approach budget season.
Um, we have seen a drop in
enrollment, uh, our current
enrollment from the most current
program, uh, costs that we see
from the department is a drop
once more at 300,000 students,
um.
What does that mean in terms of
uh funding for public education
system.
I would, um.
I would offer that part of the
innovation dollar that you, uh,
afford for schools is in keeping
in mind, um, or being mindful
of, uh, to watch for credits
that could be taken out of the
system.
Because that drop in enrollment.
It is also reflected often or
has been. It was last year to
the tune of $19 million.
As a credit that is then taken
out of the public education
department out of the SCG.
And that $19 million.
If it had been left in.
Is the cushion there for school
districts.
So that declining enrollment is
important, not just in terms of
the class size, uh, that we've
been talking about, but also in
terms of the, that's the space
with which the school districts
can then begin to see some
cushion and innovation.
Um, we can talk, um, at length
later about Senate Bill 26 and
the impact there in terms of um
directed funding to the state
tax, uh, the tax
that um.
Stabilization fund.
And why um some of that money
now there is um in a space that
is protected to the, um, which
is a good thing for the state in
terms of long-term investment.
And also, however, we won't see
these extreme windfalls in the
general fun. So what that means
in terms of budgeting or budget
budget planning.
Other considerations include the
funding formula revision, uh,
the growth fund and how that
impacts your budget as well as
below the line funding for the
department, and some of the
initiatives that you hope to
see, 00,
Aligned to that road map.
OK.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Vice Chairman and
members of the committee, it is
always an honor to be able to
address you, uh, especially when
I get to do so with the team
that is at the table at the
moment and uh really to be able
to work with, with, with you all
with Dr. Perea Ornament and Mr.
Senna and Mr. Liu on, on this
issue on Martinez Yazi and on
student achievement more
globally, it will take all of us
together to, to make the kind of
difference that we need to see.
to address the lawsuit and um to
see the growth that our students
deserve.
I want to start with an apology
from the secretary. The
secretary was meant to address
you today. He woke up very ill
this morning. He took a handful
of pills and walked out to his
vehicle and in his driveway made
the decision that this is not
going to work and, and asked
that I take his place this
morning. The secretary is a very
dynamic speaker and I am less
dynamic than him, uh, but, but I
will do my best to live up to
his, uh, to, to his standard.
Uh, we can start with looking at
uh some of the achievement data
that we have, uh, are the data
that we're looking at right now
is preliminary data. When the
final data comes out, it will
look very similar to this, but
likely may see some very minor
changes to it. Um, the, the
great news about English
language arts is again that we
are closing those gaps,
particularly when we're looking
at economically disadvantaged,
um, England.
learners and Native American
students, we are seeing those
gaps start to close, and overall
over the last two years, we are
seeing the investment that you
all have made in English
language arts start to pay off
with increases, um, in general
as well in our English
proficiency rates.
Um,
I want to celebrate the
investment as was in English
language arts as was already
mentioned by Mr. Liu. Um, it is
incredible the investments that
you've made and that is really
the work that we hope to
continue. We've been very
successful in the the summer
reading program this year as
well.
Uh, it's
Part of the as part of this
program, we are making sure that
school administrators are now
equipped with structured
literacy tools to make sure that
when they, that they know what
they should be looking for when
they go into classes, not only
are we training the teachers,
but also the school
administrators, uh, this last
year, we made it through grade 4
teachers, and this year we are
um making sure that all of our
grade 5 teachers have been
trained in letters and um we are
Also working with the um
That
Education preparation programs,
as we discussed yesterday to
make sure that training is
In structured literacy and the
science of reading will happen
in our education preparation
programs, not just once they
have become teachers.
Also wanted to call out the 3rd
grade English or reading
proficiency rates.
It's interesting we had a
discussion yesterday in the
state of New Mexico is somewhat
different than in other states
from 3rd grade, we see, or
throughout our elementary
grades, we see English
proficiency rates increasing,
and then they start decreasing
once uh students have made it to
the secondary level. That's not
always true in other states.
Many states see after, right
after 3rd grade, those English
language arts or reading scores
start to drop. Our overall
reading
Proficiency rates at the 3rd
grade level is 32% and are
across the grades 3 through 8
and grade 11 is 38%.
We have some additional
preliminary achievement data for
math as well.
In math, we did not see the
growth that we were hoping for
and we definitely have not made
the investments in math that we
have made in reading and English
language arts, uh, also, um,
We, we hope to start seeing more
attention being paid to math. We
certainly hope to, and we hope
for more investment as, as you
will know, we asked, we, we did
have.
Math funding this last year, um,
math and STEM funding, we do not
have math and STEM funding going
into the coming year and we'll
talk more about that as we go
through the presentation, but um
definitely if we, we hope, we
hope to be able to do some
statewide work to support math
and STEM.
Our graduation rate over the
last 10 years, we've seen real
growth in our graduation rate.
It has leveled off in the last
several years.
Um, we do anticipate that the
that the work we have done with
you all on the on graduation
requirements and on next step
plans in the graduate profiles.
We definitely hope to see those
rates begin to rise again as
well.
um.
There are, as we look at race
and ethnicity in terms of
graduation rates we are seeing
some significant improvements in
some areas.
Uh, particularly for the Native
American student graduation
rates?
Has climbed to just below the
statewide average.
And
the, the agency as a whole and
Secretary Romero and Assistant
Secretary Juanico, they have
worked very closely with tribal
education partners to ensure um
that Native American students
are, are receiving the Indian
education program funds that
they should and are, are able to
use them effectively to um.
To support our Native American
students.
And we, we still do want to one
of the areas that we're still
struggling to um in one of the
areas in which we're still
struggling is with our black
students and we want to make
sure that we are working to
increase their graduation rates
as well.
So that was some of the
preliminary achievement data
that we have available and now
we'll start talking about our
agency priorities as we are
looking forward to the next year
and the next legislative
session, we would like to see
improvement in student outcomes.
We want, we want to continue the
work in literacy initiatives. We
want to support our educators.
And to work in STEM and math,
artificial intelligence is
disruptive technology that we
want to use to our advantage in
support of student achievement,
uh, career technical education
is an area of focus, as is
school improvement and
transformation, and we recognize
the need to address attendance
and behavioral health as well
And these, these are priorities
and not that we don't have many
other areas that
That we're working on as well,
but these are some that we have
selected to talk about today.
Hm
And all of those priorities are
meant to improve student
outcomes. That is our primary
focus, that is, that is the, the
agency goal and as part of that,
we want to make sure that the
investments that you all make
are effective. We want to, um,
we, we do have some limited
capability to to do our own
evaluations and we, we always
appreciate being able to work
with the LESC on our
evaluations, but we do hope to
be able to
Expand uh to do evaluations
on appropriations and programs
that the LESC is not looking at
as well.
In terms of our literacy
initiatives. Again, I want to
thank you for the significant
investments that have been made
in this area and understand that
reading really is the basis and
once students once students are
able to read, they're able to
grow in other areas as well.
The first, uh, and, and again,
I'd like to talk a little bit um
yesterday, Senator Soul's, uh,
asked me a question about math
and how are we going to address
math in our education, um, in
our educated preparation
programs. And, and, and I
mentioned that we are starting
to do that work in literacy and
we need to follow up to do that
in math, but in in the area of
literacy, we have come, we have
the secretary has provided
guidance to the EP.
GPs requiring that they teach
structured literacy and the
science of reading.
The first letters cohort of New
Mexico higher education faculty
began in the 2324 school year.
So that work is now underway and
more than 9000 educators and
administrators across the state
have participated in the science
of reading training and over the
coming year, we anticipate
another 2000 being letters
trained as well. We also provide
coaching support to more than
1200 educators across the state,
and we do hope to increase that
yesterday you heard super
Intendant guys say that every
school should be a, a structured
literacy support school and
while we don't have the
resources to do that, we
definitely want to continue to
increase the supports that we
provide around structured
literacy implementation.
The summer reading program has
been very successful. Thank you
all for your support in this
area. Uh, the, the goal was to
reach 10,000 students and we, if
we can round up, uh, we'll we'll
round up to 10,000. So we got to
9,533 students.
Thank you.
Sure, that'd be great. Thank
you. Uh.
We got to 9,533 students
enrolled in the program. Another
goal that we had for the program
was to maintain a 4 to 1, um.
Educator to student ratio, and
we actually beat that. We were
at 3.4 uh students to educate
her and that that again was very
exciting, um, the, the program
is grounded in the science of
reading and focuses on phonemic
awareness, phonics, vocabulary,
fluency, comprehension, and
writing and um we
we don't yet have achievement
data back from the programs to
say how successful they are in
terms of student outcomes we're
looking forward to receiving
that soon, but the anecdotal,
the anecdotes that we are
receiving from families are very
positive. Uh, we're hearing
things like we could not afford
tutoring for our students, but
this.
But this program let my students
get tutoring, or I found my nine
year old up late reading in bed,
and that never happens.
Uh, and, and again, in addition
to the main objective of
improving student reading, it's
also important to note that the
summer reading program provides
daycare for students that may
not otherwise have had adults uh
to watch them during the day and
also provides, um, meals for
students at a time uh during uh
during the summer when they
made, there may be food
insecurity.
Supporting educators, we are
still struggling to recruit and
maintain educators in the state.
We have um we have over the last
several years we have reduced
the teacher vacancies, um, but
it's a pernicious problem that
we need to continue to address.
And these um these programs are
some of the ways that we can not
only increase the quality of
instruction, but also make sure
that we have the teachers that
we need in the classroom, um,
to, to provide students
Um
The their services, the
There are 3, I'll call out a few
of the programs that we are
working on, um, that, that you
all have funded the paid paid
student teaching provides a
12,000 1 semester stipend.
That's a more traditional uh
pathway, uh, when we think about
uh student teaching. It's uh, it
requires 15 to 16 weeks and in
the past, it has been difficult
for folks to make it through
because they would need to
participate in any coursework
had and then do the student
teaching and also figure out how
to live on um or have another
job that would support them
during that time. This
$12,000.01 semester stipend uh
helps with them being able to
focus on their, on their student
teaching.
The New Mexico Teacher residency
program, which is often looked
at as the gold standard in terms
of uh teacher preparation. It
provides a paid full year
full-time co-teaching
experience. Teachers hone their
craft in the classroom alongside
as a highly skilled mentor
teacher, um.
And then we are also now
providing a principal residency
pilot that that you have funded,
and it's focused on supporting
administrative preparation
programs with high quality year
long full-time residency.
Educator fellows has been a very
successful program and uh
particularly for um for
community, for making sure that
we, that local individuals are
recruited into the teaching, um,
into the teacher pipeline.
Uh, it's a, it's a grow your own
recruitment program that
provides entry into education
profession, allowing candidates
to work as EAs in elementary
schools across New Mexico while
they work on their degrees and
that, um, that not only promotes
EA into teachers, but also
brings more EA.
Positions into the school. It
does cover the full salary and
benefits of the educator fellow.
There are 394 fellows, and we
hope to increase that to 500.
In terms of additional supports
that uh support programs that we
provide, there are multiple, um,
1 and 2 year programs both for
teachers, aspiring leaders, as
well as school leaders.
Um, they're listed here as lift,
launch, lead, thrive, rise, and
soar.
Stem, so.
Again, I
Each time I, I, I get to, I'm
going to point out that the
agency received no funding for
math or for STEM initiatives
over this coming school year.
Um, and it's an area that our
students are struggling in, um,
and really, really needs your
support and our support as well
as a focus from, from the school
districts as well.
The, the committee heard
yesterday about the work of the
mathematics and Science Bureau
and the math and Science
Advisory Council or the MSAC.
And the the MSA collaborates
with stakeholders to develop
coherent high school math
pathways that ensure high
quality mathematics education.
This includes diversifying the
mask math course offerings
beyond traditional calculus
tracks to include reasoning,
quantitative reasoning,
mathematical modeling, computer
science, and statistics. And
again, we, we spoke some about
that yesterday.
Um, priorities that the agency
has over this coming year are
updating and implementing the
elementary science specialist
endorsement and creating a
stipend for that endorsement to
ensure educators are well
prepared and effective.
We want to provide professional
learning that focuses on
culturally and linguistically
responsive education, including
connecting educators and
students with community
resources such as museums and
not and nonprofits to deepen
learning and create a sense of
belonging.
Another, another area that um
that we.
In the agency is lumped together
with math and and STEM is
outdoor learning, and the
outdoor learning program, um,
Is one again that can support
engagement and whenever we're
able to support engagement, we
can see improvements in
attendance as well and the
associated academic outcomes.
And for for outdoor learning, we
hope to expand the program that
we have and um.
Yeah.
Um, then if, uh.
Artificial intelligence, I, I
mentioned is a disruptive
technology that we really hope
to take advantage of and that
doesn't end up taking advantage
of us. So, um,
The
It, it's evolving in education
and uh we, we don't yet have
policies and guidance in New
Mexico, or we don't, the, the
public education department does
not have policies and guidance
around AI yet. Uh, the state may
benefit from developing policies
and guidance around AI. Other
states have begun doing this,
and we can look to um to some of
those successful models.
Um,
the, the agency is working right
now with uh NMSU on providing
training to educators across the
state on the three use cases for
AI in education, which are, um.
Making sure that teachers are
supported through AI that they
can use AI as an education tool
and as a tool to run a school.
That students are supported with
AI that they can use AI uh for
the learning, for their
learning, and then also the
teachers know how to teach
students about AI.
Career technical education, um.
Director Gutierrez did a great
job of talking us through some
of the work that is happening
currently in career technical
education. Um, we have a little
bit of data here on the summer
enrichment internship programs,
that is something that you all
have graciously um invested in
and we, we hope to continue that
program into the future, uh.
And um innovation zones are
another area again, we, we are,
we're looking at slight
expansions in that area. We do
hope to serve 50 schools,
including BIE schools, um, and,
and to to to support them
working on profiles of a
graduate, work-based learning
internships, social emotional
learning, and um other, other
innovative projects that can
increase engagement attendance
and student outcomes overall,
not just in
area of CTE.
School improvement and
transformation.
Our work in school improvement
and transformation supports
those schools that are most in
need of those are our
comprehensive support and
improvement schools and our most
rigorous intervention schools.
This work is federally required
under the Every Student Succeeds
Act, and while there are limited
federal funds that support this
work, um, we have, we do have
about 500,000 that the agency
can use uh to directly and
indirectly support this work.
There are also um
Most of the, most of the funding
that we have used in the past,
the federal funding is expiring
this fall.
And again, this is an area in
which for the coming school year
we received no funding. We do,
we do not have, uh, we asked for
an appropriation in school
improvement and transformation
that we did not receive an
appropriation.
Uh, there are 144 schools in 50
districts that we will be
supporting because they have a
CSI or MRI status, most of the
federal funds that we receive to
do this work go directly to the
schools, uh, which is great, but
then the, the agency also needs
funding to support these
schools. Each of these schools
receives at least 3 monitoring
site visits uh by PED per year,
so there are a total of 432 site
visits anticipated in the.
Coming year
Uh, these schools, the, the
department may require the, the
school districts and charter
schools to implement department
approved instructional materials
and evidence-based programs,
conduct and publicly post
findings from readiness
assessments and participate in
monitoring and technical
assistance visits.
And as resources allow the, the
agency provides mentorship and
coaching to teachers and school
leaders to identify the root
causes of low performance and to
set improvement goals. Again,
that's as resources allow and we
do not have sufficient resources
for the coming year.
Attendance and exclusionary
practices, um.
So again, that it's not only
about math, but math is an area
that we talked about last
yesterday, Representative
Saranana noted that uh math is a
um a sequential.
Subject and if you miss part of
the sequence, then it makes it
difficult to move forward
through through higher level
topics, and that again, may be
one of the reasons that we are
seeing that math is continues to
be a struggle for um for
students across New Mexico
because of our high.
At our high chronic absenteeism
rates.
As part of the work that we want
to do in this area, we would
like to amend the attendance for
Success Act. Uh, we worked some
with the with the uh.
With Director Perea Ornament and
her team last year on how we
might be able to amend the act
to support both students and
schools, um, to further reduce
chronic absenteeism. And one of
the areas that we are continue
to look at is reducing
exclusionary practices. So we
would like to see how we can
reduce suspension and expulsion
and um.
And we, I definitely understand
that many when, when I was a
school administrator, and many
school administrators don't have
a lot of tools in their toolbox
in order to address student
behavior. The go to is
suspension and expulsion, but we
need to change that as a state.
We need to provide
administrators and teachers
additional tools for dealing
with student behavior, um, to
keep the kid, to be able to keep
the kids in schools so they they
aren't missing important.
and they aren't missing meals.
They are, they continued to be
surrounded at school by caring
adults and their peers, um, and
so, uh, we definitely are
looking at that as a um as a
focus area for the upcoming
legislative session, we'd like
to do some more work in that
area.
And um uh attendance is another
area where, where we will,
because it is such an important
area of work for the state, we
do hope to receive additional
funding in the area of
attendance for uh for the coming
legislative session.
Uh, behavioral health when we go
out and talk to school
administrators and teachers in
the field, they continue to tell
us that behavioral health is one
of the most important areas
along with attendance, uh, in
which we need to work to make
sure that students can see the
academic growth that we want to
see.
Uh, we in the 23, 24 school year
we received $5 million in
funding and that supported
things like curriculum for
behavioral health and resources
for families, training on
restorative practices, grants to
schools for innovative
behavioral health practices as
well as wellness rooms. We did
have a separate appropriation
for wellness rooms, but this
augmented that appropriation.
For the coming school year for
24, 25, we did not receive any
funding for behavioral health,
um, so we, we definitely will um
hope to be able to ask for and
receive funding in the area of
behavioral health, um, for
during the next legislative
session.
And so those, those are some of
the important areas and some of
the important work that we want
to do, and this is how we want
to work together for you, uh,
with you in the future, um.
To, to outline how we might
partner and and make uh make.
The work in those priorities
come to fruition.
So the the blue box on the right
hand side are some of the
funding requests we anticipate
bringing to you in the next for
the next legislative session.
And these are what we've
highlighted are mostly those
areas that we received no
funding in, of course we will,
we will have a much larger ask
than this, but these are for the
most part, those areas that we
did not receive funding in and
we really hope to for the coming
years, uh, for the coming year,
and that includes math and STEM
school improvement.
And transformation, attendance
initiatives, literacy, including
high school reading support.
Again, that is an area that,
that the legislature has
provided significant funding,
but we want to maintain that
focus.
Uh, drug counselors in high
school is something that we want
to to look at. Again, we
learned, um,
We learned more about the
prevalence of drugs in schools
through the wastewater treatment
monitoring that happened over
the last year and now that we
have some information about
what's going on, we do want to
be able to work on mitigating
that as well.
We want to make sure that all of
the education acts uh receive
funding to do work, including
the bilingual, multicultural
Education Act. We hope to have
funding for behavioral health,
uh, career technical education
have significant investments
have been made, and we want to
continue that. Um, and we hope
to see the full cost of public
school insurance covered over
this coming year as well. That
was a major burden for schools
uh for this coming year, even
though Secretary has worked very
successfully with NMSI.
to look at how to mitigate those
costs for this coming year, it
will be very important to
address that, and we hope to
work with the LFC in particular
on that over the, over the
coming year.
Um,
And
As in terms of
Legislation, we do want to
improve the quality of
instruction through
strengthening educational
leadership preparation programs.
Some of that work was happening
all uh during the last session,
um, we didn't get the
legislation did not make it all
the way through. We hoped to
continue to work with you all to
see that come to fruition for
this next session.
Uh,
as superintendent Guy mentioned,
um, letters is fantastic for
reading, but we do need
something similar in math. There
is not an an off the shelf uh
equivalent to letters, but we do
want to make sure that
professional learning plans for
math are required and so we will
um
Bring forward legislation to
support math professional
learning as well.
And as I mentioned, we want to
reduce exclusionary practices
and update the attendance for
Success Act. We also hope to
update the community Schools Act
and um we are considering how
the best way to look at
individual individualized
education plan requirements. We
do want to have a statewide
template and uh we may work
together with you all on
legislation or consider how we
could do that through rule.
They, uh, there's a lot of work
to do and.
Fortunately, the secretary has
done a great job of recruiting
staff to the public education
department to do it. In the
past, there has been a concern
that the agency, um.
Doesn't have the talent needed
to move programs forward, and
while we definitely still need
additional positions, uh, our
current vacancy rate is as low
as I've ever seen it at 12%, um,
and it, it typically hovers in
the twenties, um.
The our.
Funded vacancy rate is 23%, so
we're almost half of our funded
vacancy rate, and we definitely
hope to be funded uh at a lower
vacancy rate for the future to
make sure that we can keep the
these positions filled and, and
don't have to leave positions
filled on purpose because of our
uh funded vacancy rate.
And um.
Again, I want to thank the other
panelists as well and thank you
all for your time and attention
and um.
I'm happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Great, thank you. Um, so I do
have a number of you on the
list. If you could keep your
questions very concise answers,
concise as well, please. I will
start off with Senator Solz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Lots of information about how
much money we've been spending
the early part in uh Sunny, um,
how much we've been spending in
actual dollars. What has been
the inflation rate between 2019
and 2023.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair,
I'd have to follow up on that,
but my understanding is there
was a period of high inflation
around the pandemic, probably
around 6%, and it's mostly
averaged around 3 to 4% outside
of that.
Thank you. And part of the
reason for that is when we look
at the actual dollars, you know,
5%, but for 4 years, that's 20%
and so, you know, that takes out
a whole lot of the increase as
far as whether it looks like an
actual increase in dollars to
classroom, um.
And again, Mr. Chair, Sonny, um,
as a percent of the state
budget, how much is now going to
K-12 education and how is that
percent changed over that time,
not including early childhood or
higher ed funding.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, tough
questions. Uh, I would say
before the Martinez Yazzi
lawsuit, it was around 42 to
44%. It went up briefly right
after the ruling came out to
about 4546, and it's now back
down to 43%.
When you include all of the
other general fund
appropriations the state has
made.
Thank you. And, and the reason
is, you know, we really haven't
on a something that's kind of a
steady measure is the percent of
the total money coming into the
state, we're not making bigger
investments in education at best
we're getting the same percent
that the overall budget is going
up and so we're not really
making larger investments in
education as a percent of the
state budget, um.
Uh, John, I, I, Mr. Chair John,
I really appreciate you're
talking about the theory of
change. I've been trying to tell
everybody that investments in
education are like buying
savings bonds. You don't buy
them and expect full value, you
know, two months later, it takes
a long while for those to mature
and so trying to get people to
recognize to stay the course
because I think we're doing,
making all the investments the
right place. I was just chatting
with Tim, the drop in one of the
scores.
On reading at 3rd grade is
likely to be a shadow effect
from the COVID when they were in
kindergarten, first grade, which
set the the groundwork for that
and now they're getting tested
and we're seeing a shadow
effect. I don't know. I'm just
speculating a little bit on
that, um.
John, or I'm not sure which one,
Mr. Chair, uh, but talked about
a commission and I think, you
know, we last session, uh, tried
to put on to try and get, go
back to a state superintendent,
which is more of a commission
type of a view rather than a
secretary and not at all a
slight of the current secretary,
but the consistency across
administrations I think is some
of what's lacking and having an
elected, or I mean an appointed
state board superintendent and
Elected state board gets more to
some of that consistency over
time regardless of who's in the,
the governor's office, uh,
And I think this is more for Mr.
Frost, Mr. Chair, how much of
the gaps that we see in
achievement are due to in-school
factors and how much are likely
due to out of school factors.
Kids don't get tested only on
what they learn in school. They
get tested on their whole
experience of life.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice Chair, I
suspect you have some
understanding of this already,
but it is largely uh much of the
difference largely comes out of
school, um, so the, the gaps
that are seen are typically
developed before a student
enters.
School and then during during
times when students are out of
school, we generally do see
about a year's worth of growth
from when a student starts
school to when a student ends
the school year.
Mr. Chair and thank you, and I
think that's a really important
point that
Education gets blamed for
society's problems. Um, and as
educators, we need to make sure
that we are really looking at
building healthy communities and
what happens prenatally with
children because it absolutely
affects later and the money we
put in education certainly makes
a difference, but we're trying
to remediate community problems
and issues that happened way
before they get to school with
education dollars and money, um.
Mr. Chair and Greg, you had
indicated STEM was not funded.
Why?
Was it not in the LESC budget,
not in the in the
administrator's budget or in the
LFC budget, where did, where to
get lost?
So it was definitely in uh STEM
and math were both in the agency
and the governor's budget
wrecks. I believe they were also
in the LESC Rex, um,
yeah, so that question and I
can't remember when they came
out, uh, can I?
Of course Mr.
Liu the opportunity.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair.
The uh.
Executive and agency budget
moved STEM funding out of
recurring into a non-recurring
appropriation.
And to give you sort of analogy,
you know, STEM funding and early
literacy funding, both kind of
occurred 10 years ago.
At about the same time and.
The early literacy funding has
sort of ballooned over that
period. There's been a very
targeted approach on providing
the science of reading training
to educators, and it has grown
accordingly. The STEM funding
has sort of stayed flat the
entire time. It's been mostly
focused on professional
development opportunities, and
there's really not been a whole
lot of attention paid to it. So
when the executive moved it out.
Of recurring that was a signal
to the.
Finance committee that
More, more attention needs to be
paid to it. So it was in the
grill appropriation out of LFC
and Section 9 to give it a
3-year roadmap and runway to
prove that it was providing
improvements in science and math
scores, but throughout the
course of the session that was
again removed out of section 9
and replaced with a special
education differentials, so that
is how it exited the entire uh
recommendation process by the
end of the session.
Director, you wanted to
to comment and then I am kind of
a follow-up question. Sure,
thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair. I'll just say, uh, two
things to add to that. I, I want
to reiterate for you that your
budget had 10 million for STEM.
It was very consistent in your
recommendation. Um, uh, the
below the line funding that was
moved into the grow. One other
thing about it that I think once
the executive took it off, and
then the finance committee put
it into the section 9.
It was also identified as CTE
slash STEM funding and so it was
sort of convoluted in the space
of what exactly that funding
might be.
So, kind of my follow up
question is
You know, it was there and then
it was removed. Who made the
decision to remove it. I'm chair
of Senate Education,
one of the main education people
concerned about it. I was never
consulted, asked about it, and
it's taken out. Who made that
decision?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um.
My understanding is that it got
changed after Senate Finance
received the budget, um, as far
as who made the decision, it was
simply directed to me to execute
the change. I do not know who
made the decision.
And Mr. Chair and Sonny, I'm not
blaming you. Please understand,
but you know, did the, do you
know did the Senate Finance
Committee have an open
discussion and vote to remove
that money.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice Chair,
there's a, I know that there
was.
It was discussed in the
committee. I do not know if that
particular line item was.
Disgust in detail. There are a
lot of changes to the overall
budget, and it was one of those
included changes.
And they, the committee did vote
on it.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, the committee voted
on that specifically or on the
broad change of the budget.
OK, so somewhere along the line
somebody made a decision to take
that out and then presented a
budget back without any of that.
And again, you know, my concern
is, as one of the education
leaders in the legislature.
Never part of that discussion
process or anything of that sort
which made a major change in
some of the funding for
education.
Um,
And my last question, Mr. Chair,
is for Mr. Frost at, of the 144
schools that are in some sort of
a corrective action type of a
state. How many of them are in
low socioeconomic communities
and vice versa, you know, um,
why is, I guess and this a
follow I'll ask both questions,
but sort of the same as the last
one, the money for behavioral
health that there was no money.
Where did that come from? Was
that never in our budget or when
did that come out?
Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice Chair,
so, uh.
Most schools in the state have
very high so uh very high
percentages of low socioeconomic
status students. And so most of
these schools will be, will be
filled with students, uh, of.
Coming from poverty. Um, I don't
have a particular number, but we
can follow up on that for you.
And in terms of the behavioral
health funding, I don't remember
where that one came out either.
I will need to look, uh, to be
sure, um, so let me, let me
follow up with you on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, the
question about the, the schools
in corrective action, it's sort
of that same one is so much of
where we put a school in
corrective action is due to
community, uh, difficult.
These, uh, stress, trauma, uh,
lack of resources, not education
concerns and you know, we would
do well as we're going and doing
corrective action to spend lots
of that time working with
community rather than just with
school. But I'll stop with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I promise I'm in a better mood
than I was in Socorro. So, um.
So, Mr. Chairman and committee,
um, or panel, the question I
have is about.
You talked about cash balances
and revisions was brought up
there. So I guess my question
with that and maybe for a
different time was
we need to get a handle on what
is a good and healthy, what,
what does a good healthy cash
balance? What, how does that
help a district and I know like
for bond ratings and others to
have a certain cash training.
But for some districts to have,
you know, what is, I don't say
that you guys have to make a
definite number, but.
You know, we're talking about an
increase of you said $383
million in cash and then we have
districts that are limiting
activities, not funding
programs, limiting professional
development and all types of
things and have a cash balance
of 26%.
So I, I think that as we're
talking about appropriating
money, and I support
appropriating schools.
But it's got to go to the
school. So I want to know as far
as what those cash balances?
What are the benefits of that?
And also what are some of the
costs or some of the, the, the
ways those things are funded or
what they're used for.
Um, that would be it. And Mr.
Chairman,
My other question is about the
SCG and we're talking about
this, what, you know, we're
talking about what other costs.
Provide a drain there and I'll
give you some examples.
Attorney fees. What, I mean,
there are, those are things that
are coming out of cash balances
or through the SCG through a
school district. So it would be
helpful for us to identify.
Some of those costs that are not
going to the classroom that are
not going to our students and
our programs, but are for
whatever reason.
are being funneled elsewhere.
That would be an important part
for me to do.
I'm gonna, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna briefly briefly touch
learning time. I've made it a
point.
I will stand here.
Learning time, we fund it, but
it should be local decision and
the ability to make rule should
only be in the case that we have
an emergency or something that's
gonna help it. I, I do not
support a rule just for the sake
of making rule and bypassing the
legislative process, I will
state that, uh, Mr. Chairman, my
other, um,
is as far as.
School safety, you know, I think
that this committee when we
talked about priorities from PED
and LESC, I think the school
safety, if we're talking about
Maslow's hierarchy, we've got to
this committee has to take a
stand, and it has to be funded
on a consistent basis, and we
have to figure out how we're
going to provide that if kids
don't learn or don't feel safe,
they don't learn and I tell you,
I have kids in all age and all
college, high school, middle
school, and elementary school.
So understand that that's an
important priority that we need,
I think, need to take a stand.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I also share
Senator Sol's.
Um, frustration.
We sit on this is, you know, the
LEST. I sit on education.
Senator sits on Senate
education.
This group of educators here
should be making recommendations
as far as into the budget.
I don't like the fact that some
of these allocations are
stripped off. If we're gonna,
you know, the recommendations
from this committee should be
considered and should be
reflected not only in policy.
But also in budget.
Because we're, we're here. I
don't know a thing about oil and
gas. We have to take the
recommendations. We have experts
here.
We have this group of uh
supports we need to make sure
that this group and our
education committee has a place
at the table and that we have
input both into the budget.
Both in a policy, um.
And so my final um
Point is
We talk about governance.
And I'm going to talk about.
Administrators
I'm gonna talk about school
boards.
Most people do not leave a
profession or a teaching
profession because of the pay.
They leave because of culture
and working environment and
unnecessary um requirements or
limits that are put on
educators. The fact that we have
Superintendents that have a less
than a 2 year span for their
careers.
That's a problem and I'm, I'm
looking out there and I'm
looking at Sam and I'm looking
at Joe Guha. We've got to do a
play, if we had if we had an
athlete, a professional team or
a business where every 2 years
we change coaches or we change
CEOs.
Would we be successful? There
has to be a, there has, we have
to get a handle on this because
part of those other things where
these monies are going to is
lawsuits and payouts.
And the fact that it's going to
be said, and if we're, if we're
continuing to do that, that's
money that could be taken from
the that's taken from the
classroom that's taken from our
activities, that's taken from
our fine arts, that's taken from
our crew technical education and
quite honestly, as a
legislature, we have to take a
stand on that and saying
enough's enough. And if we have
to get more involved and look to
see what are some of the reasons
for it or how much is being
done?
I'll sit on that committee
because this is something that
in 32 years.
I had seen what a good school
board can do, and I've seen what
those that are not as function
as well.
And the same thing with the
administrators. I became an
administrator because the person
I had there was like, if this
guy can do it, I can do it.
So,
As I said before, I'm passionate
about it.
My kids go to public schools, so
we've got to do a better job of
this and so I, I do appreciate
it, but
Well, we'll continue this
conversation. We look at it in
September. Um, and if any of you
want us to respond to that
briefly, but I know that
sometimes when I come off there
you're just like, don't get in
his way, but
I understand that. Sorry, I
apologize.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you very much,
Representative Baca. I very much
appreciate your passion.
Uh, I'll just actually briefly
um say something about cash
balances, um, uh, because we do
have that on our work plan and
we will be presenting it for you
in, uh, September in
Albuquerque, uh, Daniel, uh, Mr.
Stupinan, your senior fiscal
analyst, is going to be doing a
report on cash balances, the
range of uses of cash balances,
what districts leverage them for
what it might be appropriate
threshold if there is an
appropriate threshold, what
other states do in terms of cash
balances.
I will also take this
opportunity to sort of highlight
again the LESE dashboard that
Mr. Biddeau created for you all.
Uh, one thing that's really
important or a great uh uh piece
of information on that dashboard
is the district budget, uh, as
well as their cash balance over
the past several years. And
what's interesting about that is
the percentage of the cash
balance as it relates to the
district budget. So the total
that you'll see, uh, cash
balances has increased
But that percentage in some
cases may be the same, or in
some cases drop. In many cases
it is increasing. That is true,
and that's where we want to be
mindful and actually have those
conversations. But for instance,
in Albuquerque Public schools,
you'll see that as their budget
has increased, their cash
balance is actually per
percentage wise while it
increase it's the same, it's uh,
the percentages, um, maintained
as as a percentage of their
actual budget.
And, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, if I may, on for
school safety, I should have
mentioned in school safety when
I was talking about behavioral
health. Behavioral health is the
most effective and efficient way
to address school safety and
investments there will, will
lead to safer schools. So
definitely we, we hope to do
work in that area over the
coming year as well. And thank
you, Mr. Sherman, and my last,
it's just about transportation
cause I know that most districts
face shortages or do you, you
know, as far as um lack of
Funding and transportation,
which is also coming from the
SDG was intended for classrooms,
so I do think that we need to
take a look at the
transportation for both charter
schools and for public schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent Gurola
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation and
extensive presentation and the
work that has been done in this
area.
Um, I do have several questions.
Let me see if I can.
Make them ground them, but if
not, make sure that you ask me
to clarify. Um.
We keep
I keep hearing that we are
making a lot of improvement that
is growing, that's closing the
achievement gap.
And the whole presentation is
about Jesse Martinez case,
right? And that subgroups in
that.
are still far.
Um, reading, math, absentees,
10% is students with
disabilities in reading is not
acceptable.
17% was English language
learners is not acceptable. Um.
My understanding is like this
and you, uh, that's why I need
your help. We are doing the
same, putting support, a blanket
support.
and all the students the same.
And is exactly what the case say
is not working.
So, um,
I, I have a question there, so
maybe a question is which
subgroups are actually improving
the most.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
I, I'll take it first.
Attempt at this and maybe if
there's other panelists that
want to follow up.
We are seeing some improvements
in the metrics that the court
used, notably for Native
American students, you kind of
see those proficiency rates and
graduation rates improving and
closing a little bit with their
peers of for English learners,
it's a little slower and for
students with disabilities it
is.
Not happening, so I think that
uh while we are seeing some
promising results, uh, we as a
state and to Director Pea
Warment's point.
Have do not have the data
systems and connectivity between
what we are doing financially
with what is working and not
working on the ground and, and I
think part of the.
Issue is getting those systems
talking to each other so that we
can have a better grasp on is
this initiative that you're
funding tenfold from where it
was before actually producing
the results, or is it some other
factor that to the vice chair's
point is happening outside of
school.
Representative Corola, I'm, uh,
I'm gonna take do another take
on what Mr. Senna said described
as a theory of change because I
think this, um, also is part of
the
Part of the difficulty in terms
of needing to see, um, outcomes
and impact. There's 3 words that
we usually refer to among staff
at the LESE to describe what we
hope to see from any of your
investments. The first word is
an output.
The second word is an outcome,
and the third word is impact.
And they're all different and
language, as you know, matters,
and they have to do with the
logic model or what you hope to
see with one of your investments
over time.
So
Let's say that you, um, have
decided to put $70 million to
support literacy.
Which you have,
um, so, um, this literacy
initiative begins and you have
an agency that decides to
implement it and they have a
plan to implement it, and you
hope that that plan is well
thought out, um, and has, um,
implementation science behind it
and thinks about
Timeline and how to best
leverage those funding, that
funding on those dollars. So
that all matters.
And then you begin with the
actual training of teachers in
literacy. And as Mr. Senna said,
it takes 2 years. I'll add more
to that theory of change or that
that actual logic model. The
first thing that you want to see
is what we call an output, and
that's number of teachers
trained and you heard a very
important output from Mr.
Frostad that actually shows the
investments from the legislature
do have some success behind it.
We have 9000 teachers trained.
In literacy at this point. That
is not insignificant, Mr.
Chairman. Representative Grola,
9000 teachers across the state
have been trained in literacy.
Um, in the science of reading.
The next stage of that then is
that those teachers began to
feel that they can then teach
that. They have self-efficacy in
that space, and that their their
actual practice begins to
change.
And that is what we next see in
terms of an outcome in that
there's change in practice and
curriculum, um, so it's not just
that they've been trained, it's
actually that the difference in
the classroom is beginning to
see we're beginning to see that.
Outcomes then might be student,
um, proficiency is increasing in
their short cycle assessments.
The attendance is going up or
increasing.
But the actual last stage is
impact and you won't see that
for another year or two. That's
why all research points to 4 to
6 years of where you actually
need um investment long term
investment, as Senator Solz was
saying, where that impact is
then the actual student
proficiency rates that are
happening. So that really drawn
out long-term investment, that
theory of change that includes
teacher self-efficacy.
Change in practice, investment
in curriculum, investment in
leadership, sustained
leadership, the turnover and
leadership that's represented
Baca is not happening, right?
All of those things need to
happen so that that impact, that
final impact.
Happens and that therein is a
systemic approach to funding and
ensuring that all of your
investments are actually
connected, that there's
connected tissue among them.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, and I know how long
it takes to do that. It just
frustrating when we are teachers
and we know that my um
that students can wait 10 years
like we say, 10 years since the
lawsuit, right? In 10 years they
finish high school and, and
that's so unfair for our kids,
but I know how long it takes.
You, you, you explained it
really well when you say that
first the teacher who has been
trained is just 2 years, um.
And sometimes investment, Mr.
Chair, and it does investment
that we put in doesn't
necessarily translate into that.
The services that each group
needs.
Right, so, um, let me ask you a
follow-up question on the same
thing maybe to clarify that, um,
I, I still wanna know which
groups are improving the most to
see who, who these trainees are
more effective for, but also,
um any specific investments for
these subgroups and I'm gonna be
specifically asking about the
multi-language learners. Which
specific investments are done to
target their learning.
Mr. Chair Representative Grola,
I want to mention a couple of
things, um.
So
And I'll get, so I, I should
have mentioned, and it was in my
notes and I skipped it as part
of our SCG review, the, the
possible recommendation for you
all to have an EL factor in the
funding formula because we
recognize that English learners,
we haven't made progress for
English learners. We haven't had
the sort of direct targeted
investments for English learners
that we've had for some of the
other, for some of the other
subgroups and for just education
as a whole. So I wanted to
mention that first, um.
I think part of this too is, and
I understand what you're saying
about, you know, we're we're
doing broad, broad stroke
improvements or investments, how
do we get to targeted uh to the
targeted groups.
And I don't mean to, to, to
understate how important that
is, but they're also connected
to those larger investments. And
so when we think about special
education, for instance, we
know, and you all made an
investment in um,
I'm sorry, deferential salary
differentials for special
education teachers and, and the
idea there is to recruit more
special education staff because
we know.
That that is, if not the hardest
to staff position, one of the
most hardest hardest the hardest
to staff position.
When you increase teacher
salaries when you increase
teacher minimums, yes, you're,
you're doing that for all
teachers, but you're also
creating an incentive for those
specific places where we've not
been able to find individuals
for those positions. And so I
think uh as Director Pre
mentioned already part of this
is, uh, and we don't mean to
stress this as an excuse for why
we're not seeing the kinds of
results that we that we'd like,
but I think it's important that
we keep
Reminding ourselves that if a if
someone, an individual use
another example now, decided
that because they now think that
the salaries for teachers are
means that teaching is a
feasible career path for them,
and we did that last year or two
years ago because salaries are
now at 70,000 for Level 3
teachers. They may be in their
2nd or 3rd year of a teacher
preparation program.
And so as we start to see those,
those investments pay off. It's
important.
That we give those systems time
to mature, if you will, right?
If someone is in high school to
Senator Soul's point earlier.
And has decided to enter into an
educator's rising program as
part of a CTSO that Director
Gutierrez mentioned earlier,
they're 6 years away from
entering the teaching profession
at least, potentially, right? So
again, not a, not a, hopefully
not passing the book or making
excuses for why we're not seeing
the kinds of results that we'd
like, but these are systemic
foundational changes and
supports that we're putting in
place that you all are putting
in place.
That need to be given that time
and um.
You know, we may still come back
to you with maybe you need some
adjustments. There's calibration
that needs to, to, to happen,
uh, as Representative Baca
mentioned earlier about the
budget and the need to continue
to watch the budget and some of
the the factors that the
director mentioned earlier.
That doesn't necessarily mean
that we're going to fund
everything in the same way that
we're funding them today or that
we're going to fund everything
that we're funding today. But as
you identify and as those things
that are going to have those um
long term effects. It's
important to maintain those
investments and understand how
even though they may look like
broad stroke investments, and
they are to a certain extent.
They're also going to have those
individual impacts that we're
looking for that maybe not, we,
we didn't call out specifically.
We as teacher salaries are going
to impact special education
students, if that makes sense.
Thank you. Um, couple of
comments just to try to make it
short, um.
I would like to see instead of
literacy by literacy.
Uh, talking about our diversity
in our state, so I think it's
important to start having that
language, Mr. Chair, uh, to make
sure that we include everyone
here. So, um, we try to put it
in the budget by literacy in in
the budget and, and somehow it
doesn't translate in, in the
policy, so we would love to to
see that and also um secret uh
mm.
You mentioned about something
parallel to letters and I also
will say something that as a
teacher that is very helpful as
a math teacher, um, it's when we
get training strategies,
sheltering strategies that
impacts directly and
automatically into our students
while you find a program that
will
Be as broad as great as letters,
but um some strategies uh
trainings, I mean, I remember
when I took Kagan, that was the
best thing I ever took, um,
changed my classrooms right
away. So strategies and
sheltering strategies, um, um,
um, for, for our teachers are
always something that is super
helpful and I just wanna join uh
Senator Sols about the
frustration of uh of the budget,
um, also with bilingual
education. It's the same thing
who make the decision, who
It's not important, who say it's
already included here um I would
like to be part of that
conversation too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right, thank you. Um, so I
do have a number of folks on the
list, which is awesome, and
we're having a good discussion
about a very important topic.
Um, they're going to be bringing
lunch into us, so we're gonna be
working through lunch, um, so
whenever it does come, feel free
to get up if you're not speaking
to go ahead and grab your lunch,
but we'll be working through
lunch. Uh, Representative Gar.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for making that decision,
because this is one of the most
important discussions. Um, my
first point is, going back to
the Yazi Martinez lawsuit. We
have English language learners,
Native American students,
economically disadvantaged and
students with disabilities. My
problem is that we haven't
broken down those groups. I'm
going to endorse, uh, TSol
teacher. I've taught kids who
come from other countries and
don't speak don't speak English.
But as someone who did access
testing,
For 6 years and analyzed, um,
Within ELL we have Native
American students. Uh, my school
was 10% Native American. That
was 124 students. Our, our
population was 1,100K through,
um, fifth grade. And so
culturally, some of them were
taught not to initiate
discussions with adults. And so
they're experience in English
was different than someone in an
English-only household. So when
we look at how we target things,
how
Target someone.
Who is
Learning English for the first
time versus someone who may be
an immigrant from Mexico and is
in a Spanish and English family
there there's all these
considerations. How do we start
looking at that so we more
accurately know that what we're
doing targets the same with
students with disabilities as an
inclusion teacher, I had some
kids who were gifted but
couldn't read because of severe
processing or dyslexia.
Um, and then what's the
crossover, uh, the economically
disadvantaged English language
learner versus someone who's not
economically disadvantaged and,
and
OK, can you just talk about
that? What are we doing to
differentiate within these
groups as we do our basic
strategies and things like that.
Certainly, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, that's,
uh,
Wonderful and complex question.
Um,
the first thing that I'll do is
say that, um, I've, um,
challenged staff to really begin
to look at the um, um,
complexity of data um and
identify the intersectionality
of it. So, um,
Uh, Mr. Badeau has actually has
a wonderful couple of slides
that leverage and look at the
overlap using Venn diagram of
these are English learner
students. These are low
socioeconomic students and these
are students with special ed,
and there's overlap in each of
those circles, right? And if you
can identify the percent of
students who are proficient.
That are EL.
And special ed and low
socioeconomic. It's about uh
under 5%. I don't know. I think
Mr. Bdeau can actually probably
pull it up for you, but he's
done that work in both, uh, for,
for both reading proficiency as
well as math proficiency.
Because what you're saying is
very important. The more that we
can understand the gaps between
the gaps.
The more that we can then look
at improve policy and targeted
funding targeted funding, and
I'll say that again, targeted
funding, um, and, and that is in
terms of policy, particularly
related to say extended learning
or out of school time learning
or or high dosage tutoring. The
more that those types of
endeavors can go to those, those
gaps within the gaps, the more
that you will see again, an
academic or financial return on
investment. So, um, I'll
Say something in particular that
there is a clear definite, um,
different difference in
proficiency between students who
are um EL learners and low
socioeconomic versus students
who are EL learners and not of
low socioeconomics. It's stark,
in fact.
And if you can identify that and
begin to close that gap, it's
really important because there's
no reason that students who are
of low socioeconomic status
should not be able to reach the
same proficiency that they're
they're otherwise peers that are
English learners are, are
achieving, um, with all of what
I think Senator Sowell's
references in terms of, and we
know students who have low
socioeconomic status or are
coming from poverty need those
supports. So you are identifying
those students in particular,
targeting those.
Types of supports that need to
go to them. So, um, that's a
little bit in terms of how you
leverage data to then begin to
affect policy and budget.
Thank you. And, and I want to do
something that, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Garrola
mentioned that's very profound,
um, as we train math teachers
and literacy teachers. And this
is a problem with letters is
that part one is studying
letters. Part two is how to
deliver the dang training. And
so she emphasized Kagan avid,
glad there's all these
strategies that you can
understand, you know, the best
stuff
On understanding literacy in the
world, but if you don't have the
techniques and strategies that
engage students, it's worthless.
So thank you. Um, I started to
call you Reverend Grola.
Thank you, Representative
Gerria. I have a couple other
questions, um, thank you,
Senator Souls for mentioning
COVID. We have the Yazi Martinez
stuff and then that's 2019 and
boom, 2020 to 2021, we have
COVID which interrupted
everything and thank you, um,
Well, you can call me Joy
dressing with the title. Thank
you for pointing out the length
of time. Um, a second question I
have is, I, I believe in New
Mexico. I'm a legislator because
I believe in this state and we
keep talking about declining
enrollment. I actually believe
that our enrollment is gonna go
up just like it takes 4 to 6
years. I think as we do economic
stuff on, I just came back on a
plane in Washington DC sat next
to a special ed teacher from um
Marilyn from Baltimore who's
moving with her two twins next
year, so people are moving in
and um.
That in in differentiate I get
so pissed off about this
constant we're 51 in education.
I'd like to see a chart, and I
don't know if it's already out
there of child poverty rates and
the rates that they use for
educational efficacy, if that
can, if we have that, I would
like someone to give it to me.
Um, let's see, a couple more
questions, um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representativepolarmi have been
sponsoring uh.
Uh, preparation of school
leaders and I want to make sure
we incorporate more of the
importance of community outreach
because we have community
schools, but every school is a
community school, actually. So I
think we have to make sure our
administrators have a greater
training that that's kind of a
note to sell. Um, two final
questions for, um,
Greg and Greg, don't apologize
for not being Secretary Romero.
You're just fine, OK?
Or did you want me to say that?
No, um,
Chairman, it's on the, um,
requirement for common IEP, I, I
thought we already did that. I
thought with the governor's
executive order and hiring, and
I'm so sorry I forgot her name.
I thought that was already
happening and we don't need
legislation to do that. Can you
just speak to that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so the, the
funding has been used to start
the work on developing a common
IEP template, but we also want a
policy lever to make that
happen. And so that could be
done in rule or it could be done
through statute, but we are
looking at how best to uh to
require uh a common I the use of
a common IEP template.
OK, do we really need a statute
for that? Um.
It could be done through
guidance or rule or statute.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrett, my suggestion would be
rule.
Yeah, OK, I, I agree. I mean,
people can give feedback. You
can have hearings. It just seems
like a no-brainer that we would
need more than rule, although,
as we know, rules can be
controversial.
Sorry, second question, last
question, Mr. Chair. Um, the 30
million for a physical capital
outlay literacy Institute, what
is happening with that? Can you
update us?
And, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't know if
Sonny may be able to talk more
to that, that, that
appropriation did not come to
the public education department,
and I am not privy to where we
are in terms of moving forward
with that work.
Mr. Chair, representative of 30
million has been allocated to
the higher education department.
My understanding is they've
already been in contact with
multiple universities and
partners to identify where.
This institute might rest, or if
it will actually be a physical
building. The funding is coming
from the public school capped
outlay fund and the council has
already made that transfer, uh,
to my understanding, they have
it in their financial plan that
is coming out of. Uh, thank you
very much. And then a final
comment, um, I think
Representative Baca's point
about the changeover in
superintendence is very
powerful, um, school boards.
Put people on administrative
leave without any real public
explanation, and that's part of
the problem. And I know that
some of that is personnel
matters, but I just want to
point out that it is a problem
because I know of two
superintendents have been put on
leave and no explanation. Thank
you very much.
Represent block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you all for your great
presentation as always, and I
only have a few questions, so
hopefully it won't keep us here
all day, but, uh, you know, when
I'm thinking about this lawsuit,
it comes up in conversation. A
lot of people say, oh, the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit. We need
to be in compliance, right?
That's always the end goal.
Let's be in compliance, but I
think the lawsuit, Mr. Chairman,
is, is kind of
It's very long and there's a lot
of different very vague
frameworks that it gives you
guys as a department like PED
says you must.
Do this. You, you must be in
compliance with this, but it
doesn't really have a a roadmap
per se. So, Mr. Chairman, and I
guess this would be for Greg.
I'm wondering, so.
What specific like performance
and accountability indicators.
Does PED measure to be able to
comply with the lawsuit because
I've, I've read multiple
articles and the, the plaintiffs
are always unhappy, right?
They're always like, we're not
complying with the lawsuit, but
I'm sure your department has
some indicators and metrics that
you measure to ensure that we
are indeed in compliance. So I'm
just wondering, how, how does
that work with you guys?
report those to LESC and how do
we measure those, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and
representatives, so the that's
really not, um, so yes, we, we
have a Martinez Yazi plan that
we are working off of and as we
also work to incorporate uh more
feedback into an updated plan,
um, but the
In in terms of citing specific
outcomes for what the agency
sees as meeting the requirements
that is, we don't look at that,
we don't look to that as our
responsibility. That's really
the res would have been the
responsibility of the court to
say this is the metric that you
must meet in order to be out
from under under this lawsuit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
think that's the the conundrum
that we have, right? The court
is saying one thing and the, and
the sprawling lawsuit, uh,
Rules and everything that
they've put forward in the
ruling, but it's not specific.
So what you guys are doing could
be different from what the judge
said you guys should do. And it
could even be different from
what the plaintiffs wanted and
what the goal would be for them.
And I know according to just
from what I've read, I believe
it's around 80% of New Mexico
students are indeed at risk, Mr.
Chair. So I'm just wondering,
it's, it's essentially
everybody. Everybody's in the
same kind of pot. We are all
failing together.
And unfortunately, I hate to
hear it, Mr. Chair, I hate to
hear that we're 51st and
everything like, like
Representative Garrett said, but
I would just love to get some
common, common ground, I guess,
to ensure that we all are
meeting these benchmarks. So has
the department been in contact
with entities who, who have
dealt with the lawsuit,
including the judge, to see if
your interpretation is on the
same track as what the judge
indeed said. I don't know if
that's a Doctor Warnaman answer
or
Greg answer, but I think it's,
it's, it's a good question to
ask, I would say.
Yeah.
I can start and say I.
I have not. I, Greg has not been
personally involved in those
discussions, um, and, um,
With the courts or um
Or with plaintiffs. So I, I
can't say how much of that work
has been done outside of um the
discussions we have had, the
legal discussions that we have
had with, with plaintiffs in the
court. um, and
Mr. Chairman, and Representative
Lock, um,
What I'll say is, um, I'll just
refer to what Mr. Liu, uh, and
Mr. Senno went over and there,
um, overview of the lawsuit and
the response on behalf of the
legislature as staff, I think we
try to support you, but the
finance committee and the
legislative education Study
Committee with
Um,
Keeping our eye on the court
findings. And so in the slide
deck that, um, Mr. Liu in
particular went over each of
those findings, you'll see sort
of the review of what, what is
the action that is then taken by
the legislature in relation to
exact finding, as we are calling
it from what the what the court
actually had to say. So that in
that way, I think, um, the
legislature was responding to
the particular items, um,
throughout the years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that answer. I think
this would be great to share
with the plaintiffs and those
people. I'm sure they're
listening, right, because it's
good to see what we're actually
doing tangibly to meet the goals
that were set forward. And many
of those goals can be kind of
vague, but this is our
interpretation of what we're
doing, how us as a legislature
is funding these benchmarks to
meet them, and I see some
improvement. I do, and it's good
to see that.
Maybe small, but, you know, slow
and steady, we win the race,
right? So, Mr. Chair, and uh,
I don't know who this question
would be for, but I heard from
John, I thought it was very
good, good thing that you said,
it takes time to implement these
policies. It takes a lot of time
and Mr. Chair and panel, I think
that's something that we do need
to consider as a legislature.
It's going to take time for
certain things to to hit.
On the, on the rankings or or
the uh the park tester it's not
parking anymore, but whatever we
do nowadays, right? But I think
that that's something we need to
keep in mind, but also.
I'm wondering, so, since 2019,
when the lawsuit was kind of
ruled on to now.
I do see we have some
improvement. Are we projecting
Any big improvements due to
certain um certain budget items
that we put forward.
Maybe bumping up 2-3% in 3 to 5
years. Do we have any kind of
metrics that we're projecting,
Mr. Chair.
Well, I would, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, the
investments in particular the
investments made in early
literacy, I really see as a uh
an opportunity for the state to,
to move forward and and bring
the associated.
Outcomes we're hoping for in
student achievement the.
Um,
I think if we were to cite one
particular investment, I would
say that is the most important
and the one that we are putting
the most faith in for the
moment.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Block, I would add an additional
um outcome or or impact for you
all, and that is, um, we see the
numbers of, of, um, uh,
Candidates in educator prep
programs rising.
And that's a wonderful thing
actually for the state because
of the salaries that have risen,
the teacher residency programs,
um, the investment that you have
made in the educator pipeline
work, educator fellows, as you
heard from Mr. Frost, that, that
is a great thing.
Thank you for.
Yeah, you're right. I think
those both are really good and I
think it's important to continue
to monitor them because our
investments, I love to see them,
see them grow and you know, I
don't know what percentage we're
getting on our investment, let's
just say of 70 million, but I
hope it's, it's a 10%
investment, right? 7% increase
in in uh achievement, but Mr.
Chair, I guess my last question
would be, I know in the health
committee, we were talking.
Kind of extensively about
something different, which is
doctors and getting doctors, a
lot of doctors are actually
being, being uh educated in
India and other countries like
that. I'm wondering, do any
countries like India or some
other countries have these
pipelines of educators that they
are pushing out and then having
them have residencies or at
least have years of experience
in America because I would like
to see us utilizing all
different aspects of education.
And if we can import
New educators to New Mexico to
help our children learn. I think
that could also help close that
gap that was in Yazi to say that
we don't have enough educators,
we don't have a pipeline. What
do we do about it? Do we know if
we've done any research on that
or maybe.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I'm
not sure if we've done any
explicit research on it, but I
will say, you know, in other
countries, sometimes their
residencies for teachers are 2
years, right, they, there,
there's a lot more emphasis on
ensuring preparation before
students can have a teacher in
front of them. One thing that I
will note is.
If in our current system, and
this may be more of a licensure
issue.
Uh,
we are requiring teachers to
come in at level one.
So if you are coming from
potentially out of state or out
of another country, the, the
sort of reciprocity system is
pretty complicated and so more
than likely, you might have to
take a large pay cut in order to
jump into the profession unless
you are meeting very strict
reciprocity requirements. So I
don't think that we have
necessarily.
A large incentive for
professions outside of the state
or the country, um, coming to
us, particularly in this case.
Mr. Chair, and Representative
Block, I appreciate the uh the
innovative ideas. Uh, I, I do
want to, I do want to stress
that both, I think the, the
lawsuit sort of speaks
indirectly to this as as, but so
does research in the
effectiveness of having teachers
that look like the students that
they teach. And so, uh, while,
you know, those kinds of and
I'll and I'll use um
We have a, we have a relatively
large workforce from the
Philippines, for instance, in
New Mexico. We've had a lot of
teachers, um, come and stay in
New Mexico and teach in school
districts, and they fill the
critical need in, in districts
where we've had large vacancy
rates and the inability to to to
fill those those positions.
And I'll only mention educator
fellows because we've heard from
the from the department as it
being successful in recruiting.
Folks from local communities
into those schools to fill those
positions and so I just we've
we've talked about this before.
I'm not saying anything new, but
I just want to emphasize that
as, as, as we look to innovative
ways, other folks to fill those
positions the way that you
undergird the educational system
in the state is, is by growing
your own, is by providing
opportunities and access to
those folks who are going to
stay in those communities long
term, right, and whose students
understand.
Understand them, if that makes
sense.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. And I think that's
super important and you're
right. But from what I read
today, I don't know whose
presentation it was where it's
like 2500 kids were
underperforming graduation. So
if we don't even have any of the
graduates to go to these
professions, how are we supposed
to close the gap in such a small
amount of time. So I think
that's, that's such a good point
to have, and I hope that we can
lift everybody up together, but
I just, uh, do think it's
important to focus on the
numbers. I think it's great,
according to
What I've read about $1 billion
we've increased in education
with factoring for inflation. So
that's a $1 billion that we
didn't spend in 2019 that we're
spending now. So I would sure
hope that some of those
investments are, are maturing,
you know, I don't know if it
takes 5 years, 10 years, but I
hope we see some results
increasing in the next few
years. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
I really appreciate it. Thank
you guys.
Representative V.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Can you hear me?
No.
A sap
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I
I just wanted to follow up on,
uh, Representative Baca's
comments on superintendents and
actually the last time I heard
and and Stan will know this, Mr.
Rounds will know this, um, I
think two-thirds of our
superintendents, uh, were
relatively new in the or less
than 2 years. Is that true? In
fact,
we're currently doing
a mapping.
I've forgotten to pick you up on
the webcast talk loudly but not
into the air.
Again, we're, we're currently
doing a matrix of sitting
superintendents as we speak.
Uh, in the past we've been about
2/3 of the of the uh
superintendents have had, uh,
very little practice as a
superintendent has been the
trend. We've been trying to
figure out what that looks like.
There's some good news in this
we're beginning to see some
longevity in in some of the
ranks. However, as was mentioned
by Representative Baca, Mr.
Chairman, we also have, uh, you
said there were two that are,
you said there.
Two that had been, uh, put on
administrative leave, it's 5 as
we currently said at this, at
this moment. And those are the
things that affect.
That that trend, OK, if you're
sitting in a chair for less than
a couple of years, you're having
a hard time moving the ship.
Right in, in, in the justice
that consistency of leadership
that we can continue to look at.
I will share with the committee,
Mr. Chairman,
our most current numbers that we
should be done by next week on
our mapping, and I'd love to
share it with you, but I think
you're gonna see an uptick in
the amount of time of sitting
superintendents
starting to happen.
There's about two-thirds.
Mr. Chairman, we think it's
going up.
So you're saying last year is
about two-thirds you think
you're getting better. I know we
just added another one in
espanola, uh, so, um, you know,
with two weeks left, uh, for
school to start, and we don't
have a superintendent, so.
Uh, it is a continual problem
with school boards and um.
And uh you know, we all agree on
local control, but that's
another reason we passed the
Senate Bill 137 last year was to
try and kind of create something
where, where, where we weren't
losing people every 2 years and
and to have some consistency at
the top level, so I'll, I'll
just add that, uh, our
representative Baca and say I am
in complete agreement with you
that, that we need to, I, I
think we need to work on that.
I don't know what the solution
is. We, we try Senate Bill 137.
I think in the future that will
help hopefully.
Strengthen that role from a,
from a,
From a management standpoint, I
guess, but, uh, time will tell,
I guess, and, uh, we'll keep
working on it till we get it
right. Uh, the other thing I
wanted to follow up on was, hm.
Budget who, uh, um, Senator.
Souls, well, who makes the
budget, you know, on the, on
the, on the, um, Senate Finance
Committee, whatever.
You know, we did used to have,
and we've talked about this a
lot. We had a 3rd budget for
education and I think it's time
we go back to that. If you don't
control the budget, you do not
control the plan of action.
That's all there is to it. And
uh this committee does not
control the plan of action
because we don't control the
budget and we used to have a 3rd
budget in the House and it was
on education and a third budget
in the Senate and it was on
education unless and we can go
back to that.
I think that's a vote that we
ought to take and, uh, I'm
responding to that because we
never have enough education
people on the finance
committees.
And uh it doesn't work. It's not
working. So if, if this
committee who does the policy
work can't control the budget.
You know, throw it to the wind.
It's like throwing this
legislation to the wind is
really what we do. So that would
be my recommendation on that.
Oh
And uh.
And then.
I'm curious, um,
Director War, how much money
have we put in letters over a
four-year period?
Or Sonny, whoever can answer it.
And it, you know, ballpark, I
don't want the exact, just
ballpark. Sure, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herrera, it's
about 80 million, um, and then
again, it increased
substantially this year because
of the Sumer Reading Institute,
um, but,
um, we're tracking it, um, last
year, it was at 79 to $80
million for literacy and that
included both funding in the SCG
as well below the line funding.
Sonny can add.
Um, Mr. Chair and
representative.
It's been about 8 million in the
SCG and about 1415 million for
below the line and as director
Prea Mortament mentioned there
was the additional summer
literacy Institute that was
added this year. I do want to
make a correction, just for the
record. I did say Senate
Finance, but the change was made
in house appropriations, um, for
STEM. good that we know who to
blame on this good that we know.
OK, um, uh.
I guess what I wanted to say
was, uh, we're talking about
math, right? Math proficiency
and the problem was yesterday
when we heard that report from
all the math educators and the,
in the state.
I, I realize that, you know, if
we took the, if we took the
model out of NMSU, which is a
great model, uh, that would cost
$270 million for, you know, all
these teachers for 9000 teachers
to get trained, OK? 9000
teachers and you train them and
the cost is $30,000 for a
two-year master's $270 million.
I don't think that's going to
happen anytime soon, nor do they
have the faculty to do that, um,
so how are we gonna
The money for the trainers to go
out and and replicate good
program and good curriculum. And
it just it occurs to me that we
You know, Gwen, you talked about
3 things and I can't, I'm sorry,
I didn't write them down. It was
Outlook input,
output, out comes in
You know, Gwen, you talked about
3 things and I can't, I'm sorry,
I didn't write them down. It was
Outlook input, output, out comes
an input, impact, right?
Good, thanks, good memory.
So what I'm saying when we used
to do new programming at the
Lano Foundation. It came, we
didn't call it that, it was
longer, but it's really the same
thing when we looked at programs
we said, is it replicable? Is it
scalable? Is it cost effective,
you know, can we do it for $900
million instead of 270 million.
Will it make a significant
difference in the lives of kids,
most importantly, how will we
know?
And I think that applies to
legislative matters as we bring
them forward and um and now I
know you can do that in 3 words
now, so that's better to say,
but I, I think the math people.
All these organizations need to
come up with a model and that we
could replicate that is
evidence-based, obviously, that
works and, and you know, last
night I went home and I was
thinking.
Well, if you have.
If you have evidence-based
research that's 10 years old, 14
years old, it's probably not
good research. I mean, I got in
trouble with this with home
visiting.
By the time we did the model and
did the research and then Trump
came in and totally didn't look
at it for 5 years and then we
took the research back they
said, well, it's too late, over
5 years old, so I really think
we need to do some
evidence-based research on model
programs again and maybe pay for
that so that we can take a model
that we know will work.
Out to communities and and give
it the kind of um.
Robust funding that we spend on
letters. I, I, I do think that's
necessary and I think there's
probably agreement here, but we
really don't have a model that
will work on a grand scale that
I see. Am I missing that?
Mr. Chair, and representative
Here, I think in the state, the
two programs that you heard, uh,
about yesterday from the Mass
Science Academy in MC Square
down at NMSU. Our model programs
in that they, um, are focused
both on educated professional
learning, very intense in the
classroom, uh, job embedded
professional learning as well as
boot camps that talk about math
content.
And then they also impact
student outcomes because they
are actually in the classroom
and so there's direct impact. I
think they are both model
programs. Um, they're both very
timely in that they leverage
the, um, NCTM math practices
that are very current, um, and
what actually, uh, all math
educators and, and, uh,
professors are actually looking
at is the one piece of
information that's actually, um,
uh, something that they can all
connect around.
So while we don't have, um, is
named as the Science of math, as
you heard from Ms. Hathaway
yesterday, we do have good
research in terms of these math
practices. Um, and, and, and
they are also reflected in the
PED's math framework right now.
So that work had been done. So I
think that there's the bones of
actually a a model program that
can be leveraged.
So, Mr. Chair and
And panel, I don't know if I can
ask this, but I guess I will. So
can you work on working with
these, uh, organizations to
develop a model, uh, of best
practices and give us a cost
analysis of this and then see if
we can take it forward. That's,
I think what we really need and
uh and how you would, you know,
you're not gonna do it in one
year. It's gonna be a 5 year
even if you go statewide, and
you'd be lucky to do that in 5
years, but you, you could start.
So I would like to see a 5 year.
A five-year budget. I'd like to
see uh a model program and I'd
like with you to work with the
leaders in the state who
obviously know how to do this
and give us a state model that,
that we can put forward because
I don't know how we're going to
change math unless we change the
teaching of math.
And, um, so that's my comment on
that, and then, um, I wanted to
ask uh.
School improvement and
transformation and I was looking
at this budget again 500,000 and
144 schools in comprehensive
support and improvement.
And really
You divide
500,000 by 144 schools and you
get $3,472.22 so that's what
we're spending on these schools
that are in dire.
Dire disarray, uh, for lack of a
better word, and, um, I, I just,
and the last thing you need if
you're a school in, you know.
With performance uh problems is
to have somebody come in and
Uh, what are they on site
visits? Oh yeah, that'll be
great. We'll do an onsite visit
and tell you how bad you're
doing. I.
I, I, I just don't know again,
we've worked with in the past,
New Mexico has worked with low
performing schools, and they, we
have put a lot of resources into
that.
You know, we didn't expect to
change the school around for
$3500 poor performing schools,
so I, I guess I'm curious, I'm
curious, Mr. Frosted, how much
you think you need for that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, so last year we
asked for $200 million that was
the ask and the, the 500,000
again, I want to make clear
that's not a state
appropriation. Those are, those
yeah, those are federal funds
that we have that we're using to
support that work. And there is
some, there are some other,
there are some other funds that
we are leveraging outside of the
500,000, but those will end in
this fall. The other sources
will end this fall. So
definitely, we, we hope to get
an appropriation for this coming
year to be able to do this.
Work, um, with the schools. And,
again, I want to be clear that
there is additional funding that
goes to the schools. This is,
this is for the agency to, to
support the work, but the
schools do get some additional
federal funding, um, through,
um, the elementary and secondary
Education Act funding, Title One
funding to support, uh, school
improvement activities.
OK, thank you for that. So 200
million is on the table, and oh,
I wanted to ask this, you know.
Absentee is is is really is a
big problem, and you say that,
uh, you know, we, we need to uh
have tools. I, I guess I don't
know what the tools I'd like to
know what are the additional
tools that we need. That's what
I'd like to know.
And how much do they cost
Mr. Chairman and, and
representatives. So, uh, it
really comes down to training
for for teachers and uh
administrators on restorative
practices, that's, uh, those are
the, that's what we're looking
for. That's, that's the model we
want to move toward is
restorative practices rather
than exclusionary practices and
the.
The training would be part of
the behavioral health funding
that we asked for this last year
that we didn't receive, but um
that.
Yeah, so
I, I don't have a number for you
that is specific to training
around restorative practices,
but it would be part of our
overall behavioral health ask
and schools, which is also again
part of school safety.
And Mr. Chair and, uh, Mr.
Frosted, um,
Restorative practices means you
don't suspend kids and you don't
kick them out of you look for
other ways to keep them in the
classroom so that, you know, the
less the, the longer they're
away from school, the more
they're going to stay away from
it. Is that what you're talking
about in restorative practices.
Yes, so, Mr. Chair and
Representative, there, there are
multiple pieces to it. There
it's understanding the impact of
your behavior also being able to
control your uh training on how
to control your own behavior,
um, learning about soft skills,
all of those.
sorts of activities can be used
to um.
To manage student discipline.
And I understand that there is
only uh Mr. Chair, there is only
0 for behavioral health in 2425
school year, how much are you
recommending for that,
we asked for 8 million for the
2425 school year
that be spent Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair and representative,
it, it would be spent on a
variety of activities including
training on restorative
practices, but also on um grants
to schools.
To, um, competitive grants to
schools for behavioral, um,
innovative behavioral health
practices and on wellness rooms
and on curriculum for schools as
well as resources for families.
Mr. Chair, and, um,
How when you say grants to
school, would those be
competitive grants at the, that
the schools would have to apply
for, or would you decide who
gets them?
So they, um, and they have been
nominally competitive in the
past, generally everyone who has
applied has received the the
funding, Mr. Chair and
representative, um,
So they, they are potential
depending on the number of
applicants they are competitive,
but.
It's my understanding, it's my
remembrance that everyone who
has applied in the past, um,
with, uh, a full app grant
application was able to receive
funding.
Mr. Chair, here's my problem
with that.
Because I represent a district
of rural school districts, you
know, whenever you say, OK, it's
gonna be a competitive grant.
Santa Fe has grants, you know,
uh, Cuba doesn't. I, I, it's
just how it is. They're just
struggling to get by, so these
poor rural communities, when
it's a competitive grant.
You know, you know, are they
gonna take care of a problem, or
are they going to sit down and
write a grant or, you know, come
in on the weekend and get it
done and I, it's, it's just, I,
I think what I would suggest
humbly that, uh, that maybe you
look at the schools that are in
the most need and you just
decide who should get them, you
know, who has the biggest
problem, and I think you know
that if you can identify 144
schools, you can probably
identify the school districts
that need those and not not.
Put another burden on local
school districts, especially
small local school districts to
get that funding, and I, I would
just recommend that and and with
that, Mr. Chair and panel, I
will stop. Thank you so much. I
really have appreciated all the
overwhelming problems you've
given to us today and um.
We'll try to do our best. Thank
you.
Represent Figaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you panel. My question goes way
back to the court findings and
state responses page 10,
presentation, and I think Sonny
and John can fight over who
wants to answer it. Um, the
court finding PED has failed to
monitor and ensure spending on
at-risk students. So my question
is about at-risk funding.
And make reference to the
director's comment targeted
funding targeted funding and
targeted funding. Second column
says we have more than doubled.
The agency budget around data
systems, at least that's how I
read it and I need you to
correct me if I'm wrong.
Mr. Chair, representative to to
clarify, that is just the
agency's general fund budget.
The agency has gotten additional
appropriations beyond what's
shown here for their Nova data
system and for other parts that
are connected to educator
preparation, uh, what you do see
is also their staffing changing
as.
Assistant Secretary Frost had
mentioned earlier, they have
been on a hiring spree lately to
try and address, uh, some of the
needs in their department. One
thing that
The court when they looked at
that finding about 25% more for
at risk students. They were
actually looking at other states
and their at-risk formulas and
saying how much they were
essentially allocating.
Differently for their at risk
students and and they found that
New Mexico was only doing about
9% more. And so the court took
that, took some testimony from
experts that said if you just
spend more money on these kids.
You'll have better outcomes and
and they sort of said the court
finds that this evidence that
25% to 50% more is something
that the state needs to consider
in its approach to funding
at-risk kids. Now, it's gone
through the SCG and primarily
from about 100 million to about
360 million.
And
Since that time, PD has put in a
new tracking code for those
expenditures, but we have yet to
sort of dive into how that was
used and translated into whether
it affected outcomes or not. I
think that is the missing piece
of the conversation right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Sonny. That's exactly what
I was trying to get at in
reading this chart.
Reading across it looks like
those were the responses to the
court finding about at-risk
students, and I don't think the
funding for Nova was necessarily
all about at-risk students, um,
the coding so we can track the
funds is super important and
will get us data eventually, um,
but the third column increase in
staffing, we're not implying in
this chart that that 101
increase in.
Staff is about, it's focused on
at-risk students, correct?
Mr.
Chair, representative, the
particular finding here, let me
just clarify, was that.
The court found that the
department was not holding
schools accountable and their
defense was that they were
providing these below the line
appropriations and that they
couldn't tell districts how to
spend their money. And, and I
think since that time, the
agency has tried to increase
its.
Uh, use of below line funding,
provide more staff to administer
these programs, but sort of the
crux of the case has been, you
know, where is their authority
lie in telling schools how to
spend their money.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
John. That is, that is our
quintessential problem in this
state, right? And that is our
fine line that we walk between
logo control and not, but at
least being able to track the
funds and know where they're
being spent. So that when we
allocate 4 at-risk purposes, we
can at least see if they're
going toward at-risk purposes.
Whether or not we are mandating
that is a separate authority
question, but tracking
funds and being responsible for
those funds. That is our job and
we have to be able to do it. So
I'm gonna assume that some
portion of that increase in FTE
are people who are helping to
monitor this process, we would
hope. My last question is the
4th column. Can you explain
those numbers, uh, because it
reads like at-risk funds went
down from 75% to 23%.
That's what it looks like.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative.
In fiscal year 20 the department
through the AGA process started
a new performance measure of how
much of the at-risk money is
being spent on at-risk services,
and they've been trying to
report on that each year through
their budget system on whether
schools have coded these
services as at-risk services.
Uh, in fiscal year 20, the
number was 75.4%. Uh, for some
odd reason in fiscal year 23,
the number was 23% and we're not
clear yet on whether that was
because there was a change in
how districts were coding it,
whether it was a timing issue
and when the department got the
data and made the report to the
legislature, but what's clear is
that we don't have a firm grasp
on what's happening.
And I think John wants to.
The understatement of the year
right there. Um, and
My last piece of the question
then would be when might we know
a little more about those
numbers in particular.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Figueroa, I'm going to go back
just a couple of questions
maybe, but or try to encapsulate
one response to a couple
different questions. Uh, it's
important to remember that in
addition to Nova, you all also
funded the creation of SB 96 in
2020, the creation of a budget
tracking system that the that
the PED has, has implemented and
so you can go on that dashboard
and and see some of the
information that that you're
asking about that doesn't solve
the problem about where they
spent the money, but you can at
least see some of.
Those those details and you all
did pay for that, um.
I also want to go back because
we happen to be at the
department when this, when, when
the requirement that that the
department do a better job of
tracking at risk money and how
that money was spent was first
was first implemented. This was
part of the big reform bill that
you all passed in 2019 is that
until that time, school
districts were never asked to do
that. And so depending on your
funding level at a district
level, the fact that the money
was generated by at-risk units.
Didn't necessarily mean that you
were spending in an at-risk
services only, right? And, and
I'll just bring, I'll just use
one example that that just
happened and and and some of
this has been alleviated with
some of the insurance changes
and and some of those things,
but for instance, you all
appropriate a certain amount of
money through the SCG.
That that includes certain units
and and a and an associated
amount for at risk.
That assumes that you
appropriated enough for
everything else.
So that the at-risk money can be
used on at-risk services.
If for whatever reason, and, and
not casting any blame if for any
reason we underestimate what it
costs to give teacher raises,
pay for insurance costs, fixed
costs, utility costs go through
the roof all of a sudden and and
we didn't account for that.
Districts still have to pay
those bills. And so, uh, as a
just as a, as a caution that
yes, we want money to go to the
students that are generating
those funds, that's very.
important. That's the point of
the formula, obviously.
But the value of having some
level of discretion means that
districts also have some
flexibility to meet the needs
that arise that maybe we didn't
necessarily account for or you
all didn't win and when
appropriating. So I just, I just
wanted to say that. And then
lastly,
I think it's absolutely
important that we go to find out
more information, we'll get more
information for FY 24, at least
when budgets close out and we
can look at those numbers, and I
do wonder if changes in
leadership and turnover at
district level in the way that
they report those expenditures
to PED may also have something
to do with why that why that
number is, is oscillating so so
drastically.
Mr. Chair and John, thank you. I
think you are making my point.
We don't know if we have
allocated enough to the schools
to cover all of these things
that seem to be happening.
So we don't know if the money
allocated for specific purposes
is used for those purposes or
not. And if our base is big
enough or not because we don't
have the data, but if we started
a process in 2019. This is 2024.
We should have the beginnings of
some data that hopefully can
inform these decisions, um, and
I hope that before we do the
next budget, these numbers at
least can be clarified.
Thanks.
Yeah, so I don't have anybody
else on my list, but I do have a
few things that I would like to
ask and points that I would like
to make. So thank you, thank you
for bearing with us through
this, um.
The first thing I'd like to ask
about is um.
Uh, Assistant secretary, you
brought up um amending the
attendance for Success Act, and
this is something that that
we've talked about for, for a
couple of years now.
Um,
and
We, we've been talking about
chronic absenteeism, um, but
then there's also language in
the um
Um,
Student Success Act.
Attendance for Success Act,
excuse me, um, that talks about
excessively absent students, um,
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, so in
terms of which students are
chronically absent and which
students are excessively absent.
Yes, so that's part of where I'm
going and then I'm also going
into, I guess, since you already
know where I'm practically
headed is, um, do we know how
many of those excessive students
have been referred to a juvenile
probation officer and has CYFD
followed up with those students,
those families.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, no, we do not
have, um, we do, we do not have.
Information directly from CYFD
on or from our from the schools
we can collect information on
students who have been referred
to CYFD for attendance issues,
but in terms of knowing if they
were, um, if the family was
contacted by CYFD, uh, we, we
don't have that information.
And, and I appreciate that
because I'll go back a little
bit in the history because I
think.
Looking around, it may be the
only legislator, I think there
may be a couple members of of
our team here. I don't see right
now. They were part of LESC when
we started working on the
attendance for Success Act back
in 2016, 20017, um, and a lot of
this was the discussion around,
and we've heard it from school
districts that it has
Very little teeth. There's no
stick at the end of it, um, is
what we've heard and we went
back and forth on driver's
licenses. Um, but in the
student's success, uh, the
attendance for Success Act.
It talks about the process and
all the language is
non-punitive, um, especially in
this portion about referring to
a juvenile probation office is
that it's meant to be and the
involvement of CYFD is meant to
be, um, and I forget the exact
language, but a way to determine
what those barriers are because
this is a way when interventions
from the school haven't worked.
The written notice has not, um,
um.
been complied with and the
student continues to be absent
that
juvenile probation officer along
with CYFD are supposed to be
contacted to make those um
inroads with the family and
determine what they need, what
those barriers are, and provide
a plan, um, and that's something
that I hope that we can get CYFD
to come talk to us about the
work that's involved because I
think obviously the department,
um, um, has a lot of
responsibility.
with this. Obviously we do as
legislators, but there's a big
component that we haven't talked
about that CYFD plays a big role
in helping you all at the
department, us here as
legislators and our school
districts in assisting uh uh
with attendance. I mean that was
a big piece that we focus on for
the few years that it went
through actually I think
representative Vlada was a part
of those discussions way back
when, um,
About refining that language
because the fear obviously is,
why are we continuing the school
to prison pipeline. But in the
language, it's always
non-punitive. How can we make
inroads with students? How can
we one account for them if all
the traditional methods of
school district isn't able to to
do for that student or aren't
able to reach, how could we
account for them and 2, how
could we get those services to
them. So I think that's a big
component that can go a long way
to helping all of us.
He districts, legislators, the
department PED um and us here as
LESC to talk about and, and to
further color what's happening
in terms of of attendance for
success, and I think that's a
missing piece that we have not
covered, um, as far as
attendance and the, the
attendance for Success Act.
Um,
Miss, please, Mr. Chairman, if I
may, I just want to say that
agencies very, uh, very
committed to preserving the the
supportive aspect of the
attendance for Suess Act, and,
and I have not seen any research
that supports that punitive
actions uh would would better
serve the families or or improve
attendance, no, I certainly
appreciate that because I mean,
that was a big reason why uh
Representative Loba had amended
it to
Take that portion out because
obviously us in the education
community were the ones that
really pushed back against that
stick at the end of it because.
The way it originally read was
if all these things do not
happen, then driver's license
can be revoked and so citing a
lot of what you're citing, that
was our real hang up there, but
we believe, and I think that's
still the case, and we believed
at the time, I'll say.
That all the other components
were good around this
non-punitive approach at getting
at the families and really
learning what's there for um uh
what's preventing these students
from being able to attend, but
assisting everybody within that
area because obviously we heard
from teachers, well, what's my
role? The only thing for
teachers in there is that we're
taking attendance, right? So me
as a teacher, the, the.
The absolute.
Basic thing that I do is take
attendance, um, during the day.
Everything else is on, uh, the
school, everything else is on
the district, everything else is
on PED, everything else is on
CYFD juvenile probation
officers, um, to do a lot of
that, that work, um, but that's
something obviously that that
I'm particularly interested in,
and I think it's that missing
piece,
um, to understand how the
implementation of this piece of.
Legislation, um, has been
implemented.
Um,
I, I, I will say, um.
To um.
A few of the comments about um
budget, um, and I'm gonna try to
package this as neatly as I can,
is that, um.
I think as far as budget.
We've heard and we know in
education so much of what
happens in our classroom is a
reflection of what's happening
in these student lives and
what's impacting these students
in their lives outside of the
classroom and I mean, we can
have House Bill 3, we can do
this, that and the other. If
you've been to the LFC meetings,
which I know we all have, you
see various members come in like
I'll come in for education
stuff. The folks in the
judiciary.
Committee, standing committees
during the session come in for
the court's discussions, um,
that's pretty disjointed, and
I've talked about this, Sunny's
heard me for years now talk
about this, um.
Is that
It's difficult when we're
talking about something like the
LESC road map, which I'm gonna
get to you as well. Um, it's
difficult. We have 112 other
members. Obviously, we have a
fraction of those here with us
and we have a fraction of those
um that serve on LFC, um,
obviously LFC is working with
the entire budget and what we do
and what we may propose
obviously impacts other areas of
the budget, right? Um.
And Representative Baca brought
up the point of, you know, how
do we not start um taking money
away from certain priorities.
Um, I'm afraid with the system
that we have at the legislature
and creating a budget, we start
doing that. Well, if we want
more for education, is that
going to come at the sacrifice
of something else? Can this come
on the back of another area,
whereas I would rather see a
system.
For us at the legislature where
we as an education group,
obviously this is our focus, but
become more knowledgeable in
other areas, public health, for
example, and where can we in
education piggyback off of um
what's going in our community as
far as health care and
healthcare opportunities, mental
health, um, in our communities,
but I feel that sometimes we're,
we're very isolated for for
various reasons, um.
That are out of our control. I
mean, we're all citizen
legislators, um, I go back to
my, my actual job, my, my
primary job, um, next week, so,
um, it gets pretty difficult,
but we have a disjointed system
anyway, um, that's very
difficult to to contend with.
um.
I would like to say as well as
far as the LESC roadmap is that
I argue that, and I get very
hostile and
and very upset when I do hear,
well, the legislature doesn't do
anything or PED doesn't do
anything, um, because I think
it's, it's entirely unfair, um.
One of the things I know, uh,
uh, Senator Solz and certainly
me as as my role as chair of the
standing Committee but also LESC
is that we have a guiding road
map and that we work with, with
um our team here at LESC to
develop that roadmap because the
advantage of having Tim here
with his computer was that he
was able to pull up information,
but that 57% of our students
enrolled in public school fall
into one of the categories in
Martinez.
Yazi. So over half of our
students, we're talking about
our students in the state of New
Mexico. So when we look at
things because when we look at
things like, um,
High school graduation
requirements. We try to make it
broad enough so that students
that have all sorts of multiple
interests are able to pursue
those interests,
um, while pursuing their high
school degree without being
combined to a certain um narrow
curriculum, um, we've heard it
here today about career
technical education, is that not
being so prescriptive in it.
Entering a plan to where you
start narrowing students into
just one particular pathway, um,
because our students are diverse
and interested in different
things and don't want to be
pigeonholed into single areas,
um, and I think we're doing
that, um, obviously, it's been
talked about letters training,
um, and doing letters training.
Uh, we had passed House Bill 60,
um, a few years ago for native
languages and giving those folks
um a level.
One teacher license, so speaking
directly toward um.
Um, getting our students to be
bilingual, and we definitely
have areas that we lack in, um,
but I will say that's where the
responsibility falls on us as
legislators, um, what are we
doing to make sure in the
interim that these issues come
to us and our staff, especially
here in LESC so that we can come
the legislative session put
together and have a good
framework.
For moving forward because so
much comes to us 60, 30 days,
that it's very difficult to
start fitting in these
initiatives. And when we do have
individual initiatives, um, that
haven't gone through the interim
that are just springing up, it
becomes very difficult, I think
from uh the PED side to actually
implement them, where they may
not have the staff, they may not
have the expertise. This came
out of nowhere and all of a
sudden,
Uh, assistant secretary,
secretary may have to come to us
and say, well, we're still
searching for somebody or we
haven't been able to implement
it. Whereas if we can have these
substantive discussions like
we're having now where we have
our LSC leadership, we have
representation from LFC where we
have our assistant secretary for
the public education department,
um.
Together, having these
substantive discussions. We have
some directive from our
legislators here in areas where
to to look into further.
That I think is a recipe for
continuing to improve our
schools so that we do have a
plan as opposed to more
disjointed policy that we're
trying to fit in wherever,
wherever to appease a narrow
group, um, that may or may not
get done, um, unfortunately, but
if we can all kind of bring
those initiatives forward, vet
them, um, and prepare them and
see where.
They do fit in in a broader
picture, I think is a lot more
conducive to getting these
problems solved, um, not to
mention the time that it's going
to take to do these because
we've talked a lot about
training, and I just heard it
train more training here. Um,
and, and the amount of time that
it would take to do something
like more restorative uh justice
type practices to get us up to
speed, me as an educator up to
speed, and for me to be able to
take that and start implementing
it.
Effective way in my classroom,
um.
Certainly give it a good shot,
this upcoming school year, if I
were to get trained on it next
week. Um, but it would probably
take another year or so to start
refining um in everybody's
practice, and I think that's the
reality of, of what we're trying
to do, and I think that's where
our efforts to really recruit a
diverse group of teachers into
our classroom who are certified
bilingual who have their T sole
endorsement, um, who are
qualified for special.
education who are willing to
work in in um.
Uh, inclusion classrooms like
those are the steps that we're
taking and and need to take in
order to to move the ball
forward, um, and, and hopefully
we can definitely see more
progress in that, but I think to
say that we haven't done
anything is wholly unfair to
everybody in this room, um.
Because it wasn't too long ago
that we were really cutting
education budgets, we kind of
looked at that, um, and started
ramping up these efforts in a
more uh uh concerted way, and I
think the Biden we have from the
districts, um, at this point and
a lot of the education
stakeholders is really something
that um I think it's the
legislature. I'm certainly proud
of, but know that it's also
contingent on what we continue
to do, um, and the work that we
Collaboratively do so it's
something that
This collaboration, LESC LFC
PED certainly hope um continues
uh uh into this next legislative
session because we got 60 days
and we know we hear anything and
everything, um, and I guess
that's also my request and I ask
of the committee and anybody
that's not on our committee with
with education issues, please
bring them to our staff, um,
bring them to me, obviously
Senator Solz will volunteer him,
um, but to bring this issue
forward
so that we can really start
working on them, um, um, in a
concerted way because it's
really going to take on all
hands on deck approach to get
the finances, to get the policy
right, and then get the
implementation correct on the
back end, um.
But I don't obviously have any
more questions. I don't know if
anybody else on the committee
had anything else that came to
mind or got inspired in any way.
OK.
Mr. Chair, may I, may I respond
to the, the question that the
vice chair asked about the
behavioral health funding and
when it was removed from the
budget. Oh, OK, yeah, that was a
minute ago, but thank you for
the. Sorry, it took me a minute
to get the response, but, uh,
it, it was in the LESC budget.
It was in the executive budget.
But it came out of the, it, it
was never in the house, uh
budget.
All right, cool.
Thank you for the follow up on
that. And thank you folks.
All right.
So
We will skip forward.
Our next item. It's true.
I am. Oh, if you would, that
would be awesome. I'd appreciate
that.
So Rise New Mexico.
Our longitudinal data systems.
We'll give it a moment.
To switch things up, get
everybody in place. Members, if
you need to get up and stretch,
please do.
If you haven't already, if you
haven't gotten lunch, it's in
the back.
And then you press it. That's
it.
she was.
All right.
So Tim,
Please, when you're ready.
Welcome folks.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'll, I'll just give you a, a
few minutes introduction here uh
while we let everyone sort of
get settled back in after, uh,
quick lunch.
Um.
Mr. Chair, the, the presentation
that you have today on the Ryzen
longitudinal data system,
dovetails really nicely with
both of the panels that you saw
this morning. Uh, the first
panel that you saw on CTE, uh,
we heard that there were a lot
of uh really great outcomes
coming out of CTE programs such
that CTE coordinates have a 96
or sorry, CTE concentrators have
a 96% graduation rate. Uh,
that's something that, that
worth is worth paying attention
to in this state and it's not
worth.
Attention to just to say that
CTE is an effective program, but
we want to follow these
concentrators once they're done,
what kind of jobs are they
getting? Are they getting good
salaries? Are they staying in
the state and improving the
workforce in New Mexico they're
moving forward uh or they moving
out of the state and taking
their skills elsewhere.
Those are the kinds of questions
that spurred the creation of the
Rise Arise NM longitudinal data
system, which would enable uh
tracking of a student from when
they entered their preschool in
the ECECD system all the way
through the K-12 system, uh,
into post-secondary education
with the higher education
department or into the workforce
with Department of Workforce
Solutions or the division of
vocational rehabilitation. Uh,
so you also heard today in the
second panel about the import
of coordinated data systems or
about data systems designed uh
with, with the end user in mind,
right? And a lot of that has to
do with the uh an item on your
work plan this year, which is
about data governance, so you
all authorized us to study some
data governance best practices
happening across the state and
across the entire nation to come
up with a plan to maybe
coordinate some of these
sporadic data systems that you
see being developed or the weird
rollout of
Project Nova that we saw this
year. So, uh, what I want you to
sort of listen to is first the
success story coming out of this
Ryse NM uh group that has put
together an amazing data system
for you all to look at. But as
you're listening to their
success story, be thinking about
what that means in terms of data
governance or about the types of
coordination that they had while
they were developing the system,
uh, so that you can start
thinking about what would that
look like for other data systems
across New Mexico? What would it
look like to
Put together a multi-agency body
to oversee Project Nova, for
instance, or to oversee some of
the other data, the SB 96 data
system that came up during that
last conversation about
financial transparency, would
those types of conversations be
better off with more people in
the room, uh, working together
to develop goals to design a
system that makes sure that the
uh that New Mexico that the end
users that all of you that us as
as researchers.
For you uh can access and can
use the data uh very quickly and
very effectively. So, without
further ado, I will, I will hand
it over to Deputy Secretary
Patricia Trujillo, and she will
introduce the team here. So
deputy secretary.
Thank you, Tim. Good afternoon,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Patricia
Trujillo and I'm the deputy
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department and my wonderful job
today is to introduce my
colleagues and the team that
have been instrumental in
developing the New Mexico
longitudinal data system and
much like our colleague Tim was
just talking about, you know,
uh, we're constantly having
conversations with our 5 partner
agencies, uh, to make sure that
we're working in collaboration
and
Coordination, uh, to bring the
system together, the team will
go into more detail about that,
but really, um, uh, in addition
to making sure that we're making
all of the data from these 10
different data sources across
agencies available, um, for
analysis for research, um, is
that we very often talk about
how we're establishing a
strategic data culture for New
Mexico. And so uh we're really
excited to get started with this
presentation and to begin, I
will introduce our team.
At the end, we have Catherine
Zanoni, who is one of our
Harvard data Fellows. Uh, we
have Dimple Matthew. Um, this is
Zenith Britell, and, um, uh,
here to, right next to me is uh
Joey Lea Lea Kos. I always have
to practice saying his name.
Um, and this team, I just want
to highlight, um, has done
something, um, that two other
iterations of this team have
tried and were not able to
accomplish. And so we're just
really proud of where we're at
at this point and are looking.
Forward to sharing this
information and having a
conversation with you all. So
I'll turn it over to my team
now.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, we are really
excited to present to you here
and we actually, before we start
walking through our
presentation, the first item
that we are going to do is
share, we worked to put together
a promotional video for the
system, worked with a local
flamenco artist who is world
renowned for the voiceover and
such and so we want to show you
about 2 minutes of that video
just to set the stage for the
presentation here.
I was gonna offer that our voice
talent may be from one of your
districts, uh, Mr. Vicente
Griego, so he's originally from
Ebuto, New Mexico, uh, but is a
very well-known flamenco cone
from Albuquerque.
All right, um, well, we're gonna
build some suspense for the
video, so we'll start going
through the presentation and
then we'll circle back to that
um as we are able to.
Mm.
So, uh, we are going to look to
get the slides back up for you,
but as you can see on page 3 of
the presentation, there's just a
highlight of the discussion
points that we'll be going over
here, won't belabor these, but
I'm gonna hand to Dimple to
start us off for the content.
So for the project vision.
Are our project's vision is to
connect.
Can stand up a date, instead of
a system that's reliable that
connects connects data across
different sectors from early
childhood through breakfast.
This system will help New
Mexican families, students and
communities.
To
Make informed decisions and help
policymakers to make help drive.
Systemic improvements.
So just to give you an idea
about how we started, we, we,
even though we are the one of
the last states to start to
build an SLDS. We started with a
very ambitious vision.
We are the first cloud native as
of this in the country, meaning
that while other states are
trying to migrate from their
on-prem systems into cloud. We
started out in cloud.
We also planned on taking
Including 5 partner agency data
from pre-K through workforce
that included 11 source data
systems. Also, we had 4
implementation technical vendors
when we started the project. Uh,
we got a huge visualization
requirements or ideas for our
visualizations from our
stakeholders and also we had a
very ambitious goal of
implementation timeline of a
year moving forward with our
partners.
We have uh several technical
partners in our team, uh, Google
being the main one since we are
operating in Google Cloud. We
also have a vendor, uh, contract
contractor, um Carrasoft, uh,
Tamer entity data for IBNV, etc.
Also our main partners from the
state who contribute their data
into our system, uh, New Mexico
higher education department
being the main lead agency in
the project. Early Childhood
Education and Care Department
And public education department,
Department of Workforce
Solutions and division of
vocational rehabilitation. We
have policy partners that that
we work closely with um to uh to
get guidance on process, policy
and tech technology. Uh, first
we have Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation through their
innovation of community we
collaborate with other state
people who work in the same
field to uh share our ideas and
experiences and also
them, um.
We also have Harvard and um we
have 2 fellows through it
through Harvard's strategic data
project, Joey and Katherine
working with us through their
fellowship program.
We also um collaborate with SLDS
through the Department of
Education, uh, as a recipient of
the SLDS grant, we get, we also
get guidance on best practices
in the field.
We want to stakeholders, we have
several decisionmaking groups,
um, including Office of the
governor. We also work with
partner agencies CIOs, secretary
and secretaries, um, I also have
several data governance uh
groups in that we are gonna talk
later in the presentation, um.
You know, they help us with
making key decisions for the
project. Another group of.
Stakeholders that probably.
Benefit the most from the
project people of New Mexico,
families, communities,
educators, uh, researchers,
policy makers, etc.
OK. And so before we proceed to
the next bit of slides, um, we
are ready to show the
promotional video, so we want to
pause and show you that. Um, I
really just want you to hear
Vicente's voice. That's probably
the highlight of this, so.
All right, thank you. Um,
To continue the trend and build
more suspense. There's a couple
more minutes of the video, um,
but it's pretty long and so we
didn't want to show the whole
thing here, but it's definitely
something we can share with you
afterwards if you would like to
see the remainder of it.
Right, and with that we are
going to jump back into the
presentation.
So I would like to talk a little
bit about the data pipeline that
we have implemented as Ms.
Matthew mentioned earlier, we
are hosted in Google Cloud. Uh,
the first step in the pipeline
that we have implemented is to
implement a data lake, which is
sort of a repo for storing all
the data that is in its raw
format once that is done, all
the different agencies, the 5
partner agencies are able to
load their data into uh the
Vrizon and uh system.
Because we deal with sensitive
data, um, data privacy and
security is of paramount
importance to us, and in order
to protect personally
identifiable information, which
is in short PII. We have
implemented a software called
Tamer. What Tamer basically does
is it creates an anonymized
identifier for PII information.
So that way when the data is
eventually in the warehouse, you
are not able to see personally
identifiable information. Uh, we
have a detailed slide on Tamer,
so
Stay tuned for that, uh, the 4th
step in the pipeline is to
implement the data warehouse
once that data has been pushed
through the Tamer software, it
is stored in the data warehouse,
which is used to create the data
analysis and visualizations. We
also have some visualizations
that we would like to share with
us, so please stay tuned for
that as well. And the last step
in the pipeline is to use these
data visualizations in order to
do data analysis for policy
decision making as well as help.
Students and parents to look at
these visualizations to
understand uh what kind of
options they have for their,
their children and uh what kind
of decisions they can make
around around their education.
So that's a brief overview of
the pipeline.
Um, in this slide, uh, you can
see the data sources and the
agency that contributes these
data sources. I'll give a brief
overview of what each partner
agency contributes and what kind
of data that they provide uh
from ECCD we get data that is
related to a children's holistic
development, well-being, and
kindergarten, kindergarten
readiness, um, from PED we get
data that is related to the K-12
public education system, uh, HED
Contributes data that is related
to higher education, financial
aid information, as well as
enrollment data from DWS we get
information that is related to
employment and wage data and
from DVR we get data that
relates to uh referrals and
participation in vocational
rehabilitation programs for
individuals with disabilities.
So those are all the data
systems that we work with.
So now on to the research
process, have we reached um the
research questions that we base
our visualizations on, um, so
first we,
we took a spaghetti on the wall
kind of approach to get gather
initial feedback from our
stakeholders, um, so as I
mentioned in a previous slide,
it
we got a huge overwhelming
number of of requirements to
over 250 requirement ideas, um,
so we had to.
We had to trim it down to
something we have we can work
with, so we partner with our uh
policy partners.
Policy partners to see what
other states were doing, how
they were coming up with the
with their research questions.
Um, we brought, brought that
back and customized it to my to
suit our data and our, our needs
in New Mexico. So we took our
focus was to create descriptive
and cross-agency foundation
questions. Um, so that it is
more suited for people of New
Mexico, we refined, we, we came
up with a set of questions.
and we, we find it further to
reach um to the questions that
we have in the next slide.
So these are our uh research
questions that we based our
visualizations on.
First question.
Compares pre-K, pre-K and K12
data to measure school
readiness. The second question
compares.
K2 and high red data to to
measure college and career
readiness. The third question
examines.
High red and breakfast data to
examine employment metrics based
on various factors.
So we're really excited to get
to share some like a sneak peek
of some of the visualizations
that we have been developing um
over the last, you know, this
implementation period. Um, this
is not currently live. We are
working with the Office of the
governor to provide kind of a
public facing layer to the
website so that it's more
accessible for families and
students, um, and once you know,
we get approval on that, we will
be able to to go live with this,
um, but these are are
interactive dashboards just some
snippets here, um, that will.
to show you. Um, so this
question as Dimple mentioned, we
were, you know, looking at
measures of school readiness and
so early childhood into the K-12
system. So this is looking at
percentage of students that are
meeting kindergarten readiness
standards, and as Dimple
mentioned, we had, you know, we
broke that down by a number of
different characteristics, so
we're really proud of this one,
especially, um, because we
wanted to focus on how we can
better represent the, you know,
um, wide diversity of New Mexico
and so this one in particular
we're looking at students whose
primary
Languages Dina, um, and then
breaking that down to see over a
number of different domains and
characteristics of the early
childhood observation tool, how
those students are measuring in
terms of kindergarten readiness
standards.
So then moving into that second
question that Dimple was
mentioning, um, we're looking at
college and career readiness and
how that is measured by a number
of different um how that breaks
down by a number of different
characteristics. So this is
looking at high school
graduation rates, um, the what
you are seeing, you know, in
this slide specifically is
looking at statewide, um,
graduation rates over a, you
know, wide breadth of time, um,
but you can select different, if
you want to look at that for
students that graduate within a
five-year rate or a 6 year
Right. And if you want to break
that down by specific schools,
you can do that as well to get a
more granular in-depth
information there.
And then, as we mentioned, you
know, we wanted to break that
down by a number of different
characteristics. So this is
looking at race and ethnicity,
and we were able to break that
down for, um, at the statewide
level again, but we also do then
break that down for the specific
schools themselves. And this is
one I just want to call out in
particular as we know we have a
lot of really small schools in
New Mexico and when you break
down into specific categories
like this, we wanted to make
sure we're still protecting
student privacy. So for schools
that might have a smaller
student population and we
are breaking down into specific
student groups. Some of that
information might be to suppress
in order to protect that student
privacy.
And then this is focusing on um
that college and career
readiness question again, but
looking at post-secondary
progress. So we are
It's, you know, moving into the
college space looking at how you
are progressing into and through
the college space. So this, this
graph in particular, there's a
lot of information to digest in
this one, so I'll just keep it
at a high level, but this is
looking at for students that
were seniors in 2015, 2016, and
then you qualified for free and
reduced price lunch, how they
were progressing into the
post-secondary space. So calling
out that kind of that second bar
there, it's like that purplish
color that you can see that
percentage is grow.
over time. Um, so that's the
number of students that are
receiving degrees or
certificates over time. Um, and
then I think the power of this
is really seen when you're able
to then show that up against
students that don't qualify for
free and reduced price lunch and
see how those numbers change for
those populations of students.
Yeah, and just to call out that
these, I know we're showing, you
know, more of a um.
More of a static copy of these
visualizations, but they are
dynamic on the website. You can
play around with them, you can
change the different filters and
see how that changes over time.
Um, but just for the sneak peek,
we wanted to just keep it in the
static format.
And then moving into that last
question, so looking at me, you
know, employment metrics broken
down by a number of different
characteristics. So this is
focusing on student, um,
different study programs, so
different majors that students
are, um.
different majors of of students
in the post-secondary space and
then what their wages look like
1 to 5 years out. Um, so for
this particular example, we just
selected a couple of different
STEM majors, um, and then we're
looking at students that um
graduated in the 2015, 2016 year
and how their wages are looking,
you know, 5 to 6 years out, but
one thing I do want to call out
here is you can see that there's
a toggle button for degree
attained. So if you wanted to
see these majors, for instance,
at the associates level or at
the master.
level, you could see how that
changes based off of the degrees
that are attained there. Um, and
then you could also select some
different um study programs as
well to get a better
understanding of some of the
cross comparisons.
And then this is also within
that employment metrics, um,
question that we are asking, but
this is looking at it from an
industry perspective. So looking
at industry comparisons. Um,
this is specifically looking at
service industries, um, and we
have, you know, more
documentation and information on
the website so you can really
understand like what might be in
that specific industry. Um, but
you can see how that breaks down
and how those are compared. And
again, that 5 year outrange. Um,
and then just want to call out,
you know, we're looking at the
averages here in this.
version, um, but you can select
a median version, so those
outliers aren't as much of a
factor when you include that, so
you can see what that looks like
as well. Um, so yeah, we're
really excited to be able to
share this. We're excited for it
to go live for people to go
around and play with it. Um, I
do want to just mention, you
know, I think, um, as Dimple
said, we wanted a cross-agency
descriptive foundation for that
we can build upon and we can
continue to add additional
questions and continue to
iterate on them.
Um, but even though there's just
those three questions. There's a
lot of information that you can
glean from those questions. Um,
and we're just showing you just
a snippet here, but there's a
lot of information and a lot of
really great insights that I
think these visualizations can
provide.
Thank you, Catherine. Uh, so
here are some of the major
milestones that we have achieved
in that ambitious one year
timeline, as Catherine mentioned
just now, we wanted to involve
all the 5 partner agencies and
have this comprehensive place
where all of the data from
cradle to career is stored and
uh resources and analysts and uh
New Mexicans can use that data
to make informed decisions. So
we were able to successfully
make uh this
by engaging all the 5 partner
agencies, um, we created the
research agenda with 5
utilizations dashboards, uh, the
examples of which we just showed
you. uh, we successfully became
the first state in the country
to build a cloud native SLDS.
We also are working with our
vendors to expand the scope and
budget to to incorporate the
second phase of this project, we
are in in the position of
closing out phase one of Ryzen
and project and kick starting
the next phase of this project
and we'll also show you some of
the exciting things that we
will, we are, um, in the making
for, for the second phase of
this project. We also made the
promotional video in English and
Spanish. So that is an exciting
thing like which we
you a snippet of as well. Uh, we
have two Harvard SDP fellows who
completed their fellowship work,
um, and we are doing, we did
retrospective and planning with
our vendors to incorporate all
the lessons learned from the
phase one of this project and
how we can move forward
in um bettering the challenges
going forward for this project,
and we also were able to secure
the SLDS grant from Department
of Education. So these are some
of the milestones that we have
achieved.
In what we are calling phase one
of this project and we'll be
moving forward to the next phase
of this project, uh, more
information on that will be in
later slides.
All right, so, um, a phrase that
Katherine and I came across
during our Harvard Data
Fellowship was data work is
people work, and this is a
sentiment that we really
embodied in the project as it
developed. Um,
Usually when you talk to someone
and say you're working on a big
massive data system, the first
thing they ask is, well, what
about the technical aspects or
these analytical aspects, but it
really turns out to be.
The interpersonal things, that's
where the greatest strengths,
the greatest challenges, most of
the work ends up going. And so
we just wanted to highlight on
this slide, these are kind of
lessons that uh coalesced for us
during phase one and that we are
carrying with us as some kind of
guiding directions for phase
two.
First, um, on a project like
this, we all serve in different
kinds of roles. Uh, 3 of them
that we called out here are the
technical people, leadership
roles, uh, it can expand out to
visualization work, analytical
work, any of a range of number
of things, but it's really
important to know how to balance
each of those. It's easy to for
for me I have a technical
background disappear way into
the technical stuff and you've
kind of lost sight of some of
those other touch points that
you really need to keep your
attention on.
We also need to develop um some
just clear decision making norms
and responsibilities. You'll
make the decisions, but if you
know ahead of time what that
process looks like, what some of
the pitfalls could be, so you
can get around them. If you also
set the expectations, so the
people who are ultimately making
the decisions are aware of how
the information will be
presented and what is needed of
them. That smooths a lot of
things over.
Um, and then beyond just the
decision making portion, um,
setting expectations around
communication and, uh, assessing
progress around that. So,
similar to decision making, just
informing people of how you will
be communicating how you need
them to communicate, what to
expect around that and making
sure to keep eyes on.
Sorry. Um,
So, uh, the expectations around
the communication there and
they're just making sure you're
keeping your eyes on those. So
both expectations for the
project, but just the
communication, um, we really
found in phase one that it was
just communication lapses that
ended up being the most
difficult pieces. So really just
calling that out as a separate
item for a project like this.
Um, on top of that, I'm creating
escalation channels, um, things
are going to go wrong, so making
sure the right people know we're
going to be coming to you and we
need your help, and this is how
we're going to tell you, and we
need you to see that and act
with us.
Then for our final area for this
uh kind of people focus of data
work is around planning and
strategy. Um, so like I've
already said a couple of times,
just the communication, the
relationships, that's really
where a lot of the work is, a
lot of the opportunities and,
and such.
Um, involving executive
leadership early and often, so
the executive agencies have the
cabinet secretaries who are
ultimately the decision makers
um and so making sure that all
the way up through them that
they are fully informed. There's
no surprises, no, by the way, we
need to meet 4 times before we
can get you up to speed for the
decisions. Um, that was very
helpful in phase one just to
have their support and be able
to move pretty quickly, but
carrying that into the second
phase as well.
And then crafting mitigation
plans for delays and obstacles.
Things will go wrong. Things
will slow down, um, the hardest
part of that is when you're not
prepared for it or you don't
have time in the schedule or
you're not quite sure how you're
going to respond much harder
than we know that something's
going to go wrong and we're
baking that in. We have a little
extra time in the schedule. We
know that we can pivot to other
kinds of work and that kind of
thing.
Um, and so just some highlights
of again, um, big data project,
it's always the people stuff,
um, it's where we're going to
keep going back to and phase two
as well.
All right. Um, we would like to
talk a little bit about the data
governance portion of this too.
I know it's a conversation in
the air for this committee. Um,
so for Ryzen M, um we will call
out some of the specific groups
and then some of the processes
around that. So we had our data
data governance advisory
Committee. This is our primary
group for data governance.
People, um, we had
representatives from the
different partner agencies who
were nominated to serve on this
committee based on their
experience with uh data work.
And so, uh, this group is
primarily who we would go to
about as our first stop for all
data questions. Um, should we
use this type of data? Are we
going to allow it? If so, what
do we need to do with that? Um,
typically this isn't the group
that says, you know, what kind
of data type are we going to do
here at that really granular
level. They're more setting the
policy from the higher, higher
stage for that.
Um, it's also an advisory
committee, so this group doesn't
ultimately make decisions, but
we have a separate barrier
there. They put the
recommendations together, and
that ultimately makes its way
over to the project steering
committee. So that's, that's the
group that makes the decisions
for the project. It's the
cabinet secretaries that make
the calls, but it has CIOs, um,
and other representatives from
the agencies there, but they
incorporate the different kinds
of advice that come from the
data governance committee as
well as the project team and
other stakeholders while making
those decisions.
Technical control board is a
fancy name for partner agency
CIOs. Um, so it is a technical
project and as much as we say
it's all the people's stuff.
There's also a lot of technical
work that happens. So having
those CIOs who are experienced
working with data, working with
security and compliance who
understand the really technical
nuances of a system like this.
It's very important. So, um, we
met lots with the CIOs and
again, that's a group that will
participate in the steering
committee but will also bubble
up the recommendations and help
make those to the cabinet
secretaries for final decision.
We also have uh what we call our
data working group, uh, not the
fanciest name, but this was, uh,
the group of people when we
said.
We are kind of in crunch time
and we need people who are used
to doing analysis directly on
data. We need to, so the example
that always stands out for me,
we got into a situation where we
were trying to decide for the
visualizations how are we going
to represent race and ethnicity.
We have a range of different
source systems across 5 partner
agencies. Each one does it
differently. So we needed to get
people together who could sit
down and talk about the
different ways of doing that. So
this is just a call out from a
governance standpoint, also
having the ability to get into
that level of detail of data
work is really important.
The data governance committee is
going to do something much
higher level, but you will need
to rely on or we needed to rely
on.
Um, that level of what do we do
about race and ethnicity and a
range of other decisions like
that.
So those are the core groups
that we worked with. Um, we also
call it, we created a range of
data governance policies and
procedures. Um, again, for a
very big data system, we want to
make sure we know the bounds
within which we're working. What
are the agreements we've made
for how we're going to use data
and in which ways we're going to
do that. It's very important to
have those set out ahead of time
so we understand the range
within which we are working.
Um, and then we also have one,
external facing aspect of data
governance. Um, so for SLDS
Systems, the statewide
longitudinal data systems. Um,
you will get folks who are
outside of the state, um, or who
are not necessarily, they don't
have access to the system who
would like to access that data.
So we may have a researcher from
Colorado who says, I'm working
on XYZ and would like to have
access to the New Mexico data.
So they would go through the
data request portal. This is a
custom web application, um, that
we are going to be building.
And
it will allow researchers to
create an account and say, I
would like some workforce data
of this sort and some higher ed
data of that sort. Here is my
justification for it. Here are
the research questions and a
range of other information that
we would need to make that
decision and we have a
disclosure review board who
participates in that process. So
these are again some data folks
from the different partner
agencies who will look at each
of those requests and decide do
we want to honor the request? Do
we not want to honor it? If we
do, we need more information for
that and.
Then we'll also look at the
final final data that we would
be sending out.
So just to call out, there is a
kind of more complicated aspect
of people who are not in the
partner agencies who would like
to work with the data. We do, we
will have an avenue for that
that just adds an extra layer of
governance on top of what we
have for the system internally.
And then to provide a little bit
of information on here.
For confidentiality and privacy
for uh the system.
So as Zenith mentioned earlier,
we use software called Tamer.
It's actually the software and
it's the company. This is to
perform data mastering. Um, data
mastering is when you get data
across different systems and you
identify the same individuals in
those different systems to, to
provide an example, um, let's
say I'm in the K-12 system, the
higher ed system, and the
workforce system. So in the K-12
system, we maybe have my name
and my address, higher ed
system, we have my Social
Security number and my name. And
it could be again, may not be
the most exact example, but
The workforce system, we have my
Social Security number and my
address. So you can see we have
different kinds of personally
identifiable information in the
different systems, but we need a
way to say that it's, it's the
same person in each of those.
The software will also handle
things like if I show up as Joey
in the K-12 system and Joseph in
the higher ed system, it will be
able to handle those kinds of
things. If you have a Social
Security number or one of the
numbers has been flipped or
something like that. So it's um
complex machine learning
software that will go across all
of the source systems and
identify.
will provide an anonymized
identifier that has nothing to
do with that individual. Um, you
can't connect it back to them at
least. And that's what we pass
forward in the system to the
warehouse. So when we say that
people can work in the warehouse
without seeing personally
identifiable information. It's
because they have that
anonymized identifier that still
allows them to say, this is Joey
in these three different
systems, but they would never be
able to determine that it's me.
Um, another layer that we have
for protection is that in the
data warehouse, well, following
up on that, we just discussed
with the MUIDs is that the
warehouse has um the anonymized
identifiers, and then the
visualizations also use those
anonymized identifiers, so
there's no analysis or
visualization on PII.
We do trend-based visualizations
and reporting. So if you noticed
in the visualizations that
Catherine showed earlier, we're
looking at cohorts. It wasn't
individual student who graduated
from high school. It was all of
the students who graduated in
2015-2016 and how they fared
over time, for instance. So this
trend-based reporting provides a
level of aggregation that also
protects privacy.
By virtue of being the first
cloud native SLDS in the
country. Um, we were able to tap
into some security offerings in
Google Cloud platform, and it
was also part of the decision to
go with Google Cloud platform
with some of the security that
they offer out of the box. Um,
so, uh, just by virtue of being
in there, we got some security
governance and oversight, extras
as a part of being in the cloud.
Um,
Decided to use one technical
term in here, but I'm pretty
sure after the pandemic
everybody is aware of a VPN. Um,
so when we transfer data from
the source systems up into the
cloud. Everything happens
through a VPN. So in the same
way when everybody is working at
home during the pandemic, it
provides levels of encryption,
which just means if you were to
see the data when it's
encrypted, it's scrambled up and
you don't know what it means.
And then once the data makes it
up into the cloud, the data is
encrypted there with uh
different layers of protection
for that as well.
And all of these are just
different IT best practices. So
there's a whole range beyond
that for these, but just to call
out, um, we're not kind of
coming up with brand new things
here. We're seeing what are the
standards we need to be
following and making sure we are
implementing those according to
IT standards.
And the final one to call out is
that we recently received a
privacy impact assessment from a
third-party security vendor. Um,
so this vendor goes in and looks
at how we are using the PII to
confirm are we handling it
responsibly, um, the ways that
we say we are handling and
protecting PII, are we actually
doing that? And so we got a
thumbs up on our privacy impact
assessment, but it's also just
in generally a good thing to
call out that you want to engage
third party auditors and such
for these. It's very easy on a
system of this scale to know
what you.
intended to do, but then
somebody can come behind and say
you actually missed a piece here
or there's some other oversight
you need before you launch a
system.
Then talk just for a minute
about what's coming in phase
two. So Senna said earlier, we
are tying up phase one at the
moment, and phase one was
getting the system built out in
the cloud. We are, um,
Having some people doing some
testing now we have the work
that we're doing so that we can
ultimately launch that first
batch of public facing
visualizations. Phase two will
be starting. We're doing some
preliminary work on that at the
moment.
And it'll kick into full force
this fall. So we're going to be
focusing on enhancements and
improvements to the system. So
it's a big wide bucket. We are
focusing on what those are based
on the retrospectives we had,
feedback from stakeholders, um,
discussions with the vendors
about what they saw, um, as well
as from beta testing, so we
currently have some researchers
from the partner agencies in
working in the warehouse to give
us feedback about what is
usable, what is not, so that we
can make the data uh more
available, easier to use. Also,
um, based on like the security
assses.
and stuff, um, any kinds of
improvements to infrastructure
and automation and processes and
such would be baked into that as
well.
For phase two, we're gonna be
adding new data sources. So a
data system can answer more
questions with more data. So,
um, the goal for the system
would be to increasingly just
add more data in over time so
that it can answer a wider range
of questions.
Increasing access for internal
and external researchers. So the
external portion is what I
mentioned a few slides ago about
that data request portal for the
researcher from Colorado. Um,
and then for internal, uh,
users, it's kind of what I
mentioned just a.
A minute ago about um just
usability of the system when our
analysts get in, do they find
things that are roadblocks and
how can we clear those out so
that those are ultimately the
experts who will help really use
the data in the best way
possible. So helping them with
that.
Um, expanding our research
agenda. So this could be adding
to the current 3 research
questions that we shared
earlier. It could be adding new
research questions altogether,
adding new visualizations, um,
so just making sure to build out
that research agenda further in
phase two.
And then enabling advanced
tooling, so advanced is uh is my
choice of word. I'm not sure how
I feel about it ultimately, but
it's just to call out that uh
We have researchers who use
different programming languages
for their analysis. They use
different software. They have
different backgrounds, so it's
part of the advanced tooling is
by virtue of being in the cloud,
it's easy for us to hook into a
wider range of tools that
analysts will be able to use.
There's also things that are a
bit flashier than what we have
available right now. So in GCP,
for instance, we can enable uh
machine learning that would be
more user friendly for
researchers. So enabling stuff
like that as well. And part of
this will also just be doing
that evaluation of what do we
want.
To implement for them. But just
calling out again, really
wanting to make the system more
accessible for those who are
best keep, uh, best equipped to
use it.
OK.
Thank you everyone for having us
here to present this RNM system,
we are really excited for the
work that has been done and
we're also excited about the
future of the rise in M project.
um with that, we would like to
open the floor for any
questions.
Thank you.
Yeah
Uh
Representative Garrett.
Thank you so much, uh, Mr.
Chairman. My first question is
for Tim. Tim, how does this
relate to the ICOSA.
That we've been talking about.
Any relationship
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, that's a great
question. I'm actually not sure
if the team here has been in
contact with ICASA under any of
the data governance
conversations, I think, um,
maybe I'll just turn it over to
them to, to, are you guys
familiar with ICASA at New
Mexico Tech?
Mr. Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, currently the
NMLDS isn't working with ICASA,
um, but that doesn't mean that
we cannot in the future, for
instance, we're working with
ICASA on our statewide basic
needs survey right now. Um, so
we are building that
relationship and would love to
bring them in.
Uh, thank you very much.
an asteris. OK,
my second question is, um, so at
the University of Illinois
Chicago, there's a private kind
of thing like this. Have you
talked to them? I, I toured
there and they, they, your phase
two, which they've done in my
opinion, has the employment
patterns in all these kinds of
agencies. Is that something that
will inter phase two? I mean,
when you go in their system, you
can say, um.
Do we have teachers in Cook
County, Illinois, you know,
what, what is phase two? What
are some of those practical
things that we certainly
discussed in the legislature
constantly about CYFD vacancies,
you know, all of vacancies in
all these areas are vital.
In all 5
Of the partner organizations.
Mr. Vice Chair Representative
Garrett, thank you for your
question. Um, we, I'm not
familiar specifically with um
with that particular system, but
in terms of phase two and in
terms of kind of how we're
looking to expand the research
agenda, you know, as we
mentioned, we had an influx of
visualization requirements and
research requirements that came
out of working with our partner
agencies at the beginning of
this project. And so we've kept
those, you know, in, um, we've
documented all of those and
things like you are saying have
come up in some of the
those questions. So we will
likely be looking at continuing
that kind of research process
for phase two. So looking at how
can we continue to expand the
system based off of some
feedback that we've heard in
different, you know, committee
sessions from our different
partner agencies from our
different stakeholders and
looking how we can expand that
appropriately for the scope of
phase two. Does that help answer
your question? OK.
Thank you. And then my last
question came from texts that I
received from people listening.
People are listening online and
it's on the cost. This person
heard that it was over $10,000
to build this and felt that
wanted to know about the cost
and the timeline.
Can you
Someone talk about that Vice
Chair Representative Garrett,
thank you for the question. So,
to date, we have spent $8.9
million and we are still working
with Google and our um our
vendors to, you know, to develop
the scope for phase two. So we
don't know exactly what the
scope for phase two will cost at
the moment, um, but to date it's
been $8.9 million.
Thank you. And then the other
question that was text to me is
what's the ongoing subscription
and maintenance cost, how much
Is that per year or do you
anticipate?
Mr. Vice Chair Representative,
it's around $500,000 about
$500,000.
And uh just my final follow-up
question to that, um, Mr. Chair,
how, where does that money come
from? Does it come from the
budgets of all 5 departments?
We, we or
Uh, deputy secretary, I don't
know if that's your question or
can somebody answer that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Garrett, I can begin the
conversation and then I think my
team can fill in more detail,
uh, but we have a myriad
resources, um, I mean sources of
funding for this project. Um,
the state has been generous in
funding. Uh, we've also received
some federal funding for it as
well as grant funding, as was
mentioned with the from the US
Department of Education, um, and
we even have had some foundation
funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. So,
uh, we've worked really, um,
diligently.
From the project management
perspective to make sure that we
have um all of those varied
sources that are helping to pay
for and fund the entire system.
That's OK.
OK, so, so not, it's not all
state funding, in other words.
No, it's not. OK, thank you.
That's all my questions.
Thank you, Representative. Other
questions?
I do have a question or two. it
sounds like this takes several
databases from different
agencies and kind of melds them
together. Is that accurate? OK.
How do we verify the quality of
the data? I know as the data
going into the pad we regularly,
you know, some districts aren't
reporting yet. Some districts
report it differently, who
monitors the quality of the data
and ensures that it's accurate.
Mr. Vice Chair, thank you for
the question, um.
So there are many layers of
those kinds of checks. So one
aspect to call out for the
system is that Ryzen M is not a
system of records, so ultimately
we are receiving the data from
the partner agencies. So
ultimately the partner agencies
are that first line of defense
for ensuring that their data is
accurate and clean and such, and
so some of that is just internal
and then when they send data up
to us we also have discussions
around that. Once we received
the data, we have a verification
process. So let's say for the
higher ed data when we load it
up.
If something goes wrong, we will
get some notifications letting
us know what went wrong. So some
of that is we thought we were
sending up names here and they
didn't really make it in the way
we were expecting. So there are
some checks there. Um, then when
we send the data and prep it to
go into tamer for that mastering
process, there will be some
other eyes on the data there as
well to make sure that that is
clean before he is going in, and
that's a process where we work
with the data owners from the
different agencies, so they will
be looking at the data to make
sure that looks right.
And then we fast forward to the
data in the warehouse. This is
where we've combined it
together, and this is actually
this is one of the big areas
where what we're doing with our
system really expands what the
agencies can do easily at the
moment. And we spent a lot of
time in phase one working with
data owners and researchers from
the partner agencies to do
things all the way from basic
counts, you know, the number of
students who were enrolled in
the higher ed per year.
Do those look like what we're
seeing in the warehouse to
working between partner
agencies. So I remember we spent
a lot of time working with the
Department of Workforce
Solutions on when we combine our
higher ed and workforce data are
the numbers we're getting making
sense for the researchers that
are that that have already done
these analyses and looked at
them.
And then right now we are
currently doing beta testing
where we have another round of
researchers in there, um, part
of what I called out before was
usability of the system, but
other aspects that we're asking
them to look at are this is your
data. We need you to start
running the analysis you're
aware of and confirm that the
data is looking accurate before
we would consider opening it up
just for more broad use. Um, so
I don't understand the workforce
solutions data as well as they
do. I need them to confirm for
me that it's looking right and
how to use it so that when I
then use the higher ed data
combined with it. I'm doing it
accurately.
Thank you. Yeah, and that's
helpful because I mean y'all
know the thing of garbage in
garbage out, you know, that if
it's bad data you get bad
results or the analysis makes no
sense, um, one of the ones in
particular I was looking at the
one chart that shows the
five-year pay average by field.
How is that data being gathered
cause that seems like somebody's
got to call an awful lot of
people and ask them what's your
salary, that there's not just
the database for all engineers 5
years out of school.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. Yeah, so that
information is wage data. We
have quarterly wage data that um
the Department of Workforce
Solution collects in their
unemployment insurance tax and
claims system. And so we do have
that information and then we are
through the tamer process able
to connect that back to us, you
know, an individual, um, and
have that information. So we can
then create that, you know,
longitudinal perspective with
that matching system, but the
wage information particularly is
coming from.
The UI tax and claims system.
OK, um.
Yeah, just, you know, I, I know
how difficult it is to get
individual data like that and
the
It matters very much what
questions you ask, how you ask
the questions. I mean, there are
a whole lot of other things that
go in to getting accurate data
or at least to getting data
which you think you're asking
the questions around, um, you
know, and there's also, it's
very exciting. Um, most of what.
You know, and correct me if I, I
misunderstanding, but a lot of
the charts seemed like they are
descriptive, mostly. Is there
any mechanism for doing
predictive analytics and
statistics out of this, or is it
just descriptive of what is?
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair for
the question. Yes, we are
interested in doing more
predictive and more, you know,
robust analysis over time. I
think our perspective from, from
the get-go and from phase one
was making sure that we do
provide that really broad and
robust descriptive um
information so that we have an
understanding of the landscape
before we move into more um
predictive and more advanced
analytics.
Thank you, I mean what would be
really helpful as legislators is
not just describe what has been.
But what do we need to do to
impact forward based on on
what's happened in the past and
so a bit more of the, the
predictive and and forward
reaching statistical analysis
rather than just what we had
over the last 4 or 5 years,
which certainly is helpful, but,
you know, not as powerful. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and yes, we have
been having really exciting
conversations with Google around
kind of what some you know,
additional analysis and what
kind of opportunities there
might be for phase two, so we're
excited.
to look into that.
Thank you. Other questions,
other committee members.
No, thank you. Uh, this looks
like it's got lots of potential.
I'm curious to watch as it rolls
out as the, you know, how much
it's used, uh, many times I've.
I would wish our universities
acted more as repositories to
answer questions we have rather
than research they just want to
do.
Uh, and so that it's more
practical research rather than
just basic research things
Mr. Chair, may I respond? Yeah,
um, that is our hope as well in
regard to our own field is as we
move forward, you know, uh,
thinking about beyondta beta
testing and beyond, um, how we
can engage some of our
researchers in the state of New
Mexico to start answering, you
know, uh, what we call in the
field wicked problems, um, to do
some of that predictive
analytics. And so uh we're on
the same page and have the same
goals.
Thank you. I have a moment of
privilege. Um, I just want to
acknowledge that uh one of our
Harvard data fellows is leaving
our agency, uh, Catherine Zanoni
will be returning to her
homeland of Colorado Springs,
Colorado, um, but, uh, she has
really been an invaluable member
of this team will always be a
part of the foundational work in
this project that will serve New
Mexicans for generations, and I
just wanted to give her a shout
out um in front of this group.
Very good, thank you.
Thank you. See, our chairman is
still in the back, so I'll
continue to
move us on to the next topic,
uh, which is the STEM Innovation
Network and Connor, I believe
you're leading us on this with
uh.
One Tur from NSU, yes, I've
known Wanda for a long, long
while. This is the little spiel
about it.
That
So kind of as they're getting
up, they've, I've got a little
script this to this next
section, given legislation in
the past few sessions seeking
funding and support for STEM
education, the LASC work plan
included investigating a viable
structure for a STEM network for
the state, including possible
funding and organization.
National and state partners are
also on the panel to discuss the
possible implications.
So Connor, I think we're ready
whenever you're ready.
OK, uh, Mr. Vice Chair, members
of the committee.
Good afternoon. On a beautiful
day here in Los Alamos, uh,
smoky one, but still beautiful.
Uh, I'm really excited, uh, to
bring this panel to everybody
today on uh to discuss STEM
education in New Mexico. So
excited in fact that you'll
note.
I wore a tie, uh, with geometric
shapes on it. Uh, any and all
positive feedback is welcomed,
uh, but
As you know, this is a STEM
education is a really important
topic in our state right now as
it is really across the country
and around the world. Uh, but
these, the idea of a STEM
network is also nothing new in
New Mexico. We've talked about
this for years, and the
presentation today, I hope, will
build upon the work started
prior to the last legislative
session spearheaded by Senator
Pope and advocates from across
our state.
And so in this presentation
today, I'm going to start by
providing an overview of the
proposed structure and
legislative framework. Uh, I
don't have any slides, so please
use the brief and I'll do my
best to point out where it is in
the brief as we're going along.
And then following that, you'll
hear from Heather Sherman, the
executive director of STEX, who
will discuss STEM network
impacts in other states across
our country.
After this, look at best
practices from around the US
Shafiq Chaudhry, director of
PED's Math and Science Bureau
will speak a bit about the work
that the Department of the
Public Education Department is
doing in New Mexico on science
and math visioning in our state
and how the network could
potentially support that work.
Next, Wanda Bulger Tams, PhD,
director of the New Mexico State
University STEM Outreach Center.
Uh, we'll talk about the work
that her organization does as
well as the source of activities
that you, uh, outreach
activities you may see a STEM
central hub or a STEM regional
hub undertake. And finally, to
address the industry perspective
of all of this, we have, uh,
Monica Sandoval Johnson, PhD,
the CEO of Boomerang, New
Mexico, that can talk about how
the network could potentially
support the work that her
organization and other
organizations.
New Mexico are doing to create a
robust workforce pipeline in New
Mexico, especially in the realm
of STEM education.
But before we truly get started,
I do want to offer my sincerest
thanks to a truly remarkable
group of advocates that I've had
the honor of working with since
I started in this role back in
March. Uh, they come from every
corner of our state, and they
have been incredible and
instrumental thought partners in
this work, and I look forward to
continued collaboration in the
months and years ahead.
Now if you would all turn your
attention to the hearing brief
titled A STEM Innovation Network
for New Mexico behind tab 9.
Hope I got that right. I'd like
to start by setting the stage
for why this network could
benefit students and educators
in our state. So why does New
Mexico need a STEM network?
The shortest way to talk about
this is that in numerous
conversations that I've had and
that other LESE staff have had
with STEM stakeholders across
New Mexico, we hear a common
theme. We have a wealth of STEM
resources and programs, but
they're often operating in silos
and are not broadly accessible.
Beyond that lack of
coordination, the student
achievement data that we have
paints a picture of a student
population that is not
adequately prepared for an
economy and society that is
increasingly impacted by STEM.
And so as you'll note at the top
of the brief on page one, the
Federal Bureau of Labor
Statistics projects that STEM
occupations will grow by 10.8%
between 2022 and 2032, whereas
non-STEM occupations will grow
by 2.3%. At the same time, NM
Vista's data from the public
education department shows that
New Mexico's students have low
proficiency rates in both math,
24% in 22, 23, and science, 34%
in that same school year.
These low low levels of
proficiency and STEM
disciplines, which I should note
are particularly low in groups
named in the Martinez Yazzi
lawsuit. Stan to have ripplet
flex throughout the remainder of
these students' lives. As you'll
see in the middle of page two,
data from the Department of
Workforce Solutions finds that
the average STEM wage in New
Mexico is approximately $98,000
a year. While the average
non-STEM wage is just over
48,000. This disparity in
average pay raises serious
equity questions given the
demographic makeup of our
current STEM workforce.
Compared to the overall
demographics we have in New
Mexico, nearly 75% of all STEM
jobs in New Mexico are held by
male workers.
Half of our state's population
is female. 57.2% of New Mexico's
STEM workforce is white, well
above the 36.8% that white New
Mexicans account for in our
overall demographics.
Hispanic, Latino, black, and
Native American New Mexicans all
make up noticeably smaller
percentages of the STEM
workforce compared to the
representation in our overall
demographics.
So now that I've set that stage,
bringing it back to the idea of
the network, I think the best
way to understand what a STEM
network is and what it would be
in this scenario is to
understand it as the connective
tissue between the various STEM
learning opportunities and
resources that we have in New
Mexico. And at the same time, it
can serve as foundational
infrastructure for the
development of additional
resources going into the future
in partnership with stakeholders
from across our society.
Turning to page 3 at the top,
you'll notice a graphic
outlining the components of a
proposed STEM innovation
network. Uh, this proposed
structure is meant to address
concerns previously identified
by lawmakers on this committee
and on others, as well as
stakeholders from across the
state and discussing their needs
and their wants for a network.
We'll also placing an emphasis
on leveraging existing resources
that we have in New Mexico, so
we're not reinventing the wheel
or replicating effort.
You'll also note and uh and I
hope so, my canvas skills aren't
the best, but you'll note that
most of the arrows in the
constituent elements point in
both directions, and that is
quite intentional, is that I, I
want us to think of the STEM
network as not just a network
but really an ecosystem for STEM
education and that it's not
meant to be a top-down
government says this approach,
but much more of a uh ecosystem
approach that relies on
collaboration across the network
without relying on a strict
hierarchy.
You'll also see that right at
the top, the network has a
clearly identified fiscal agent.
The proposal would designate
either PED or HED for this role.
They would serve as the flow
through for all funds
appropriated by the legislature
to the network.
Beginning on page 3 and
continuing to page 4, you will
find information on the
network's governing body. The
STEM steering committee. This
committee would be comprised of
representatives from K-12
Education, higher education,
regional STEM hubs, industry,
tribal partners, and state
government. The list of possible
members you find on those pages
is by no means exhaustive but
rather meant to be illustrative
of the types of entities that
might take part in this work.
Now, the role of this steering
committee would be to establish
and maintain an ever evolving
statewide vision for STEM
education in New Mexico. Similar
to how this committee operates
with Director Warnerment and
staff presenting an annual work
plan for your review and
approval. The steering committee
would review and approve an
annual work plan from the
network's central and regional
hubs.
Moving on to the central hub,
the legislature could establish
a center of excellence for STEM
education at a higher education
institution. As a center of
excellence, the central hub in
addition to state dollars, would
be able to receive philanthropic
gifts and other funding sources.
Now the central hub will be
responsible for the following
activities, asset mapping to
identify existing STEM resources
in New Mexico as well as taking
that next step of identifying
the gaps in service that exist
once we understand what
resources we truly do have in
every corner of our state.
In addition, they would oversee
a STEM school designation
process, similar ones found in
states like Ohio and Tennessee.
They use this process to provide
LEAs with a clear road map to
develop comprehensive STEM
education plans for their
schools and schools applications
are evaluated based on a rubric.
In New Mexico, the central hub
would oversee that application
process with support from
regional hubs. While the final
approval of the STEM schools
would be under the purview of
the steering committee.
In addition, the central hub be
responsible for managing and
planning monthly convenings of
regional hubs and hosting of an
annual STEM summit to ensure the
sharing of best practices and
awareness of need across the
state.
In addition, they will provide
statewide STEM vision support to
the the steering committee as
subject matter experts on STEM
education and what STEM high
quality STEM educational
outreach looks like. They can
help provide that clarity and
creating a coherent statewide
vision so that everybody doing
this important work is rowing in
the same direction. And finally
they would oversee and last but
not least, they would oversee a
request for proposals for
potential regional hubs, and
then bring that final uh those
recommended hubs to the central.
steering committee for a final
approval.
The final component that you'll
see of the STEM network's
internal structure is the
regional hubs that would operate
around the state. In creating
these hubs, it's really
important to recognize that as
we often say in the world of
education policy in a state as
large and diverse as New Mexico,
a one size fits all approach is
simply not going to work here.
Different parts of our state
will have different needs and
different resources, and to this
end, this proposal provides for
a considerable degree of
flexibility in what entities
could serve as regional hubs. At
the bottom of page 4, you'll see
an example of entities that
could potentially operate as
regional hubs. Once again, this
is not meant to be the idea
behind this is we do not want to
be overly prescriptive and
potentially get in the way of
any innovative practices that
regions may develop as they do
this work.
I do want to particularly note
that in the case of New Mexico's
tribes, nations, and pueblos, in
our previous LESC hearing, one
of our analysts, Natasha
Davalos, did do a wonderful
presentation on tribal education
sovereignty, and it's critical
that we recognize and we
recognize the role that
education sovereignty plays in
our state's educational
landscape. And so with that in
mind, this proposal would also
give tribes, nations, and
pueblos the opportunity rather
than participating in the
Brought a regional hub, creating
a tribal specific hub of their
own if that is their preference.
These regional hubs, roughly 6
to 8 as advocates have
discussed, would serve as the
local arm of the network and
provide on the ground support to
LEAs, community partners,
industry partners, and any other
stakeholders in STEM education.
These hubs will serve as
advocates for the needs of their
corners of the state and also
actively engage with the
stakeholders in their regions to
develop the partnerships that
will be critical to the
network's success, whether these
partnerships are with industry
leaders, K-12 education partners
or just the broader community.
I'm sure the big question for
you as lawmakers, as it often
is, is what is the cost of this
effort. On the top of page 7,
you will find a draft budget
that was created by the STEM
Network Coalition. I, the group
of advocates with whom I've been
working since March. And so the
total initial appropriation for
this network as is proposal
envisions would be $60 million
distributed over 3 years.
The 3-year funding cycle is
meant to acknowledge the need
for the network to have
sustained state support as it
builds capacity, and each year
during this funding window to
ensure accountability, the
central and regional hubs will
have clear indicators of
progress as set by the steering
committee. At the end of those 3
years, an evaluation of the
network's success in meeting
these indicators will determine
whether recurring funding would
be established.
And so now that I've given a
pretty high level overview of
what a network would be, I'm
gonna stop talking, uh, and I'm
going to turn over to Heather
Sherman to discuss STEM networks
in a more national context.
Mr. Vice Chair and members of
the committee, thank you so much
for having me today. I'm really
proud to be here to represent
Pattel's work in STEM and the
work that we've done in leading
and managing STEM networks for
more than a decade now.
My name is Heather Sherman. I'm
the director of STEM X, which is
a national network. It's a
coalition of state STEM
networks, and so I have a pretty
good handle on what's happening
across the country in terms of
state STEM networks. Before we
get into that, I want to
reiterate my personal commitment
and uh Pattel's commitment to uh
New Mexico, we were awarded the
contract to manage Lael in 2018
and we've got over 45,000
employees at
9 national labs, about 17,000
employees right here in Los
Alamos. Also, I've been involved
with the STEM efforts here in
New Mexico for a number of
years. I consulted and supported
a group of people who uh got
together to to create the first
New Mexico governor STEM
challenge that's been 5 years
running now. Uh, in 2021, I
presented at a community
conversation on STEM and
workforce development. We also
engaged the eight managed Pattel
labs in a lab.
Community of practice where we
talk to all the education and
outreach representatives at our
national labs to talk about
what's working and how to scale
best practices. And then also
New Mexico is a member of the
Stemach's National Network. And
so we've been working on, on
this issue for a number of
years.
At Patel, our mission is to is
to translate science and
technological discovery into
societal benefits. And the chief
way we do that is by investing
in STEM education.
We have through our Batel
education efforts.
Created a number of ways to
empower educators with new
methods and also we're working
on the goal of helping build
skills for students so that they
can be successful.
So you understand a little bit
about elation. We manage
education networks. We run STEM
school designation programs in,
of course, a collaboration with
the Departments of Education in
Ohio and Tennessee. We manage
the army's educational outreach
program, and we just took on a
new network called the Stay in
the Game Network, which is a
partnership with the Cleveland
Browns Foundation to address the
challenge of chronic
absenteeism, because kids can't
do STEM if they're not in
school.
In the last year in 2023 we've
trained over 1400 teachers.
We've held three state
conferences, a national
conference, and we facilitated
the awarding of $2.6 million in
STEM classroom grants. We do
manage two state STEM networks.
The first is the Ohio STEM
Learning Network.
The second is the Tennessee STEM
Innovation Network and we've
also gotten into the business of
helping and consulting other
states who'd like to create STEM
networks of their own.
Both of our state-managed
networks are public-private
partnerships between the between
Battel and the state in which we
operate.
We support the education
priorities that are identified
by the Department of Education.
We're not working independently
like Collin's proposal, there's
a state STEM committee that
drives the priorities and we
just help them execute the
vision.
We provide teacher professional
development. We host an annual
conference. We also identify
what deliverables uh the hubs
are responsible for because the
hubs proposed the work that
they'd like to do within their
own organization over the course
of the year, and we make sure
that they make good on those
promises.
We are primarily funded by state
funds in both Ohio and
Tennessee, but I want to be
clear that operating these STEM
networks have made us as a state
or as these states way more
competitive for additional
dollars. I've got a slide later
that I'll tell you about the
diff different different funding
that we've been able to bring to
bear and use the network as a
way to disseminate that great
training that we've been
supporting.
The big message I have for you
today is that.
This STEM work is a really great
example of collective impact,
which was first cited in the
Stanford Social Innovation
Review in 2011.
Uh,
And collective impact if you're
not familiar with it, has 5
elements. The first element is
having a common agenda, so Colin
talked about there's a number of
people who are mobilizing STEM
and the reaches as big as their
organization can reach.
Creating a STEM network here
will allow us to take collective
impact to the next level and
reach even more students. So if,
for example, the common agenda
in New Mexico would be to
increase access to access to and
quality of K-12 STEM education.
We would have some shared
measurement goals.
The network central hub would
provide communic I'm sorry,
continuous communication about
the network activities, about
the opportunities that are being
made available through the
network, and then the hub model
allows for mutually reinforcing
activities, so we'll talk a
little bit more about regional
hubs in a moment, but it's, it's
meant to be take the strengths
of these different organizations
who are already operating. Let
them have the approach that they
want to have.
With the goal of increasing
access to and quality of K-12
education.
And then you have to identify a
backbone organization. The
backbone organization's job is
to wake up every day and think
about how can we make this work?
The backbone organization that
we, the role that we play in
Ohio and Tennessee, we manage
the network, we employ the staff
for the network. We have
communications personnel who do
commun continuous communications
from a central perspective, so
if something's going on in the
southwest hub of OSLN.
We'll put it on our website if
we have a professional
development cohort that's
launching. We'll do the
recruitment through the website.
Um, we distribute funds. We
convene network stakeholders, we
collect data and we're also
accountable for deliverables to
the state because we are in
contract with the state to do
this work. And so we're not out
here promulgating our own
agenda. We're working to advance
the vision that's set by the
state.
Because we have access to all of
this information because of STEM
X. I wanted to tell you that
we've seen state networks with
hubs, very similar to the model
that Colin presented earlier in
Idaho, Iowa, Louisiana, Ohio,
Oregon, Michigan, and Tennessee
and
I ran out of room on my slide. I
don't think that that's an
exhaustive list. These are the
state state networks that we
know are doing a great job with
this work.
So we'll talk a little bit about
regional STEM hubs. You've got
backbone organization or your
central hub.
And then you have.
Individual hubs in Ohio we have
University of Cincinnati as a
hub we've got.
Cleveland State University as a
hub. Our central hub is run by a
small nonprofit that does STEM
outreach. So a number of
different entities can take the
role of a hub.
They say, OK, for this year,
we're going to do 2 professional
developments on computer science
or engineering design process,
whatever they'd like to do
that's aligned with their
strengths and their
capabilities. They also
coordinate one regional
convening so that it's not just
them talking, they're also
pulling in the different
entities who are in a given
community.
Then their role is to actively
engage with the network and so
you've got this cycle where
people are doing great work, it
gets pushed out through the
larger network and then people
have opportunities to recruit
participants in their programs
through the network and so
really it's the rising tide that
lifts all boats.
Um,
The
I think the key message about
these hubs, you've got someone
who's leading the charge. Think
about like an orchestra
conductor.
The strings are doing their
thing.
The winds are doing their thing.
Everyone's an expert at the
thing that they're doing.
The backbone organization acts
as a conductor so that you can
create a giant harmonious impact
in a way that no one can do by
working independently.
I wanted to give you an example
of one of the ways that we've
been able to take the impact of
uh collective impact in Ohio
with computer science
professional development. So
both Ohio and Tennessee were
brought on to be a partner with
Code.org to do professional
development training. It just so
happens that both Ohio and
Tennessee care about computer
science. And so through the
power of the network, we've been
able to train almost 600
teachers in computer science
because we push out the
Information through the hubs.
The hubs help recruit. They also
echoed the importance of
computer science professional
development.
This all happened to the point
that both the director for the
Ohio STEM Learning Network and
the Tennessee STEM Innovation
Network, were asked to provide
subject matter expertise on the
computer science state plans
when they were making those.
And because they knew that we
had all of the years in the
field, they really wanted to
hear what the barriers and
challenges and opportunities
were going to be about growing
computer science in the state of
Tennessee.
It directly connects to teacher
licensure programs in the state
of Tennessee and so these
teachers are able to get their
computer science pathway
endorsements because of the work
that we're all doing together.
Uh, Colin already provided a
sample budget in, in your
documents, but I kind of
combined.
The Ohio STEM Learning Network
budget with the Tennessee
budget, and this is roughly what
it looks like. So, of course, we
hire personnel.
We contract sometimes with
professional development
facilitators in given regions to
help.
Support the work that we're
doing.
Event space because we have to
gather people together and feed
them. Uh, we also offer a middle
school uh career exploration
curriculum for every student in
the state for both Ohio and
Tennessee because as we say all
the time in STEM, you can't be
what you don't see, and we need
students to be able to
understand the pathways and the
opportunities earlier than high
school so that they understand
the why. Why does this STEM work
matter?
Supply and occupancy, people
need to sit somewhere. We need
to pay rent for them and then
opportunities for travel and
conferences because our state
network folks travel all over
the states and sometimes uh
nationally to attend different.
Um, meetings.
So that concludes my
presentation today. I'm happy to
take any questions when it's
time, and thank you again for
the opportunity.
Oh.
I ended prematurely, really
quickly, as I said earlier in um
my presentation, we have an
opportunity to leverage the
network to make us more
competitive for grants. We've
won money from the Office of
Naval Research to help teachers
learn about um manufacturing and
engineering. We worked with USDA
to help Ohio rural educators
successfully incorporate
agriculture, education, and
their science classrooms through
a hands-on uh method and then
right.
Now we're working with the
submarine industrial base to
teach teachers that believe it
or not, in a landlocked state
like Ohio, we have a need for
building submarines and all of
these programs have have.
been made through grants from
external funding that I believe
we've won because we have built
this robust network.
Let's check to be sure. Now
we're done. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Shafiq Chaudhuri, director of
the Math and Science Bureau at
the Public Education Department.
I don't have any slides. I have
a few talking points, um, but
first I just want to thank the
committee again for um allowing
me back to talk about STEM
innovation. Um, I will talk
about a project that math and
Science Bureau is doing in
service of science education
that can support and be
amplified with the STEM
innovation Network.
So the math and Science Bureau
has been working on several
cross-agency projects and
projects with local stakeholders
through those projects, we've
identified the need for a
statewide science vision to
ensure programs and projects
done by organizations across the
state are geared towards common
coherent outcomes. So this work
is only focusing on science
education. The math and science
advisory Council at the moment
is working on updating their
STEM strategic plan and also
having beginning conversations
of defining STEM in New Mexico.
So thinking about so just going
to our science visioning work,
um, we have contracted with
external consultants who've done
this work nationally to work
with us and partners to identify
key stakeholders from educators
to administrators to policy
makers, parents, guardians,
students, industry
representatives and community
leaders. We've convened
A steering committee in late May
to develop and guide the some
engagement methods such as
surveys, interviews, um, to
collect some initial data from
the broad from our broad
stakeholders. Um, we sent out a
survey in early June to collect
anonymous data. Um, the public's
perception on science education
that survey is still open and
will be closing at the end of
the month.
month
Um,
We're then gonna plan on
reconvening the steering group
next month.
To get guidance on how do we
develop the stakeholder meetings
to analyze the data, look at
developing the focus groups, um,
for the fall. The ultimate goal
will be to develop to have an
assessment to understand the
current state of science
education in New Mexico.
To develop a statewide science
vision and then ultimately
develop tenants that will lead
to the development of a New
Mexico science framework.
We see many intersections with
the with a potential STEM
innovation network. Um, this
will help to expand STEM
education in New Mexico. We see
the network being a vehicle to
operationalize the.
Uh, forthcoming New Mexico
science vision, but also to
operationalize the already
existing New Mexico math
framework.
Uh, the network could also
support statewide STEM
initiatives such as the New
Mexico Governor STEM challenge
and expand high quality STEM
instructional strategies, such
as adoption in and
implementation of high quality
instructional materials,
programs for uh that support
high quality STEM instruction
and increasing the coherence
between in school and out of
school STEM instruction and
access to those resources.
The network has the potential to
reach rural or smaller
communities that may not have
the infrastructure in place.
We also want to continue having
collaborative conversations, um,
to ensure that the 4th.
That the potential STEM
innovation network is in
alignment with the 2007 math and
Science Education Act and aligns
to or complements the scopes of
work of the math and Science
Advisory Council and the CTE
State Advisory Board and should
account for already existing
policy and statute.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for allowing us to speak
here, um, about the STEM
network. Um, I only have 2
slides.
Um, those two slides are really,
um about access and equity and
why it's imperative that we have
a network to provide more access
and equity to students across
the state. Um, my name is Wanda
Bulger Thomas. I am the director
of the STEM Outreach Center, and
we do provide professional
learning experiences in STEM, as
well as at a school time
programs and coordinate a
graduate program for teachers at
New Mexico State.
Um, so the first slide is really
about KO students and access and
so what a network could do is
promote inquiry-based and
hands-on learning and STEM
concepts for every pre-K student
across the state. And a story
I'll tell is that we have uh a
grant right now to support high
dosage tutoring and mathematics
for elementary students. That
has
Very promising showing it's for
students who are scoring below
proficient in mathematics in
elementary school. So it's meant
to provide small group setting
intervention, but not more of
the same, something that is
game-based, uh, research, uh,
informed, um, and actually
really fun for kids and it's
provided in and out of school
time program. So there are 100
teachers that are participating
this year. We'll be able to
serve about 800 students. So
there are more than 800 students
that need.
in mathematics and that
intervention. And so, and we're
serving districts from Aztec all
the way to Las Cruces, but, but
really it's a handful. We have 5
school districts that we're
working with. There are many
more that need the service. And
so what a network could do is
provide those resources through
the hubs to other districts
across the state.
The second bullet is about
expanding STEM after school
programs and summer camps.
Currently, um, the STEM Outreach
Center is working with about 100
schools, um, mostly in southern
New Mexico, and um what I love
about what Heather said is
The hubs would would allow for
um school districts to define
what is important to them. So
when we work with 100 schools,
it's not 100 1 size fits all
programs. Each learning center
gets to decide what is its
priority. Are they going to
prioritize, um, hands-on
science? Are they going to
prioritize, um, uh, well, it
could be math, it could be
dance, it could be um a myriad
of things that are
Presented in that school's
culture. And so it's how do we
entice kids to be a part of an
after-school program, um, that
is going to connect with who
they are as humans, while also
promoting STEM. And the schools
get to define what that looks
like. So we're working right now
with about 7000 students, um,
about 6000 in Donana County, and
I have to say we are blessed in
Donana County because most of
the kids who want to be in an
afterschool STEM program can be.
But what we know in New Mexico
based on the after school
alliance and
Also New Mexico out of school
time program is for every one
student who is in an
after-school program. There are
3 others in New Mexico who are
not or don't have access to it.
And so the network is providing
those sorts of curriculum
resources, technical assistance
to schools across the state to
be able to create a robust
afterschool program or summer
camp. Um,
The uh the picture there on the
bottom in the middle with the
little boy, that's from one of
our, our summer camp summer
camps in Gadsden where they're
learning about a 3rd grade
they're learning about NGS
standards, they're, they're,
they're being engineers for 3
weeks. And so they talk about
we're engineering a boat, um,
that can be transferred through
wind energy. And so, so the kids
are learning to design and
redesign and also the teachers
at that time are learning more
about NGSS standards and how to
incorporate those
ideas in their regular school
day. OK, so out of school time
programs are way important for
OK, I'm gonna, I'll be brief.
I'll, I'll move on. Um, uh,
expanding career experiences for
students. We have a little bit
of state legislative funds for
them, what we call our pipeline
funds and what we know is not
enough students in New Mexico
have experiences where they know
what it means like what am I
gonna do after I graduate from
high school.
I want to go to college? OK,
that's what I'm supposed to do.
Um, but they may not have any
idea what that looks like and so
an example about 3 years ago
with this funding, we had some
funding to take kids from
Chaparral to NMSU for an Aggie
experience. And so these are
juniors and seniors who are
going to come on campus and tour
the campus, go to a football
game, and, um, out of the 40
kids that got on the bus, 2 of
them had been on campus before.
And Chabala's 40 minutes away.
They had no idea what they were
getting into.
And so.
This year, I'm really excited to
say we were able to bus all the
juniors from COre over for an
Aggie experience we have now
closer to 200 kids that are
coming on campus in the summer
and through field trips to
understand what the
possibilities are and so the
pictures you see um there on the
right is they're going to DACC
not just NMSU. They're finding
out what 2-year programs are
about. So the kid is learning
about that he's doing the
chemistry expe experience and
learning about what
Different chemicals, what color
fire they can that will burn and
then the student and below is in
a coding program, but, but
they're not just going and
listening to a financial aid or
admissions, you know, they, um,
presentation, they're actually
going to different departments
and learning what the
possibilities are. They're going
to a two-year programs, 1 year
programs, 4-year programs. So
they can see themselves, um,
they can see their future selves
in a STEM or other career. OK,
so access for students. The
other
Um, slide, the next slide, oops,
I'm supposed to do this, right.
Help me out, Shavi.
OK, thanks. Um, is thinking
about access for high quality
teacher professional learning in
STEM. Um, one program that I
think you heard about yesterday
from my colleague, Patricia
Carden, is expanding um the
elementary math and science
specialization program. We, we
know that elementary teachers
need more content knowledge than
STEM. You can't teach STEM if
you don't know STEM. And so what
we're doing is providing a
program that immerses them in
those experiences. And, you
know, we have classes that are
that are
by engineers and by biologists
and by educators and
mathematicians because we, and,
and they're not just like more
math, we're not taking
differential equations to figure
out how to teach a third grader,
um, how to add and subtract, but
they're designed specifically
for elementary teachers to
understand the research of how
kids learn mathematics, how kids
learn science, and um right now
we have um um teachers who we
don't have any scholarship money
for them. I mean, we have a
little because we've been
piecemealing any bits of money.
that we have to provide at least
partial scholarships, but, but
what right now when we invite
teachers to participate, they're
having to cover the full cost of
that program when they sign up
and then when we have money, we
give them money to pay for
classes.
Um, we'd like to scale up
professional learning. I through
the public education department
and some congressional money
that we have, we've been
creating these micro
credentials, um, and those micro
credentials that I'm excited
about is you don't have to just
take them online. It could be a
an instructional coach at a
school that says, I want to work
with my K-2 teachers around some
concepts and number. Well, you
could take that micro credential
and implement it in a PLC or
implemented in a workshop or
online, so they're versatile.
And that the content is there
for our professional
development, um, um, providers,
but they're not having to build
all the activities for the
teachers.
The other, so, so I think the
STEM network could help us
through those hubs provide the
technical assistance so that
teachers have more access to
professional learning. Students
have more access to STEM and I
think it's already been talked
about that that through this
work, we would be convening
partners regularly to share the
resources that we have because I
think in the brief, it talks
about having silos. We have some
great programs in New Mexico.
We've got Meso, we've got Lanel
Foundation, we've got MSA, we've
got, I mean, there's, there's a
lot of programs, but we're not
coordinated in a way that we're
ensuring that all students and
teachers are served across the
state.
Thank you.
Good afternoon. um, Mr. Chair,
Madam, members of the committee.
Uh, this is my first meeting
hearing of any sort, so excuse
me if I am mess up in any way.
I'm sorry about that. Uh, my
name is Monica Sandoval Johnson,
and I run Stem Boomerang and so
I kind of bring a different take
here for this presentation. We
really work on workforce
readiness and getting
professional students into their
professional career. So not
necessarily at the K through 12
with STEM education and
exposure, but more of getting
them into their jobs. And
So I'm bringing that take to how
the STEM network could really
work and how connecting the dots
and preparing our students for
the education side, but also
ultimately getting them into
their, their jobs. And so, um,
oftentimes we work with hundreds
if not thousands of
professionals over the years
we've been doing stem boomerang
and we hear regularly, if not in
every professional, um, that
they did not know about the
breath opportunity that's
available to them here in the
state. So they're educated here,
uh, they go to school here and
then they, they go to college.
and then they don't quite know
what's available to them in
industry when they're ready to
enter the job market. Um, and
that's a huge miss because
oftentimes we lose New Mexican
graduates to out of state
because they don't know the
opportunities that exist for
them here. And that is a lot of
what started Stem Boomerang. Uh,
boomerang being the aspect of
leaving the state and then
coming home. So just brief
overview. I have a boomerang
story, as do many of the people
that I know. I left the state.
I'm a 5th generation New
Mexican, and I left.
The state for higher education,
I wanted to go to grad school in
Colorado, so it wasn't too far,
right? I was still kind of
close. I could drive home. I
ended up spending 5 years there
getting my PhD in uh the
pharmaceutical sciences, so I
did a lot of drug discovery and
and um a drug identification
work, and then I went off to do
my postdoc at the University of
North Carolina in Chapel Hill.
So I moved even further to the
east coast. Again, all of my
family is in New Mexican. I am
well versed in the New Mexican
culture. And so there was a time
when I spent
A UNC running a 3 year research
grant, uh, that I wanted to come
home after that was over. I was
ready to sort of um uh plant my
roots down again, build my
family with my husband. And so I
started to transition back to
New Mexico. And what I was hit
with was that I could not find a
job. So I had these highly
specific skills um in the
pharmaceutical sciences. I had a
PhD. I did a 3 year program at
UNC Chapel Hill, one of the best
pharmaceutical sciences um at
universities in the world.
And I could not find a job here
in my hometown, and I was well
connected, so I knew a lot of
people from the university. I
was heavily invested in my
education at the university
level. um, and I still found it
difficult to navigate. And so
that's why we started Stem
Boomerang because there was a
challenge for many professionals
to navigate the job market. Not
just those out of state,
although it's exacerbated. But
those in state as well.
And so we started it to really
foster the STEM workforce in New
Mexico. So we offer hiring and
outreach events, we do um we
promote New Mexico job
opportunities so that oftentimes
kind unnoticed, but that needs
to be something that we focus
on. So what job opportunities
are available for the workforce
now. And uh we also offer a lot
of employer support and that's
kind of where my view is going
to come in on this, is that we
have heavily invested in
industry connections. So
oftentimes at the uh education
level, higher ed.
But even K through 12, it is not
the industry connection is not
well aligned. So I can go and
give a presentation, say at CNM
or UNM, uh, to a group of uh
masters students or
undergraduate students, and they
have not heard of probably 80%
of the companies that I present.
New Mexico-based companies doing
innovative technologies here in
our state. They've never heard
of them. Um, and that's because
professors and teachers don't
have the access to connect with
the industry. We need that
centralized hub. How do we
support students as
Grow through their careers um
through K through 12 and then
through higher ed. And then how
do we ultimately get them into
the job. There needs to be a
network, sort of this connective
tissue, if you will, in place to
support that.
And so, um, what we've learned
of doing stem boomerang for the
last I guess 7 years, um, is
that students are not prepared
to enter the job market. They do
not have a technical skills that
they need to um meet the
industry demands. And that's
because oftentimes they have
narrow exposure to the diverse
career opportunities like I had
presented on. They didn't know
about all the opportunities that
are available to them. Uh, there
was inadequate access to
work-based learning
opportunities. Um, for instance,
I'm working with a semiconductor
industry right now.
Now, there's about 17,000 jobs
in the semi semiconductor
industry in New Mexico, um,
through three major employers,
Intel, Sandia National Labs, and
Solero. 17,000, um, that are
employed in our state. We have
less than 100 internship
opportunities from those three
entities in our state every year
for students. So that we are
not, they're not gaining the
access that they need because
they cannot receive that
technical assistance when
they're in their education. Um,
and there's also insufficient
awareness of the robust
Employer ecosystem in New
Mexico. So there's over 3000 New
Mexico-based STEM employers in
our state. Um, and we know that
the top ones, of course, our
largest employers, but there are
so many innovative technologies
happening in our state that a
lot of the workforce can um
transition into. They just don't
know that they exist. Um, and so
that's where we kind of come
working with both the job
seekers and the uh the industry
partners, that the employers of
our state is that we came up
with this idea of this
internship co op model. It's not
a novel.
I idea, but our state really
doesn't have this, and that's
really investing in future STEM
workforce today. So how do we
get them the on the job learning
and technical skills that they
need while also getting industry
buy-in, so it benefits both
sides. It benefits the
workforce. They're getting
technical skill training that
they much need to be ready for
the industry while also helping
support the industry in a
pipeline of workforce. So we
hear all the time from industry
partners, we don't have enough
workforce, our talent pool is
limited. Um, well, we need to be
the ones.
that helped train that and
foster that talent pool. So this
internship co op model is
something that Stem Boomer in
conjunction with New Space Nexus
is putting on and getting
funding for. Um, and this is
where the STEM network could
potentially support as a hub. So
this is a component of what the
hub can support, not just the K
through 12 education and
curriculum, but how do we
ultimately get our students into
jobs.
And so we are initially doing a
gap analysis, so we're trying to
understand what programs are
available for uh New Mexico
learners, and this is pre-K all
the way through a graduate
education. What types of
programs, and these are more
informal STEM education programs
for those that are out of
school, um, then the STEM
outreach center is one of the
largest, probably the largest,
um, of these STEM outreach
programs. And so there's lots of
programs available. There's not
a lot of connection. There's a
huge amount of siloing.
It comes to this. Um, and we're
also trying to understand what
the data trends are in STEM and
then also how the workforce is
ready in the eyes of industry
leaders. So they receive
candidates every every day for
positions that they have open,
what are they seeing in the laps
of actual technical skills that
they're missing. So that's what
we're doing with this gap
analysis and what we've found so
far is that there's 49 programs
identified across the state um
with broad programming, so
limited industry specificity,
like I said, semiconduct.
the semiconductor industry is
growing in New Mexico, yet we
have very limited specificity
specificity, excuse me, for
support in that arena. Uh, and
that's just one example. Space
is another example as well. Uh,
it's often co-localized with
institutes of higher ed, and so
that lays out a lot of the rural
communities, and they're not
easy to navigate, and that's I
think where I really was
interested when I heard about
the STEM network, is that
there's no clear connectivity
between these programs. There's
a lot of support available for
Students, um, not as much as
we'd like, but there is a lot.
How are these programs
connected? Um, where is that
sort of connective tissue, if
you will, and how can they
easily navigate it. So I
actually have a group of interns
doing this research. They're
going out, they're and they're
great, right? They're high
school and college students,
they know how to research on the
internet and they have a very
difficult time figuring out how
to find programs at a specific
age range and a specific
technical or STEM arena. And so
could you imagine how difficult
it can
be for someone who maybe has
limited access to the internet,
um, so honestly, there could be
more support in this. So what is
the STEM innovation Network in
my eyes and how I can see this
benefiting a group like STEM uh
Boomerang or other organizations
that are doing really good on
the boots on the ground work to
help with the current and career
readiness initiatives. So
oftentimes it's about connecting
the dots. So how do we get them
interested in STEM careers? How
do we get them access and
exposure to what STEM careers
look like. How do we get them
into the pathways, so not
necessarily a pipeline because
Pipelines, um, it's commonly
referred to as pipelines. I
don't like to use that because
oftentimes means that you can't
get out of the pipeline or come
into it, so I like to see the
pathway. So how do they move
along this pathway. Then when
they're ready for their careers,
how do they gain internship
opportunities to then get access
to those types of careers? How
do they get their feet in the
door essentially with an
employer. And then ultimately,
how did they get the great job
in New Mexico that we all train
at these students to get. So
that's where I see the STEM
innovation network.
Working, connecting these dots
between all the programs that
are doing the support, um, and
allowing access for students at
any age in any um range to be
able to meet these needs and
find access to it.
And that's all I have. Thank
you.
OK, thank you, Monica, thank you
for the other panelists and uh
in closing, you know, I think
that it's talked about a lot in
education policy that, uh, we
rely on.
Schools to fix a lot of the
problems that are facing us as a
society, uh, and people often
lament the fact that we don't
take a whole of society approach
to addressing these issues. Uh,
in my view, that's what this
network is supposed to be. It is
meant to bring together all of
these well-intentioned folks
from across a spectrum of
industry and and the broader
community to support high
quality STEM education and also
high quality STEM career
pathways. And so in closing, I'd
like to
Turned to the policy brief at
the beginning right after tab 9
and on the bottom of the last
page you'll notice I did skip
over a part and that was
intentional, I promise.
Uh, you'll note a list of 4
recommendations for you as
legislators to consider ahead of
the 2025 60 day session.
Throughout this panel you've
heard from STEM leaders at both
the state and national levels to
understand how this connective
tissue of a stem network could
support and enhance STEM
education and STEM more broadly
in New Mexico.
I do want to stress again, as I
said at the beginning, that this
is by no means a silver bullet.
The network is not in and of
itself a solution to all of the
problems facing our state
students and educators in
preparing for a STEM-driven
world. But by developing this
infrastructure now, we could lay
the necessary groundwork to
better support our existing
resources and build for the
capacity in the years ahead.
So before we stand for questions
as a panel, I would like to
leave you with the following
policy options.
In the next legislative session
or in the years to come, the
legislature could consider
establishing a center of
excellence for STEM education at
a higher education institution
to function as the STEM STEM
network's central hub.
You could designate either the
public education department or
the higher education department
as the fiscal agent of the STEM
Innovation Network, and you can
create in statute the stem in NM
steering committee including
membership to oversee the
operations of the central and
regional hubs. And finally, you
can appropriate $6 million in
funding over the course of three
years to support the development
of the STEM Innovation Network
and its components.
Today's presentation is most
certainly not the end of this
conversation. Uh, but I
sincerely hope that today has
provided a clearer picture of
what a STEM network is and what
it can be in New Mexico and what
it would do to support STEM in
our state. Uh, so with that,
I'll step off my soapbox and we
stand for questions. Thanks.
All right, thank you all.
Represent Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that presentation. Um, when
did Pattel start this program?
Mr. Chair and representatives of
the committee, um, history
lesson. I have to do it. Um,
gosh.
I, I feel like it was around
2006 or 2008 for Ohio. It's been
a long time.
Mr. Chair and, uh, Heather, I, I
actually was a founding director
of the Lionel Foundation, so we
had done the in career science
and uh the tail came and talked
to me. I went out to Ohio and I
looked at the tails and I looked
at and they were putting in so
much money into it at the time.
I just, I, I came away saying I,
I couldn't even with.
You know, and I was, I was the.
What was like the president of
the uh New Mexico Association of
Grant Mayors. I couldn't even
see how I could put the money
together at the time to do that
and it was nothing like $2000 a
year. I'm just gonna tell you it
was they were just pouring money
into it, and of course it was,
it was a combination. Ohio has a
lot of industry, so it wasn't
just Patel, it was a lot of
industry which we don't have
here, uh, pouring millions into
this.
Program, so I, I just didn't
even know how we would begin, so
I'm actually
Uh, very pleased with this
proposal. I must say I believe
in the power of nonprofits to
change lives. I, uh, I, I think
they're vital and we certainly
have the connections, um.
Uh, I, I, I'm curious, Heather,
how, what is your annual budget?
Stemex does not have an annual
budget. No, not for New Mexico,
you're, you're just not in the
mix. Are you just in New Mexico
now? I am in Columbus, Ohio, and
I managed the STEX, which is um
just funded by overhead for
education and philanthropy, the
STEM network in Tennessee, the
allocation that we have, I think
is $1.7 million in Ohio, I
believe it's 1.5 million every
year, but
To your point, Representative
Frea, um, that those are not the
only dollars. I think going back
to this notion of collective
impact. Um, we're able to
leverage external grants that we
win, you know, competitive
awards from organizations like
the Office of Naval Research,
um,
I do not have an exact figure on
the total budget, but I will say
that the $6 million that you
could put in plus all of the
learning that we've all done
over the last decade, to be able
to figure out how to stand up
and mobilize the STEM network,
we'll certainly put you well on
the path. And uh Mr. Chair, I
would like to say it is the
power of collective grant
writing that will get you the
money. I'm sure that you will
probably triple that amount of
money in by 3 years.
I'm, I'm sure of it.
That would be incredible just
because, you know, I, I, as the
director of the Atlanta
Foundation, I raised $150
million over a 17 year period.
80 of that was left in an
endowment, but we spent 70
million in the community and of
that.
I mean, I mean, we just, uh, you
know, we had partnerships with
the Smithsonian that brought in
$100 million to the state. So
there's a lot right now in STEM,
there's so much activity, so
I'm, you know, I think this is a
well thought out plan. I, I
just, uh.
I will be glad to carry this
legislation if nobody else wants
to on the floor. I, I have some
familiarity with how these
things work and how they how how
it has a real multiplier effect
and um and uh you know, the
devil's always in the details,
but, but I, I think this is a a
very good, uh, plan, and I, when
I first opened it up, I said,
well, I know, I know this there
we can't do it, but Tell did,
but I see you.
Really, really changed the, um.
The strategy, if, if nothing
else, so I, I appreciate all
this work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Presumed care.
Uh, thanks, Mr. Chair. I, um,
before I ask a question, I just
could, um, Fran Stewart and Shan
Williams, could you just stand
up. These are two women in
engineer fellows, they are
tireless champions, uh, Jan is a
constituent of Senator Pope and
myself, as he likes to say, she
never hesitates to wake him up
early in the morning to talk
about this, but just this is,
you know, citizens and actions.
I just want to really thank you.
Um.
Um, Mr. Chair, Wanda, you said
something so incredibly simple
and I don't know if everybody
heard it getting students to
college campuses, and I say that
because my, I, I taught at a
middle school in the South
Valley of Albuquerque, and my
math science partner and myself
took 60 kids to UNM on a public
bus. First of all, it was one of
those connected with a a thing
that you don't want to get
caught in the middle. One of
them had been on a bus before,
OK.
So, you know, technology in
action, they got to the
university and you might think
this is superficial, but it's
not. They looked at me and they
said, Miss Joy, look at all the
cute boys. So it's like if
you've never been to a college
campus and somebody says, are
you going to go to college, you
get a degree. It's, it's way up
here, but if you go there and
you see attractive people that
are engaged, it's
Think about your own college
experience. OK, I just wanna say
that, so taking kids to campuses
is really profound. I also wanna
thank Wanda, I think you've
presented to science and tech
about the work. I thought
already at that time that we
were gonna have a stem center of
excellence centered at NMSU just
to let you know. Um, but, um,
This is really vital. We, we
have to do it and um we have to
do it and it's like 2 million a
year over 3 years. It's really
nothing, so, um, and I know that
Jane and Fran have reached out
to many people on this panel.
You've heard Susan say that
she's in, um, we just have got
to do it. So thank you. That's
it.
S.
I was hoping we'd get Senator
Sols Mr. Chair, first wanted to
make sure I was gonna I was
gonna move a Du pass and act
like we're in a committee.
But, uh, I
I just, uh, Mr. I just want to
thank uh Fran and Jan, um, and
this is just a perfect example
of ideas, policy and legislation
coming from community and
people, you know, she actually
called me about this. Uh, we set
up a Zoom and talked. Uh, it was
like right after I was elected
and we've been really trying to
push this and for me, this is
just so important because what
you're talking about.
is what's impacted me.
Um,
You know, I never thought I was
gonna even go to college. I.
Never thought about these things
and because I never seen people
that look like me with STEM
degrees.
You know, when you talked about
engineers or scientists, it was
like, oh, that's just on TV,
that's in a movie, it's, I don't
know anyone in my neighborhood.
I don't have anybody that I'm
related to in these fields. And
so I had to go in the Air Force,
got a biochemistry degree, and I
actually got to work in these
areas, you know, when I got to
work on satellite programs I get
to work on rockets to launch
satellites in space. I got to
work on.
You know, science projects for
the Air Force and so there's
opportunities that I never would
have been able to do if I
wouldn't have seen it, if I
wouldn't have met people that
told me that there were these
opportunities. And I think so
much in New Mexico, we see this,
there's people who think that
they can't do things and
literally they live a few blocks
from where these things are
happening. I think about in
Albuquerque on Gibson near the
Kirtland Gate when I used to
come out.
And there's kids there thinking,
oh, I don't have anything to do
with technology and we're
literally operating satellites
only 2 blocks from their home.
And some of them don't have
broadband, but that's another
issue we'll continue to work on
that, but.
These are the jobs of the future
and there's jobs that we don't
even know about yet. And I get
frustrated so much when I hear
from, you know, our labs, I hear
from AFRL. Oh, we, we don't have
the workforce here, we, we
don't, we don't have the people
here.
And in some cases, that is true.
But in some cases, my friends
have went and got their STEM
degrees and you're right, they
don't have, they didn't get the
internship or they don't even
know about the opportunities
that are here in our state, so,
you know, they go, you know, the
Bay Area and go work in Silicon
Valley or go somewhere else.
And so if we're really going to
change.
Really what happens in our
state. We talk so much about
where we're ranked and what
people are dealing with and
people who are impoverished.
This is part of the way that we
do that is to bring people out
of poverty and give them the
opportunities. And that, that,
that goes with, you know, how
we're living that goes with what
we're dealing with when we talk
about public safety and crime,
we have to make it towards a
situation where folks aren't
even thinking about making those
types of choices.
Um, and it's gonna bring in a
bigger tax base so we can
provide.
More of those services and
support systems, so, um, I just
want to thank Jan, Fran, I know
there's been more people from uh
Swe as well. I want to thank the
panel. I really want to thank
Connor. He's went over this with
me, and I know he's been doing a
lot of the work. Um, I
appreciate it.
Um, and I just hope that they're
probably going to be some more
questions and making decisions
on where this goes, but I, I
just hope that members on LASC
and the legislature and LFC that
we can come to some type of plan
or decision to really make this
happen. It might not be exactly
what's on this paper.
But we have to have to do
something. This is the amount
we're talking about, we're going
to get so much more in return.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The comments questions. Is that
again oh
well, turn on your microphone
and please make it real fast,
representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, I just would like the
body to know that we've spent so
far about 45 million on the
family income index and with not
really measurable results. I
just want to put this in a
perspective. Thank you.
All right, so anybody else? OK,
um, I did have a question, uh,
Doctor Walter Thomas,
if I may, um.
When you talk about the uh
Statewide community based or
professional learning workshops
that you all have um for
teachers.
When does this happen for the
teachers you work with?
Um, so is this after school,
during school, summer.
Um
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, different ways. And
so we have different projects
that that provide different
sorts of support. So let's go
EMSS, um, that happens during
coursework that usually is on
Saturdays and sometimes Sundays,
um, depending on where teachers
are coming from, but all the
coursework is also situated in
the classroom and so the
homework assignments are based
on going back to your classroom,
trying something with kids,
videotaping what's happening
and, and coming back. And so the
same with the the math, um.
The mass intervention that
happens over a week in the
summertime, plus one Saturday a
month and then implementing
activities in their classroom,
bringing back, how is that
working and, and teachers honing
their practice. So we try to
combine it within school
practice and Saturdays or
summer.
Oh, that's the question I had
because we've been talking a lot
about training. Training's been,
um, a big issue, and I'm just
thinking about, you know, me as
a teacher and my own workload
and um continued workload that
we put on teachers and keeping
that also in mind as we work
through some of these
initiatives, um, is, is not
overbearing on our teachers and
our, our, our current teacher
workload, um, because one thing
I failed to mention during the
last presentation I will hear is
that
Hopefully those that are on our
committee, I know most of us
have been in education that
those have not understand how
absolutely complex it is and we
talked yesterday about reviewing
IEPs and BIs and making sure
that we're good on those, but
also being able to assess where
our own students are at any
given point, and then like you
all are proposing in this is
continued educational
opportunities for educators to
provide those opportunities.
turn to to our students as well,
um, but I guess this is a, this
is a bit of a big puzzle for us
to put together in how we
navigate um the time that we
have with our educators to keep
them engaged and hungry to learn
right along with our students,
um, because I think that'll be
equally important as we continue
on talking about STEM math,
social studies, and all the
other different subjects that
that we continue hearing but
Making sure that we're not
making it so that we're
overloading and over jamming
our, our work population as well
cause.
Us educators are going to be
vital to any of the work coming,
uh, um, coming through the work
that we do and the work that you
all do as well.
Well, thank you all so much. We
really appreciate your testimony
and your expertise and the work
that you all do. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Connor.
All right, so.
Believe that concludes our work
for today.
Oh, Uwe, this is, I understand
your last day, so thank you for
joining us. Hopefully you've had
a valuable um experience here
with us and us.
All right.
She'll be a senior. Cool. Well,
best of luck in your senior
year. All right.
So that concludes our work for
today. We'll be back tomorrow at
9.
Tomorrow, yep.
All right. Thank you, folks.
