Thank you,
um, thank you very much for
joining us. I will now turn it
over to uh Senator Munoz, the
chairman.
Good morning or good afternoon,
everyone, uh, this morning we're
glad to present the legislative
Finance Committee's uh budget.
uh, we're going to bring that
forward. Uh, it's designed to
carry New Mexico on a new path
and it clear trajectory for
long-term success for New
Mexico.
The LFC's budget, 26 budget
represents a total of $10.8
billion in reoccurring general
fund spending, which is about a
5% year over year increase.
Uh, New Mexico is fortunate to
have over 3.4 billion in new
money.
And 2 892 million of that, uh,
new money is in reoccurring, and
it's a consensus revenue
estimating group from the Craig
out of that.
New Mexico.
is in the best financial
situation it's ever been in its
history.
We were experiencing 6% stable
growth. If we go above 6% to
10%, we start to see that
stability lose and we start to
lose seed growth, lose in New
Mexico. At a 10% or higher.
Spending New Mexico would
quickly uh start seeing a
deficit spending.
If we do maintain responsible
policies in New Mexico.
We'll continue on this growth
the path.
Um, for the next 10 years.
The budget reflects a thoughtful
approach.
To making investments that will
benefit our children, our
grandchildren, by, by
prioritizing education, health
care, jobs and opportunity.
With that all handed over to uh
vice chair uh represents. Thank
you.
Uh, well, good afternoon. I
wanna first say uh thank you to
all of the LFC members to
compliment Chair Munoz. I think
this LFC has been an exceptional
one where we're able to travel
the state engage with New
Mexicans whether it's at their
work, in schools, in healthcare
facilities and in so doing,
really bring forward a very
strong legislative budget, um,
this budget is focused on making
New Mexicans' lives better
immediately, and
setting a path over the next 5,
10, and even longer, 5, 10, and
more years to provide an
elevated quality of life for New
Mexicans want to illustrate
that, uh, we propose again
increase wages for teachers.
That is something that follows
on previous work the legislature
and the executive have done, but
in saving wisely and ensuring we
have future revenue, we're able
to ensure that not only do those
ers receive those wage, the
raises now, but that those
raises for teachers, law
enforcement officers, healthcare
professionals and others
sustain, whereas in past cycles,
uh, it was a much more of a boom
and bust approach. Again, we're
very focused on making life
better for New Mexicans every
single day, and we know that
with this budget and its
prioritization of healthcare,
housing, education,
infrastructure.
and public safety we're going to
be doing that. We have an
enviable opportunity in order to
spend increased uh amounts today
while also saving for the
future, and I wanna, uh, now
turn it over to some of both the
Senate and the House leadership
to reflect on what that overall
place means for the state of New
Mexico.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, committee members,
staff, a whole bunch of work
goes into making this happen,
and it's exciting to be here. I
just want to reiterate what an
extraordinary opportunity this
is for our state. Uh, our
neighbors to the north in
Colorado are facing our
legislative colleagues, they're
facing $700 million deficit as
they start their session and
look where we are, uh, this
budget is a responsible
investment in New Mexico's
future.
It continues doing something
that I think we've really
emphasized the last couple of
years using now money to make
future money.
And coming into the session,
we're gonna have a big focus on
behavioral health and the
framework for that is built into
this budget. There will be a
proposal for a new behavioral
health trust fund, and also an
infrastructure bill, again,
using non-recurring money to
address the immediate needs of
our citizens. So again, I just
want to thank all that worked on
this, and I'll say that I feel
like the legislative budget and
the executive budget.
You know, we're not that far
apart, and that's a really good
thing going into a session.
Thank you.
Understood.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
I'm gonna add my thanks to the
LFC, uh, we really do have a
good model. Icameral,
bipartisan, and just work one
week a month, every year, so
they have great subcommittees.
They have the good people on it,
so what they've come up with, I
think is really outstanding.
I'll just mention a couple of
other things that are in there,
uh, part of the uh proposal to
do a
community benefit fund to help
fund our communities all over
the state to do electrification
infrastructure to look at
expanding our grid, uh, doing
microgrids, uh, transportation
infrastructure, and clean jobs
infrastructure. Um, all of those
funds are designed to help
communities uh lower their
greenhouse gas emissions, uh,
have healthier air, land.
And water, so we're kind of all
on the same page for many of
these funds, uh, you'll see more
of it during the session, just
really proud of what LFC has
done, thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Munos and
Vice Chair Small and to, to the
entire legislative Finance
Committee. Thank you for your
hard work, uh, to the staff, you
guys do incredible work day in
and day out to Sharon Boylan,
where are you, Sharon? She keeps
LFC in line if you don't know,
get to know her. She, uh, she
knows where all the money is,
uh, look, I'm proud of this
budget again, because this is
something that will, it's a
budget that will continue to
invest in New Mexicans across
the state. This is about making
life more affordable for New
Mexico families.
This budget is about making our
communities safer. This budget
is about building more access to
healthcare, including behavioral
health and drug addiction
treatment, which we, uh, need
all over the state. Um, so, uh,
you know, as we, as we enter
the, the, the 2025 legislative
session next week. Uh, this
budget really is the guide and
the driving force of an entire
session, and I'm proud of the
work that the folks behind me
have done, and I'm proud of the
work of
All of the communities that
played a role in building this
budget over the last several
months. Thank you.
Thank you. I also want to echo
my thanks to this entire team,
um, I think we're in an exciting
moment where there's so much
collaboration between the House
and the Senate, and we're really
not that far apart from the
executive, um, that gives us a
great basis to begin the
legislative session. Um, I know
many of my colleagues in the
house have been passionately
working on behavioral health,
and we will finally see this
session, some real meaningful
progress that builds on
all of the progress that we have
made over the past few years.
Um, so you're really seeing the
culmination of a lot of
research, a lot of hard
conversations in community, um,
a lot of deep exploration of how
do we rebuild this system in the
way that works for New Mexicans
and I'm incredibly grateful for
the work of the finance
committee to make that a reality
and it's gonna happen this
session. Thank you.
Thank you, we're just gonna
touch on some highlights and
we're just gonna go in this
order. We're going to start off
with some healthcare highlights.
Thank you, Chairman. Um, in
terms of healthcare, uh, the
leadership has talked about the
importance of health care and
the LFC budget includes
approximately $15 billion for
health care, for the healthcare
authority, which is a 23%
increase over last year, um, the
LFC recommendation really
focuses on performance and
oversight.
Uh, working to strengthen our
hospital and behavioral
healthcare system. We have
utilized the grow fund to invest
in criminal justice and
behavioral healthcare reform,
especially with nearly $200
million in funding for support
for transitioning from prison,
medical respite for the
unhoused support for high-risk
pregnancies, as well as critical
uh crisis response, acute.
Care, community behavioral
healthcare and some of our
mobile crisis and recovery
response. So thank you very
much.
Hello everyone, thank you for
being here today. I get to talk
about the early childhood
recommendations, great things
are happening in early
childhood.
For the early childhood
education and care department,
the legislative Finance
Committee recommended an
increase in the general fund by
2.9 million, or 9/10 of a%.
However, the LSC recommendation
includes the general fund
revenue swap of 15.7 million
from the early childhood trust
fund for childcare assistance,
not including this revenue swap,
the general fund increased
recommendations by the committee
is 18.7 million, or 5.4%.
%
The recommendation for the use
of the trust funds includes 3.1
33 million for home visiting
rate increase, a 3.5 million for
pre-K quality support, 10
million for pre-K expansion, 2
million for tribal language
support and what everyone is
excited for, 11 million for
childcare assistance. The LFC
recommendation from the trust
fund also includes 5 million
transfer to the healthcare
authority.
For Medicaid maternal and infant
health services, 3.5 million um
child care quality improvement,
10 million for families,
infants, toddler, provider rate
increases.
1.2 million for personnel in the
FIT program, 600,000 for uh Dola
certification and other programs
implementation by the Department
of Health, a 750,000 for
personnel in program support and
150,000 for hearing screening
for our young children.
In FY 26, the LFC recommendation
increased the distribution for
the trust fund to 299 million.
So in total, the LFC
recommendation amounted to 842.8
million, reflecting a 7.3%
increase. Thank you.
OK
Well,
good morning.
For the Republican response. Oh
no, wait a minute.
Surprise
surprise. Maybe you thought I
was gonna talk about higher ed.
Today I, I'm here to talk to you
about higher end. We are really
trying to put a budget together
and have accountability in that
budget.
We are, we are striving to spin
the state taxpayers' money
wisely.
Every bit of this money comes.
From the state taxpayers, and
they should deserve the best
place to put that money and
today I want to talk a little
about higher ed, we are striving
to move toward a accountability.
Performance formula.
We are trying to
Who
The school's responsible for
educating our kids.
We're asking in this uh
committee recommendation for a
3% increase of general funds
appropriation to a total of $1.4
billion.
Uh, that's a 36.3% million
dollar increase.
We're gonna have a $3 million
distributors amongst all
institutions.
For a student support and mental
health. $750,000 for raises for
grad students. We don't realize
some sometimes being on the
outside, how much work grad
students do to educate other
kids, and we don't pay them very
well, so we're working towards
that. The special schools, the
schools for the blind visually
impaired, the death and Nemi
will receive a base increase of
about 3.
%
And this is one of my favorite
topics is research. Uh, we're
gonna spend a total of $5.4
million for research, including
1.4 million for agriculture
programs, 1.5 million for water
treatment.
And 1.7 million for nursing and
other healthcare related
programs are non-recurring
experience we're talking about
135 million for that, 40 million
for uh
Uh
facility management and uh uh
uh.
Demolition, I'm sorry. 20
million for student retention
incentives to be expected to be
spent over 3 years, 20 million
for technological enhancement
fund, 19 million for aquifer
mapping and characterization of
those aquifers, it's one thing
to discover the water, but it's
another thing to get that water
out of there. 15 million for the
medical education loan for
service program.
one of my favorites. How do we
get more doctors into the state
of New Mexico, that's one way.
Uh, thank you very much.
Good afternoon and uh thank you
to.
Everyone that is here today for
your time and to seeing, you
know, where we are in our state.
And uh as uh an educator for
many years, so, but I'm gonna be
presenting to you is on the
public education from K to 12
and uh how valuable this part is
to our state, you know, every
single day and with the LFC
recommendation increased
recurring general fund
appropriation. This will be to a
4.7 billion.
For public schools by 263
million or nearly 6% increase.
Uh, this includes some
sufficient funding to provide a
4% raise for all school
employees cover a 10% medical
insurance rate increase and
boost teacher and principal's
minimum salaries by $5000 for
the each of the licensors level
going to 55,000 level 2 665,000
in level 3, 75,000. Addition.
The appropriation for school
incorporates family income index
into the school funding formula,
improving the equity of state
distributions to low-income
students and increased funding
to support the needs of 6th
graders as they transfer
transition into the middle
school.
Like the prior year, the
committee recommendations
support key legislation
priorities for career and
technical education initiatives,
training in the science,
reading, and out of school
learning opportunities, new to
this year recommendation is 150
million appropriation to create
a research fund for studying
innovative proposals related to
math.
Achievement, indigenous
education, attendance,
improvement, innovative
staffing, and other promising
ideas over the next 3 years.
Thank you.
Good afternoon to everyone.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, co-chair,
members of the committee, our
leadership.
And of course, ultimately our
staff. We couldn't do without
you, truly, you know, much has
been said about the need for
housing and the shortage of
housing here in New Mexico,
especially the shortage of
inventory housing for um that's
affordable for people, but one
thing that I noticed, we are
doing differently this year in
approaching this big need is
changing our priorities a little
bit with respect to funding.
We are funding for supportive
housing for people experiencing
homelessness, and those affected
by substance abuse disorders and
other behavioral health issues.
We find that if we don't
approach this problem
comprehensively.
As in a cohesive manner where we
have a one stop shop, for
example, in treating the problem
for people who have mental
illness, behavioral health
issues, or substance abuse
disorders, uh, all together, if
we don't get it, get a handle on
it and provide housing for
people. How can we expect people
to survive and have a meaningful
result, um, at the end.
So, um, that's what we are doing
this year. Um, we also focused
on funding local governments and
continuum of care organizations
to intentionally and
strategically address homeless
encampments, for example, local
governments bringing them to the
table was huge through this
behavioral health package that
has been discussed and more will
be coming as far as the
discussions about it, but it's a
wonderful thing because what we
did this year.
And thanks to the people who
initiated the thought and the
idea uh to get this done. Um, we
have brought the stakeholders
that deal with this every day to
the table, for example, the
local governments, municipal
governments, um, organizations
that deal with these uh
situations of mental health
crisis and and uh behavioral
health issues and so on. We
brought him to the table and so
now we are funding local
governments.
In order to assist and make sure
that they can continue to
provide these services that we,
um, we work together on through
the summer in this uh
informational setting that we
did by bringing them to the
table. Um,
Housing in general, we have
approximately 50 million in the
budget, um, an infusion to the
mortgage finance authority.
To the Affordable housing Trust
Fund that we do, we try to find
it almost every year, but many
times it's not as much,
sometimes less, but we do all
that we can to ensure that the
fund continues to work, helping
people with um their housing
needs. This year, again, as we
moved a little bit off of the
routine affordable housing
venture. We are doing supportive
housing, uh, with this money
also, for example.
Supportive housing, many people
think, well, what is supportive
housing? It's all housing is all
supportive. Well, supportive
housing means, for example, that
you can have someone who is
coming off the street, but, um,
needs help and wants to get
rehabilitated or um he needs
help with her mental health
issues, and counseling, um,
substance abuse abuse issues,
uh, and they need different
kinds of behavioral health and,
and clinical health. Well,
What happens is that supportive
housing again through the
healthcare authority will be
provided to ensure that these
individuals will also have the
housing that they need as they
uh work with them to help in
these um terrible situations
that they live with every day.
Now, um, it's for transitional
housing also and uh substance
abuse, people with substance
abuse, as I mentioned, but so I
won't get so long here.
in my uh in my talk. I know
others want to speak too. We
also have $48.9 million for a 3
year grow pilot um at the
healthcare authority to provide
medical respite for the
homeless. A little bit of that
was said earlier. What that
means is that sometimes people
homeless people without a home
will end up in the hospital and
when they come out of there,
they go back onto the streets.
What we're trying to do here is
capture that need at the moment
and provide
Holmes, housing, respite for the
homeless and then continue in
this continuum that we're
talking about for behavioral
health services through the
behavioral health package that
is being provided.
36.8 million is also in here,
combined state and federal funds
for housing to build capacity.
Let's talk just briefly about
this, that housing is one thing,
but if we don't have the
clinicians, the specialists, the
um appropriate individuals to
help these individuals in need,
for example, counselors,
psychiatrists and others who
deal with this every day. If we
don't have the capacity building
in these homes.
Uh, or clinics we're just gonna
spin our wheels. So we're
approaching this as a holistic
comprehensive system to ensure
that we don't leave any of the
pieces hanging there, uh, in
cracks that will keep us from um
from uh getting these results
that we're looking for. Um, we
also have 5 million to local
governments, and I mentioned
that directly earlier, uh, and
for strategic planning, for
example, for the coalition to
end homelessness as an example.
Uh, so that we can all work
together and have all the pieces
um in one.
We also put together a 2.3
million of opioid recovery
funds, um, we have a fund, as
many of you know, that a spits
out approximately, I think it's
a little less than 20 million
per year, um, into the general
fund and this the funding goes
spread out to different
departments and um in this case,
the healthcare authority will
get 2.3 million for the of these
recovery funds to um for people
to uh for people affected.
by opioid use disorders
specifically, so, and then we
have finding in there for the
last for veterans and um and
here again, it's $200,000 for
homeless veterans and their
families, however, this would
not be the only piece of the pie
that the veterans would be able
to to come to. They would be
able to qualify for all these
other um funding mechanisms that
I just spoke about. So, um,
again, to keep it short, I spoke
to.
long already. Thank you so much.
This is my last press conference
before you, um, as I have
retired, I thought I had
retired, but I'm here, so I
guess I haven't, but um I just
want to thank each and every one
of you and, uh, of course, my
colleague's leadership and
everyone, I, I can't say enough.
Um, I'm truly standing here.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
First of all, to the uh to the
media. I want to thank you very
much for your coverage
throughout the, uh, interim. The
information that you
continuously provide our people
here in New Mexico. Is that
information that helps them to
not only know where we're at as
we travel around the state, more
importantly to help us as we
move forward with their
thoughts, their initiatives, and
more importantly, with the needs
of the state. So your coverage
definitely uh has not gone
unnoticed. It's, it's important.
To us as we move forward.
To our honorable leadership to
our chair, uh, Senator Munoz,
our vice chair, Representative
small to the members of the LFC
and most importantly to the
distinguished LFC staff.
As we move forward,
infrastructure continues to go
ahead and be one of the
important aspects of how we're
going to get these resources to
the people throughout our state.
We have $1.1 billion in
infrastructure resources that
are going to go for quite a few
of the projects.
The areas that we're going to
cover include water, roads, uh,
uh, to support some of the
federal grants that are coming
in. Some of our small
communities don't have the
resources to go ahead and match
whenever they're applying for a
federal grant. These were
resources definitely will help
them.
When we start talking about
parks or public service, if you
will, the CTE or the career
technical programs. We're gonna
see more and more of these
programs surface around our high
schools and what's going to
happen, that means that we're
gonna help people not only train
but be ready for employment as
soon as they leave high school.
That's gonna be very important.
Also, our healthcare facilities
there at UNMH. That's going to
be one of the big things as we
see the planning that's going on
now.
We're gonna see if you will,
healthcare is really at the
forefront of everything that we
do.
Along with that, there's several
others, and I'm not going to get
into the numbers if you have any
questions specifically, we can
talk about that, but basically
what we're doing for New Mexico
is we're building quality for
the lives of our residents and
for those people that visit,
those are guests, and most
importantly, as we take New
Mexico forward, infrastructure
is an important part of the
economy, and thanks to the
people that are here today,
they've invested in it, and
what's happened is we've
Listen, we've listened to the
people of New Mexico in every
corner of the state. Thank you.
Excellent. Uh, briefly, I want
to speak to some of our natural
resource investments as we know,
New Mexico is not only the most
culturally diverse state, but an
incredibly rich state with
natural heritage and natural
treasures. In fact, we're the
4th most biodiverse state in the
entire country. Right now we're
the 2nd largest producer of oil
in the entire country. At the
same time as we host the largest
onshore wind farm in North
America. And as we're poised to
grow into
either the largest or the 2nd
largest solar energy producer.
All of these seem to both our uh
budgetary strength now, our
ability to provide affordable,
reliable, uh, energy for our
residents and for economic
growth and diversification, it
truly will become the currency
of the new economy, how much
electricity at what cost and at
what level of carbon you're able
to provide will help.
determine the economic future
and will allow us to grow
robustly providing good paying
jobs for New Mexicans, while we
also safeguard our state. One of
the key parts to that is our
water future and so in this LFC
budget, we set aside nearly $300
million in non-recurring
investments, specifically for uh
water.
Quality, water quantity, and in
some of the things that like we
just heard from Senator Campos,
particularly for rural
communities to help bridge the
infrastructure needs and the
opportunities that they have
this really also illustrates
something that we've been able
to see over the last few years.
Last year we split $100 million
with 50 million to the water
trust fund, which of course,
generates 5% every single year,
which is important.
It grows, but that 5% of 50
million is going to be
insufficient for that
community's wastewater treatment
plan for the new water line or
to help treat water and reuse it
so that we or reduce pressure on
fresh water.
Accordingly, this year, with the
$300 million that's dedicated
entirely for these non-recurring
investments. The bulk of that
being dedicated to the water
trusts board, and as we look at
the balance between trust funds
and the non-recurring spending
that can boost services, not
only in natural resources, but
across other areas of state
government also think this does
well for us to, to guide us
along that road.
Uh, that's a bit about natural
resources, and I'll turn it back
to Chair Munoz.
So thank you guys. As soon as
we're gonna go to questions,
just one minute, but this group
of young people that year was
led by Charles and, and, and
really leads us in a nonpartisan
way. It is the most important
thing as we as LFC members
listening and recommend, but you
know, this group of young
people, um, and they're young,
they're a lot younger than me,
and, and so, uh, we don't know
how much we appreciate our
staff. And what you guys do for
us each and every day because we
mail.
They meet once a week, but you
guys are always there working
behind the scenes and working,
you're gonna have a tough 60
days, so get ready. Um, that's
my advice to you is, is where
I'm at in in Charles, thank you
guys and thank you to our staff.
Uh, no person can do this. We
could never do this even if we
work full time without this
group of of staff behind us. So
we appreciate you, uh, we thank
you for your commitment and your
time and and setting up New
Mexico the way we have without
this staff, without a lot of
people in there, we had not
been.
been able to set New Mexico up
the way it is now, so.
Well, we'll stand for questions
right now, so, and she'll have
the money.
I have 2 questions. The first
one is that we heard, uh, you
all say that the executive and
legislative budget.
proposals are not that far
apart, so my first question is
what are the main differences
between the executive and
legislative budgets. And the
second question that I had is
that we, uh, New Mexico is
obviously seen uh record
revenues and budget, big budget
increases in recent years, and
yet we're still struggling in
education, crime, and other
areas. So when are New Mexico
taxpayers going to see a return
on their investment.
I think they already do see a
return on their investment. I
mean, we can, as a legislature,
we can only set up of where
we're headed. We can't control
every situation in in
educational environment. One of
the best things that you're
going to see is, and it's a slow
move into that is how early
childhood education and how
that's gonna set us up. That's a
slow moving, that was a 4 or 5
year old agency that we've just
started, and they're already at
$700 million in operations. So
that's a slow change that you're
gonna see coming, um, on
The differences between the
governor and us, 1%, we have
more reserves than the governor
does. Um, there's a few
differences, um, mainly you'll
see some differences really in
um behavioral health and in the
way we did some road
infrastructure and and so we're
pretty close, that's the closest
we've ever been. I mean, 5.7%,
uh, really keeps New Mexico
whole for the next governor.
And we as legislators have been
here 20 some plus years, 30 plus
years, Senator Gonzalez is.
Been here for a long time. Um,
but we're here for the long time
and execs come and go.
And so as we see that in our
future, we're looking long term,
not short term.
Did I miss anything there.
Hi, everyone. Good to see you
all, uh, wanted to ask you, I
know this isn't part of the
budget recommendation, but if,
if there's room for a, you know,
a tax package, adjusting tax
rates or or rebates, you know,
given the, the revenue levels
we've seen over the last few
years, and if there's discussion
about some of those kind of
things. Well, over the last 4 to
5 years, we've, we've given
about $2.5 billion in tax
incentives, right? or whether
it's low income.
Uh, child tax credits, uh, film
tax credits. I mean, so there's
2.5 billion out there. There's
always room to look in where
they're targeted, um, but we
know that that our incomes
flattening. So as we flatten, we
have to look at those tax
credits, very cautiously, uh, is
there gonna be an offset for
that? What's gonna happen? Um,
the number one thing, you know,
in in across the state is
anybody knows I drive by 40.
The roads are the most critical
asset we have in New Mexico, um,
it, it's how I get to work every
day. It's how my employees get
to work every day, it's how we
move, uh, we may travel more
miles and and so roads are gonna
be a critical infrastructure
piece and, and so.
That's gonna be a an interesting
conversation as we move forward
through the session. I don't I
haven't heard of any tax
packages. I don't know any to
discuss so.
Thanks very much. Um, with the
new administration in
Washington, some people are
concerned about loss of federal
dollars in terms of things like
Medicaid, SNAP, that kind of
thing. Are there any provisions
within your proposals to fill
any of those holes is one
question. Another one is, um,
there was discussion during the
interim period of a of a
behavioral health trust fund,
um, is that funded in these
proposals?
You know, um, it's interesting
that you mentioned that I went
to a a legislative financial
leadership meeting in and out of
all the states there, that's the
number one issue uh with the new
president coming in. I don't, I
don't see that happening. Uh,
it's a number one issue across
in the states for everybody, uh,
Medicaid and and and how that
funding is going to be held, so
I don't see that in, and we can
react to that if that does
happen, we have the ability, we
have the the money to react to
that, um, but we'll see what
comes down the pipeline. Uh, the
dedicate, I I'll refer this to
Senator uhirth about our
behavioral health package, um.
Thank you, um, great questions.
Uh, I wanna, um, step back just
a little bit and uh.
Daniel, to your question, you
know, one of our most important
functions is accountability.
To ensure that dollars that are
set aside and invested by the
legislature, often in a
bipartisan way, reach their
intended um area support New
Mexicans again from day one and
I think there is a varied track
record of seeing that. So as we
go into the final two years of
this administration that
naturally will be one of our
very important focuses and of
course, I'm sure one of the
focuses for the administration
as well.
In the LFC budget right now,
there is a very strong start in
down payment when it comes to
behavioral health. Over $200
million addressing everything
from behavioral healthcare
professionals to housing to the
linkages and many other
components. There's not
currently a trust fund in the
LFC framework. And I think as we
sort of with the water
discussion, there can and will
be different perspectives
approaching this. But when we
see the acute
Healthcare needs that New
Mexicans have, and the driving
force that behavioral healthcare
or lack thereof is in driving
folks into homelessness or into
some of these situations on the
street, the need for that
healthcare and for those
services and for policy
improvements as well is
immediate.
And so if there are ways for us,
I think, to surge funding to
address some of those, that's
currently what the LFC budget,
uh sort of reflects a little bit
more now, although as we make
sure and look forward to paying
for these things into the
future, the approach is
obviously like a trust fund, uh,
need to be considered. I know
the Senate has been doing a
great will of, of work on that.
So, I think it'll be Senate Bill
1 to create uh a
Trust Fund for behavioral
health, and again, the
interesting thing when you're
using non-recurring money,
there's different buckets
throughout the budget process,
and I think the idea is to
hopefully get that up to a
billion dollars permanent fund.
Uh, again, that may not happen
the first year to get to the
full amount, we've kind of
loaded these up over time, but I
think it's similar to the water
issue, you need to have both a
recurring revenue stream for
continued investments moving
forward, and then you need to
have the immediate investments
that, uh, Representative Small
was Chairman Small was, was
mentioning, and I think you're
going to see proposals to do, to
do both, uh, and just
conceptually in conversations
I've had with the
Governor. Uh, she's been
supportive of using the one-time
money to create these funds, and
I think that's allowed us to be
in a position where we can have
a 5.7% budget proposal that
actually has lots of other
pieces built in which are
spinoffs from the trust funds.
So again, using one time money
to make future money, I think
you'll see see proposals on, on
that front.
Uh, so it, the, the bill's gonna
ask for a billion dollars.
And again
You know, that's the start and
how it actually gets structured
and where it comes from.
That's what 60 day sessions are
for.
Hello, um, last session there
was a push to help local
departments, you know, address
crime, um, in this budget, is
there gonna be anything for
recruitment retention or law
enforcement to support law
enforcement officials.
Uh, thank you. The, uh, both
increasing pay uh for first
responders including uh our law
enforcement professionals
recruiting recruitment and
retention remained very high
priorities. We need to make sure
that the funds that were set
aside and nearly $100 million on
the recruitment and retention
side, the expansion of that for
corrections officers, which of
course are a dire need as well.
We need to ensure that those
funds are utilized.
effectively, uh, and before we
set aside additional funding. I
think what we're hearing today
is that there is additional
funding that can be uh invested
in those priorities, but from an
accountability perspective, we
need to ensure that those funds
have been spent well. Fire is
another place for the first time
last year, there were
recruitment and retention funds.
That was something that was set
aside. There is a very robust
beginning to public safety, uh,
that has been set aside in.
This current budget.
Over $40 million and I expect
that we will only build on that,
and then we're gonna optimize.
We're gonna make sure that the
funds that are working,
especially recruiting local law
enforcement, getting folks off
the street, providing new
avenues for treatment and
dealing with really tough
challenges. I want to thank
leaders Zansky and so many
others, uh, Mr. Speaker, for,
um, building we're building the
infrastructure that was not here
during the special.
session as we look at things
like competency, so that there
are alternatives for folks, uh,
including potentially compelled
alternatives to ensure that
public safety uh improves and uh
that we have the funding to do
that, which this budget has a
strong start toward.
Yeah, very briefly, uh, we do
have a package as well that will
uh deal on the policy side with,
with competency, with treatment,
uh, building out programs like
the assisted outpatient program
through the courts to ensure
that those New Mexicans that
need those supports, those New
Mexicans who encounter law
enforcement for whatever reason,
who are suffering from drug
addiction, from mental health,
uh, disorders that they can get
those services that they need.
That's why it's so.
important to rebuild that
behavioral health system and,
and, and I want to emphasize the
word rebuild, because that
system was decimated 10 years
ago. Um, and so we have been
playing catch up ever since, um,
and so now we're at a point
where we have a, a very good
plan, both on the services side,
the infrastructure side, as well
as on the policy side, and, uh,
you'll, you'll, we'll, we'll
make sure that you all get a
briefing on those competency
bills as a, um, you know, as
they get.
tuned up over the next few days,
um, prior to the session
starting.
Morgan, uh Morgan Bright
to break my chocolate cake.
Um
I was just wondering, excuse me,
um,
Where the budget, if at all, uh,
money is allocated to the
governors, so called, you know,
strategic water supply for
recycling, uh, industrial
wastewater and the other one is
um
If the budget contemplates uh
new investments and, and, uh,
education for indigenous
communities like moving on from
the idea of um.
Uh, fun to, to support um
language instruction and things
like that, yeah.
So there is no, there is no
money in the budget for the
governor's strategic water plan,
uh, that was new to us and, and
we heard a bill last year and it
ended up in my committee and,
and there was no consensus on
it, and so we'll see what their
plan is today, but I know she
does have 75 million in her
budget for that plan. Uh, we'll
see what happens and what it
looks like during the session,
uh, Senator Wor said it best,
it's a 60 day session and, and
things that can change quickly.
Um, there is money in there for
indigenous education.
We know the Indian Childhood
Trust Fund, which was talked
about last year, uh, is very
critical, but we ran into an
imbalance and and how we, who
has the most kids, how that
works, uh, we in the
legislature, I think, are going
to look at how do we fund them
and how we fund them correctly
without creating a trust fund,
we could trade a $50 million
trust fund, but it only spins
off $5 million a year. We can
fund them at a higher level than
the trust fund can. And so I
think that's very critical that
money just.
Doesn't sit in the fund that
especially when we need a a
large part of my district is
Navajo and Zuni, and how we
handle that and and so.
On as the chair said, really
strong steps following
legislative leadership that
relate to funding for tribal
education departments were
taking the step as a legislature
recommending funding that goes
directly to tribal education
departments, bypassing some of
the um uh things for whatever
reason that kept that money from
flowing in the past, including
from uh the, the trust fund.
We're taking that forward step
and I think there's an intent.
to look at more potential in
that area. When it relates to
water, uh, as I talked about,
there is a very strong amount,
by far the most ever and
non-recurring just to the water
trust board over $200 million
that's set aside.
When we think about something
like the strategic water
reserve, which is a longtime
program, it exists to help uh uh
lease or purchase water rights
and take pressure off of
communities, uh, that and then
it's allowing uh communities to
find more in a way to innovative
ways to use their water, that's
clearly a way of saving water
just like better pipes in a more
efficient system. In the same
manner, something like the
strategic water supply.
Where there is sufficient
funding in our budget should uh
sort of a proposal coalesce if
we reduce pressure on fresh
water, and whether it's growing
and creating a data center,
building a clean manufacturing,
um, the solar, some of the solar
manufacturing or even an
expansion at Intel, to name just
a few examples. If you reduce
the need for those to utilize
fresh water that very directly
save.
fresh water for people, for
communities, again for our
environment as well. And at a
time where we're facing
projected 20% less surface water
saving that surface water,
reducing the pressure on that uh
surface water is a, I think a
key goal that we have very
strong funding.
I think
That kind of wraps it up. Thank
you guys for coming this
afternoon. Thank you for the
presentation. Thank you to our
staff and thank you to the
members of of uh ELSA.
Uh, the staff will be here for a
while and many of the members.
So if you have additional
questions, just let us know and
