service, um, and being willing
to want to work with us here at
the Legislative Education Study
Committee because said it was
very fitting that all of us are
here, um, because we're the
regulars and we're the ones that
um very much not to say anything
about our colleagues, but we're
the ones that that really,
really, really care about
education are very passionate in
it because um this has been and
continues to be our livelihood,
um, and the communities that we
grew up in, so thank you for
being willing to put yourselves
out there and wanting to be our
director.
Um, I also want to thank, um,
Alonzo for handling a lot of the
technical work, um, for us as
we've gone through this process.
Thank you very much, Alonzo. Um,
legislative.
All right.
Um
Our legislative council service
for handling um the logistics of
this and our direct um Shawna
Cape, thank you so much, um, for
the help and guidance in, in
this process, um, and certainly
the narrowing committee for
their assistance in reviewing
applications, um, and, and doing
that work representative Lada,
um, Madam Purte Stewart, uh,
representative, uh Meal Moya.
Thank you so much,
Representative Block,
Representative Saana for um
being a part
Of, of that process and being
willing to to um
Give your time to do that and
then members here, thank you for
being here. um, and
participating in the process.
So, um, at this time, I will
accept a motion, Madam Proton
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
After this thorough process and
after our interviews today, I
would like to.
Nominate for our next director
of LASC, Mr. John Senna.
All right, so we have emotion to
make John Senna, our director of
the Legislative Education Study
Committee is there. I second
that Moya,
thank you for the 2nd. Um,
Any objection from our voting
members.
Seeing none, it's unanimous.
John Senna is our new director
of the Legislative Education
Study Committee.
Thank you.
All right. And so members, that
concludes our business for
