that we ought to get going
because as we found out
yesterday,
Things can suddenly expand and,
uh, we run out of time to give
adequate consideration to
everything.
And we're opening this morning
with are, are we on, we're on,
we're good. OK. Uh, we're
opening this morning with a
presentation by an Albuquerque
program that, uh, many of us are
familiar with, but, but we would
love to hear what the plans are,
what the issues are, and how we
might be helpful. That's Quando
Los Ninos, and with us is the
CEO Trina Jellison.
The president of the board of
directors, Alice Brusso.
And the vice president of the
board of directors, Kelsey
Flanagan. So if you three would
come on up and a couple of
little points, uh, only one mic
at a time should be on because,
um, we get feedback if both Iran
and you turn them on by using
that little person icon on the
mic.
Mr. Chair, could I, could I jump
in here? I got a text from, um,
Representative Vincent, and he,
they had more flooding in
Riodoso last night and so he
said he will be late. He's
trying to help deal with that.
Well, good morning and thank
you, Mr. Chair, for this
opportunity and for the
distinguished representatives
for letting us be here to
present. Um, I'm Trina Jellison
as the chair said, and I have
the privilege of being the CEO
of Quando. Um, we thought that
there was going to be an
opportunity to project, so there
is a video embedded in the, um,
in the program. I'm just going
to describe the video to you
because it's based on a real
story based on a real child, um,
so.
The, um, video opens up with a
little guy holding his teddy
bear. Um, and it goes through
what his life looks like, um, as
a child that is, um, unhoused.
Um, so it goes through, this is
my living room and you see a
busy street. This is my bedroom,
you see a, a mattress without
any mattress on it. It's just
the bones of the mattress. Um,
but then he talks about coming
to school, um, and this is the
bus I ride to school. These are
my teachers, these are my
activities.
I strongly recommend that you
watch it because I think it
tells the story better than
anything that the three of us
will, um, talk about today, um,
because it is a real story.
Be
embedded in your presentation,
we have that online so members
we can watch it if you go to the
handouts for the meeting today.
Yes, so Kanno Los Ninos was um
established in 1988 um by a
group of individuals that
immediately saw, um, at that
time, um, the unmet needs of
families with small children
that were unhoused. um, and said
we can do something better than
what's going on. And at first
started just very, um, very
dedicated to just children's
programs, but they realized very
quickly if we were going to meet
our mission,
of breaking the cycle of
homelessness that we needed to
start providing the wraparound
services for the families as
well. And so, um, that, that
very quickly followed um the
early childhood center, um, to
have some wraparound services
grew from a kind of grassroots
effort to now a staff of about
40, um, that range everything
from school teachers to
workforce development teams to
case a house house.
Um, ho, housing case managers,
um, to, um, cooks to drivers, to
advocacy folks that are
dedicated to that. So it's grown
quite rapidly over this last,
um, 35+ years.
Um, the, um, when we talk about
the challenge, um, as we look at
why is this still important, um,
with the cutting of funding, um,
just this last year alone in the
city of Albuquerque for housing
programs. Um, the, um, the known
anticipated folks that will not
be, um, that their issues will
not be addressed is about 708
more families, um, without, um,
without.
us to permanent housing. And
there's lots of reasons for
that. It's the lack of
caseworkers to help them find
the housing, but it's also the,
the lack of physical places to
put people, um, so, um, and a
lot of those people, the people
that we're recognizing that
we're talking about are not the
people that you see standing on
street corners with signs, um,
and that, um, that also is a
problem, but that is not the
need that Quando is addressing.
We're we're addressing the
hidden homeless.
The moms or the families that
are fleeing, fleeing some kind
of violence, um, that are, um,
Trying to hide their children so
they're that nobody takes their
children, whether that be the
state or, um, or somebody that
would be trying to traffic their
children. So, um, with that, um,
just talk about like we are
really truly laser-focused on
breaking the cycle of
homelessness starting with
families, with children under
the age of 5. Kelsey's gonna go
ahead and talk about our
services. Oh, it's Alice. I'm
sorry, Alice is going to talk
about our services so.
Good morning, everyone.dondo
offers a wraparound services for
our families, starting with our
educational programs. We help
students thrive at every stage
of their development.
Um, the majority of the children
that come to us have
developmental delays. They've
been in shelters, the majority
of their life. They have Aces
and so not only do our educators
have to have children in the
classroom. They also have to
bring these children up to grade
level so that the goal, um, is
that once all of those students
are ready to graduate into the
kindergarten program and mostly
at public school systems. They
are ready to go. And I believe
that we had all of our children
that just graduated from the
Program this last year.
Everybody was at their
developmental level so that they
would be successful when they
moved into kindergarten.
We also have a supportive
housing program. Uh, we
understand that life, love, and
learning start in the home. So
we want to make sure that we can
get all of these families housed
both temporarily and hopefully
into a permanent, uh, housing
situation.
Um, we also offer workforce
development, um, the path from
living to thriving starts with
that workforce development.
Um, trauma informed development
as well. We believe that kids
with adverse childhood
experiences deserve a trauma
sensitive agency. The majority
of these kids that come with us
have on average 6 of 10 aces
when they come to us, so we need
to be very cognizant of how that
impacts their developmental
delays and having the team and
the staff on to be able to
support those children and their
families.
We have transportation services
for all of the children to and
from our school and the
facility, um, for those that are
staying in local shelters and do
not have their own
transportation.
Uh, we have a lot of advocacy
services as well. Our advocacy
mission is to elevate voices
with lived experience on
homelessness and housing
instability.
And of course, as part of all of
this, we need to bring in the
nutritional aspect of that. So
we partner with the Bishop's
Storehouse to provide families
with nutritious foods such as
meats, fresh produce, and canned
goods. And like Trina was
saying, we have a full kitchen
on staff so that the children
when they are with us, they get
meals, but we also have food for
the families to take home so
that they have nutritious food
for them when they're in the
shelters or in their um in their
different housing.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, if you have not taken
a tour of Cuidano, I highly
encourage you to schedule a
visit. Uh, their staff and the
resources that they have in
place are just exceptional and
you can truly feel the impact
and the difference that they're
making once you walk through
those doors, you also get to see
the program in action with all
of the students and it just
touches your heart. um, and to
that note,
We at Quando cannot do all of
this alone. So while we have
exceptional staff and incredible
people in leadership like Trina,
we do partner with other
organizations like Circles ABQ
and Early Childhood Coalition,
as well as our board of
directors and I'll speak for a
little bit on our board of
directors being the vice
president of the board myself.
We have a very rigorous process
that we go through. We want to
ensure that all of our board
members.
are aligned with the mission.
Uh, I have a 2.5 year old
menace, as I like to call him,
at home and, uh, just.
Imagining myself in the position
that some of these families are
in and having a place like
Guando to bring their children
to actually service the needs
that they
Actually need at that time is
incredible to see and putting
myself in their shoes, uh,
really changes the
Makes a light go off in your
head. You're like, this could
have been me. Uh, so having a
program in place like Los Inos
really makes a difference. Uh,
