Physical plant, if you will.
we have a lot of deferred
maintenance throughout our
system, and we're probably
looking at into the, into the
well into the billions of
dollars, we're asking for 100
million or $100 million of the,
of the building renewal
replacement.
The equipment renewal and
replacement. Some of these
pieces of equipment are
outdated. Again, a tie into the
sciences, a single microscope
will cost you $1 million to $2
million rather quickly. And so
you could see that that's an
important piece if we want to
remain competitive. The final
piece, and I, I know we
experienced this over in
Highlands, we've experienced
this in a couple of places where
our, our cybersecurity needs to
be beefed up, because once
you're taken hostage, as they
call it, and or ransom in terms
of your, your ransomware. Uh, it
can be extremely
Possibly. So we need to make
sure that we stay, stay abreast
of what's happening on, on our
campuses in terms of the
cybersecurity, and we're asking
for 11.7 million there.
With that,
um, Mr. Chair, I only have one
other piece of, of, of, of
business because we do have some
new presidents. And if you'll
indulge me for a second, I know
you, you recognized our new
president, um, from, um, New
Mexico State. But Mr. Chair,
could I ask for your permission
to have at least the new
presents come up and just say a
couple words to this committee.
Sure.
Thank you for the opportunity,
um, I look forward to work with
this committee with everybody in
the state, um, I've been in my
position virtually because I'm
not really starting until
January 1st, but I've been going
around the state to our uh
stations, our research centers
and our extension groups and
it's been a great experience to
learn more about the needs of
the state in many different
communities and so I'm looking
forward to a
address these issues with uh
those of you who represent these
communities, but also generally
with uh the Senate and the
House. So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the community, Neil Wolf, the
president of Mexohos University
and uh we are, I'm so fired up
to join New Mexico and the Las
Vegas committee
that community. Um, we have a
lot of exciting things going and
the reason I came to Mexico is
because a lot of the work that
you uh are doing to invest in
higher education. Uh, so I
appreciate that it's, it's
exciting and uh appreciate
working with you and being a
service, uh, to you and to our
students. Thank you.
Morning chair and committee. I'm
Carol Linder. I'm the interim
president at Luna Community
College, and I've been in higher
education in New Mexico for
many, many years, but I'm really
excited to be in my current
role, and I mostly appreciate
all the support that everybody
at the higher education
department and all the different
um presidents that have
supported us and continue to
support the work that Luna
Community College has done as
the only community college in
northeastern New Mexico we're
really um.
Um
Uh, we really care so much about
continuing to serve our students
and we're thankful for all the
support that we've received in
terms of workforce development
and also from the state. Thank
you.
Hello, everyone. Thank you so
much for having us. My name is
Jonathan Fuentes. I am the new
president at Clovis Community
College. I've only been there
for about 5.5 months. So really
still acclimating myself, uh, to
New Mexico and to Clovis. I'm
originally from the Permian
Basin. I'm, I'm from Pecos,
Texas, so on the Texas side, um,
so I'm about 4 hours away from
home, Eastern New Mexico is
very, uh, it's home. It feels
like home. It it definitely
feels um like my part of West
Texas, Texas, and so really
happy to be there and and look
forward to working with all of
you. Thank you.
so much for all your support and
higher education, that is one
thing that has been, um, really,
really nice to see is that New
Mexico really cares about higher
education and cares about
students and so it's really a
wonderful place to be and thank
you so much for having me.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Nahira Muziger. I'm the alamo is
a new president of New Mexico
Tech. I've been here 8 months,
so I feel like an old hat
already.
I don't know how many more car
bombs I can go to and still
enjoy it. So it's been amazing,
amazing experience for me, uh,
I'm looking forward to growing
the campus, serving the state,
making sure we have more
engineers and scientists that
would do better for us. So thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
allowing that indulgence. And
with that, that completes our
presentation. And again, I want
to conclude where I began. Thank
you for what you've done. You
have made this a better state.
You have made higher education,
a better, a better place for our
New Mexicans, for the, for the
men, women of all ages who go to
our institutions. So deep deep
felt thank you to each of you.
With that we stand for
questions. Thank you,
Representative Baca, you're
first on the list. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you for
your presentation. Um,
So, uh, as I'm gonna sound like
a broken record, but for the 3
years I've sat here on this
committee and part of this.
What are the emphasis that I
really want to focus on is the
K-12 collaboration actually
pre-K through collaboration.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I, you know,
when we talked about it is at
some point, I want to hear about
dual credit. I want to see is
how many classes that were
actually providing, but even
beyond dual credit.
I want to see classes,
university classes on campus.
As we see the education and we
see higher ed as just a
continuation.
It's not challenging for our
students and by when available
and when possible, having those
classes on campus.
And providing our students an
opportunity, it helps everyone.
The other big um piece that I
want to, you know, we talked
about along with that. We talked
about folks who graduate with an
associate's degree while in high
school, right?
I would be interested to see
what that number is because that
number, not just indicates a
student's motivation. To me, it
also indicates a university's
collaboration.
And it should not be a uh unique
thing what a kid does that.
By working on the graduation
requirements, we need to have
more of our students on that
pathway.
So that uh they could be
prepared for that.
And on my last piece with the
collaboration, Mr. Chairman. I
want to talk about CT and
internships.
As we're looking about how we
share resources and we're not
replicating duplicating
resources, but in working with
our local school districts, how
can we give our students
opportunity.
To those same internships and
CTE.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, another big
focus on me is, is I care about
all of our
400,000 pre-K through
K-12, I care about all of our
high schools, uh, our college
students as well. Your request
of $10 million does not seem
like it's enough. When we're
looking at all of our campuses
and I think I don't know the
number 27 or so.
4 year and 2-year degrees at $10
million.
We're looking about $200,000.
And when we're looking at access
control and we're looking at
funding here.
You know, it's funny how when
before an accident, we can't
find the funds, but after an
event or an accident, we find
that we need to make our
students safe now. We need to
make sure that our faculty and
our staff are safe as well. And
those kids are important and
they, they deserve our, our
focus. And finally, Mr.
Chairman, I'm gonna talk about
Um, our last piece.
And this is about the
relationship of activities and
athletics as economic
development. I think that we
need to take a hard look.
At how we can support those
programs. I was at the uh local
Aggie game on Saturday, and that
pit was rocking like when I
remember seeing Michael Cooper
played there back in the 70s. It
was so rocking that I had to
move my chair because I sitting
by a bunch of energetic Aggies,
but.
So you chased out in your own
hometown, right in your own
home, but, um, but I, in a
serious note, when we talk about
this, those types of activities,
those types of
Events bring money and business
to our communities. We can no
longer think that they're being
separate. And finally, Mr.
Chairman, we talk about requests
for retention of staff. OK, we
talk about pay. I'm all for
that.
But my question is, what are we
doing to retain the students as
well. Not just in the short term
for graduation and once they
graduate, what opportunities do
we have after we've provided
support through the opportunity
and lottery scholarship. What
kinds of support are we building
here and half of them in Mexico.
The greatest export that we
have.
our kids that are leaving after
we have educated them. We want
to keep them here. That is our
investment, that is return on
our investment for our kids.
And so I, I, I know that we're,
you know, we're, we're, we're
challenged here, but the fact
about it is we can no longer
operate in silos, and we can no
longer just say, hey, this is
kind of how it is. We've got to
be, you know, making changes for
the needs of our students of the
future. So, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Is it your son and Maggie?
Yes sir, he, he was an Aggie so
I not only got it during the
pit, I got it at home too. So
guns up for you, Aggie there,
but locals, you know, going on,
actually I guess it was a sweep.
I was informed that they swept
the Aggie swept the lobos so
President Stokes and uh present
yeah, thank you, sir.
Then
Go Aggie.
I told Secretary Rodriguez.
That I was gonna do all softball
questions today.
So
Here's my attempt at that.
What I'd like to know, you know,
we put a lot of money into
education.
And we put a lot of scholarship
money. We did a lot of things.
I would like to know.
What is the all-in cost.
Of getting a say a, a, a
education degree out of a
four-year university.
If I, and I know you don't have
that right in front of you.
But
When I talked to my
constituents.
And a lot of them want their
kids to go to college.
But with all the help that uh
that we're given, I keep telling
them, college is free, and I
know college isn't free.
But I would like to know.
What that cost is.
by institution, if it's
possible.
Um, and I'm talking all in cost.
Because
You know, everything comes into
this deal, books, housing, the
whole deal.
So, Madam Secretary, would you
have any comments on that, Mr.
Chair, I knew you were playing
with me when you said a softball
question. I'm just kidding,
Senator. Thank you so much for
the question. Um, for a 4 year
comprehensive regional
institution for an educator prep
degree. We're talking about 8000
per year. Now, if you're talking
a 4-year research institution,
all three of our research
institutions have teacher prep
programs. We're talking
approximately 10,000.
for in-state residents. Um, the
second part of the question,
Senator, I forgot.
That's the cost to a student.
That is tuition and fees
associated with the cost for uh
the institution, yes. And, and
the reason I asked that question
because
We're talking about uh
non-formula adjustments and
things like that, is that too
offset some of those costs.
So the instruction in general
really addresses multiple things
at the institution, including
operations and student success
and support. We recognize what
the opportunity and lottery
scholarships, we need more
supports on campus to make sure
that they're completing their
classes, they're passing and
they're graduating on time. Good
news, lottery or scholarship has
a 90% retention rate from fall
to spring semester. Opportunity
scholarship were seeing 9%
points higher than the
retention rate for that program.
So the institutions have been
using the increases to ING to do
those student support services,
but we know it's not enough. And
that's why you'll see um both in
the recommendation from the
higher ed institutions today,
the $4 million retention fund
and then also part of our
special appropriation ask as a
department to do that. However,
yes, we are looking at it at the
base, in the base right now in
the sustainability study that
we're completing, and we're also
talking
about students that are at risk,
who live in rural communities
who may not have the same access
in an urban community. All of
those things are being rolled
into the base to consider those
at our institutions, so that we
can increase that base and they
can actually pay for a student
to be successful at their
college and universities through
academic support and wraparound
services
between
The, the degrees we need.
Even in state government, we,
we, we have a, a, a shortfall
of, you know, vacancies that
every department. And we have a
huge number of
You know,
The agencies come in here and
they'll say, well, we're gonna,
we want more money because we're
gonna hire this specialist, and
we're gonna hire that specialist
compliance specialist over here,
uh, Flo
Flunic auditor over here. We're
gonna, we're gonna do all these
grandiose things.
Are we training anybody to do
that?
We do have an incentive in the
higher education funding formula
on top of the base. And that's
related to completions and STEM
healthcare, and then workforce
priority areas in the state of
New Mexico. That's determined in
partnership with the Department
of Workforce Solutions, and we
run that every single year with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions to identify those
sectors that we have high need.
Right now it's trades
construction, renewable energy,
educator, prep, and social work
IT STEM, um.
And there's one other that I'm
forgetting, sir, but I know
there's one other, those are the
ones we also incentivize through
our higher education funding
formula. Can, can we relate
those two jobs.
Job
For the kid
Are we pretty well assured that
they will have a job when we
When we focus on that group
right there, Mr. Chair, thank
you for the question. So right
now, we need social workers, we
need teachers, and we need
health professionals. Those are
three of the main areas I talked
about. Oh yeah, and of course
construction. There's been
inflation and there's been a
labor shortage on top of that.
So for 4 of the areas I just
mentioned, we absolutely do have
jobs, and there is a high need
in the health profession work
first alone. We need 2300
nurses. Um,
in educator prep we need 800
teachers, um, in all high need
areas, and as far as social
work, we're looking at the
1,000s.
OK, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary.
How are we coping with
all-campus learning.
Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry about
that.
No, no, but
My
He showed me her finger, and she
now has the blue ink on.
Did you vote today
Mr. Chair, I apologize and I
touched my nose right
afterwards. So can you please
repeat your question?
My question was,
Every day on TV you see
advertisements for off-campus
learning.
Out of state off-campus
learning.
Are we competing well with that?
Are we delivering in those same
markets.
Is, is, I guess the question I
have.
And is that
Cheaper to the student.
than otherwise. There's no
substitute.
For going to a low bowl.
A&M, I mean, uh, Aggie football
game, there's no substitute for
that on campus experience.
But some of those students are
out there.
That could do a lot of online
stuff.
And I just want to make sure
that, that we are competing with
the so-called universities out
of state on that.
Mr. Chair, yes, I've seen those
commercials for Southern New
Hampshire University, Grand
Canyon University, Phoenix
University, the list goes on.
However, because of financial
investment from the legislature
the past 2 years, NMSU Global is
really trying to handle that in
state for us. Um, it was a call
to action 3 years ago, actually
to look at the ASU model and try
to implement something here in
the state of New Mexico that
could work here and be unique to
our state and serve our students
better rather than.
them leaving to those
institutions, so that has been a
very strong example. It's now
sustaining itself. There's no
more state investments going
into that. Students are
enrolling, students are
receiving the opportunity
scholarship, um, but that's the
model that we're working with at
this point in time, as a matter
of fact, Chancellor, I'm gonna
call you out a little bit. She
comes from Southern New
Hampshire University and got
that off the ground there in
their marketing strategy and has
brought that knowledge and
expertise to New Mexico.
But is matching it to what the
needs are of our student body.
OK, so
Maybe if you would give me kind
of the enrollment of that and,
and how that's progressing the
trajectory of that kind of a
deal. I'd appreciate that. And
um,
The the dissemination of
information.
Of these students, when, when,
when these students get out of
college.
Many, um, you know, they're,
they're getting degrees highly
specialized degrees, and I
always worry about
How, how well we train.
Let's take teachers, for
example.
How well are we training
teachers today to teach kids.
This is a different environment
of teaching, certainly then
100 years ago when I was in
school.
But
The teachers today are teaching
a, a different demographic.
Uh, I should maybe not
demographical, but a different.
Um
Way of learning.
Then we had at one time.
And uh often wonder the success
those teachers have. And I'm
sure we measured that success.
I've often heard that you learn
to teach about 3 years on the
job.
And and
But also heard that most
teachers don't last over 5
years.
So
I don't know, it's not a
question, is that right,
I don't know, it's not a
question is that? I,
the last thing I've got, I don't
want there to be a battle.
Between public education and
higher education.
The battle, they, they should be
some, some unity. We, we often
talk in here about, well, all
those kids aren't going to go to
college. Well, we've got a, we
got a huge number of kids going
to college.
And we need those college kids.
We need those high school kids
trained up to go to college.
And we also need those kids not
to be afraid to go to tutoring
if they get over their head in
college. And so,
Just to
Just a voice in the
neighborhood, Richard Chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning.
Um
I'm, I'm looking in this annual
accountability report page 20.
Um
And I just, if you could help me
to understand a little bit about
it. One of the things that uh
It's very important to me as
nursing degrees.
Uh, there's a huge demand for
them in our rural areas.
And I'm looking here at the high
demand degree programs down at
the bottom, it says nursing. So
I'm looking, uh, year 22021, 21,
22, and it we're, we're
graduating 1412, 1112. So it's
running along in there with
associate degrees. Then I, I
turned over here and I see a
bachelor's degrees are 639 up to
638.
So, my question, my first
question is, don't you have to
get associate's degree before
you get a bachelor's degree, so
how did we have so few
associates and then all of a
sudden, we just have bachelor's
degrees by the gazillions.
Representative Chatfield, uh,
Mr. Chair, once upon a time,
that was true. You'd get your RN
and you'd move to the BSN. That
is no longer true. Now there's a
track that goes directly from
starting college and moving into
the BSM. And in fact, many
institutions and even the
nursing profession have a
preference for the BSN and so
they're encouraging the track of
basically straight to the BSN as
opposed to the stop of the RN
which was your associate's
degree. So that has changed. So,
so there's my second question,
which might be a little
harder, uh, we put a lot of
money into nursing, uh, at the
legislature. We want to
encourage people to go into that
field. There's an enormous need
for nurses in their statewide,
but in our rural areas,
especially, and it looks like
they're
Pretty much flat. It doesn't
look like we're graduating any
more nurses than we.
That we did. What do we need to
do? Is that true? And if so,
what do we need to do to
increase the number of nurses at
work.
train.
Representative Chatfield, Mr.
Chair, simply my opinion, I'll
leave it to my colleagues also
to address that question. But
what we need to do in part is we
need to encourage more people to
go into nursing, and that means
starting off in middle school
and so forth to encourage them
to
Be serious about the sciences
and the mathematics that go
into, into being, being a nurse
and going into that profession.
Um, this goes back to the
conversation that was just had
about
The collaboration that Senator
Woods was talking about between
public education and higher
education. I think we need to
start developing some programs
in there to encourage that
pipeline of going into nursing.
Secondly, um,
We also need to take a look at
how do we get, like we have with
alternative licensure with
teaching. How can we do that
with nursing? How can we bring
in adult populations who may
want to have a career show. So
those are just, just some
thoughts. I don't know if my
colleagues have some thoughts as
well.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, one thing
I've just been informed about is
the uh the BSN numbers, um, and
Representative Chatfield are,
are cups numbers, so the, the
community colleges, um, most of
the community college nursing
programs participate in a
program called NEMEC that is uh
just kind of generated by the
University of New Mexico, but it
is a it is a pipeline where
community colleges are able to
host the bachelor's degree on
their campuses, the the
bachelors.
degree is still awarded by our
four-year partners, but with an
extra semester are um what we're
uh associate degree nursing
students are able to complete
with a bachelor's degree.
Generally, we have um a system
where students can stop out with
the ADN degree if that's what
they choose, or they can go on,
because as you, as you so aptly
indicated the real issue is that
there is a shortage. And so in
working with our local
communities, we often find that
Um, they want nurses the fastest
way that they can get them as
long as they're well trained,
so, you know, you can go in and
start working at the associates
level and still are a very
decent wage and then still
complete the bachelor's or go in
with just an additional semester
at the, at the bachelor's um
level, um, there's no difference
in the, um, the certification or
anything like that. The
associate degree nurses can do
all of the same things that
The bachelor's prepared nurses
can do there, there might be a
difference in leadership roles
or supervisory skills or
something like that, but, you
know, when I visit with our
local hospitals here, they want
nurses as fast as we can
generate them and so the problem
is that we cannot, we cannot
seem to get enough people into
our program and get them through
quickly and that is the that is
the problem that you also
identified and that that I am
concerned about because um
you know, I think people, people
know about all of our programs,
I think that it's a complicated
uh situation. Our, our programs
are not um
You know, we're not, we're not
just, we're not just drawing
hordes of students as we did
pre-pandemic and, and it kind of
depends upon the location of
your college. Um, I know San
Juan College has just added a
cohort. So, um, I, I, I am
really impressed with that. And
I wish that we were all able to
do that, but it takes quite a
bit of time and planning to be
able to do that and then when we
talk about reaching out to
adults or, or healthcare workers
in a hospital setting that
may be interested in getting a
nursing degree, but, um, that we
need to work with. There are
prerequisites that we have to
figure out faster ways to get
them through so that they can
get in nursing programs because
I really do think there's
interest and they already, they
already know how to thrive in
that setting. And sometimes that
is um overlooked and you have
people who graduate and, you
know, they've gone to clinicals,
but still, this is not for them.
Um, and so we can do better at
that, and, and I do want you to
know that we are all working on
this because it, um, I, it's a
priority for all of us in our
programs.
what you had to say and I,
I really appreciate the, the, of
course, all the nursing
programs, but the one in our
community colleges can serve
people that already live there
cannot
leave and go to a, to a
four-year college somewhere far
away. Uh, they have family, they
have roots, and that, for that
very same reason, they will stay
there. So, I think that's very
important that we encourage
these types of programs and uh
So I'm a little confused about
the total number of statewide,
uh, are we gaining, uh, we both
agreed that we don't have
enough, but are we gaining
because we've kind of focused on
that and are we statewide total
enrollment in nursing programs
are we gaining?
Mr. Chair,
I don't, I don't
represented Chatfield, um, I
wanted to respond to a couple of
other things while we see if we
can gather some information on,
on that. The number that you see
on page 20 of associate degrees,
those are cup schools which are
universities, cup schools,
universities don't tend to
produce associate degrees in
nursing. Most of the associate
degrees in nursing are produced
by the community colleges across
the state, and while we're
trying to see whether that
number has gained maybe Vanessa
and Barbara could help us. Um, I
I think the second thing, uh, or
Mark, I think the second thing I
wanted to say is that the NMSU
system of community colleges has
seen a couple of gains in the
last year, um, NSUelmogordo is,
has started an associate degree
in nursing program, and that is
largely in collaboration with
the hospital, um, there, um,
Donana Community College has
started a nursing program in
southern in the southern part of
the county in Sunland Park again
responding to some of the need
there. So even though it's close
to El Paso, a big city, um,
southern part of the
Counties is, is rural, still has
elements of of r. So I think
some of the things that we're
trying to do are, are in fact,
and I'm sure that my colleagues
at the other institution, we
really are looking is how do we
support nursing in um in, in
rural locations as well. Um, I
think Mark may have had some
information to to share.
No, he was just making sure that
we highlight one of the other
factors that have shifted for
nursing over these past several
years is with mic and, and the
articulation agreements that we
now have, that allows for our
students to have a um a better
flow pathway to get their
nursing degree, no matter which
institution. So for example, you
start off at UNM Gallup and then
you move over to the UNM, uh,
Albuquerque uh campus or if you
start off at Western and then
you move over to, to, um, Santa
Fe Community College or vice
vers.
So we have a lot better
articulation agreements and
common course numbering that I
think is facilitating a better
access or better completion, but
I know that Madam Secretary is
looking at the actual numbers
for you, sir.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, I forgot to, to
mention also that, that in terms
of articulation, for example,
um, Grant's campus has a
bachelor's degree completion
program in nursing, that's
affiliated with NMSU. So, so
that we, we are trying to serve
that because students who go
there are in fact probably gonna
stay in grants. And so those are
the kinds of things that we're,
we're, we're attentive to as
well and I, my apologies to my
eastern and my UNM colleagues.
I'm not as familiar with the
details.
Mr. Cherry didn't turn into a
smurf, but I almost did thank
you for giving us those wipes. I
was able to take the blue right
off, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, we're pulling
the nursing numbers for you
right now. I'll text you or
email you as soon as I have
them, but I do want to touch on
health professions. We have
those completions as we speak.
Those have been flat the last 3
years post pandemic, so that may
be telling us that may be the
case for nursing as well, but
I'm pulling those numbers.
However, when we did nursing
expansion.
a couple years ago in the
legislature, you'll remember $10
million went to the nursing
program throughout the state of
New Mexico. They were able to
increase uh the enrollment of
nursing by 437 students across
the state of New Mexico, uh, so
let me pull the nursing numbers
for you because we might be
seeing nursing enrollment with a
slight increase, but overall
health professionals have been
flat.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, thank you for all the
great information that you guys
are able to dig up, you know,
for us sitting up here, there's
just one question. How can we
help you to be successful?
That's
That's what it's all about and,
and I appreciate your hard work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chaffield, I, I, I just did get
information you and Taos, they
have doubled their nursing
cohort in the last few years,
it'll last year, but of course
it'll take 2 years for those
students to, to graduate.
That is awesome. Thank you.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, a few
questions, if you will. Um, and
I'm just gonna continue the
conversation about the nursing
and the nursing programs. I
really want to emphasize
quality over quantity.
Um
In my community, in my district,
I have Saint Vincent's Hospital.
Which is the original hospital.
Um, I have been a healthcare
professional myself. My mother
is a retired RN.
Um, I grew up with nurses and
educated by them, um, so one of
the questions that has been
coming up.
In regards to that profession,
other healthcare professions is
how are we tracking?
Those nurses and those degree
programs as they enter into the
professional careers are the
majority of them going into
administrative roles, or are
they going actually into the
workforce where they are uh
working with patients one on
one,
has any of that work been done,
Mr. Chair?
um Representative Wuhan and Mr.
Chair, I don't have that
information. Maybe my colleagues
might or maybe the secretary
might about the tracking of
where nurses go. Do they go into
administration or not?
like that information and as
well as how um in the programs
in our training programs, how
they are utilizing technology
and in the care of, and when
they are, they are in principle,
um,
Work situations and they're,
they're interacting with uh
patients, how they are
interacting because there have
been many, many complaints, and
I have actually witnessed myself
that when these professionals go
into their, the rooms in our
hospitals and their patients and
their interactions. They are not
completing um assessments as
looking at a patient as a human
being, if you will, and I hate
to say this because I'm very
proud of my mother and the
profession in
But it goes back to their
training and so I'd like to have
more information on those
training programs and how they
are really um interacting and
how they are, uh, then going
into the profession where
they're going, how we are
tracking their professional
route. Um, it is, I have read
somewhere too that it is, you
know, a lot of them don't, um,
fulfill and, and, and continue
that professional route in in
nursing. They go to other, in
other areas, um, related,
however.
But not, um, actually doing the
patient care, um, routes, Mr.
Chair. So I just wanted to bring
that to the, you know, to the
attention and ask those
questions and if you can get
that information for us. Now
into the budget, Mr. Chair, uh,
as I'm looking at our, our
higher education budget and some
of the agency requests, um,
particularly, I'm looking at the
highs, uh, where are we? The
minority doctor alone, uh,
repayment programs and the
graduate scholarship fund and
reading some
of our information, um, one of
the questions that uh I have is
how many of our students that
are going into these um master's
and doctoral programs are
receiving scholarships, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that
question, representative, and
I'll send you that information
that you asked in the first part
of your question, Happy to do
that. We have it on hand. Um, as
far as the, uh, health
professional loan repayment
program, and the graduate
students, um, the majority of
our students are in the
associate bachelor degree level
when it comes to the health
professions. As far as the
graduate professions are
concerned, my team is pulling
that information and we'll have
it for you soon for nursing, but
then health professions as a
whole.
so you can have that broken out
in the state of New Mexico, we
have really strong nurse
practitioner programs, and then,
of course, the MD program at the
University of New Mexico and
then the private school bureau.
We have a DO program. So there
is good enrollment there as far
as how it's paid, we don't have
as many scholarships at the
graduate level, as we do
undergrad, we have lottery op
opportunity tuition free
college, that does not exist at
the graduate level as
frequently. We do have the
graduate scholarship Act in the
graduate scholars.
that does not discriminate
against the type of degree that
you are getting. It goes to the
high highest need individuals.
So if you're unable to have a
family contribution and you're
not making the dollars to
sustain yourself in college, you
will receive that scholarship.
We've also had investments from
the legislature for STEM
graduate degrees, STEM graduate
degrees in the amount of 2
million or I'm sorry, 10 million
total of 20 million in the past
10 years, that can
graduate students in the health
professions field as well. Um,
but also graduate scholars Act
is the other program that we
look to. And then, of course,
our institutions have a
foundational money, private
money, and other programs that
they have to support these
students.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
in account of all those things
and those opportunities and, uh,
the request that we're still
looking at is uh $230,000 for
the minority doctor alone uh
repayment program.
Um, but that's different. That's
a repayment program. So can you
distinguish, you know, how our
graduate students are taking
advantage of those repayment
programs and to ask for the the
expansion there that is true.
Mr. Chair, so
Health professionals loan
repayment and teacher loan
repayment program, our teachers
and health professionals are
really taking advantage of that.
We've increased applications by
more than 600%. We went from 10
teachers to 537 teachers. We
went from 44 health
professionals to almost 600
health professionals.
That's where we're doing a lot
of investment. Minority doctoral
loan repayment programs a little
different. What that is is it's
to retain faculty at our higher
education institutions. So we do
really good job with teachers in
our K-12 system and early ed
system. We don't do the same in
our higher education system. We
also have low salaries and wages
for our professors compared to
other states. So this program
really tries to lock in that
professor to stay by paying off
that debt.
Um, right now, we only help two
professors a year. We'd love to
grow that program to 15 to 20 to
see how it uh looks, how it
stands, kind of pilot it up, and
then we can give you an update
in the future, but that's how
that program is different from
our others.
OK, and so, Mr. Chair, um,
that's great too, and I see
that, you know, the graduate
scholarship fund is at
$50011.7,000. Um, how, who would
that cover? How many? Mr.
Right now as it stands, we have
about half a million dollars
that only covers 54 students.
Um, if we were to increase that
number to 1 million, which is
the request. It would be about
uh 50 students that we would be
able to, I'm sorry, over 100
students
that we'd be able to support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate it. My last question
is just gonna go to um.
Um, how we are integrating AI
into a professional development
for our faculty and staff and
how we're looking to incorporate
it with student learning because
I don't see that addressed in
the budget, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, that's actually a
fantastic question. I'll give
you one example and then I'm
gonna turn to my wonderful
colleagues who are on the ground
actually doing this with their
staff, but, uh, the Center for
Excellence for Agriculture and
Sustainability at New Mexico
State University, 4 years ago
when we requested the Center of
Excellence and got that funding.
They were the first college to I
don't get mad at me, but they
were the first college to report
to me as a department, how they
were using AI in an industry
sector that really served their
community, and that's integrated
into that center of excellence,
the research, the work and the
teaching that they're doing. So
that's just one sample of how
the state's been doing it and
how that institution has really
led that work, but I'll give my
colleagues here examples of how
they're
Integrating AI into their
curriculum and research.
Thank you, Representative Lujan
and, and Mr. Chair. AI is a, a
double-edged sword. On one hand,
we can utilize it as we are in
our classes and so forth. On the
other hand, it can be used for
not such good purposes. I'll
give you an example. In our
humanities, I just had a
conversation with our faculty
about how students may or may
not be using AI to write their
papers. So, so then we use AI to
catch them at using AI to write
their papers. It reminds me as a
mathematician,
back in the day when the
calculators started to get more
and more advanced, and I, as a
purist would say, you can't use
your calculator in class. You
probably remember that many of
us do. Yet now, that is a
resource that's utilized in math
mathematics. I suspect AI will
continue down that path. But,
um uh we are currently exploring
all those different pieces of
both AI as a mechanism for not
doing good things, and how do we
educate our students that that's
not appropriate to utilize
AI in our sciences, in our
chemistry, and, and identifying
various molecules and so forth.
So it is being integrated in
the, the curriculum in two ways.
One not so good, one very
educational.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Wuhan, I, I'm
aware of at least 2 universities
in the state who have who have
recently appointed kind of
administrative position that
this basically to lead efforts
across institutions saying how
are we thinking about I IAI
globally within an institutional
setting. And so I think that's
one of our, uh, that's an
organizational approach to, to
really saying how do we get our
hands around this, um, and, and,
and the folks in those positions
are obviously have expertise in
AI. In addition to.
that almost from the beginning
when AI, I, I imagine we could
look at professional development
web pages at any institution
across the state of New Mexico
for the last two years, and you
will have seen a lot of training
for certainly for faculty in
terms of how are you thinking
about AI? And I would guess that
at all institutions you're
starting to see initial, initial
stabs at at policy at
incorporating policy to think
about how we use AI. I, I think
what's interesting is AI is
starting to impact us kind of
pedagogically on the instruction
side.
Uh, but it's also impacting us
on, on the organizational side.
Um, it, of course, our chatbots
are AI and, and so I, I think
trying to get a holistic
approach to AI institutionally
is going to be critical for all
of us.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
I, I would add to that that, you
know, at, at
I know in in all of our
colleges, it's something that uh
we're starting to offer
consistent training for faculty
and and offer um different kinds
of workshops so that they can
see, you know, there, as, as my
colleague, uh, Doctor Shepherd
said there, there are various
aspects of AI. So one of the
things that it can do for
faculty members really shorten
the time that it takes to do
things like reading assignments,
uh, student assessment work and
things like that that are really
important, but pretty labor
intensive.
Um, and then our staff have been
using AI at different levels for
quite some time and so we're,
um, you know, bringing it and
it's becoming more and more
mainstream and everything, and
we actually require our faculty
to address it in their syllabus.
Um, but one thing that I am
particularly interested in is
that.
Because our students are going
to be expected to know how to
use this tool in almost any work
setting they are likely to go
into.
We absolutely have to teach
students how to use the tool
responsibly, and it evolves
every day. So that's part of the
challenge right there, but we
can't tell our students this is
bad, don't use it. We have to
show them how to use it
appropriately so that when
students come out of any of our
colleges and they go into a
workplace that they haven't just
heard this is bad, we don't use
this. They have some sense of
how to use it and they can, they
can, they can learn how to use
it and become more adept at it
as they.
Mr. Chair, and I'm sorry to add
one more comment, but I do want
to know that the New Mexico AI
Consortium does have members
from Los Alamos National
Laboratory Sandia National
Laboratories, but also the
University of New Mexico, New
Mexico State University, New
Mexico Tech, and Central New
Mexico Community College that
are regularly in these
conversations as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I think
that those conversations need to
be had here as well as we're
moving into this, this, this
generation of technology so
advanced that this is a, this is
a sector that we really need to
grasp it and really um mature in
what it is and how we're going
to um.
Use it either as a tool or as
you know, um, all the elements
as we discussed, and I just
don't see any that represented
anywhere and then the budget,
Mr. Chair, so that's why I'm
bringing it to the attention as
we will have legislation here as
well, and, um, Mr. Chair,
cumulatively, I just think
technology is necessary. This is
where we're moving. But when it
comes to our professional health
providers and educating them,
I'd like to know more how we're
doing that and how we are
interfacing with our patients in
the patient care because
Technology cannot be a source,
it can be. It could also as, as
a president has said that it can
also, there are some negative
parts of it, and that goes back
to the curriculum and how uh we
are educating our um.
Our future uh professionals.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Gonzalez. And then I
have Senator Gallegos and
Representative Armstrong on the
list.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, um, uh, thank you to all of
you and good morning and uh
thank you for the hard work that
you do. You are.
Really the base of our
foundation to our state, you
know, for everything that
happens.
Um, I don't have any questions,
but I have some homework for
you. So, um,
On, uh, one of the parts on
being on the finance committee.
So we have some of the finest
and state of the art
presentations.
And on Monday at 1:30.
And this is the one that I'm
asking to all for all of you uh
to go back and look at.
It was an economic development
and effects of the demographic
changes in the workforce, James
Johnson Junior, Professor of
strategy and Infur.
and director of urban investment
strategy Center, University of
North Carolina, and it really
came from our chairman, you
know, with uh bringing this in
our LFC staff.
Um
This is probably one of the
finest presentations that I have
seen in a long time. And if you
go through this, it will really
give you a real solid.
Of what's happening in our
country from state to state and
what's happening to New Mexico
as far as the workforce.
And how it's changing, what's
happening and also birth rates
and aging population, just a
very solid on, you know, what uh
would really help, you know,
with uh all the planning, you
know, that needs to go into a
curriculum and to also to a very
defined um.
scope and sequence system at a
universities, but I really urge
you to, to really look at that
and to do that, um, you can go
to New Mexico legislature.
Under webcast.
And then go to LC and then it
was a presentation on Monday at
1:30, that was done to us and on
our chairman would like to
expand a little on that. It was
just very uh.
Um, it'll really give you a
really good insight.
Anything?
Um, no, I, I, I've seen that
presentation in Nashville, and,
and it's, we're on a
fifteen-year declining
population, right? And the
metrics are very interesting
about
Now, who's going to college,
who's getting their degrees,
what the pay scale is, um, more
women are going to college than
men.
And, and so how do you change
that and
it's interesting to see where
we're headed in the nation as a
labor pool.
In education, right? Where the
workforce is going to come from
and how immigration is going to
affect us.
Um, but it's, it's worth one
hour of your time to really
figure out.
How you're gonna do that when we
get to some other questions, I
mean, where are those kids going
to come from? What are they
gonna do? I mean, the disruptors
in the system and
College students are kind of
disruptors anyway, but the
disruptors in that system and
how it's gonna cure, but it's,
it's worth one hour of your
time.
I spent 8 hours on the flight to
get there, so it's worth 8 hours
of my time.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
uh
With that, uh, your test will be
before Christmas, so all of you
have to watch that. Thank you,
Mister Chairman. You mean
they're gonna give him a call,
uh.
Saragos. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you all for the
presentation. I wanted to go
back in time to representative
Baca's discussion on the 10
million dual credit, especially
because it's 3 year, 3 to 5
years, uh, I wanted to go back,
um,
My granddaughter just graduated
from uni schools and a brother
of mine from Denver was there,
and as they're given the
diplomas they kept talking
about, you know, your associate
degree, your associate degree,
and it's, it's really really
incredible on how that works.
Currently the junior college,
and I know Doctor, uh, is, is
here with this, um, but they
currently have 20122 high school
students enrolled in our early
college program.
That's 8% higher than it was
last go around, and we have a
total of 252 taking dual
enrollments uh for school, so
they get to high school and the
junior college credit. Uh, the
other thing I wanted to bring up
because I think um
Representative Bach is right
that we need to look at this.
This is the next generation of
how we're doing business in
hogs, we had the Cec that was
built.
It is at capacity already.
So the junior college, Doctor
Moore is already looking at how
do they backfill that because as
a good idea comes up.
Then we need to be prepared, and
I appreciate what you guys do,
being open and responding to
your communities, because the
needs of the community really
speaks volume, and that makes it
easier for us to be able to
support the finances to do those
specialty programs.
Um, and, and all that said, I
just wanted to bring up and it,
it goes back to the high demand
degree programs.
I would really like to figure
out how we help you, because in
the uh booklet that they gave
us, uh, page 20 it shows
actually some declines, um, you
know, in preschool educators,
um,
They went up 17 um elementary
secondary education bachelor's,
they went up 129, but then it
gets scary. Education
administration master's degree,
no change, uh, negative in
social work bachelor's degree
minus 1124 on master's degree.
And only a plus one on nursing,
uh, last session, uh, myself
and, uh, Senator Schmmedys gave
to Eastern, uh, $200,000 each on
our grow monies in order to try
to help.
Find a way to funnel people back
into the grades or into the
programs because uh we're
dependent. I mean, I'm on school
board for I think I'm in my 23rd
year. If we
Uh, don't get teachers, and we
haven't we had a discussion
yesterday, you have to go out of
country to try to find staff.
And it is so much better if we
can do it with this group in
here, if there's a way that we
can help you, I would love to
help you because I believe in
what you're doing, and I just
need to make sure that we're
responding to your needs as
you're responding my our
community needs. The last point
I want to make my, is on the AI
discussion of uh writing papers
and red flagging papers. I think
you can ask the same AI bot.
To do both, it's just in
preparation for that. So with
that I'll yield, but I just want
to thank you for what you do and
highlight Doctor Moore and
everything, make sure junior
college is doing in my area. So,
thank you, Mr.
Represent Armstrong. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I'll be quick and
to the point. I, uh, thank you
for your presentation. I was
curious, um, Madam Secretary, if
there's any restrictions, um,
uh, for nursing students on the
testing. Uh, do we still have
that in place where they have to
wait a year if they fail, and
what is the percentage of nurses
that pass it on the first try.
Mr. Chair, so if you failed the
Elex, it's a 6 month waiting
period and
that is still in place. Um,
we've addressed those concerns
with the board of nursing as far
as the passage rate, I will look
that up for you right now. I can
go ahead and uh text the
director and ask her directly
and get that number for you. But
yeah, it is very difficult. Our
higher education institutions
through the nursing expansion
funds that you all supported,
um, actually did test
preparation. We had that at 5 of
our sites where they were
working with the students one on
one to get them prepared for
that test. We actually need to
pull some of
that data and see how many of
those students actually passed
versus didn't to see if that's
where we need to put more
dollars. Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary. I
think it's an issue and uh the
board of nursing needs to hear
loud and clear.
That that is an issue and we're,
we, we have a shortage and um
it's a good thing that New
Mexico Tech and ICASA are
creating a healthcare workforce
dashboard.
So, uh, shout out to them. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Armstrong,
uh, a couple of things. I
believe that that, um, according
to accreditation standards, 80%
of the students have to pass the
first time. Um, and so it's
somewhere between 80% and 100%
if, if the program is
accredited, um, there was one of
the other things we saw, we saw
really um some troubling trends
for students who are educated
during COVID, um, and so I think
one of the things that you will
have seen across, across
institutions.
Is people putting in additional
interventions to help students
prepare for the influx, and then
we've seen those numbers go up.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thanks for the presentation. I,
I'm running late today I ask the
question that's already been
asked you can correct me on
that. Uh, my concern is what are
all these bras, colleges, or
universities doing for veterans
to help them out, a lot of
veterans are coming out of a war
zone and they have special needs
and then problem facing them
that we need to address if you
can touch on that very briefly.
Representative Garcia, Mr.
Chair, I can't speak for all of
them. I can only speak for my
university, maybe at the higher
education level, they have the
overall data, but I can tell you
this Western, for example, is a
military-friendly um university
and that designation comes from
analyzing how we treat our
veterans and so forth, because
you are absolutely correct. Um,
many of those individuals need
us to advance their lives into
the civilian sector.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, I would also add that in
addition to be receiving the
military friendly designation.
Um, many of our institutions
have actual veteran centers on
campus too, so there is a
physical place where uh veterans
can go to uh receive assistance.
Um, we offer different types of
um mental health benefits for
students who need that and just
um more of a supportive system
and I and I think uh it seems to
be an environment where people
are more likely to come forward
and, and, um, and speak up when
they have needs, um, and so I,
you know, I feel like ours has
been very successful in Santa
Fe, and I know most of my
colleagues have that too.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
I will also add that YNim Taos
has a statewide program. It's an
upward bound program for
veterans.
I thank you, um, uh, panel, Mr.
Chairman, I know that Doctor
Dreanon, uh, the branch college
in, in, in grants.
She has a place for veterans up
there, you know, it's very
important because, you know,
veterans are kind of a different
breed of people.
normal like everybody else, but
they have a different needs for
uh to address issues that uh
they're facing, so the reason I
just brought that up to make
everybody aware that we really
need to step up.
On, on education because they
also need an education then Mr.
chairman, like when I got out of
high school.
You know,
I was 18 years old and I went
from high school to Vietnam.
No education. I did, there was
no opportunity and there's a lot
of veterans that are facing the
same thing right now.
You get out of high school, go
to the military, and the, the
education just comes to a halt,
and we need to address that
issue to make sure they have an
opportunity to get that
education afterwards.
With that being said, go ahead,
sir.
In her share.
Thank you, mister.
Chair, this, I've just got two
questions. First, we talked
about early on, uh, Doctor
Shepherd, uh, 5% increase in ING
and then another 4% in
compensation and even though I
went to New Mexico public
schools, is that a 9% increase
that you're really looking for
Senator Sher, uh, Mr. Chair, no,
it's, it's a 5%, the ING is
instructional in general dollar,
so those are the operating
dollars. And then, of course,
the subset of that is your
compensation, so we're asking
for a 4% increase on that subset
of just compensation. So
Those are two different numbers.
But the ING wouldn't go to, no,
those are, those are your
operation dollars.
Well, how do you pay people now
if you're not using we do it
through the compensation, so we
keep those two funds separate,
so compensation goes to
compensation, ING goes to your
lights, your physical plant,
your um supplies or student
services, those sorts of things,
OK.
Uh, there's one other thing
here, uh, that
It has come up and that's
diversity of thought.
So I know at UNM there's been
some people that have not been
allowed to speak or been run off
the stage or whatever because,
well,
Diversity of thoughts not really
protected in some of our
institutions. Do we doing
anything to allow
People with a different point of
view to speak on campus, meaning
not a progressive. Senator Mr.
Chair, on, on that note, under,
under the Constitution and under
the laws, uh, freedom of speech
does not leave at the schoolroom
door. That was a tinker case
back in 1969, I believe. Um, and
so if that is going on at an
institution, I, I would suggest
that we probably should have a
conversation with that
institution. I know at my
institution, we allow anybody to
say anything.
Well, Mr. Chair,
Doctor
Uh, I believe it was Riley
Gaines at UNM that was literally
had to lock herself in a closet
to be protected from the mob
that was about to beat the snot
out of her.
Because she had a different
point of view than the average
progressive. So those things.
trouble me. I mean, I'm
certainly willing to listen to a
progressive talk, but they also
ought to listen to me talk.
In public forum.
So I'm not sure that that
happens. Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
the, the issue on the Tinker
case that I just mentioned that,
as you may recall, was they're
wearing armbands protesting the
Vietnam War and the students got
uh uh suspended in Des Moines.
And so the Supreme Court ruled
that you cannot do that. You do
not leave your, your freedom of
speech, your constitutional
rights at the schoolhouse door,
and it's just a famous case.
Moving on though, they also said
that if the if the speech
interrupts the business of the
institution that and
Institution can take measures.
So for example, let's say it
interrupted the classroom or it
interrupted the business of the
institution or a student going
to to to the cafeteria. Then an
institution can take action on
that. And the third piece is the
safety and security. If it posed
a threat to the institution or
to the members of the
institution, then that would,
that would take, and that would
um also be looked at a little
differently, but the primary uh
cornerstone of our country, as
you, as you know, is, is our
Constitution and
In that is the freedom of speech
and has been defined by
precedent through the Supreme
Court.
So, and, and I don't disagree
with that at all. In this
particular case, she wasn't
threatening anybody. She was
being threatened.
Uh, and she was being threatened
simply because she wanted to
express a different point of
view.
Diversity in thought.
So that's why she was
threatened. And I think that
that then uh comes to
suppressing speech because now
why, why would anybody else even
attempt to speak at UNM since
UNM is a threat to the life of
anybody that's not progressive.
That's the way I see it. And
Uh, I know they came out, oh
well, no, she's gonna cause
riots on campus. Well, there was
a riot against her.
Right, she didn't, she didn't
start a riot.
Yeah.
Um, but I know that that's,
that, that, that happens, that
happens all over the country,
but when it happens here in New
Mexico, that's what really
troubles me. I use this one as
an example, but I don't think
that's the only one.
Um, were.
Where people want to express an
opinion.
Um, and they should be allowed
to, especially in this case,
because she wasn't stopping
people going into the cafeteria,
she wasn't stopping him in the
classroom. She had a venue.
You have to go to that venue to
hear her.
He wasn't interrupting the
campus at all. So I want to
bring that out because I do
think that's important.
Diversity of thought should be
allowed.
Both ways.
Thank you.
Thank you and enjoyed the
governor and Gallup the other
day. represented small. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panelists, uh, I have a quick
question for the panel, uh, in
2023. What was New Mexico's
national ranking for state
support of higher education
students.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it was actually in
the top 10, um, according to the
Shio's chef report.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. That's right,
the information from our
analysts was #2, as a matter of
fact, for state support, which
is in double the average
national support, which is
great, and I, uh
I think it's publicly important
to sort of give uh appropriate
credit and the opportunity
scholarship, I think the
governor, Madam Secretary, you
deserve, uh, in all of the
collaborators there, um, but
it's a point of real pride, and
I want to thank you for that.
Uh, I want to ask Mr. Chair and
panel are degree production
though is sort of nowhere near
that level. Um,
So I guess my question is, is we
start to think about new money.
What does the panel think about
prioritizing progress, degree
production, uh, as, uh, sort of
the door to open to get that new
money, that new money isn't just
sort of, uh, there, there's not
penal, you know, we're not gonna
go back to the old days of
penalties, but should we
condition uh all some or most of
the new money on progress at
institutions. Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for that comment
on degree production, uh, total
awards since 2018 has been over
170,000 on average per year or
higher education institutions,
uh, graduate 25 to 30 or produce
25 to 30,000 credentials for uh
people across the state of New
Mexico, which is actually really
good for a small state like
ours. As far as incentivizing
completion that is already built
into the current funding model
that we have for higher higher
education.
Um, it is also something we're
looking at for the new model, so
we're looking at that base to
make it equitable, but still
making it competitive, and as
far as the new many
conversation, I'll defer to the
other folks so that they can
give you their insights and
answers to that.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, and
Madam Secretary as it relates to
the uh credential production. I
don't wanna uh not necessarily a
topic for now, but a significant
share perhaps a
Significant majority share of
those credentials, um,
Seem like they often don't lead
to that, uh, New Mexican or that
student, uh, being able to bring
home a higher paying job to be
able to do more work in their
community to uh support their
families. Many of those
credentials, and I know we're
working to change this, are
non-degree, uh, and in some
cases, yeah, there, there's
I wouldn't necessarily focus
just for me and I appreciate the
information. The number of
credentials is not necessarily
connected to uh helping New
Mexican students, uh, get the
sort of well-paying jobs that
support them themselves, their
families, and uh support
progress in their communities, I
think is the committee is
rightfully and you all, and
we're all focused on it.
Um
Representative small Mr. Chair,
one you asked our opinion about
this, and so let me share that
with you. As Madam Secretary has
noted, it is part of the funding
formula. But one of the dangers
you run into, particularly at
the comprehensives in the
community colleges is
The type of students we serve.
I've said this publicly. I'm
equally as proud.
Of that single mother or father
who graduates in 10 years by
being persistent in taking a
course every single semester
because he or she can't take a
full load like a traditional
student. And so the measurement
is simply but Mr. Chair, Mr.
President, I, I don't, with
respect, as we move into online
learning as we move into a more
braided way, uh, I think that
sells New Mexican students
short. It, it's not, I'm not
advocating for a
the door out the door, you know,
and 3.5 or 4 years. But uh, I am
very
I am asking how do we make the
sort of progress we're asking
for and sort of looking
backwards to challenges that may
have existed in, in previous
times under previous models, our
funding has massively grown, and
we're proud of that. I'm very
proud of that. Again, I want to
publicly give credit for that to
this administration, but our
progress has to follow that
investment.
And it's not enough to look,
yeah, you get what I'm saying,
yeah, yeah.
Any other perspectives is, is
the current share for production
appropriate, too big or too
small.
Well, I think I'd have to always
say probably that it was too
small, just because, um, but one
thing that I want to, uh, and,
and, and uh Mr. Chair
Representative Smalley, you did
touch on this, but this is the
non-credit workforce uh numbers.
So those numbers are not, uh,
you don't have those numbers.
We're just kind of moving to
where um we are, we are
recognizing those credentials,
those students as having as
significant an impact.
Our economy as many degreed
students, and so we, um, you
know, the legislature has just
recently been appropriating
significant funding $20 million
a year for non-credit workforce
training and so that is kind of
a game changer for us, and we're
just in our 2nd year of being
able to access that funding and
and really make it work for our
students, so, um, I, I would say
that a lot of the that money
Um, those students are entering
into credential programs that we
are offering because they're
needed in communities and
because they lead to the types
of jobs that have that that pay
well and that generally
speaking, have some sort of a
career ladder, and so it's, it's
easier for us sometimes to be
able to get people into the
workforce more quickly and more
efficiently by offering them the
credit way and, you know, to
your, to your point about um
getting students to finish
degrees more quickly. I, I, I
agree that that that is
something that we do need to be
working on. Um, at my college,
we our students are on a very
long path often and so what
we're doing is trying to figure
out ways that we can
Incentivize our students, make
it easier for our students to
take more credits per semester.
And, and Mr. Chair, uh, real
quick on that is one of the
reasons that we have so many New
Mexico, New Mexicans, we, we
know we have a lot of New
Mexicans who have started school
in New Mexico, haven't finished
for whatever reason, is one of
the big reasons that they've
actually gone out of state and
looked at some of these other
online programs is because they
can actually get it done quicker
and smoother in these other
places.
Mr. Chair, Representative Small,
I think it depends upon the
student. There certainly are
students, I'm sure who have done
that. But if you're looking at
the typical community college
student. No, that's not what
they're doing. Generally
speaking, they stop out because
they have to work more and so,
you know, tuition is free, but
what they, but what we don't
really
cover is the cost of not
working, lost wages, and that is
much more significant to our
average student. And so, um, you
know, we've, uh, you know, Santa
Fe has been fortunate enough to
engage in uh guaranteed income
pilot a couple of times and
we're finding that that that's
significantly helpful. So no,
they're not going out of state.
They're not going at all. And so
sometimes what can happen is
that we can get somebody back
or, or the students that are
going into a lot of non-credit.
Programs, um, our students that
we often wouldn't get at all
because they don't feel that
they have the time they can
afford to not work and to go to
college, but if we can, if we
can provide a really top-notch
training in 4 to 6 weeks and
then have them connected to a
job at the end of that, they can
do that, Mr. Chair, and, and I,
uh, sorry, uh President Doctor
Torres, if they're, um, uh,
thank you very much for that
point, Mr. Chair. I
I would sort of slightly quibble
in that, it's my sense that
there is a high degree of out
migration, particularly using
the online platform or
historically has been. That
said, Mr. Chair and Madam
President, I'm very much 100%,
you're at uh the identification
of sort of lost wages is a key
component want to compliment you
all here in Santa Fe, want to
publicly thank.
Serato and others and thanked
the legislature for passing it
with a sort of a stipend program
to begin to work in this way
last year. So it's a credit to
the work that you all are doing.
Um, and as you noted too, the 20
million a year in the grove,
total of 60 million credit there
to LFC for the grow, uh, and
want to thank Representative
Catherine Brown, who actually
really made some good language
suggestions working with HAFC
and the ranking member and uh
Representative Armstrong, um,
and others supported it
unanimously by the committee to
make those changes. Um,
Again, though, I guess, a key
question for me as we go into
next year and as we move
forward, we have stepped up to
the plate and said we're gonna
fund more.
It does not seem fair to New
Mexicans who want to get the
skills to get a better paying
job to support their families
and to do this awesome work in
their community to not
Sort of hold ourselves
accountable to make that doable
for them, and that challenge one
of the ways not penalizing, but
it's to support more for that
sort of production, and I want
to acknowledge the longitudinal
data system, Madam Secretary,
and I see half of that money has
been uh put out in contract,
which is great. All of this is
gonna help us connect how these
uh accreditations.
For, you know, sort of further
New Mexicans' ability to get a
better job and work better in
their communities or not, and I
think we all agree that we're,
we're starting to move in the
right direction. I do have a
couple other quick things, Mr.
Chair, um, on the, uh,
The, the leveraging and
collaborations on display now,
um, really positive as it
relates and, and there's so many
good examples, right, where New
Mexico Tech and New Mexico State
University leaders nationally
and internationally in uh water,
produce water treatment, other
sorts of things with a lot of
great opportunity there. Uh, I
can go through each of the
institutions and you all are,
are collaborating.
and working in ways that are
moving to Mexico forward and um
the, uh, you know, that said,
um,
As it relates particularly in
the online space, Madam
Secretary, you talked about, uh,
sort of the expertise,
obviously, that's there at New
Mexico State.
As all as our institutions move
more into an online space. Does
it make sense to sort of for the
state to have sort of like a,
almost like a purchasing model
approach where each institution
has their own students, goes out
and gets more students because
they're able to offer more
flexible online programs, but we
leverage the expertise that
currently exists and don't go to
sort of outside vendors in order
and, and essentially send more
state dollars.
Out of state to use new
platforms for different
institutions. Do we sort of
white label uh a platform and
make sure that our in our
dollars are going to our
students.
Mr. Chair, that's a fair
question. For me, it's always
collaboration with higher
education institutions, as you
noted, we're seeing some of
those successful collaborations
happening as we speak, so I know
that the online program here in
New Mexico at New Mexico State
University is already speaking
to other institutions about
growing that online model that
they've already built at other
institutions, whereas other
institutions feel independently
they're doing well as are. And
so we're respecting that, but
we're also looking at data
system platform.
forms. How are we coordinating
and collaborating our data
systems, our human resources
into one platform across
institutions, making it more
affordable, making it user
friendly, and making sure
institutions are talking to one
another and there's easy
transfer even for our students
and their records. So those are
kind of in the preliminary
stages though, right? Those
conversations are happening.
We're looking at it. Another
great example is in the realm of
software and cybersecurity, so a
lot of uh credit to
checks in the work that they're
doing there as well, working
with other higher education
institutions on how we can
leverage those um platforms and
memberships and dues together to
make it more affordable for one,
as opposed to separate uh dues
for many. Um, but those are some
of the things that are happening
through checks, through chess,
and then, of course, NMSU Global
through their online platform.
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
that's great. Thank you for that
and I, it sounds to me like the
sort of the
respect for sort of the
individual institutions, but
really strong guidance, uh, and
again, looking to maximize the
dollars and frankly, more money
can flow when we're, when we're
sort of using it more
efficiently, right? So thank you
for that. That sounds right to
me. uh, Mr. Chair, I want to
close on something um.
Uh, with, uh, present, uh Ammo
Zagar, um, uh, and I apologize
for my pronunciation, but it, I
think really struck me earlier
this year, Mr. Chair, when you
brought us to New Mexico Tech,
um,
We have remarkable research and
comprehensive work done in so
many different areas, from law
enforcement to health care, to
teachers, sort of, you name it.
We're moving away from
institutions competing against
one another in the state.
For and, and facing cuts as a
result of that, which was the
previous old funding formula.
It seems like we also maybe
look, need to look forward to
being willing to sort of support
institutions in their individual
needs and how they're like
really changing the game. And
there's so many things that New
Mexico Tech University of New
Mexico, what Western does, um,
the collaborations with Western
and, and, uh San Juan, etc. Um,
Obviously, I'm very familiar
with uh New Mexico State
University. Congratulations on
achieving our one status, by the
way, which is great.
Um, yeah, it's great.
Long way of saying, should we
think about outside of the
formula, other ways to do large
investments that help
institutions meet their, the
moment, meet their opportunity.
Mr. Chair, I'm just gonna speak
briefly to this and allow my
colleagues to respond right now
with the funding formula study
that we're doing, we're looking
to increase the base to
accommodate for the types of
students that they're teaching
on their campuses, building and
building renewal and replacement
equipment renewal and
replacement. So you're not
having all these appropriations
outside of the formula, it's
already built in, and then yes,
we can focus appropriations on
larger appropriations that
aren't built into the formula,
but makes sense for the higher
education.
institutions. So we're looking
on consolidating some of those
things like retention, student
services into the formula, but
then what our creative
innovative programming and
research endeavors that can
happen outside of the formula
and be funded, so you're not
doing all these separate pots of
monies and it's distributed it
that way, but it's more
organized, cohesive, and you're
getting more bang for your buck.
But if I can, Mr. Chair, I'm
gonna go ahead and defer to
these folks as well.
Represent a small, Mr. Chair,
the unequivocal answer is yes.
We should look at
We should look at things that
change the world. And, and this
might sound strange when I say
it coming as a comprehensive
university president, but we
really should make even heavier
investments into our research
institutions, and I'll tell you
why. All ships rise on a rising
tide. When UNM does good, when
state does good, when tech does
good, when those technologies
and that, that research, uh, it
becomes globally recognizable.
Guess what happens, they hear
the word New Mexico. I do good
as Western New Mexico
University. So
Absolutely.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you, Mr.
President. um, uh, all the, uh,
one point of question I know
moving forward is is
specifically on the BRNR. Thank
you for the answer, really
excited about that answer. The
BR and RP specifically uh my
sense sort of institutionally as
a legislature as we've been
trying to move away from sort of
funding footprint just for
footprint. Um,
But that said, I wanna thank you
for all of your answers and the
engagement. Overall, I think
we're making really exciting
progress with an opportunity to
sort of take that fully to the
next level and very much want us
to continue to support that and
hold all, you know, all of us
hold each other accountable to
meet this moment. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, representative.
You know, it's interesting to
look at some of this LLC stuff
in the report and, and, and how
we get
students in 6 years. Well, they
don't enter college prepared for
college class.
And we got to go back and
remediate those, right?
And then try to get him pushed
through the system, right? 6
years is a long time to be in
college. I know I was there, but
It's a different scenario
nowadays, right? But I don't
think we've kept up with the
changes that are happening.
The online, uh, the president
from New Mexico Tech. I, I still
need to meet with him because
kids learn differently.
And we're not keeping up.
When we fund you at the 2nd
highest level in the US per
student.
And we're forty-ninth.
That's on you guys.
That's a new presidents and,
and, and not succeeding in what
needs to happen.
And I don't know how we're gonna
rebalance that. I thought the
study would be done.
Madam Secretary, do you know
where the study's at today and
when we can expect that?
Mr. Chair, we're actually
wrapping up the study. I'm gonna
have a draft at the end of this
month, and then we'll be ready
for publication in the beginning
of the year.
So it'll be wrapped up and ready
for Christmas.
It'll be wrapped up and ready a
little after the new year.
But it was definitely be before
February, sir.
Uh, I mean, that's gonna give us
a true tale. I mean, we'll have
to see what comes out in the
draft and, and, and where we're
headed, I mean, that should have
told us, well, we really
actually are in funding and what
we need to target and and
everything that we need,
anything you want to hint about
to us about before that.
I kind of alluded to it in um
Herman Smalls, uh, the response
that I had for him. What we're
looking to do is create a more
efficient model, so you're not
throwing appropriations at us
left and right for all these
things we're telling you we
don't have money for, uh, which
is true. We don't have money for
certain things, that's why we do
all these one time
appropriations, but building it
into the higher education
funding formula through the base
is critical, so we can do more
things that are cutting edge
innovative, and put New Mexico
on top and as far as
forty-ninth in the nation. I'm
really proud to say because of
you all in your support through
the opportunity scholarship, the
trust fund, and then the leaders
in this room, we've actually
moved from 47 and higher
40-something in higher education
to 21 in the nation and higher
education. So in public ed, we
see these negative numbers, but
as far as higher education, we
are really moving mountains to
move our students forward. And
additionally, retention rates in
New Mexico. So you're right,
students are coming to college
not as prepared as we want and
we're
working with Secretary Padilla
at the publication department to
address those issues as we
speak. As a matter of fact, it's
one of their performance
measures, but as far as
retention, we have been
increasing retention, um, at the
two-year and the 4-year sector.
The 4-year sector really high,
um, it, it increased by more
than 4% last academic year. So
we're making those gains not
fast enough, but that funding
formula we're trying to wrap
things into it to make it more
efficient and easy for us to
fund higher education.
and keep it sustainable.
Well, I mean, we did opportunity
lottery,
the opportunity scholarships,
then the lottery on top of that.
So people will get more in their
Pell grains, or they would not
have to go to work or, or they
could not go to work or for
whatever reason. So then coming
back and say oh we're gonna pay
you when you're at college.
I mean
Very much a free ride, but I
mean, uh, we got to get a hold
of that.
We can't continue in over 11
year period and the opportunity
is not there yet.
To see declining numbers, I
mean, 4 or 5%, 3% declining
numbers.
I mean, the population is
declining.
We're spending more money than,
than it, than.
Ever on universities.
And we're not getting the
graduation rates, uh, Charles,
we're forty-ninth, correct? In
six-year degrees.
In 6-year degrees and that's
giving them a little leeway.
I mean, catch you up, 2 years up
from high school, and then try
to get a degree in 4.
I mean, in in a six-year
graduation rate, worth 49th.
That's still.
You can only go down from there.
And we don't want to go down.
That's gonna have to change it
and then
You know, I think represent a
small touched on this is
This online system and, and uh I
can tell you the stories of my
kids and think you guys have
heard them, right?
I can take an online course at
anyU for 700 bucks in 1800 at
UNM, right? Where am I gonna go?
I can go get.
For the charter school or build
credit school and get walk out
with two associates and go
finish my college in 2 years,
right?
And take online classes at the
same at a different school in
the same institution at NAU at
ASU at Grand Canyon, right?
compete.
And we're gonna have to learn to
complete globally in this
economy for students and online
learning.
Each school is gonna have to
have their own little sector
that they're gonna have to deal
with.
But globally,
If, if we want to make money and
and wanna get more students in
the system, we're gonna have to
compete nationally and
internationally to get that
number.
Cause if I'm sitting here in
Senator Rodriguez retires and
she wants to take an AI class,
and she looks at inSU Global,
you can take it online for MSU
Global for.
8900 bucks, right?
But she may look at ASU and say,
well, I can take that that
online class for 450.
And so
Students are shopping.
And their shopping heavily, and
how they get their degrees and
then, you know, at the end of
those.
3 years, 4.5 years when I when I
graduate, where am I gonna go,
right? Am I gonna go to Western
and, and finish at Western?
Because it completed so much
online, or am I gonna go to
Harvard?
And get my degree from Harvard.
I mean, there, there's
opportunity everywhere for those
kids.
And if we don't start competing,
You're gonna see these numbers
go down and down and down
because they'll get there
education online and another
school in another state or.
New Hampshire.
Grand Canyon or wherever, just
start naming them. And, and
we'll have lost.
And so,
We're gonna have to figure that
out and figure it out pretty
quickly.
Uh, we're gonna have to figure
out six-year graduation rate at
49, that's a lot of leeway.
We're gonna have to figure out K
through 12, why those kids
Have to
take low 100 level classes to
come in and and to bring him up
to speed and in education so we
can get those graduations up.
But we're also gonna have to
deal with the declining
population. And that's probably
the most scary thing for a
university then.
than anything because the
population declining is rapidly.
Uh, approaching us and and
hitting us and.
I, I, I hope the study comes,
covers some of that population
growth and migration into
Mexico.
Cause that will, that will give
us a telling tale, so.
Anything else you wanna add, Mr.
Shepherd?
Other than you're not allowed to
have a blue pain the rest of the
day.
I'm, I'm interviewing for the
Blue Man Group. Mr. Chair.
You're absolutely right.
Well, I wouldn't say that, but
you are. We, we have to
understand the online arena, and
you're correct. It's a, it's a
competitive arena between
students to go out and they do
look at the the price shop. We
right now have an opportunity
scholarship, so, you know, are
you a New Mexico student can go
online at my institution or UNM
or state or wherever, right? Uh,
and they don't have to pay, but
somebody's paying it.
We're paying it. So to your
point, we do have to become more
efficient. We do have to become
more productive. And I, I'm
gonna vouch for my colleagues. I
think they all agree with that
statement.
I mean, on a universities are a
business model, right? You have
to make a profit.
ASU is gonna dominate the
Western US in graduation rates
with their online stuff. Grand
Canyon, it was a little podunk
school 25 years ago that really
only baseball players really
went to.
uh
I now look where it's at. And,
and if, if
If I could say what I want in
New Mexico to look like in the
online system.
Look at Grand Canyon, look at
there. You want to build an
athletics, you want to talk
about building the whole system.
Look at what's happening in your
neighboring state to the west.
And, and I just know that
because I'm there a lot and I'm
right on the border.
Mr. Chair, one final note, and
again, compliments to to this
body.
You all invested quite a bit of
money in NMSU's global online
program. Back to Representative
Small. That's an example of a
program where we singled out an
institution, and we funded it.
We ought to take a look at what
are some other models out there,
so that we drive down the price,
not only for the New Mexican
who's still paying, but for the
legislature who's paying.
We just want kids educated in
the workforce.
And if it takes 6 years, it
takes 6 years.
But we want them there, and we
want to keep them here, and we
want to retain them. Is it out
migration after graduation is
even higher.
And, and that
You know, the legislature's
supposed to rescue everybody.
Economic development and, and
education K through 12, well.
We can fund it, but somebody has
to do the work.
So.
Mr. Chair, may I, may I make a
few comments. You know, one of
the things that the committee
and the legislature is really
asked us just to think about
impact, where, where are we
really making a difference
because there's been incredible
investments where the impacts
from those investments. And I, I
think across the state, you
would see a number of
interventions both on the
academic affairs side and the
student affairs side, things
like um embedding undergraduate
research earlier so students
can, can, can learn, um,
embedded tutors, um, more, um,
uh, coaches, students.
academic success coaches. You
know, there are a number of
things we tried. I think that
one of the things that's
incumbent upon us at this point
is to really look and say, OK,
which of those are successful,
which of those are making a
difference. And so then that
gets the point to the data. I, I
really look forward to the day
where we have data that shows
pre-K to to the workforce
because that's gonna be, that's
gonna be incredibly helpful, and
I'll give you an example. A few
years ago, I, I looked at some
data and I looked at students
who were having to take remedial
courses, students, uh, what was
the percentage of students
having to take remedial courses?
Who graduated the year before.
2 years later and 5 years later,
and, and it's, it should be no
surprise that the students who
had graduated 5 years later and
hadn't had any educational
experience, we're in much, much
greater need of remedial
education and the students who
came directly from high school.
And, and my, my point is that,
that as we are able to really
look at the data whether it's
interventions, specific
intervention or or something
like that. It tells us where do
we need to, where do we need to
to do our work, and, and it may
be that that um I, I think it,
it made me think that.
the students in this particular
county in Donana County, uh,
that, that many of them coming
right out of high school were in
better shape than I thought they
were, uh, but that some of the
interventions really needed to
be on the students who had gone
to work for 5 years and hadn't
hadn't had any education, but
so, so I'm looking forward to to
to that and and but I, I think
we have to insist in our own
institutions that we have to
look at the data asking the very
question that you're asking
represent a small, what's the
impact? What's the impact of the
tremendous investments that that
um the legislatures.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
You want to wrap it up for us
here?
went to my presentation.
I thought we went over all the
budget numbers.
Mr. Chair members of the
Committee for the sake of time,
I do want to respect you all in
your request. We'll be jumping
to the Health Sciences Center.
However, as far as the higher
education department is
concerned, um, most of you have
my cell phone number, please
text me if you have any
questions. It's 505-690-7799.
Yes, I know I shared that with
the whole state of New Mexico.
It's OK. A lot of people will
text me about going to college
for free and I helped them one
on one, but you all can reach
out to me, um, the main things I
just
know is, uh, it's an adult
education year at the higher
education department, we've
increased enrollment
dramatically. We are almost at
pre-pandemic levels for uh adult
education programs that almost
every single one of your
communities has an adult
education in your own uh program
in your own backyard. So Mr.
Chair, um, please let me know if
you have questions. This was our
presentation has all the
information in there and I'm
available 24/7 to you and I will
be texting you or emailing you
official.
responses within 24 hours for
things I could not answer. Thank
you.
Thank you.
I don't see Doctor, oh there.
We're ready when you are.
Um
I would be cautious that there's
no blue ink all over that.
Charles, maybe we can send
somebody to make sure,
we can have somebody pull up the
slides. I tried to do it for you
all. I apologize.
like
All right. We'll go ahead. I
know where time is of the
essence, as folks have
conversations, go ahead and take
them outside, and then we'll,
we'll dive in.
So thank you, Representatives
Small and members of the
committee. I'm Michael Richards,
the interim executive vice
president of the UNM Health
Sciences Center, and today I'm
joined here with, sorry, uh,
Doctor Richard. I just ask
everybody to take the
conversations outside if they
can, so we can continue on
apologies for that, but also
appreciation.
Go ahead. Thank you, sir. So
I'm, I'm joined here today by uh
with Dean Finn, who's the dean
of our UNM School of Medicine.
Many of the topics we're gonna
talk about today will involve
the school of medicine and so
she's here as a reference and a
resource.
So thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here. Um, I
don't believe that they're able
to project the presentation, so
we'll just um work by hard copy
if that's available for folks.
The first thing that I'd like to
really do on, um, which is on
slide one of that deck is really
just making acknowledgement of
the great support that we've had
from the state to be able to
grow both our education and
research programs. You see a
long list of those things here,
but I'll just highlight some
items such as the recent ribbon
cutting on our crisis triage
center or the ground baking on
our children's psychiatric
center or the photo that you see
here on this diagram, which is
our critical care tower, which
is now at about 94% completion.
But I'd also like to just
specifically point out that a
lot of this, of especially the
clinical growth is really driven
by the partnership that we've
had with the state through
Medicaid funding, specifically
the, the dedicated directed
payment program. That program
has allowed us to grow clinical
programs, but it has also been
an incredibly important uh
mechanism to bring our
compensation of our faculty, our
staff, and our residents up to
the national average, and I'd
also like to
say that it's been an important
mechanism for us to grow our
graduate medical education
programs, which I'll mention
here in a few more minutes. On
the next page, um, I'd like to
just kind of note this is page
2, just a few of the, the items
which you have seen before,
which are um our RPSP request
and our capital request. I'll be
very brief on these items
included in the packet in the
appendix is a one-page summary
for each of these items, but for
the RPSPs we have um 2 which are
really for operational.
avenues for the um OMI or the
Office of the Medical
Investigator or and our New
Mexico poison and drug
Information Center. Those are
really programs that we operate
in collaboration with the state.
We also have um funding requests
to support the expanded faculty
at our College of Population
Health, and then today you
earlier talked about the
importance of pathway programs
and so there's some additional
funding for the NAA program,
which is an important pathway
program to help, um, um,
students and
Mexico, become aware of and be
prepared for health professional
careers on capital priorities
for us this year, there are 3.
The most important and biggest
one of this set is the UNM
College of Pharmacy phase 2
renovation. That is a $66.8
million program. This phase 2 is
$28.5 million which is, will be
used to really build out the,
the remainder of the research
and educational space. The
Dominici 3T MRI.
is really um a facility
modification through rehearsa
grant, we've been able to um
acquire the equipment, but we
have to make some modifications
to the facility, and then the
last one is really capital
equipment to support our
simulation centers, which does
also include um resources for,
um, artificial intelligence,
education and training. So, um,
committee members, I'd like to
then move into page 3 of the
document, which is probably one
of the more important messages
for today. So, over the last 15
years, we've
really not had an opportunity to
significantly change or expand
our clinical footprint of the
UNM health system. Um, but that
has been significantly changing
because of the support of the
state, and over the next 10
years, we see um the opportunity
and, and are anticipating major
growth of our clinical um
platform that includes such
things as that critical care
tower which we showed in that
first slide, that, that tower
also has two additional phases
to it, building out of our
C campus things such as our
children's psychiatric hospital.
That means that over the next 5
to 10 years, we will see an
almost doubling of our adult
clinical platform. In terms of
just inpatient beds, that's an
86% increase. When we look at
this in terms of physicians that
it would add to the workforce.
This gives us an opportunity to
add 350 more physician faculty
members to the School of
Medicine.
This is transformative because
it allows us to deliver
essential patient care for New
Mexico, but probably also
important for today is that this
really now creates a very unique
opportunity for New Mexico, for
us to grow our education and
research programs, which then
takes me to slide 4. In this
interim role, President Stokes
has made it very clear that her
top priority for me as the
executive vice president is to
grow the health
healthcare workforce for the
state of New Mexico, Growing
that clinical platform creates
that opportunity for us.
Healthcare professionals, um, in
training require a clinical
delivery system to complete
their training.
And because our clinical
delivery system has not
expanded. It has essentially
been saturated with learners for
the last 15 years, and so we
really have not been able to
grow those programs with all of
this clinical growth and the
support of the state, we are now
at this point where we can,
where we can set big ambitious
goals for growing health
professions in New Mexico. And
so I'd just like to highlight a
couple of things. Um, we talked
today about the success of our
educational programs. I'd like
to note that our
of nursing and the investments
that the state has made in the
nursing programs allows me to
say today that as compared to FY
24 NFY 25, we will see a 32%
increase in the number of
nursing admissions for
undergraduate programs and a 47%
increase in graduate nursing
programs.
Um, that, um, will take us to a
total of 716 um nursing
students. That is supported by
this new college of nursing
building that the state helped
us acquire.
I also point out our College of
Pharmacy, which is another one
of our capital initiatives, our
College of Pharmacy is ranked
18th in the United States for
pharmacy schools, and our
College of nursing is in the top
10% of all nursing schools in
the United States. So we are
very proud of the quality of
those health profession
educations.
As we think about this goal from
President Stokes, we want to
double the size of all of our
health profession education
programs by 2024, and then this
takes us to the next slide,
which is that in order to do
that, we will have to make some
significant investments in the
supporting infrastructure for
the school of medicine. On page
5, we kind of highlight that the
primary education research
building associated with the
School of Medicine is Fitz Hall,
built in 1967, it is essentially
at the end of its useful life,
it is not really amenable to
remodeling or renovation, and
after extensive analysis must be
replaced. Um, to be able to do
that, working with Secretary
Rodriguez and her staff, we put
together a plan that started
with an assessment of need,
which we reported out to the
regents in uh May of this year,
and then followed with a
business plan.
And a facility programming plan
so that we could bring the best
information um to her and to you
for this potential investment.
On the next page,
We've completed the assessment
work, and it confirms the needs
of uh the healthcare workforce
needs for New Mexico. We are now
completing the business plan
and, and Mr. Chair, I would have
an opportunity to show some of
the highlights of that business
plan for you today, and we're,
and we're about halfway through
the programming. We normally
would not advance programming
documents like this, um, until
they were finished. But we feel
that this is such a substantive
process and such an important
project that advancing them as
preliminary documents for
discussion could be important
today. All of that has led to,
for this upcoming legislative
session, an HED capital um
appropriation request for a
design of a new school of
medicine building for $37
million.
Mr. Chair, that concludes that
part of the presentation, but I
do have supplemental material
that I think would be very
important for the committee, and
that is some of the preliminary
findings of the School of
Medicine Business plan and the
programming.
If you'd like me to proceed,
please. So on page 7, we start
the discussion on the School of
Medicine business plan. Purpose
of this business plan was to
test the idea, can we double the
size of the school of medicine?
Will it meet accreditation and
what are the impacts to the
state if we were to do that. We
used a national consulting
company called ECG Management,
which has worked with over 90%
of this medical schools in the
US for this project. On page 8,
we start to see um some data
talking about the
demand for medical education in
New Mexico. There's a lot of
information on this slide, but
I'd like to just highlight a
couple of very important points.
First point is that 95% of all
of the students in the UNM
school of medicine are from New
Mexico.
Another really important point.
If you are going to receive an
MD degree and go to any medical
school in the United States, and
you are from New Mexico, about
85% of those individuals will
get that M degree, MD degree
from the University of New
Mexico.
So we are very important source
for this training for
individuals who are from our
state. It also shows that, that
when we look at the number of
seats that we have available to
train these individuals that we
are below the national average
and that expanding this medical
school would allow us to get to
that national average. It also
shows that we have a lot of
interest from others in
attending our medical school.
On the next page, which is page
5, this shows a 10-year
projection of what it would look
like if we were to double the
size of the school of medicine
educational programs. You'll
note here that there are 3 lines
on this graph. The middle line
is really the undergraduate
medical or MD degrees, and that
takes us to 812 over this
proposed time period, but
there's almost 1200 other
learners, and I'd like to just
note that our medical school is
also the primary education.
site or health professions
outside of pharmacy, nursing,
and population health. So
occupational therapy, physical
therapy, um, anesthesia
assistants, all are trained in
our medical school. And so when
we set this goal for doubling,
we are also doubling all of
those health professional
students at the same time. This
graph is also important because
it shows that, that not only do
we need the clinical delivery
system to be able to grow these
programs that we also
must have new physical
infrastructure to accommodate
this number of students, and you
see that that's why the
trajectory starts to increase at
year 5.
On the next page, which is slide
10 of this deck, the single most
important point on this page
shows that in order to grow to
this volume, we would need to
add at least 338 more position
faculty members. I bring us back
to the growth of the clinical
delivery system. I showed that
that anticipated growth of our
clinical delivery system will
require us to add 350 faculty
members to be able to deliver
the care. This is one of the
things that
creates the very unique
opportunity for New Mexico that
we are in fact growing the
clinical delivery system will
need to bring those physicians
in to deliver clinical care, and
it matches up with the number of
physicians that we would need to
also double the size of the
school of medicine class. On the
next slide, which is page 11,
um, in addition to physician
faculty members, we have
biomedical scientist, which
teach our faculty in order to
double the size of the class, we
would need to see a 50% to 70%.
increase in that number of
faculty, but we've also talked
today about the importance of
research, those individuals also
do research in addition to
teaching, and as part of the pro
forma that I will show you,
you'll see that they contribute
another $55 million of
extramarily funded research as
part of the projections.
On the next slide,
You'll see some of the pro
forma. This is not a budget, but
this is asking the question in
today's dollars, if we were to
have doubled the size of the
school of medicine, what would
the fiscal impact have been and
is this achievable? This diagram
and, and table confirms to us
through this business planning
that this is in fact a very
achievable and sustainable
project. You'll see is a couple
of really important highlights
that the total revenue of the
school of medicine.
by adding these number of
students would change the
revenue from about $7034 million
to over a billion dollars a
year.
That, um, that when we get out
to the full buildout that you'll
see that there is an operating
gap that we would need to cover
that right now is listed as $44
million. Know that this is still
a pro forma that's under
evolution, a significant portion
of that is covered by the is
driven by the research, so there
may be opportunities for us to
eat the right size of the
faculty, provide more research
support. So again, I offer this
up because this is not a budget.
This is a pro forma estimate to
show
what the cost would be. Also
note that that support or those
modifications really aren't
necessary for us until year 6
of, uh, of this ten-year journey
to double the school of
medicine, which shows that we
are really grateful for the
support that we have right now
for the state to be able to
deliver the educational program.
Um, and so I will, um, that, um,
covers the main portions of this
um diagram, and now what I'd
like to go to a slide 13.
A couple of the really important
points about this is that when
we compare tuition, um, for the
school of medicine at UNM to
other public institutions,
schools of medicine in the
United States. We see that our
tuition is approximately half
that of other public
institutions at $19,700 as
compared to almost the $38,000.
That becomes really important
because this means that our
tuition is of a really high
value.
And I can say that when we look
at our medical students and the
debt that they have upon
completion of their MD degree,
that they're coming in at 40%
lower than the national average
as compared to other public
education institutions, um, at
about $118,000 a year. On the
next slide, which is 14, this is
looking at the support, assuming
that we were to have an
additional $40 million of
support at year 10, and
comparing that.
total support of the state as
compared to other academic
medical centers and schools of
medicine, again, public
institutions that the total
support we would need would,
would be then at about $115,000
per student as compared to a
national average of $121,000 per
student. Again, demonstrating
would be right at the national
average. I mentioned that our
school of medicine is also the
primary home for training other
health professions. So we've
looked at
the financial component
separately for that group, and
the, at the 10 year mark, that
the total cost of our
contribution from the state
would be $332,000 per student as
compared to a national average
of $35,000 per student. We
conclude that this really
demonstrates that, that we can
in fact achieve this doubling of
the size of the school of
medicine, and that this really
is a good value for both the
students and for the state of
New Mexico.
This is still a work in progress
and on slide 15, we talk about
some of the next steps on this,
which will include refining that
pro forma, uh, uh, lining up
with the accreditation process,
we are also doing an independent
economic analysis of this
expansion, and I'll show that
the incremental expansion from
where we are today to doubling
the size of the school of
medicine, preliminarily we will
see that that will have a
community impact of over $400
million a year.
OK, Mr. Chair, with that, I'll
move into the last section of
this, which is that that as part
of this process, we were asked
to do a programming analysis of
what this new facility would
look like. We have partnered
with Paige Sutherland Page to
accomplish this task, I list
some of the other medical
schools that they have worked
with, and you'll see some photos
in here of those medical
schools. On the next page 17,
we've actually put this
programming together with the
idea that we could in fact be in
a building.
With the first starting class of
July of 2029 and graduating the
first group of new medical
students under this doubling by
2034. This process of the
programming looks at how we
would expand the building, how
we would replace the existing
building with a contemporary
platform and how we would
accommodate all of the new
clinical growth that we've
talked about on slide 18, this
planning process as 4 really
large questions, um, what would
go
In the new building.
How big that new building would
need to be. Using those two
things, how much this building
would cost, and then lastly,
where would we put this on the
UNM campus. All of this would be
used to then inform the design
appropriation and that 2025
legislative um request. On slide
19, we kind of start to list the
volume of work that we've done
to get to this phase of the
project, some of the, the
numbers of people and the
meetings that we've had. And
then on July 20, I'll start to
show you
some of the preliminary
outcomes.
One of the outcomes is where
would we put this? We went
through an extensive site
selection process looking at 6
different criteria and on slide
21, you'll see the proposed
location of where this building
would go. This building is
proposed to go on the corner of
university and Lomas, and that's
in the blue box labeled School
of Medicine. You may know that
corner, there's the old galleys,
um, car dealership is on the
northwest corner. There are some
university buildings.
on this northeast corner. This
becomes a very important, um,
um, activity because that
proximity of the school of
medicine, puts it in very close
proximity to where the yellow
boxes, which is where we will
build our next multi-specialty
medical office building for the
physicians and patients, so that
the school of medicine building
will be right next to the doctor
medical office building, and
that is right next to the green
box, which is
our new hospital tower, that
creates that proximity and flow
that is efficient for both
learners and for the faculty
members. This also creates an
important anchoring for the
University of New Mexico, so
much so that we now referring to
this as the gateway site.
On the next page, I'll talk just
a little bit about the
programming and then just show
you a few photos of what a
contemporary educational space
looks like. This planning
process is highly benchmarked to
national expectations and
averages, and that's what we
articulate on slide 22, 23. And
on the next slide where we have
the, the, um, the chart. What
we're showing here is that the
preliminary programming gets us
to about a 3,044,000 square foot
building.
And when we compare that square
footage to the and the number of
students to the other new
medical school buildings that
you see listed here that have
been recently built, we show
that we come in at about 639 net
square foot per student, which
is below but near the national
average of 695. This is the kind
of demonstration of what I mean
by this is a highly benchmarked
um programming process.
On the next few slides, I just
wanted to just kind of share
with you a little bit about
about how these buildings look
different or contemporary health
professional education on slide
24, you see what classrooms look
like in these new modern medical
school buildings, highly
flexible, they have integrated
technology, they allow for the
kinds of group learning that is
expected in contemporary health
professional education.
On slide 25, we'll be relocating
the research infrastructure
that's in that old school of
medicine building in the upper
right corner, you see a photo of
one of our, one of our current
labs. Current labs are typically
in smaller rooms, one or two
investigators, 2 or 3 benches,
that was the state of the art
technology, 50 or 60 years ago,
you will see here on this slide
what a contemporary medical
science space looks like, highly
Flexible, highly adaptive, far
more collaborative, and you'll
see in the bottom right, that is
a diagram showing that
contemporary space can be built
so that it can be adaptable to
the scientist and to the group
science that represents
contemporary medicine today.
On slide 26, we have some
examples of some of the
simulation space. We've really
appreciate this investment that
has been made, but you'll see
here in some of these diagrams
that, that continued investment
and simulation will be important
to medical education and that
we're now bringing the
simulation labs into the
classrooms. On slide 27, as I
conclude with the some of the
what the contemporary spaces
look like, we see that office
and administrative space is also
expected to be.
Much more flexible, um, shared
space, less assigned office, um,
and that we do create spaces
which are open and adaptable for
multiple uses. We're now in the
process, we're doing the, the
stacking and the um test of fit
on that corner of Lomason
University as I've talked about,
and then this takes us to the
final slide, which is slide 29.
The cost of this building today,
and again this is a very
preliminary um,
Um, a number or a 350,000 square
foot building at um at a cost of
about $1200 per square foot,
which is the national average,
would get us to a construction
cost of about $423 million. The
materials and supplies that
would go in that building or
another $148 million getting us
to a total project cost at this
point or something like this
approaching $600 million. Please
note that this is
is again a preliminary finding
based on the programming that we
have now and over the next
several weeks, we will continue
to refine that. And with that,
Mr. Chair, um, I'll conclude and
stand for questions.
members
representative Baker.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Doctor Richards. I
I want to first say I, I'm very
interested in this.
Uh, school of medicine, uh,
healthcare services. Um, you
know, as we, Senator Gonzalez
mentioned the other day we saw
the presentation about the aging
population of New Mexico. So
healthcare is something that
It's gonna be needed for our
aging population is something
that we have an opportunity to
to have an impact, not just now
but for future generations. So,
uh, Mr. Chairman, Doctor
Richards.
Can you tell me, what is the
operating budget now for the
School of Medicine and what
would the operating budget be by
doubling it, because I, I caught
two numbers there and I just
wanna highlight those numbers.
So, Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca using today's dollars, um,
which is what we did in the pro
forma. The current budget for
the school of medicine is about
$740 million. Now I also note
that the school of medicine also
has a business arm called the
UN.
Medical Group, which is a
year and that that has a budget
of about $300 million but, and
so, um, so take that into
consideration. If we were to
double the size of the school of
medicine and using today's
dollars, that would bring the
total operating revenue of the
School of Medicine to about $1
billion a year.
And thank you for Chairman and
thank you, Doctor. You talked
about efficiency and use of
space, that's why when we talk
about doubling it, we're not
talking about 1.4, we're talking
about $1 billion. So by
utilizing the space, by making
the changes that we need to the
learning environment. That's how
we can
Pretty much through efficiency,
uh, save some money. Mr. Chair
and Representative Baca, that is
correct. Um, you'll see that we
are able to double the size of
the school of medicine by doing
a 50 and 70% increase of some of
the educational faculty, and
we're growing the clinical
faculty in, in, in accordance
with the growth of the clinical
delivery system, that is not
that, that allows us to be able
to do this without doubling the
total budget of the School of
Medicine.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Doctor Richards. So
when we talk about using today's
monies to help future
generations. What are we looking
to get at the expected life of
this facility or the usable life
of this facility for the school
of medicine, if we make if we
fund these changes. So, Mr.
Chair and uh Representative
Baca, we would expect this
building to have a, a useful
life of approximately 75 years.
Uh, that's very impressive.
Thank you. Um,
Mr. Chairman, Doctor Richards,
we're gonna talk about the
economic impact. I, I thought
that I caught the number of $400
million.
About the economic impact. Can
you briefly and just in a few,
describe what that looks like,
how, how we're gonna achieve
that and what that will do for
our communities and for its
citizens. So Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, so we're,
we are completing a detailed
economic impact of this proposal
now, and that will be included
in the business plan. But
preliminary findings from the
economist would show that that
the incremental growth from the
750 to the 1 billion on the
operating.
avenues of the school of
medicine will have an economic
impact of between 400 and $500
million. That is achieved using
the double AMC benchmarks of
$1.6 of economic impact per
operating dollar spent in 2.3
multiple for every research
dollar spent. That is just for
the school of medicine. We'll
have that detailed as we um
received the economic impact
report from Trip on Bach.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Doctor Richards. One
of the other questions is that,
and I, I appreciate it. I wrote
it down. You saw me write it
down and we talked about the
percentage of New Mexicans that
are attending our schools. So
Mr. Chairman and Doctor
Richards, the other question
that I have is, how do we retain
those doctors that we educate.
What, what is it that the
doctors and our graduates from
the medicine cause I know that
it covers many different areas
of medicine.
What are some of the things that
we need to consider that after
we support this, that we retain
those healthcare professionals
in New Mexico.
So Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, um one of the most
important things that we're
gonna do is actually create the
healthcare infrastructure and
the jobs to recruit them into.
So as part of this clinical
growth, we create over 350 new
jobs for physicians to recruit
into. We create over 2000 new
jobs for other healthcare
professionals to be recruited
into. That is an incredibly
important part of that equation.
Um, also the support that we've
received.
from the state to ensure that we
have competitive salaries, um,
as compared to the national
benchmarks also lets us re
recruit and retain these
healthcare professionals.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, the, the, the
question I would also be because
I, I support this. I, I really
do. I'm excited about it.
But I'm also talking about the
doctors that will be working in
the rural communities, cause
that's also important because in
my county, Valencia County,
every time we do a presentation,
we are always red. So on top of
the school of medicine and
supporting those jobs that will
be created there.
What are some of the things that
we need to do support our
medical professionals, nurses,
doctors, and our rural
communities. So Mister Chair and
Representative Baca, so I'm
specifically thinking about
Valencia County. I think that is
a very good example of, um, the
number of healthcare
professionals that you have
there is in part represented by
the healthcare infrastructure
that we have in Valencia County
and the investments that the
state has made to build new
healthcare facilities in
Valencia County.
will now create the opportunity
for you to recruit individuals
into Valencia County. However, I
will acknowledge that there are
many places in New Mexico that
have physical plants that could,
but they still have provider
shortages, and so that's not the
problem in all places, creating
the right practice environment,
ensuring that we have a
competitive compensation and the
support that you've done to
ensure that that underlying
healthcare infrastructure is
fiscally stable, largely through
the work that you've done
through Medicaid.
We all really contribute to
being able to recruit and
sustain a healthcare workforce
for New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Doctor Richards.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vaca. Next, we're
gonna go to Senator Gonzalez and
then Representative De la Cruz
and we're keeping the list.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to both of you. Um,
what an excellent presentation.
And the first, you know, I do
support you 100% and I can see
how we cannot afford not to
support you, you know, where we
are in our state, but two parts
that uh that I wanted to ask is
um.
On the
Very exciting about having grow
our own in New Mexicans being
part of our
Education population to go into
the medical field.
But maybe if you can, uh,
Expand a little bit or maybe if
we need to do more work.
Is how will the outreach to the
recruitment from uh
The
You know, from high school to
say to our first degree to the
medical part.
And do we need to do more or uh.
How will we get out there?
So Mister Chair and, and, and
Senator Gonzalez, I very much
appreciate this question. Um, I,
we are not just building a
healthcare workforce to deliver
the clinical care. We're not
just doubling the size of these
educational programs for that.
What we also believe that we are
doing is that we are creating
educational opportunities for
students from all over New
Mexico to have a health
profession's educational career,
and that inclusive approach is
Fundamental to this for us. We
know that that educational
opportunity changes the lives of
those students, it changes the
lives of those families, it
ultimately changes the lives of
those communities. So recruiting
those individuals from all over
New Mexico is essential to us
getting to the workforce that
representative Baca was
referring to, because when we
recruit from those communities,
they go back to those
communities. When we, when we
look at why people select where
they go.
Family is often at the top of
the list. So you will see, sir,
that when we, um, um, advanced
in our RPSP, our pathway
programs, which are designed to
ensure that we are getting the
word out and building the
support so that students,
regardless of where they're from
in New Mexico. Well, um, we'll
we'll be told and encouraged to
pursue a science or health
profession's career that is
foundational to this. We believe
that this, um,
has to be connected to that
rural outreach. Dean Finn is
here. She also thinks about how
we address and build the right
resources for students who may
not always be fully prepared for
the rigors, and so maybe I'll
just, if Mr. Chair and with your
permission, turn this over to
Dean Finn for a moment.
Please, Dean.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
Senator Gonzalez. I think that
is germane and key if as
Representative Baca was speaking
about, we're talking about the
next generation. This is not a
building. This is the concept of
how to reach and how to engage,
and I know we had conversations
about online. There are many
tools and many adaptability that
I think New Mexico is poised to
use for thinking about
education, but with our core
values of
Keeping human beings and our
patients at that heart center.
So as we train the next
generation, we're incorporating
new technology. Here's where the
atom was split, but we're also
remembering who we are, where we
are, where we came from. And I
think that the programs that uh
Doctor Richards has suggested
are key and Germaine to this
effort, is that we think about
not only why folks want to come
here, why folks want to stay and
how we can ensure the best and
the brightest. I think that
really
Thinking about introduction to
the different models of
healthcare that you might pursue
as a career, you've heard we're
thinking about not only
physicians, but in tangent and
can parallel with um all of the
other healthcare workers that
enhance us. We want to ensure
that if you're thinking about
that education or that as a
model, it can happen. So that
means being very present in not
simply when we got to college,
but also in our elementary
schools and are graduating and
our high school.
schools and also being present.
I know that for all of us here
who are here in support of this,
we want to make sure that there
are options and you can make a
difference. It's also really
important to think about the
items that if you want to have a
career in a rural health
setting, who will be there?
What's the team? How do we
provide that? So I think that's
as, as important. I could go on,
but I do I just thank you so
much for that question, because
we can't have the kind of growth
that represented Paco
suggests unless we think of
who and where. I will bring up.
Just one example. Um, we have
begun a course curriculum terms
AI in medicine, artificial
intelligence and medicine, and
that's really just to begin to
introduce the tools to think
about ethics and morality. There
were 800 people, this is in
concert with Echo, but what was
really important, 17 of the
counties and rural providers
showed up because we want to
know how we can not only do
better, but we will do better.
Thank you so much for that
question. Oh, Mr. Chairman, no.
You know, if I might make a
suggestion.
You know, uh, I would really
like to see the tie between our
secretary from public education
department and our higher ed
secretary, that articulation.
You know, going into the
information and going into not
also but also a career path.
You know, of what it can do to
some of his students and I would
be the one that, you know, just
opens their eyes and I want to
do that.
And uh participate and then, you
know, with uh a program with a
facility as you're mentioning,
you know, there's uh nothing but
um positive to it to to go into
that, but uh, I really believe,
you know, and
If uh the more exposure and the
more information we can have out
there at the very early age.
And I always remember the late
Uh, Jeannette Wallace from Los
Alamos.
She would say all our programs
start at 3rd grade.
You know, with everything that
we do and the sooner we have
that.
Awareness, you know, to those
paths.
Uh, it works, you know, and then
again we support ourselves with
uh that infrastructure of the
human part of uh.
Our students being a part of it.
But thank you for that and the
last question that I have is on
page 29.
So for the breakdown of the
what the cost would be.
Would this be uh uh to so much
be bonding and so much would be
on a meal levy, and so much an
appreci to maybe uh.
Gift or
Foundations
So, Mr. Chair and, and Senator
Gonzalez. So we're at the phase
now where we need to start
working with our key
stakeholders and the legislative
and the leadership at HED um to
start looking at ways that we
could finance this building.
That'll be part of this next
phase, you specifically mention
philanthropy, um, and so we have
um commissioned a philanthropy
assessment with the UNM
Foundation to see um what role
that can play, we normally have
about $20 million of of
donations and giving to the UNM
School of Medicine, but we
appreciate that this is a very
different project and offers a
very different opportunity, so
we'll be specifically pursuing
that also. Chairman, I just want
to mention something that I
personally experienced.
I know, uh, born and raised in
New Mexico.
And also part of the Taos
community.
And uh recently,
You know, the Harwood museum was
having a fundraiser, you and
him.
And it really
Just unbelievable, opened my
eyes that they could raise $15
million in one setting, you
know, for the museum. So it is
out there.
You know, again, that's another
skill and another expertise that
it takes to go after this
fundings, but um, you know, if
we do have the right individuals
with it and, you know, we can do
that also, so.
Uh, I'll just say Mr. Chairman,
with uh anything that we can
help you with or anything I can
help you with.
You know, please do.
So
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Gonzalez. Next we're gonna
representative de la Cruz and
then represent Montoya,
Representative Chatfield, and
we'll keep going. Sam de la
Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation, Doctor
Richards.
What does it cost for on average
for a typical MD student to
complete their 4 years.
So Mr. Chair and um and
Representative Dela Cruz, the,
the, the average debt of a
student in New Mexico going to
our medical school is $118,000.
That is 40% lower than the
national average for students
that attend other public schools
of medicine.
How would it compare to Ivy
League?
So the typical Ivy League
tuition, um, or I should say I,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't
know specifically the Ivy
Leagues, but I do know that I
can compare this to non-public
private schools of medicine, and
the, and, and so the non-public
private schools of medicine are
about $225,000 of debt as
compared to our students at
about 118.
Thank you. I think that's
important to note, and I think
it's important for the public to
be aware, especially for our
kids, our potential
Medical students to understand
that we have quite an amazing
medical school in New Mexico
that that actually creates some
amazing dogs.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, on a side
note, uh, my daughter is doing a
dental residency. We don't have
a dental school.
But is doing a dental residency
at the UNM Dental Clinic, she'll
be there for a year. And I just
want to share with you, Doctor
Richards at uh she's really
enjoying that place. She's
really working with people that
are in need.
It's, it's for folks in the
community that don't have the
means to be able to visit a
commercial, uh, dental clinic,
and so she really appreciates
being there and she appreciates
her cohort as well as the docs
that are there that oversee the
program.
I just wanted to mention that
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Thank you very
much, Representative Dela Cruz.
Next representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, Mr.
Richards,
I'd like to follow up on my line
of questioning that uh
Representative Baca had about
retention of our graduating.
Uh, students.
Um
What percentage currently of uh
UNM graduating students in the
in
The medical professions are
staying in New Mexico, and what,
what percentage are leaving?
So Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, so on nursing, about 90%
of our nursing graduates stay in
New Mexico and about 85% of them
come from New Mexico. On
pharmacy, about 95% of the
students that attend, um, um,
are from New Mexico and about
81% of all the pharmacists in
the state, um are are graduates
of our pharmacy school,
um, population health is
still too new for us to speak to
and for physicians, we can say
that the physicians that
graduate from our residency
program, have a 53% chance of
staying and practicing in New
Mexico. Again, I think that
number will go up as we create
more job opportunities for them.
Thank you, um, thank you, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Richards, sorry about
that.
Um
That, that doctor number is, is
the concerning number, um,
because we are at a deficit
virtually in every county across
the state.
And so
And then creating the jobs alone
is, is, is not enough.
Um
If we're gonna make this
investment, which I think it
sounds like a, a good
investment.
I mean, just by increasing the
number of jobs, even if there
were 53, even if we were
graduating a higher number, 53%
of a higher number is still
better than what we have today.
However, considering what we're
paying,
And what we're looking at
investing in.
Um
It's, it's, it's a, it's a big
request.
Um, I would like to see, uh,
health sciences department.
Work with us on
Finding out as, as the students
are graduating and they're
leaving for other jobs. Um, I,
I'd like to see.
An exit interview. I'd like to
find out why they're taking a
job outside of the state of New
Mexico, rather than staying in
New Mexico.
We have the jobs here.
And, uh, I, I think that would
be very helpful for, for us on
other policy that potentially
would help us with our other
doctors who are leaving or who
are
retiring. Um, I, I've heard a
number of, of things.
Uh, including just the high
percentage of Medicaid that we
have in New Mexico and I
understand that we look, we may
be looking to
Include more of our population.
Under Medicaid coverage.
Um, that's one of the reasons
in, in, in my
County that I've heard why
doctors are either retiring or
moving on is, is, um, they can
just make more money elsewhere,
uh, in particular because we
have such a high Medicaid
patient percentage.
Um, now, granted probably San
Juan County is a higher
percentage.
But
All across the state we're
having problems retaining
doctors.
Um
So, uh, and, and currently we're
paying nurses very high, I
think, uh,
traveling nurses in particular
in the state are making a lot of
money.
Um, so
I, I'm just, I'm, I'm very
concerned about that 53% figure.
Um, and, and I would love to
see.
Collaboration.
With health sciences department
and with this body in
particular,
To find out, to, you're gonna
have a graduating class.
Let's find out of those who are
leaving the state, why are they
leaving the state? What, what
informed their decision to
leave.
I think the jobs alone.
I love the idea of you creating
more jobs, and I, and
Um, but it, it also will beg the
question from the standpoint of
the rural communities.
Are we gonna lose more doctors
to Albuquerque.
Going to be a high-tech
facility, gonna be a brand new
facility, um,
So
this this out migration.
Uh, of doctors is a, is a
concern to everyone here on this
committee and
I mean, we have the job, so
creating the jobs.
Not necessarily enough to to
turn the tide, so thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Montoya. Next,
Representative Chatfield and
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, you know I have
two concerns. Uh,
In, in, and ultimately you want
to talk a little bit about
residencies. But I'm concerned
not only with where our doctors
go, but where do they come from.
And uh I'll tell you my personal
story and my personal
experience, I had a a child that
was raised in a very rural area
where I live on a ranch next to
us, wanted to be a doctor.
Straight A's all the way through
school, went to UNM.
I'm not sure of all the steps,
but pre-med or whatever there at
UNM did not make medical school
in the UNM went to New York,
went to medical school.
Uh, applied for a residency at
UNM.
Uh, didn't get a call. Uh, we
called to find out they hadn't
even uh looked at her paper, uh,
at that point, there was, uh,
300 applications for
residencies, there were 3
residencies in the state of New
Mexico.
We were able over the years to
double that and then double
that, and then double that. I, I
think it's like 16 now and I.
Do those for, for doing that.
Um
Where a person does their
residency is where they're gonna
get married and live.
She wound up going to Washington
state.
The residents didn't see in
Washington state.
Got married and lives in
Washington state. Uh, she comes
from a rural area. If you're not
from an area that has, um, I
think we have 610 people in our
county.
And if you come from a city and
you move there, you're not gonna
stay there cause you won't like
it. I promise you, if you're
raised there, you'll love it.
So we need to get New Mexico
kids into this system. We need
to create more residencies, and
I'm not sure what, I know
there's a waiting system, and
whenever I have talked about it
with previous folks at UNM, they
said, well, we want the best and
the brightest from all over. And
um, my thought is we have some
Best and brightest kids that are
raised in New Mexico, and I want
to see some of those New Mexico
kids have the opportunities to
be educated here, to do their
residency.
Here and to stay here and go
back to the communities where
they were raised where they're
comfortable, where they will
marry and take care of the
people that, that they know
around them. So I don't know
what the rating waiting system
is, and I'm, that's a, that's up
to you, but I just would like to
see more of our New Mexico kids
have the opportunity to go into
that educational system, get
their doctorate.
Go back to their home
communities because they will
stay there.
Um, let's say you?
So Mister Charon Representative
Chatfield, uh 100% agree with
you, sir. We want to create more
educational opportunities for
New Mexican students. We want to
create more health profession
opportunities to train New
Mexican students and you
specifically mentioned residency
programs. So as part of this
growth process, we're right now
at about 750 residents, we'll
actually grow our GME program to
over 1000 residents. I would
just like to just really
explicitly note that we are able
to do.
that at UNM and in a way that is
very different than other
academic institutions because
the state of New Mexico has
supported us to grow those
residency programs. So we will
in fact have one of the largest
graduate medical education
training programs in all of the
United States and and
Representative Chapvi, you also
mentioned the importance of, of
being from a rural area, we also
appreciate the importance of
training in a rural area. So we
are also creating residency and
training programs.
You know, both on our own and in
partnership with other
institutions to be able to have
that experience in rural
communities and probably the,
the single biggest example is
the brand new UNM Shiprock
family community residency
program, which is the first of
its kind in an IHS facility in
the United States.
Thank you for that answer, and,
and I invite you to reach out to
me anytime that you want to know
about rural, uh, anything, and I
will help you as much as I can.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representative Chatfield,
uh, Senator Woods, uh, chair and
Thank you for your presentation.
We've talked before.
I wouldn't ask the same question
again.
In, in
I've got a granddaughter that's
applying for vet schools.
And when she applies in Texas,
we find out that 90% of the
slots are only open to Texans.
10% from anywhere else.
What is our policy in the state
of New Mexico.
Here slots.
Thank you for the question,
Senator Woods, and um, chair,
small, um, so our policy is to
open the door for all New
Mexicans with qualifications
that are set and required. Um,
as Doctor Richards has said, we
have over 95% um residents from
New Mexico who enter our medical
school meeting those criteria,
those other
Depending on the year somewhere
in the 3 to 5% come from these
neighboring witchy schools are
Native Americans or for whom we
have agreements, they don't have
medical schools. We don't, and
I'm aware, um, as in Texas, as
in other schools, they do have a
cap, uh or I shouldn't say a
count, uh, they have an
allowment of somewhere between
10 and 20% from out of state. We
don't have that. We take every
applicant from New Mexico, that
meets the requirement and that's
how we fill our s.
so there are over 95% from New
Mexicans. Um, I will, if I may,
uh added an additional, I think
this idea of building and having
opportunity for both the medical
students and the residency is
the joy, thinking not just about
buildings, but how we in
parallel with training, and I
want to give you one sort of
heartbreaking example. I've
heard from um Representative
Chopfield, but I want, I want,
um, I previously was at an
institution where
incredible medical students um
from New Mexico came to that
institution. They actually
pursued both an empty and a PhD.
They wanted to be here. We had
exactly one slot per year, and
I'm really proud to say with
applications through Doctor
Perkins and Doctor Baca, who
have achieved an NIH
of these MD PhDs per year. It's
still not a lot, but it allows
for those slots, so we don't
have these heartbreaking
conditions of as I'm listening
very intently of those that want
to be here. So I hope I've
answered your question. I'm
happy to answer any other
questions.
Well
From, from the way I understand
it, no, we don't have a.
Policy that we are going to take
New Mexico students first.
In my room, in my right? Yeah,
are you, are you telling me that
our policy is that we take 100%
of the qualified New Mexico
students first before you take
any outside student. Absolutely.
I'm so sorry if I've been unable
to convey that and please help
me, uh, I mean, please clarify,
that's why I said we have over
95% of our class is our students
from New Mexico. Our policy is
New Mexico first.
New Mexico foremost, that other
with within less than 5% occurs
from these other schools
primarily Native American
serving in which if they don't
have a medical school is witchy
schools, we have an agreement
because we can do that, but we
do not have a policy uh that
what's the words,
we have a policy that is New
Mexico first, New Mexico
foremost. Is that clear? OK. I
just wanted to make sure that
uh, I know that
You know, I hear stories like.
Representative Chatfield's
stories.
And
When we, when we lose one of
those, we lose them out of state
forever.
And
We have a, a hard time.
With doctors today.
Staying in state.
You know, I sat down beside the
Dean of the law school.
And it's amazing how much better
retention rate in state they
have.
In her medical school.
I may say something about the
business model of the trade.
I don't know.
And I thank you for your
comments. Thank you, Senator
Woods. Uh, next, Representative
Garcia, then, uh, Representative
Lujan, Representative Garcia.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor Richards, thanks for the
presentation. Along the lines of
what uh Representative Baca was
talking about, about retention
and recruitment.
You know, you hear it all the
time, the doctors do not want to
stay in New Mexico because of
the liability insurance costs.
How is that going to affect what
we're trying to do here.
So, Mr. Chair and Representative
Garcia. So I, we fully
appreciate that the practice
environment in the state is a
very important consideration for
where physicians ultimately um
go to practice. Um, I, I think
that that is our role as an
academic institution is to
partner with the, the key
policymakers in the state to
make sure that we're not just
training individuals because
that's a very important piece of
it, but that we're also helping
get to the right place where we
have the
things that, that will help us
both recruit and retain health
care professionals.
I think that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and as far as the liability
insurance cost on on doctors,
you know, I think that comes
back to the committee here.
Uh, to cry in a just, would try
to put a cap on it somehow,
because you know, you, I hear it
all the time, you know, I, I
live in Grants and doctors do
not want to practice their
because of the insurance is why
they they cannot afford.
The premiums, so they move out
of state and what's gonna happen
here, Mr. Chairman.
is new students that are coming
out as doctors.
I not be able to afford to stay
in this state because of the
liability insurance costs. Am I
correct?
So, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Garcia, I think
that that ensuring that the
total compensation packages and
the practice environment are
absolutely essential for local
communities to be able to
recruit healthcare
professionals.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Doctor Richards. I just want to
put that out because it's a
fact, you know.
They do not want to practice
here. It's not that they don't
want to practice here, they just
can't afford to do it. And we as
a body and this committee right
here, we need to address those
issues. With that being said,
thanks for the presentation on
100% behind you, and thanks
again. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Jan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
we've touched a little bit on
some of the topics, uh, that I
wanted to talk about. Um, I come
from a.
A different position I was a
pre-med student at UNM, um, so I
need the a few cohorts that were
going into the program, and I
can quite honestly tell you
there are 2.
Individuals that I'm uh I'm
friends with that are still
practicing here in New Mexico.
OK
Uh, one recently just moved back
maybe 2 years ago, started his
own private practice as a
primary physician.
Um, the other is a pediatrician
in Albuquerque.
So with that said, I, I think
you're, you're, you're getting
the gist of, of some of the, the
issues we're facing here in New
Mexico.
And as I continue my friendships
and and discussions with them.
I, I have next door neighbors. I
live in a neighborhood of
doctors who live right by Saint
Vincent's Hospital now.
Um
And grew up with medical
professionals and you know, so
understanding.
Our needs and the things that
are going on with our state and
the disparity we have.
Um, when your students are
matriculating out of their
programs and doing the after,
you know, they've they're doing
maybe even while they're doing
their rotations and whatnot.
What is the, how are you
preparing them for the business
aspect and policies that will
affect them in their future as
professionals here in New
Mexico. If we are trying to
retain them, Mr. Chair.
I think um Representative Luhan
and Chaunos, um, this is a
really important question
because if I may, and I really
appreciate the question you're
saying, how are we in general
approaching, teaching our
students. I, I see medicine as a
calling.
We are consider ourselves
healers always first and
foremost, um, and in that
calling though, we need to be as
best prepared as we can be, and
that includes
Our scientific progress,
clinical care, empathy,
education, thinking about it.
But our curriculum, and this is
something that Doctor Richard
has spoken about is part and
parcel of this plan of growth
that we're looking very intently
at our curriculum and how we
prepare. So right now it's been
my experience that you
specifically asked about
business and what it's like not
only to practice in New Mexico,
but to be practicing as a health
care provider. And so we are
looking at
in evaluating, right, as you're
speaking right now, and that is
an entryway in the same way
that, you know, I've used the
word artificial intelligence,
you might have a student come in
and say, well, how do you use
this algorithm? What do you use?
We really want you to be
prepared to, what does it mean
to practice lifelong, and that's
a calling, so that's one in
medical school. The two is me, I
just started. It's also part of
our components. You've heard our
residency program, we have about
750 with the plans as outlined
by Doctor Richards, that will be
1000.
Those are students who are ready
and prepared to be here, as we
noted, residency can be where
you find your lifelong calling
so.
Incongruence with the clinical
education research is thinking
about what is your practice
plan, not only your billing and
coding, but what does it look
like? What are the implications
for liability and for ethics and
morality. And so my answer is
absolutely that's a key
component for what medical
education may be now and I'm
just contrasted to a building
that's 1967, but how do we build
those new types of technologies
to prepare that very specific
question. Thank you.
Yeah, I don't think that quite
answers my question, no offense,
I, um, and I'm going to relate
this to the, the, the
Doctors and MDs that I actually
interact with quite often
frequently. They would rather
leave our state because it is
not.
Uh, economic, uh,
Value to them to stay here.
So that's what I'm asking, and
that's where I'm I'm bringing
forward as we are, we are going
through this practice and
looking to spend these.
hundreds of millions of dollars
to build a new building, um,
who's and create the faculty,
and we can't even keep our, our
doctors here, who are you gonna
recruit for your faculty. The
fact of the matters were in a
stagnant population that's been
referenced by our chair.
Um, and to grow a program this
uh an esteem program. This is,
this is a huge, huge lift.
And in all practicality, how
are, I mean, this is, this is,
we need to be asking these
questions and we're looking to
to do this sort of thing, and we
know we have a problem with
recruitment.
And retention in our state
because we are in crisis, and we
don't have
The, the population, quite
frankly, I'd like to know those
numbers that are really
interested in going into this
profession as well as these
other professions that are
they're not going to go into
debt.
Where they're not going to uh
have an economic uh um profile
that's not gonna benefit them as
opposed to going to another
state.
So it took a lot for my friends
to stay here and it was because
of family that brought them back
when in particular, but he's
having a hard time and he opened
his own private practice.
And he's saying that A economy
is not friendly to his practice
and what he needs and what he's
trying to accomplish and, and
the outreach and one of the main
main things, Mr. Chair, and I'm
sorry to bring this up, but
these are, these are the issues
here, especially in northern New
Mexico, transportation issues.
And bringing their their
patients from all over here in
Santa Fe because we are original
hub.
Christi, but also for our
primary providers.
And there's a new program that's
going on for our, our primary
providers that are, they're,
they're engaged in, uh, with
Medicare dollars um for
follow-up, um,
Uh, appointments after they have
uh uh.
Surgery or whatnot because
that's not being facilitated.
And so now we're going to
incubate these primary providers
to do the follow-up and do the
best practices and and other
things and then they get a
check, um, very small check at
the end of the day, but there's
not even enough of them. I don't
know how that's gonna make a, a,
a change that tells us that that
is an indicator that our um
public and our patients or
clients, however you want to
refer to them, I, I choose
patients.
That they are not getting the
health care that they need.
So, growing this industry, if
you will, at UNM and creating a
Billion dollar building if you
will, I would have to ask what
buildings, and I know you're
referring to the 1967 building,
but what other build, and I do
believe we need to update, no
doubt, no question.
But what other buildings, and
we've done a lot of building at
UNM aren't being used or or
where, where are the assessment
of those other buildings that
could be utilized in space, and
have you done that assessment,
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair and a
Representative Lujan, I, I think
you bring up some very important
points. So what we've been
largely talking about is the
role of an academic medical
center to train and produce
healthcare professionals, but
what you have highlighted
through your comments is that
that's not enough to to to solve
ultimately the healthcare access
and health provider shortage in
the state. And so we do
recognize that, and I think
about this as being, you know, 4
major kind of activities, and
the one we focused on has been
training today, but you
highlight um through several of
your examples, the need to
develop healthcare
infrastructure, whether that be
facilities or transportation.
You also talk about the issues
of retention and recruitment
and, and how compensation and
reimbursement systems all play a
very big part of that. We fully
recognize that, that to be able
to get to that sustainability,
all of these things are going to
have to be addressed.
Lastly, Mr. Chair, I just ask,
and this has been a pee for many
of my, my friends that that have
gone through the resident, um.
Uh, programs and uh
that we have and they're
wonderful.
If they, and I'd love for them
to stay, but their question is,
How does New Mexico, how do we
compare and pain our residents
as opposed to other states,
other programs.
So Mr. Chen, Representative Lu
Han, um, through the support
that we received through the
state Medicaid program this
year, our current resident and
fellow compensation is just
above the national average.
Thank you. Um,
I, I don't think we're doing as
well as other programs. I, I
think we're on the bottom of
this list of how we are.
Let's, that's what I'm
I've seen, but thank you for
answering.
We can do more. I think we, uh,
we need to look at that, the,
the whole program holistically
having another building, yes, we
do indeed need one, but really
what is, what is the assessment
and all the other asks that we
have from the state to build
other buildings and for you and
them.
You know, there's a, there's
another ask, um, on the
education part of this for uh uh
Where are we prioritizing that?
I'm not hearing that quite.
Well, well, from you and I, I'd
like to know more about that as
well, but this is a heavy, heavy
list. We have a lot of other
issues to address, I think.
As we're looking to to do this
huge project, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh
So she.
And we're gonna try to wrap up
so kind of be quick.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Doctor.
Uh, I'm gonna try to ask the
question that
Representative Chatfield and
Senator Woods asked because what
we hear all the time.
Almost all of us.
I
My son or daughter can't get
into.
UN a medical school.
And
So all of us hear that, and yet
you're saying that 95% of
everybody there is is in New
Mexican. The question, I guess
that I'm trying to boil down to,
how many of those graduated from
a New Mexico high school,
because that's, that's who we're
hearing from, the people that
came here got an apartment and
then applied for medical school.
aren't really New Mexicans. I
mean, they may technically be
today, but they weren't.
It it so how many high school?
New Mexico High School.
So Mister Chair and and Senator
Sher. So I'm, um, what, what we,
what the, the key message here
that I think we want to make
sure that we convey is that the
UNM School of Medicine is for
New Mexico, and that 95% of the
individuals who are there are
from New Mexico and, and, and,
and we define that as one of the
key criteria is graduating from
a New Mexico high school. We
also fully appreciate that not
everyone who might be qualified
and wants to.
to enter into medical school,
has a spot, and it's because we
don't have enough spots. So when
we look at the number of spots
we have, we are, we are 50%
below the national average on
the number of spots that we have
to offer to New Mexico. What we
are proposing is that we want to
double the number of those
spots, so that we hear far fewer
of these stories of qualified
individuals who are from New
Mexico, who want to go to
medical school here. We want to
create the capacity so that they
I can go to medical school here.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, I, and I
appreciate that. And I know that
you've got all this great stuff.
The problem is,
We don't believe it.
So somehow, you've got to make
us believe it. And I, and I
don't mean me.
New Mexicans, so thank you.
Represent Bellson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, my question is a little bit
different than all that's been
asked this morning, but the
commonality is in the rural
areas.
Do you have
A number of percentages of your
graduates that go to the Indian
Health Service Hospitals.
That's my first question.
The reason why I ask is I'm
gonna use the example of a
healthcare facility in my
district. It seems that most of
the medical training that the
doctors and the professionals in
that arena or from the military
background.
They were medics in the
military, and because they uh
could not go into private
practice as a licensed
professionals, they choose to go
the route of the Indian Health
Service.
I believe that
The main point behind
A student graduating from a
medical school is to make money.
And they make their own rates
and wages as to what they want
to collect.
I don't think you'll find that
in the Indian Health Service.
I feel that, like I said, I'm
using the example of
The health facility in my
community.
It almost seems that
The people that are tending to
our native people.
Are the ones replacing.
Or being placed into positions
that nobody wants because of
rural areas because of housing
shortages and many, many other
obstacles.
So, do you have uh any number or
percentage of what your UNM
graduates go into the Indian
Health Service, or do the Indian
Health Service have their own
Criteria as to uh produce
doctors and uh nurses and such
professional people.
So Mr. Chair and Representative
Allison, I do not know that
number um of the specific
graduates that go into IHS
service, but we will get that
for you. And just as a um just a
key point, um, um, the UNM
hospital and our delivery system
is really founded from a
contract from 1952, um, with the
native peoples, and we, um, and
consider ourselves to be a
non-IHS Indian Hospital, and so
we remain committed to that and,
and we've also talked.
a little bit about some of the
specific kinds of rural
education programs that we would
like to, that we have built and
would like to continue to build
like the Shiprock IHS residency
program.
Thank you for your comments,
sir.
OK, thanks for that, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Um, you know,
We have a really, really
shortage of uh professionals in
the IHS hospitals. For example,
if I had a toothache, I went to
the IHS facility. The remedy is
to pull that tooth into the
problem, right?
Whereas if I went to
A license for professionals, he
would recommend maybe a root
canal, maybe a crown, or other
options.
Whereas doctors or the dentists
that we have presently, their
solution is pull the tooth out
and in the problem.
Solve the problem once and for
all immediately.
You know, we
We don't see professionals in
the IHS hospitals that we see in
the border towns. So if I need
to save my tooth, I go into
Farmington and talk to an
orthodontist or somebody that'll
do a root canal. So just a bit
of information to share. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We're gonna wrap up.
You know, Doctor Richards, I
think it, it, it's refreshing to
hear someone with a vision and
where you want to head with the
medical school and students and
it's a 10-year plan, right? And,
and that's what it is, and
that's what's gonna be, but it,
it's refreshing to hear that
cause the, the pharmacy school
and correct me if I'm wrong,
Charles, we never did anything
for them and and
a new facility, but it's from
1970s, never got upgraded.
Nobody ever mon
enter that. Every campus in the
in New Mexico.
Majority of what was built was
built in the 70s. There's a
bunch.
Yeah, and, and so we've got to
start bringing this up.
We know this is gonna be the
greatest need. We just turned
the aging and of America the
other day and in the demand.
But the real key is,
is when I got to leave Gallup
and get services in Albuquerque.
I'm coming to you.
Right.
With the trauma centers, the
everything we're coming to you,
to you and him, right? And r New
Mexico is so reliant on that
hospital.
That if we don't start fixing
some of these things, insure,
you know, not everybody's gonna
get into medical school.
I know there's 2 kids in Gallup
who did it, and I asked him if I
could help him. They said, no, I
wanna do it on my own, and, and
I think they're white coats are
student doctors what they call
them.
But I mean they did on their own
and they're in the system, then
you, you know, you always hear
the one that got rejected
because they're gonna scream the
most and, and you don't want to
lose them, but it's just not
everybody can go cause there's
just not enough room in in the
quality needs to be there as
long as quality there, I mean
we're gonna have to learn that,
but 98.
I need or 95% admission rate.
In from New Mexico.
Can't get much better, could get
a little bit, but I mean, just
5% is not enough to really
complain about, so I appreciate
that. I appreciate your
presentation.
Um, we're gonna go down this
path in New Mexico.
Uh, I'm still the chairman on
the opening day. We're gonna
begin to, to start to fix some
of these things, and they're big
money issues and in their
long-term issues, but we're
gonna start fixing things in New
Mexico, and this is something
that we have to have, and I just
appreciate your vision, so.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, I just
want to say on behalf of
President Stokes and the
Regents. We greatly appreciate
the opportunity to, to come and
talk about, um, these plans and,
and our aspirations to build
this healthcare workforce for
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Let's see, tribal colleges use
presenting.
We're ready when you are.
You'll have to turn on the
button, the green button.
Thank you. Uh,
Go back a little bit since too
loud, um, but, uh,
Mr. Chair and members of the uh
Legislative Finance Committee.
Thank you for this opportunity
to present the uh funding
priorities for the New Mexico
Tribal College Consortium. My
name is Robert Martin, and I'm
president of the Institute of
American Indian Arts here in
Santa Fe, and I have with me uh
Jason Arviso, who's vice
president of Navajo Technical
University and uh crystalarook,
who's director of legislative
finance is somewhere in the in
the room and
or will be joining us,
representing the College, and
also I have with me the vice
president of the Institute of
Marketing Arts, Larry Mirabba,
um, he's our vice president for
operations, but uh again
representing uh the four tribal
colleges that I just mentioned,
and we appreciate your ongoing
support of Capital outlay
projects, uh, dual credit
programs, the New Mexico
legislative Lottery and
opportunity scholarship
programs. These programs
Um, have really, uh, increased
student success at all of our
institutions and and make a
difference uh for our students
across New Mexico, um.
Our priorities we're, we're
going to present those to you
now, and they are all supported
by the uh New Mexico higher
education department.
And I want to thank Stephanie
Rodriguez and her staff for all
of their support and bring in
supporting our request. The
first one is the high school
dual credit reimbursement
funding and uh all of the tribal
colleges here are, um, are
committed to building strong
partnerships with local school
districts, high schools, um, to
increase graduation rates and
create a clear pathways to
college for Native American
students, uh, as
Many Native American
undergraduates are first
generation college students the
opportunity to earn college
credits in high schools makes
quite a difference in terms of
their success in college, and
we, we see it in improved
retention, persistence, and
graduation rates. Uh, the tribal
colleges currently serve more
than 1000 students enrolled in
high school dual credit programs
through partnerships with over
35 school district.
District's Bureau of Indian
Education Schools and
independent charter schools. We
expect the enrollment to grow
exponentially in the foreseeable
future, uh, moreover, CIP will
launch its dual credit program
in January of 2025, and this is
Sippi's first time participating
in the dual credit program and
increased levels of support we
know are going to be needed. Um,
Uh, to expand this program for
us, uh, and we're certainly
grateful to uh representative uh
Allison support and New Mexico
higher education uh department
support recommending 600,000
last year in uh recurring
funding for the tribal college
dual credit program. Uh, what
we're grateful for the support,
we know that it's not going to
be able to uh address the needs
that we have across Indian
country.
uh,
as our uh school districts and
schools, uh, we, we're over, uh,
you know, we've been
Approached by many of the school
districts, and we, we have
50,050 students enrolled in dual
credit programs is for the fall
semester, uh, Navajo Tech, uh,
technical university has 450 and
Dana College doubled their
enrollment this this fall. So we
know that there's a need there,
uh, there's an interest, and we
want to assist indigenous
students throughout the state as
much as we can.
Um, now, I'd like to present our
capital project funding request
and all of these again have been
supported by the New Mexico
Higher Education Department, um,
sippi and the Institute of
American Indian Arts, we both
express gratitude to the state
of New Mexico for the continued
support in advancing our higher
education needs and our uh
capital outlay projects on our
campus. This, uh, budget cycle,
uh, the sippi and IAIA are not.
Requesting capital project
funding, um, this year for this
budget cycle. Our current focus
is on completing ongoing
construction project
initiatives, uh, to ensure this,
the success of our strategic
priorities. Um, for example, at
the Institute of American Arts,
you know, we were funded for the
electronic key um card access
system and received over 500,000
for that, uh, and so we're
process of completing that
project, we also are looking
forward and thank you for your
support and the general
obligation bond was approved for
480,000 for a loop, uh, access
road that's gonna improve um
emergency uh accessibility for a
campus. Uh,
So, but thank you for your
support and, and we'll be back
next year with a, with a request
that's coming up in the queue at
that time. Uh, the, uh,
The New Mexico Higher Education
Department again recommends 5.2
million for Navajo Technical
University, uh, to, uh, support
TCU in NTU campus security.
Academic growth and
infrastructure renewal, um, and
I would call on Vice President
Arviso to outline those projects
for you.
Um, good morning. Again, my name
is Jason Avi I'm vice president
of Navajo Technical University
and thank you for the
opportunity to present our
capital outlay requests.
Essentially, the, the first
involve, you know, pedestrian
safety, namely our students,
faculty staff, and those that
are
Visitors of Navajo Technical
University's Crown Point campus,
um, we have
begun the, the, the development
of ensuring that there's
adequate sidewalks in and around
the campus, we are building, you
know, additional uh
Capital projects, so we should
ensure that students are are
adequately
Um, prepared or capable of
walking to and from the
destinations on campus.
We also are nearing the
completion of our NTU academic
building, the academic building
is, is built to actually remove
15 modular buildings that we've
had for a number of years.
In fact, those buildings have
been there on campus since.
About 1979 when T was actually
established the new academic
building is nearing completion,
and we just need additional
funding to actually complete it.
The initial proceeds came from
capital outlay, roughly 3.5
million NTU has contributed 18
or 8 million to that particular
project, and we're asking for
the supplement of money to
complete.
Complete the project itself.
Uh, the demolition, we had, you
know, again, original
infrastructure established since
the inception of now technical
university, there's a whole
building that we need to, you
know, demolish.
That'll clear the way for
additional expansion regarding
capital projects at NTU.
I stand for questions, thank
you.
Thank you. Um,
Uh, Vice President Arviso, now
uh for did today college, uh.
The higher education department
is approved a recommended 5
million for the Shiprock
agricultural.
Multi-purpose center um and I
would ask crystal car cook to uh
Give us the
The Information about that.
capital outlay request.
Thank you, um.
I appreciate the time to share a
little bit about our request
here and thank you to the
representatives for making time
for us today and including us
with other higher education
institutions to present the
Shebra multi-purpose
agricultural center, um, is
requesting $5 million for its
phase two and uh this phase two
will be the majority of the
construction of the building. We
have broke ground for this
building in July, um, this past,
or this year, and we have, we
are nearing the end of uh
completing your uh phase one and
um are looking to uh
continue to uh establish this
building, this
Agricultural center will
contribute to the regional
economy, providing training, um,
to the community of Shiprock and
surrounding communities in the
in the field of agriculture. It
sits on a 300 acre lot where
this building will also
supplement and provide uh access
to a commercial kitchen to
assist in getting um
The
Grown foods from the fields to
commute the schools and other
community uh establishments such
as like the hospitals. So, uh,
this initiative is uh around the
um contributing to the economic
regional economy of that area.
Thank you.
Thank you, Crystal. Um, that's,
uh, our, um, priorities. We
thank you for allowing us to
present those to you, um, for
consideration in the upcoming
legislative session, we
respectfully ask for your
support, and we want to thank
again uh the secretary, higher
education department secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez Rodriguez
for her support in recommending
uh our priorities, uh, to the
legislator session.
Um, we certainly want to invite
you to uh visit all of 4 of our
campuses to see uh the
improvements that we've made as
because of your support and for
capital outlay projects and
other programming, so, uh, thank
you very much and uh with stand
for questions.
Thank you very much for your
presentation and and for
explaining your requests.
We appreciate all the services
you provide. We were just at the
uh at the American Institute of
Indian Arts recently and it was
wonderful. Um, I hadn't been
there in a long time, so it, I
saw the difference in all the
changes, not only in the
buildings, but the programs in
which you offer, thank you.
Thank you. Yes, and I don't have
immediately, but I do have one
in the, OK, there's more coming,
so let me write them down. I
didn't have any, but now I do.
Senator Shendo and then we have
Representative Allison. Thank
you, Madam, and thank you.
Doctor Martin and, and uh
representatives from the various
schools for your presentation.
I, I appreciate you. I was
noticing that there was no
request from uh Sippi and I, I
and we we're looking at our
Capital Alley from previous
appropriations and it looked
like a couple of these projects
were slowly moving from IIA and
CIPI. So I appreciate, you know,
the update, uh, Doctor Martin on
the uh projects that are
providing uh I guess it's access
and security and, and the
proments that you're making, uh,
madam in anybody here or can
somebody give us an update on
SIP and their project or what's,
is there anybody uh from SIPP
here as a representative, um.
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Shindo, um,
No one was able to be here for
their project and they didn't
provide that information to me,
so I can't share it, but we can
follow up with you and, and get
that. I can't tell you, for
IAIA's project, we're completing
the electronic key card system,
probably in the next several
weeks, and of course the second
project that we have, uh,
funded, and thank you very much,
uh, the campus uh loop access
road, uh,
We won't have access to those
funds until this summer and and
they're approved.
OK. Mhm.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Uh,
I'm probably most familiar with
the, the Navajo Technical
University cause that's in my
district and uh sorry I didn't
make it to the last graduation
and, uh, but, uh, a lot of
improvement going on, and I know
that the they're doing a
wonderful job in, in, in getting
these projects completed, so I
appreciate you being here.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator, and, and um
I have to say I'm familiar
somewhat I'd like to be more
because it's so beautiful out
there in Farmington when we go
to the uh to the meetings and we
see the Navajo Prep out there.
It's, it's wonderful what you're
doing. Thank you. All right,
Representative Allison, and then
we have Representative FAA.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, and this morning's
presentation, I was
Very glad to hear that, uh,
Madam Secretary is thinking
about increasing the dual credit
monies. So in working with the
tribal colleges, I know they
really use what's given them in
the dual credit money, so I'm, I
would, uh, echo the words of my,
my colleague, Representative
Baca, in increasing that amount.
So because I think it really,
really helps the tribal
communities. Um,
And I'm glad to see the
representative from NTU and then
A College here. Yesterday, we
were also given a presentation
on outstanding projects with a
capital outlay.
There is a project from NTU and
another project from uh Dane
College.
That are listed as being slow
moving or inactive.
And when I talked to the young
lady from there, her name is
Callie Carlson. Carl Carswell,
she's, she, I asked her what can
I do to stimulate uh some
action, and then she says, well,
get with the two individuals,
and then give me a plan and we
can work together. So, being
that you're already in Santa Fe,
I would suggest you stop by the
LFC offices, uh, particularly
Callie Carslow and ask him what
what.
You can do to help remove those
projects along. So just a
suggestion. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
All right. Thank you,
Representative. Good suggestion.
We're gonna move on to
Representative Baca, and I don't
have anyone else on the list and
that we're going to be having a
working lunch so.
we'll go from here. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you for
your presentation.
I, I, I do appreciate and I
support, you know, the request
for our
Uh, Native American
institutions, um, I served the
community of Slow to represent
part of a sled and bordered by
Laguna, so.
Uh, I think it's important, you
know, just as, as my colleagues
will tell you that when I
greeted my colleagues here, I
greet them in their native
language as cousin, right? So we
all have a, a, a great stake in
that. So just know that I
support.
This, um, Madam Chair, my, my,
my question is going to be,
About the dual credit as, as I
was asking as Secretary
Rodriguez had told me 15 to $18
million.
I basically lost revenue by
universities in supporting it.
Your request was for $600,000.
Is that, is that the cost that
you guys are losing in tuition
to serve the dual credit pro uh
programs in your schools.
It's probably greater than that.
We, um,
We have to, uh,
Use part of our operational
budget to support the program,
but we're, we're grateful for
the support that we do have it,
uh, there's a formula that's
used by the new school Higher
Education Department, and it, it
funds a certain percentage of
the total cost for that, but,
uh, we, we appreciate that
support. We're committed to it.
Uh, we, um, even before we
received funding through the uh
New Mexico Tribal College, uh.
Uh, do credit act, uh, we, we
funded it ourselves and we
sought grants to do that,
private grants and others, and
used our operational budget, but
we know that for some of our uh
indigenous students in our
schools at Hama and other
places, what we heard was they
never thought about attending
college that they were college
material until they were able to
uh
Uh, earn 15 credits, college
credits, uh, and then they were
very confident and, and they,
uh, uh.
Enrolled in in uh either
Institute of American Arts or
other colleges and universities
which we, that's the whole point
of the program.
Thank you, Madam chair and thank
you for that answer. I, I guess
the question is, I mean, really
it's more of a common as, as we,
many of us sit here and we talk
about K-12 articulation. I think
we need to double down and make
sure that in doing so, we are
not causing a loss in revenue
and or added burden for this, so
I, I appreciate you highlighting
that as far as in your request.
And thank you, Madam Chair. Yes,
thank you very much and uh
thanks to Senator Campos for
bringing me this note I hear on
the question having to do with
sippy, um, here for.
Senator Shando, I understand
Greg is a, where's Greg here,
let's see, oh, there we go,
great, you have the answer. So
we're welcoming you. Give us the
answers.
so the, uh, so for the
committee, uh, the higher
education department does uh
provide funding through our
agency for the tribal college we
do know that high school.
And they're extremely complex.
And so we are working very
closely capital outlay funding,
uh, is moving, uh, and
Thank you so much, Greg. I
appreciate all your work and and
always so efficient and helpful.
Thanks, uh, Senator Shinto, is
that uh helpful and of course
somebody else had asked earlier
on the sippy situations just
wanted to make sure that you,
you're OK with your answers here
for today.
And then we'll go to Senator
Woods after that, I, I
appreciate that. I, I forgot
that they were still connected
to BIA, so
that there there is.
OK. Thank you very much, Senator
Woods. Thanks for your patience.
You're next. Well, thank you
very much, Madam Chairman. Um,
the question I have, I just
wondering, uh, off the top of my
head is how many students are
currently enrolled uh full on
campus students for um Navajo
Tech University.
Mad,
Madam chair and and Woods,
roughly at this fall semester,
we actually have over 1500
students enrolled at Naro
Technical University.
OK
In, in y College, how many
students were.
En rolled there on campus on
campus for Jane College is about
1600 students.
300.
1600 1600.
Thank you.
I was just wondering, kind of
the student population.
And I appreciate that.
May I also add 400 of those
students are dual dual credit,
yeah,
OK.
And just tell me.
How many?
What is your staff numbers?
How, how many staff do you have
it off the top of your head.
Well, the number of staff that
you have.
Or dinner at college is about
350.
350
And New Mexico Tech.
Navajo
Sorry Senator Woods, we have
roughly 300 faculty faculty and
staff members.
OK.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You're
welcome. Thank you, Senator, and
I don't have anyone else on my
list. Did you say something,
Senator? No, OK, I don't have
anyone else on the list, so
we're gonna move on. I thank you
so much for your presentation,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee for your support. Yes,
you bet. You do great work, so
thanks again. You have a good
afternoon and stay safe. We're
gonna a break for lunch here
just to get our food and come
back in. We're gonna be coming
into an um let's see where we
are right now. Um, yep, they
know.
lunch executive session, so we
have to eat to stay alive,
