making the trek over. A big
thanks to the LFC staff for
getting everything ready, um.
And we're so excited to have,
uh, a really exciting panel, uh,
we're gonna, uh, ask, uh, Casey,
uh, Dura who she will kick us
off with a welcome to really an
exciting and, and pretty
spectacular space, so we'll turn
it over to you from there we'll
go over to, uh, Nora with EDD.
And um we'll get started. OK,
Casey, please take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I just
want to welcome you all here to
our new space launch pad. We'll
talk a little bit more about it.
You'll get to see it firsthand,
uh, through the afternoon, and I
am just very, very honored to
have you, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, and the Legislative
Finance Committee here joining
us and so we want to welcome you
and I want to introduce my
leader here Ariel DeHerrera that
makes everything happen here.
So we'll talk about more.
Excellent, thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, um.
Members of the committee, my
name is Nora Sackett. I am the
director of the technology and
innovation Office at the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department. Thank you for having
me here today.
I'm going to give just a brief
introduction of um TO as we call
it, uh, and then leave time for
questions from, uh, from the
committee.
Um, the technology and
innovation office, as you know,
is apologies, uh, members, we're
on tab D, uh, so we'll have the,
the, um, presentations from the
stakeholders and then for LFC
it's TAD.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
As you know, the technology and
innovation, uh, division was
created, uh, earlier this year
in House Bill 20, uh, we're
calling it TO to have a nice
pithy little name for it,
technology and innovation
Office.
Um, we administer numerous
programs to support science and
technology innovation and
business development across New
Mexico, including awarding grant
funds for early stage companies
commercializing innovation,
providing sector specific
business assistance to startups
and providing overall ecosystem
support and coordination.
We, uh, focused primarily on 4
sectors, um, as, uh, first
identified in, uh, House Bill 2,
which are advanced computing,
advanced energy, aerospace, and
bioscience. We operate several
funding programs that award
grants to New Mexico startups,
uh, and businesses establishing
a presence in the state, and
these programs have grown
significantly in number over the
last few years. For example, uh,
in FY 23, the EDD Office of
Science and Technology operated
only
2 grants, the SBIR matching
grant and the science and tech
business startup grant. The next
year in FY 24 with the support
of the legislature, we were able
to grow to offer 4 grants total,
um, piloting the advanced Energy
Award, which I, I believe you
heard a little bit more from uh
an awardee yesterday, uh, and
the research university team
pitch award.
Uh, the following year in FY 25,
uh, we, uh, added the quantum
technologies award, as well as
funding for pilot and
demonstration projects in
advanced energy and water and in
FY 26, we are continuing these
programs with the likelihood of
adding at least one more funding
program.
The good news is that these
programs are yielding results.
You'll see your last slide, uh,
it's an article that came out
just yesterday on a company
called Yo Egosafe, um, they're
commercializing science out of
the University of New Mexico,
um, combating, uh,
mosquito-borne illnesses. This
company fully intended to
commercialize this New Mexico
born innovation elsewhere in
Florida, specifically, until
their founding team, uh,
received a grant from
My office, uh, and was received
connections into the New Mexico
ecosystem, um, I think the quote
there says it all, they would
not be here were it not for
these programs that the
legislature has funded and that
EDD is administering. Uh, so
really a direct tie to see the
impact that these programs are
having, um, I look forward to
answering your questions and
talking more about what we're
doing, and I'll pass it along to
the panel. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Hello again and, uh, welcome
again. Thank you, uh, Mr. Cha,
Madam Vice Chair in the
committee. Uh, I just want to
introduce myself really quick.
Um, my name I'm, uh, Casey and
Glada Drod.
And I am a 12th generation New
Mexican and I'm telling you this
because when I started New Space
Nexus, it, I have a long career
with the Air Force and working
on space systems, but I really
wanted to do something that
supported our space companies,
adding jobs and primarily for
our workforce so that we have
our, our workforce and our
state, uh, people have
opportunities and so.
with that started New Space
Nexus, and um, it's all about
where we're trying to grow the
space industry from New Mexico
for the nation. Our mission is
to provide members with direct
and faster access to the right
connections, resources, and
collaboration so that they could
succeed in in less time. I was
asked to talk about the role of
new uh new space as a business
incubator and the challenges
faced by our members.
With that, I am excited that out
of enemy DD we're just, uh,
recognized as a New Mexico
aerospace business incubator and
with that we're very, very
honored to get that. We had, we
had tried for that for quite a
while and it was all about the
programming that we have that
you see here with running our
new space, uh, launch pad, the
collaboration center.
Providing spaces for our
companies to come in and
prototype and work, um, our
programming with our pathways to
the stars curriculum and our new
Space igniter, you can see many
of the company logos of the
companies we have supported
through our, uh, incubator
program and uh we also have uh a
new space center that we're
excited that the OERF, um, the
New Mexico finance, uh,
opportunity.
Fund has awarded that we will be
able to get that started soon
and I provided slides, um, in
your packet. But, uh, one of our
taglines, you'll see it on the
wall is we unite and ignite
space and part of that is where
you have to to build an
ecosystem and to be able to
support that industry growth,
you need to do both. And so, you
know, we unite, break down
walls, try and bring people
together and then.
we ignite by providing resources
that these companies need so
they can accelerate their
innovation faster and I want to
start with, I know in your
packet we talked about this, um.
This New Mexico space ecosystem
if you all don't know it, it's
amazing what we have here. We
