So anybody coming in from north
of that is going to be delayed,
uh, unfortunately, but uh
We don't want to get too far
behind schedule, and so we'll
get started. So Leo, we're,
we're up and operating, we're
online, and so we'll call the
Um
Uh, August meeting of the Health
and Human Legislative Health and
Human Services Interim Committee
to order and we'll start this
morning by asking the members
who are here to introduce
themselves, and we'll start with
you, Representative Herndon.
These heights and thank you. I
need to turn that on.
Yeah, OK. So I'm representative
Pamela Herndon from House
District 28 in the Northeast
Heights, where we are getting
ready to celebrate the 3rd
annual.
Northeast Heights Day to bring
all of our communities together
because House District 28 is
going to be the most.
And the safest district in all
of New Mexico.
It's like a like
Thank you, Mr. Chair Harlan
Vincent, State Representative,
District 56 serving Lincoln and
Otaro counties, and it's good to
be back in Socorro, um.
The state fire academy here.
And I've spent a whole lot of
time. I've been here since 1993
And, uh, I served all the way
till 2014 and I visited the
State Fire Academy usually once
or twice a year and they, they
put out a lot of good
firefighters. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I'm Jennifer Jones,
Representative Jones from
District 32. I serve in Hidalgo
County, Luna, and part of
Donana, um, our population
center is dimming and we just
had our dimming deck races all
weekend, so yeah, we had a
blast. It was so fun.
No, oh no, I, I don't ever race
a duck, but it, it is a fun time
and we host about 30,000 people
in Demming over the weekend.
It's pretty amazing. So thank
you. It's good to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is
Antoinette Zedillo Lopez, and I
represent District 16.
In Albuquerque. That's the
university, that's the area
south and east of the
university, um, and it includes
CNM and the base.
Um, and it's really good to be
here.
Good morning and um I'm
Representative Joanne Ferrari
from Las Cruces, House District
37, it's kind of like, um, our
version of the Northeast Heights
and we have a lot of growth and
development going on right now,
so it's pretty exciting in Las
Cruces.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And it's
nice to be here in Socorro. We
went golfing yesterday
afternoon, even in the rain.
Representative Roybel Caballero,
would you like to introduce
yourself this morning? Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
the audience and those viewing.
I finally get to make it to a
meeting without conflict with
other meetings, so it's good to
be here. Uh, my name is Patricia
Royal Caballero and I represent
House District 13, which is the
far southwest quadrant of, uh,
Albuquerque and I'm very happy
to be here today. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Good morning everyone. Bill
Tollman.
Representing Senate District 18
Northeast Heights, Albuquerque.
So that would have been on time,
but, uh,
It took me 25 minutes to get
from my house to the big guy.
Because there were 2 accidents.
And it's uh
Driving in Albuquerque is like
the wild west. US News and all
reports says it's one of the top
10 most dangerous cities to
drive in. It's ridiculous. Glad
to be finally get here, looking
forward to today's discussion.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good
morning all. I'm Representative
Liz Thompson, House District 24,
which is the near Northeast
heights of Albuquerque. I have
Wrock and Uptown in my district
and, uh, uh, Senator Tolman,
thank you for adding to my
anxiety about driving in
Albuquerque.
You, but you're exactly right.
You never know what's gonna
happen. So I'm glad to be here.
I want to welcome all the
members and the public and folks
online. Thank you for joining us
and as usual we got a jam-packed
agenda.
This is sitting over there, uh,
Representative Lata.
Did you want to introduce
yourself, Representative?
Good morning, Mr. Chairs. I'm
still navigating a month full of
allergies, so I appreciate that
there's somehow a comfy couch
left here for me. Uh, but I'm
glad to be joining you for most
of today's conversation. Thank
you for having me. I'm State
Representative Micaela
Laracadena from South Central
New Mexico,
um, about 2 hours south of here
in Donana. I represent the
historical communities of
Mesilla, San Pablo and Tortuga,
and then about half of Las
Cruces, the west side, south
side of Las Cruces, including
New Mexico.
State University and our
Department of Ag. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
and before I introduce myself,
I'll ask, uh, Xander to
introduce the staff that are
here with us.
Good morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. I'm Zander Dawson. I
staff this committee. Uh, I work
for the Legislative Council
Service as a staff attorney. Uh,
we also have Andrea Lazarro over
there. She's also a staff
attorney, and then we have, uh,
Grace Balderrama. She is a
proofreader in, uh, the LCS and
then we have, uh, Leo Gonzalez.
He's our tech whiz, making sure
everybody can see us online.
Good
Well, thank you all. Uh, I'm
State Senator Jerry Ortizipino.
I represent state Senate
District 12.
Um
That district will actually be
moved up to the number will be
moved up to a
And, uh, my district, the one
I've represented for 20 years.
Has been divided up among
several others, uh, Senator Cedo
Lopez got a piece of it, uh,
actually 6 different senators
acquired slices of my old
district. Um, so I'll be
retiring at the end of this
interim and, um, I've enjoyed
being the chairman of this
committee. This is one of the
The most fascinating committees,
I, I can't imagine a committee
that has a broader
Purview than ours does.
Everything from
Cradle to grave and all the
services, all the healthcare,
all the varieties of social
determinants of health, we
somehow managed to cram into a
24 meetings during the interim,
so it's been a very busy time.
We have a lot of stuff on the
agenda today. And without
further ado, let's get right to
it and Secretary Allen, I guess
you, you're first up. Welcome.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Patrick Allen,
Secretary of the Department of
Health, since we care about
prenatal care as well, some in
the business refer to not cradle
to grave but sperm to worm.
As a way to think about those
issues.
Uh, I'm joined today by Josh
Swok, who until recently was a
harm reduction, uh, manager.
He's actually taken now a new
position as our policy manager
in the agency, but he's here to
bail me out in case I get in
trouble on the, uh, on the
content that we've got for you
today on the mobile
homelessness response
demonstration project. You
should have, I think, a handout,
uh, from us, or, uh, yeah, you
do. OK, good. So I'm gonna go
ahead and dive, uh, and dive
right in and give you an
overview of this project, how
it's
worked some of what we have
learned from it thus far, um,
and, uh, and, uh, throughout
we'll scatter in some quotes
and, and, and some things from
the partners that we've worked
with and then we'll talk a
little bit about those partners
as well.
Just on the slide 2 for some
quick background, um, uh, you
appropriated $4 million to us
for our mobile homelessness
service demonstration project
for fiscal 24, it was aimed at
really building response
capacity around the state in
rural New Mexico, uh, across 19
counties. It's a little bit of a
reflection that you all made
that homelessness is not
restricted to our largest cities
and that, that in fact, it's a
it's an issue that occurs
everywhere and if we're able to
deal with it everywhere we can.
Actually help prevent it from
concentrating, uh, in, uh, in
more urban area, uh, port, um,
parts of the state. Uh, we
funded 13 community partner
organizations, uh, and we
included a partnership with the
University of New Mexico around
uh around data research and
surveys through their through
their pickup study. On slide 3,
just a little bit of, of sort of
why do we do mobile outreach,
uh, as a, as one component of
homelessness response and maybe
this is as good a place as any
to stop and suggest.
That
in no way is talking about
mobile outreach intended to sort
of be out end all be all of this
is how we deal with homelessness
in New Mexico. This is how we
deal with a slice of it that we
think is important and that has
implications for other, other
portions, but this presentation
is not about a comprehensive
strategy around homelessness.
This is really about how we do
mobile outreach and how that
mobile outreach particularly,
um, uh, affects, affects health.
But we've, uh, identified really
some of the, uh, uh.
of the primary reasons that that
we do this. We can individualize
care. Uh, we can reach people
where they are, uh, as opposed
to, you know, kind of where we
wish they were or where we want
them to be. Uh, we're able to
provide a trauma informed
approach to doing this work. Um,
we're able to really reduce
barriers due to stigma and
distrust. The idea
comprehensively is to, is to
bring services to where people
are, and you can see that
actually you all have made a
series of investments in a
variety of topic areas trying
To do that, whether it's
general, uh, uh, uh, mobile
health outreach units that, uh,
that you've, uh, that you've
provided funding for the
Department of Health to
purchase, uh, WIC outreach
units, um, mobile vaccination in
a variety of fronts we know that
that an important element of
care is, is breaking down
transportation and trust
barriers and bringing things to
people where they are, and this
really is consistent with that.
On the next slide.
Want to share a little bit of of
data, uh, that we've been able
to, to glean from the emergency
medical system database. This
gives you a rate, um, uh, uh,
per, uh, uh, per 10,000
residents of EMS calls that
involve homelessness and what we
did is we searched the EMS
database, uh, for any kind of a
narrative report that includes
words like homelessness, tent,
sleeping bag, camp, shelter,
those kinds of things to
capture from the narrative
report where we would find
indicators, um, that
homelessness was a component of
that emergency call. Um, that
said, it's not at all
comprehensive. There's not
really an absolutely ironclad
comprehensive way to gather
that, but we think it's pretty
good. Um,
probably the, the standout piece
of data here is, is, um, the
place that Grant County has uh
on on this list, Silver City,
um, uh, and, and that may be
counterintuitive to some. And of
course, there are some
There are some possible data
gathering elements that could
have an impact on that, how
thorough people are in their
reports, those kinds of things,
but, um, but I think it helps
illustrate the fact that when
we're talking about
homelessness, we're not talking
about just something that occurs
in in uh in uh Albuquerque or
Santa Fe, that really is a
situation that's impacting every
part of our state. Um, if you go
to the next slide, um, we've got
some, some data around, uh, the
2023 uh point in
Time or pit count survey. The
point in time survey if you're
not familiar with it, is exactly
what it sounds like at a
particular point in time,
organizations and volunteers and
staff fan out, uh, and go try to
to make contact with and count
every single person they can
find who's homeless.
Um, or experiencing homelessness
by all accounts it's a pretty
significant undercount, um, of
who's actually out there. Um,
and we're not trying to use that
today to talk about numbers.
We're really talking about, um,
Why people aren't using the
shelter system. That's the
question that was one of the
questions that's asked in the
pit survey.
And and here and throughout,
we'll talk a little bit about
what did we learn in Albuquerque
and what did we learn in the
balance of the state. You'll see
BOS, uh, listed as a, as an
abbreviation because the, the
issues are somewhat different.
Um, and if you, uh, if you look
on the right-hand side of the
balance of the state, the number
one, number one item at the top
of the list. I don't think these
are in in numerical order, but
the the the top issue is no
shelter options in the state. So
you're in that community. Why
didn't you use a shelter because
there wasn't one that I could.
fine. Um, on the left-hand side,
if you look at the Albuquerque
issues, you see, I think some of
what comes from, uh, the
experiences we know we have
around mass sheltering, very
large shelters where identified
concerns are previous negative
experiences, safety concerns,
those kinds of things. And so
the, the, the issues are
somewhat different across the
state, uh, in those two
different, uh, in those two
different settings. The one
thing I would call out though,
that's common to both, uh, has
to do with pets, uh, and the
fact that most shelters won't
allow you to bring a pet now.
you might be tempted to think,
well, if you're experiencing
homelessness isn't a pet kind of
a luxury, and I, I, I, if you,
if you happen to have a pet, um,
you know, the, the degree of
emotional support and
companionship that a pet
provides is in, in some
instances incalculable, and the
idea of well we'd like you to go
to the shelter, but you're gonna
have to leave your dog with
somebody else or
Tied up outside or you know, who
knows what is just that, as it
would be for me, uh, we have a,
we have a a dog. Uh, it would be
intolerable for us to think
about, you know, leaving him
outside overnight while we went
in somewhere and I think that's
the case for, uh, that's a
common issue that's raised by
people experiencing
homelessness.
If you go to the next slide, we
talk a little bit about, um, uh,
how we've tried through, um,
through mobile outreach to
connect systems and we've just
kind of graphically shown some
of the systems that we're
talking about around harm
reduction, uh, uh,
medication-assisted treatment
behavioral health, health care
services, law enforcement and
emergency services, the whole
gamut of what kinds of, of
services interact with or do
people experiencing homelessness
need. Um, uh, on the, on the
left-hand side, um, we've given
a little bit of a list of, of
the
variety of services that, that,
um, that providers make
available. One, I want to call
out just because you see, you
begin to see interact
intersections with other issues
is STD testing.
Um, uh, New Mexico has, I think
the 2nd highest syphilis rate in
the country. Uh, and people
experiencing homelessness as
well as incarcerated populations
are some of the highest
concentrations of where that's
occurring and so being able to
provide, uh, STI testing for
people experiencing homelessness
becomes a critical pathway for
how we try to deal with that
challenge and you can see how
these circles begin to overlap.
On the next slide, uh, we've
identified the 13 funded
community partner organizations
that we're working with in 19
counties. We've got a list of
the organizations on the
left-hand side, um, and then,
um, a map of those organizations
on the right-hand side. You do
see, although this is focused on
rural services, you do see
Albuquerque listed because
that's the partnership with UNM
around surveys and uh and
research. We're not funding in
this project mobile units there.
But I think what you do get is a
good
sense of the fact that, um, that
we got a pretty broad geographic
reach um for this project around
a variety of places, um, you
know, larger, uh, larger
communities like Las Cruces, but
also, uh, uh, into smaller
communities like uh like Demming
and Silver City.
If you go to the next slide,
Um, just a little bit of a
discussion of why focus on rural
areas. I've talked about this a
little bit in terms, in terms of
people experiencing
houselessness being a, a
challenge all across the state.
But what you find in rural areas
is, is challenges begin to kind
of pyramid on top of each other,
uh, and become quite
overwhelming. What we're trying
to capture here graphically is
not so much that there's a
progression of one leads to the
next, but the idea that if there
are fewer shelter beds, um,
that, that gets compounded by
the.
that not only are there shelter
beds, there are also fewer
services, um, transportation
challenges are greater because
you're talking about distances
as well as often lack of any
kind of transit infrastructure
or those kinds of things. There
are fewer jobs in smaller
communities and so it goes in
each of those add to others that
are present and cause the
barriers for those experiencing
homelessness to be, uh, to be
really, uh, quite overwhelming.
On the next slide.
Then turning to the project
itself, uh, just the idea of
kind of what's the approach. Um,
and, and, and the, the approach
has two primary components.
First, really reaching the most
vulnerable, unsheltered
populations. So again, not a
comprehensive strategy around,
uh, around homelessness
generally, uh, really focusing
on a segment that is least
connected and least well served
by, uh, by the systems and
structures we have, so it's
really focusing on unsheltered
populations and then really
being able to bridge
use services to bridge gaps, um,
uh, uh, for people as we move
toward trying to provide
permanent housing and and how do
we, how do we serve their needs
in the, uh, in that gap? How do
we bridge that on the next
slide.
Um
There are, as I said, there are
kind of quotes and those sorts
of things salted throughout, but
I really, I really did want to
call this one out and if you'll
indulge me, I'm gonna go ahead
and just read it out loud. The
difference is that the people
that we reach in the mobile
space is that they're the most
vulnerable. They're the most
traumatized when you're in a
trauma place accessing services
or having the wherewithal to
feel confident and safe and
nowhere to go and being able to
self-advocate is next to
impossible. These, these are the
folks that would not necessarily
have known that we would not
have known about because they're
brilliant.
At hiding in order to protect
themselves that came from, uh,
from our partners at the, uh,
San Juan County Partnership.
Um,
On the next slide, then I'm
going to talk transition into
talking about the project
itself. Uh, we'll talk about 4
highlights around expanded
organizational capacity, the
partners that we work with and
how they're able to do more. Um,
we'll talk about improved, uh,
effectiveness in working with
people experiencing
homelessness, you'll see that
PEH, um, uh, uh, acronym
periodically or abbreviation.
Um, uh, uh, we'll talk about
strengthen community
partnerships and we'll talk
about increase engagement in
services. So if you flip over to
slide
we talk about strengthened
community partnerships and here
I'm not going to dive into
individual quotes, but what we
tried to capture is a little bit
of who all is involved when
we're working on a project. Um,
this is not us going in and
working with these partners.
This is the partner organization
