Thank you, Senator Neville and
Representative Chatfield, glad
you're here. Do we have anyone
else that we're waiting for?
Oh yes,
Representative V Hill Hoffman V.
Hill, she was out there a minute
ago, so we'll just, uh, see if
she comes in. OK. Uh, we're
gonna start off with the um item
that was supposed to start at
1:30 and it is federal funding
opportunities and state budget
priorities, and we have got
Rebecca Rs, who I just saw it in
the hall a minute ago.
Infrastructure advisor from the
governor's office and Tanya
Trujillo. Hi, Tanya, deputies.
State engineer and senior water
policy advisor for the governor.
So we're going to talk about
first about the New Mexico
integrated water finance plan
for federal funding. We're also
gonna talk about state
programmatic and non-recurring
funding priorities related to
water. So which one of you young
ladies, one of the first. All
right, Tanya, you're it. So
let's go so we can move it and
get to questions and comments.
Thank you.
You got it. So we'll try to.
Perfect. Thank you. Hello,
everyone. I'm Tanya Trujillo,
the deputy state engineer and
senior water policy advisor for
the governor Happy to be here
today with the subcommittee.
So the first part of our
presentation today is going to
highlight the fact that we have
great opportunities of matching
federal funding with state
funding and state project needs.
And so we have um embarked on a
plan called the Integrated Water
Financing plan to develop that
develop those federal resources
here and this is something that
originated um through the
Western states Water Council,
and I don't know if folks are
familiar with the Western States
Water Council. It's a group of,
um, water representatives
designated by the governors of
all of the water, all of the
western states to get together
and talk about water issues and
that was, um, kind of originated
through the Western Governors
Association. Our governor is
currently the chair of the
Western Governors Association.
And so she appreciates us
continuing the work on these
subjects.
So this project brings together
resources from the Western
States Water Council.
From an entity called the
Western Federal Agency Support
Team, Westfast, and that
includes representation from 16
different federal agencies.
We also have pulled together a
numerous entities within the
state, different agencies within
the state, and we have involved
private entities and so, for
example, some of the funding
that's available for us to do
this project have come from
private foundation funding
sources and
We appreciate the collaboration
and cooperation that we have
among those many partners. The
goal of this project is to
maximize federal funding
resources for investments in New
Mexico's water resources to help
us implement our water action
priorities and we look forward
to working with the legislature
on, on some of that matchmaking
effort for sure.
When this um project is
complete, it'll be a model that
we can use here in New Mexico
for water and other programs. It
will also be a model for other
states, so we're having, um,
folks that are watching this
from other states and other
agencies. So we're looking
forward to continuing the
momentum. I'm really excited to
just provide a little background
about it, and it's in our, our
PowerPoint slides, so turning to
the 2nd page.
The back gives me, Tanya, for
everyone to know we are on this
one here,
just hand out so everyone will
know. Thank you very much. You
can proceed. Thank you.
The um we might have to watch
the mics for the background.
Thanks. Um, so the origin of
this stems back to a lot of the
great work that was done through
the, the task force and the
report conclusions in the task
force are on our minds when
we're thinking about how to meet
some of the goals and
requirements of of these plans.
We're also working closely uh
since the governor released the
50-year water action plan in
January.
We're working closely to match
up the priorities from that plan
with this project and that plan,
uh, will go into a little more
detail later, but it has 3 main
areas of focus, water
conservation.
Development of new water
supplies and protection of water
quality and watershed
protections. So when we're
thinking about this.
Federal funding financing plan.
We're trying to match up
priorities from each of those
three main buckets, and we spent
a lot of time thinking about
how, how the best way to get
that done.
So, um, in
The 2nd half of that 2nd page,
we talked through several of the
steps that we did to.
Develop these project areas.
They are uh demonstration areas
in those three main buckets and
the first area that we chose
was.
Trying to develop resources for
accelerating small community
drinking water systems and
promoting regionalization, and I
was excited to see in the New
Mexican over the weekend, you
know, progress that's getting
started in Penasco and Rodarte
and um want to give a shout out
to uh my former boss at the
Interstate Stream Commission,
Esteban Lopez, who's working uh
in the in the system there in
Penasco, but definitely
recognize that the strong need
that exists throughout many
communities for trying to
bring resources together and
think about how to work and in
that regionalized capacity. So
that's one of our main areas of
focus.
Where, um,
Trying to look through many
layers of state resources to
build and identify the program
needs here and um.
Jumping to the next page, we go
into detail on the three major
areas. So the first area is
accelerating small community
drinking water systems, the
second area is recognizing the
need for more capacity in our
aquifer mapping and monitoring
programs, and I know at the
interim Water Resources
Committee, there was information
presented on that program
recently, and then the third
project that we're using as a
demonstration activity is
development of
Habitat restoration and
watershed protection in the
Upper Rio Grande and that
riparian area. So I'll walk
through a little more detail in
each of those areas. For the
demonstration activity one
accelerating small community
drinking water regionalization
that recognizes the challenge
that we have in many of these
small communities we know, um,
around on the order of 80% of
our communities are small or
very small, are these, these
community
water systems are small or very
small. That means they're
serving 3000 or or or fewer
people, 3300 or fewer people.
I think um trying to match up
federal programs and develop a
broader range of opportunities
for funding and matching funding
for those systems is part of our
main priority. Uh, we've, we've
looked through the prior reports
and funding analysis and
identified on the order of $400
million worth of priority needs,
and we know from prior reports
As well that there are projects
totaling over 200 million that
are have raised their hand and
said, hey, we want, we want more
support, we want to be ready to
go. So that's one of our
demonstration activities that
we're working on. We
for the next page, one of the
Areas that we wanted to
highlight as well was developing
additional resources for aquifer
mapping and monitoring, um,
again, the, the excellent
technicians at New Mexico Tech
presented on this subject in
detail at the interim and water
and Natural Resources Committee
and identified specific needs
for additional aquifer
characterization and monitoring
resources throughout throughout
the state.
We have identified, uh, a
potential need of
Approximately $175 million over
the next 12 years. So we're
trying to think creatively about
what additional federal funding
resources we can bring to that
need to to partner with the
state resources that we're we're
working on as well.
And then trying to go quickly
here to activity 3, which is
a titled The Rio Grande Upper
Rio Grande Basin riparian
Conservation Restoration and
Water Health Initiative.
It recognizes the challenges in
the upper Rio Grande Basin that
are critical to make sure we can
have functioning stream systems
and and good water quality. So
this is focused on that 3rd
bucket of water quality
protection and watershed
restoration needs. Um, we
investigating the potential
areas of projects we were made
aware of some initial planning
efforts that were going on among
numerous partners on.
This project, and it will
essentially cover on the order
of 2000+ miles of stream and
habitat restoration areas. So
it's something that we're
looking forward to.
Helping that local capacity
sector in building their their
capabilities. So the
investigations have identified
uh approximately $11 million in
counting for um the need in this
particular area and then we also
have goals of again
strengthening the coalition of
partners, recognizing that there
are many different
constituencies who are already
working in this area and could
benefit.
From additional funding needs.
So, turning the page to the
slide promising federal funding
strategies. This is just an
additional list of some of the
additional ideas we have for
bringing resources together from
those 16 federal agencies that
are partnering on this program.
So for the accelerating small
drinking water systems, we know
we need to try to bring a
broader range of federal grant
opportunities to the table and
for the statewide monitoring,
we're looking for new uh
connections and for example, the
Army Corps of Engineers has
planning programs that may be a
resource for this type of, of
work, um, and the ribbons of
life in the upper Rio Grande
riparian restoration.
sector we're trying to match
federal funding that
specifically tied to watershed
designations we're looking for
grants that aren't usually
accessed by for restoration
purposes and expanding that
potential, and then, um,
Trying to tap into that
coalition building area. uh, so
this project is something that
we're um doing in kind of an
experimental context we're
looking for it as a model for uh
bringing resources here to New
Mexico. It's in progress. We'll
have a kind of a concluding
workshop planned for the middle
of November and then have a
final report where we can think
through the next steps and how
to best utilize this information
that
We're coming together, but I
really appreciate the support
that we've had from our, our
private funding foundations from
the federal and state agencies
who have been involved in
working on these workshops to
date and all of the local
partners that have contributed
their time and energy and raised
their hand and said, hey, we
could use help in this, in this
area, um, to make this, this
project, uh, success. So it's
been great thinking about new
ways of
Of, um,
my my friend to my left says
de-siloing the the federal
funding areas and the state
funding areas and, and getting
people to, to talk to each other
who might not otherwise have,
have the ability to, to compare
notes on some of the
opportunities. So thank you for
letting us be here. This is a
great news story and we're
looking forward to continuing
to, to watch the progress of
this. Thank you. And I'll hand
it over to, uh, Rebecca Russ.
For the second half of our
presentation. Thank you, thank
you, Tanya Rebecca, you're it
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
It's a pleasure to be here with
you this afternoon, um, and to
be able to talk to you about um
the very important issues around
water and what we need to do to
fund our, our water needs and
challenges and priorities in New
Mexico, um, and you know, as you
just heard from Tanya in the
first half of our presentation,
um, lots of work going on to
make sure that when we talk
about
water security needs and
programs.
And projects that need further
investment. We're not just
looking at our state coffers.
We're, we're looking, um,
Strategically and consistently
at our federal partners and the,
the many dollars and programs
that are out there at the
federal level, um, and trying to
make sure that we get more than
our fair share of those dollars
into New Mexico given the
significance of our water
challenges. Um, and it's,
that's, that's all part of why
we're really excited about that
integrated water finance plan,
and I'll just add really quickly
that as an infrastructure
advisor who works on
transportation and broadband and
energy infrastructure.
I'm also really excited to see
what we can take away from this
integrated water financing plan
about bridging different paths
of federal money to meet our
state priorities and apply those
lessons learned and strategies
and approaches to other
infrastructure sectors with high
need in New Mexico as well.
With that, um, onto, uh, there's
a transition slide that says
state funding priorities for
water. So I'm going to pick up
there, um, the slide right after
it. Just a refresher slide on
the priority areas in the
governor's 50-year water action
plan. I'm not going to spend
time on this, but I wanted you
to have a copy of it, a new, um,
in case we need to reference it
during discussion in any way.
But what I'm going to be talking
about on the the next two
slides, which are our final two
slides is
In part, how do we fund that
50-year plan and the many other,
um, priority programs and
projects that we have in New
Mexico around water, including
the um Water Data Act, a lot of
implementation going on, a lot
of ongoing need, including the
2023 um water Security Planning
Act that's revitalizing and
revamping our regional water
planning program that's going to
underpin the work we do in
future years on on water issues
and, and water projects.
And you know, many other
priorities that um we can get
into through discussion if
you're interested.
Um, but what we want to do at
just a high level since we are
officially in budget season. Uh,
you all are always in budget
season, I know, but uh with the
agency request process, um,
really being, uh, further along,
uh, I wanted to take this
opportunity to tell you a little
bit just at a high level about
where we are in terms of
building the executive request
and what are priorities. So
really clear shift from Tanya's
presentation about federal
funding. Now we're talking
Exclusively about state money.
OK, where you're all is bread
and butter. Um.
So on this slide, um, just a
couple of key points. We're
going to see things in
agency-based budgets
as particularly as this natural
resource agencies come before
the committee and present their
budgets. Um, that that are tied
to ongoing programs that, some
of which have been around for
decades, others maybe are newer,
um, but where there's base
budget and agencies are asking
you to continue funding those
programs. And some of those
programs that relate to
implementation of the 50-year
water plan.
Um, includes the water planning
program at the Interstate Stream
Commission. It includes, um,
base funding for OSE's water,
um, data and permitting and
regulatory programs. It includes
ongoing recurring funding for
the Environment departments,
water protection programs,
including cleaning up
contaminated sites across the
state. So lots of things that
are already baked in, right, tie
into the 15
your plan, but as many of you
have probably heard me or others
say, um, since we finalized the
50 year water plan in January,
there's a lot about that plan
and our priorities that's not
yet fully funded, not adequately
funded, and you're likely going
to hear from some of the
agencies later in, um, the fall
as you have budget briefings
about some recurring requests
tied some recurring increases
tied to programs that relate to
the 50 year plan. We're not here
today to break all of those down
for you.
Because I know you're gonna,
you're gonna hear that from
agencies in the coming months,
um, but some recurring increases
tied to the 50-year plan, mostly
though, the, the requests that
are being evaluated right now
within the executive to feed
into the executive, the final
executive request is going to be
around non-recurring funding.
And uh we even heard Senator
Munoz in the earlier session
before lunch reference, um, the
Environment department's, uh,
agency level requests for
non-recurring funding. Uh, when
we've looked across all of the
natural resource agencies that
work on water programs that are,
um, that have developed their
agency requests so far, um, that
we're in the 450 to $500 million
dollar range at the agency
request level tied to various
aspects of the 50.
Your plan and associated water
priorities. Um, so those are
things like the strategic water
supply, which we'll hear more
about on the next panel. Um,
cleaning up neglected,
contaminated sites and
continuing to our investments to
clean up our, our designated
Superfund sites across the
state, um, uh, increased
investment in Indian water
rights settlements, which is so
key to again leveraging more
federal dollars into the state
and meeting our state
commitments with our sovereign
nation partners around those.
And water rights settlements,
um, implementation of the Water
Data Act and Water Data
Initiative, um, beyond what's
what's actually on the slide.
There's also non-recurring
requests at the agency level for
launching a, a statewide water
education campaign, which is the
first action called out in the
governor's 50-year plan in the
water conservation bucket. So
lots of things in those agency
requests were continuing to
evaluate as an executive, the,
the whole host of the water
requests in conjunction.
With the whole rest of of the
state budget. Um, of course, and
uh we'll be fine tuning that as,
as we go through the coming
months and, and finalize the
executive request, um, but
wanted you to at least know that
ballpark range, um, which I know
you're, you're doing your own
review and analysis of those
requests as well. Um, as to
where the correlation is between
the agency requests, especially
on non-recurring.
And the 50-year plan.
OK, so on the next slide.
a bit of a step back from the
typical budgeting process. We're
also looking closely at um how
can we as a state,
Beyond annual agency budgets and
requests, most effectively meet
the near term and longer term
needs of addressing water, uh,
programs and projects and
implementing the plan, the
50-year plan, implementing that
water security planning Act
implementing, um, uh, the
programs and initiatives
associated with the 2022 water
policy task force, um, and so
we're thinking bigger picture.
About whether or not we need a
new fund or to build off of an
existing fund, and I spoke to
the subcommittee about this same
concept back in June.
When you were down in Carlsbad,
um, and so we're looking at
whether or not we should
and and can set aside a reserve
source of funding for water
programs and, and needs going
forward. Um, we're working on
this like 4 questions that are
listed in bullets on the
considerations for future water
funding slide.
So, kind of breaking it down,
how much do we need?
Tomorrow, you know, in the next
year or two, and farther out,
um, for a round of, you know,
all of the priority programs and
projects that have been
identified by the task force, by
the 50 year plan, by the
legislature and policies that
you've enacted. Um,
How, so that's how much, um,
where's it going to live? So
this is my point about can we
purpose an existing fund, maybe
with some new authorities, with
some new revenue streams, um,
should we establish a new fund?
These are questions that we're
asking and carefully evaluating,
um, to develop a more robust
proposal.
And then whether it's a new fund
or an existing fund, who would
manage it and how would it get
managed? Um, so what would the
mechanics be for um using any
set aside dollars for the, the
dedicated and authorized needs.
And then the last question
there, which is my favorite.
Where does the money come from?
Uh, the obvious answer is, uh,
for a lot of folks who think
about, you know, state funding
is general fun and I, I do
expect that the agents that the
administration, the governor
will have a request associated
with general fund for this, but
we are absolutely not stopping
there. Um, we know that uh what
the revenue projections look
like, we know how great the
needs are in this state across
so many different issue areas,
including but not limited to
water. And so how
We creatively look at uh new or
expanded revenue streams beyond
general fund to set aside and
prioritize revenue for water
security programs and projects.
Um, so for that we're looking at
some uh what other states are
doing, um, new fees, sometimes
temporary fees that sunset, um,
sometimes longer term or, you
know, fees without sunsets. Um,
sometimes it's fees on
industries and activities that
relate directly to the water
sector.
Some states, especially Western
states, are looking at fees, um,
around things that aren't, um,
Already in place, uh, that
aren't directly tied to the
water sector, but nonetheless, a
source of additional revenue for
the state that they hadn't
really tapped into yet. Um, so,
so we're looking at, uh, lots of
different models and options to
see how creative we can be at,
um, setting aside a sizable
amount of funding that can grow
over time.
And meet the the level and
nature of water program and
project needs that we have in
the state. So, um, with that,
uh,
We, we look forward to more
opportunity to talk more with
the legislative Finance
Committee, um, leading up to the
60 day session as we get further
along in this work and have a
more concrete proposal or or set
of options that were sort of
leaning into, um, and we really
look forward to ideas, thoughts,
and feedback from this committee
today and, and as we continue to
dialogue through the interim. So
with that, um, Madam Chair,
we'll sit for questions.
Thank you very much for that.
Uh, can we go on to committee
members now for questions or
comments?
Um, oh my goodness, this is like
quiet, OK, all righty, we've
got, um, Senator Gonzalez has a
question or comment anyone else
Um, oh my goodness, this is like
quiet, OK, all righty, we've
got, um, Senator Gonzalez has a
question or comment anyone
knows, and of course the chair,
uh Nathan Small, and then we are
gonna go on to um.
Representative Luon and who
else?
OK, yes.
OK.
Thank you.
So have some
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
um.
On the request for funding.
Um, is this a one time or what a
year?
Like you have 11 million.
And then you have the other one,
so is this the the ask is for a
one time.
Or would it be?
Recurring. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and Senator Gonzalez, um,
the first set of slides until
the last two slides in the
presentation. So where you see
the 11 million, that's related
to the project that's underway
to get federal dollars and so
that's just to be very, very
clear because you're used to
people coming to you and asking
you for money. That is not a
request for state dollars.
That's an articulation of a need
for a particular um set and type
of water.
Projects that is, um, informing
this integrated water financing
plan, uh, to identify and
leverage more federal grant
dollars and other federal
dollars into the state to meet
that $11 million need. Um, and
so that's, I wanted to clarify
that in terms of whether it's
recurring or non-recurring, the
11 million is for, is that
ribbons of Life?
Yeah, go ahead on that.
We can do a tag team and it was,
it, it really is an
investigative process. So we're
trying to figure out and answer
that question how much funding
need do we have in these various
sectors. And so that particular
project is designed to fund
coalition building, tracking,
and um development of some of
tracking progress on some of the
restoration activities that
they're they're working on, so
the watershed restoration work,
trying to look
For, um,
Needs identified through the
tribal and non-tribal community
participants there, I think lots
of different good um projects
that we're looking for in-stream
flows, and it's, yeah, we don't,
we haven't dialed it down to a
recurring need or a
non-recurring need. It's a a a
combined assessment of potential
need that's feeding into this
federal funding investigation
project.
And uh Madam Chair, the, the
last part, um.
And, and by all means don't
misconstrue my statement as
negative.
But uh,
Uh, I've been here 30 years.
And what would be for 30 years
I've been hearing about we need
more money for litigation. We
need more money for this.
What would be different on this
than what has been in the prior
years.
So Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, I can um try to
clarify that what we're trying
to do with this special
integrated financing plan is
think about the new resources
that we could bring into New
Mexico and I recently was
working at the Department of the
Interior. I know there are
billions of new dollars coming
in that would be used across the
country. I know Department of
Agriculture, Department of
Energy, EPA, Corps of Engineers,
all of the
agencies have tremendous funding
opportunities now. So we want to
try to figure out how to make
them, make those opportunities
more attractive to um to those
agencies to use their dollars
here in New Mexico and we're
we're always trying to think
about that, but this is an
effort that's on steroids
essentially and trying to be
more creative with that with
that process. So we're
partnering these new federal
dollars that could be coming in
with the, the state
funding that has has
traditionally been available for
some of these projects as well
to try to make them go further
and and be developed more
quickly, perhaps.
So, Madam Chair, um,
This would bring us to like a
higher level of technical.
Competitiveness.
You know, to the other states if
I'm a Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, I think that's an
excellent point, like having
being able to address the need
for funding for water projects
in New Mexico and water programs
in New Mexico will help across
all our sectors as, as you all
know, water is life and it feeds
our economies in rural
communities, in big cities, in
agricultural communities are
important asses. I told Paula
Garcia, I would remember to give
a plug for the.
The Sea communities, all, all of
our economic drivers come back
to that, that need for water.
And so if we can bring more
federal dollars into the state
that helps us have a more robust
water security system throughout
the state.
Very well, thank you, thank you
for your work.
Sure. Thank you, Senator, and
thank you for your responses. We
have next chair Nathan Small.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both for the presentation.
Uh, first, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Hell, there's a couple of sort
of, it seems like bright spots.
One, there was $700 million for
the lower Rio Grande federally,
that followed, say, would you
call it like 50 million in state
investment?
How
Yeah, do you think that it
helped that we made the state
investments and those help draw
that, uh, larger federal
investment.
Madam Chair and Representative
Small, no doubt about it, and I
think coming from the federal
role very recently, it makes a
huge difference if the state
steps up and says we're we're
providing our cost share or we
already have this under in in
progress, you know, be partner
with us to make sure we can
complete a project or add
capacity to a project that makes
a huge difference, and we're
looking for those opportunities
on both sides. This is, this is
a project that does that, that
tries to.
say, Where is their state
programs like this
regionalization
project? How can we expand that
capacity with additional federal
funding, so thank you for your
support, of course, and that
connection and illustration is
super helpful. Another, Madam
Chair, another example, uh this
past year, the legislature set
aside over $20 million to
support future Indian water
rights settlements. The can you
It's, as I understand that that
helped make sure New Mexico's
Indian water rights settlements
were part of federal movement
within both the Senate and the
House, while it has it sort of
passed all the way yet we were
kept in the game because again,
we sort of had a substantial
state commitment. Can you share
just a little bit more with us
about that, please? Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Small.
The 6 bills that are poised to
move forward in Congress right
now represent approximately $33
billion worth of federal funding
that would be coming into New
Mexico. Our state contributions
do exactly what you said. They
signal to the federal government
and the Congress that we need
to, they need to do their part
to meet the progress that we've
already made here and we are
requesting in our, in our budget
$400 million.
that would be an additional
infusion to meet those state
cost share requirements for
those settlements. Again, when
they move through Congress, they
will provide on the order of $3
billion worth of funding for us.
That's awesome. Um, and so maybe
as we go forward in the process.
If there are sort of an expected
in some of these areas where
you're asking for, you know, um.
You know, over $400 million I
guess just on that in the areas
that we're looking to match
state and federal funding.
It's gonna be an imperfect
system, although as I think
we've noted before, we're so
fortunate to have you to come
home to New Mexico because of
your remarkable federal
experience,
if there's like a sliding scale
that tells us in general put in,
you know, this amount of state
money and be at least
competitive for this much larger
amount of federal money, that's
a really helpful, probably way
for
For us to think about.
Um, leads to the second broad
question, which is the sounds
like.
In a best case scenario, we're
setting aside multiple years of
funding soon that that you're
we're trying to do, you know,
and take the uh mapping aquifer
mapping, we could do $10,000
over the next, you know, say 15
years or 10 to 15 years, do we
advance faster if we set aside
larger sums, whether it's in a
longer.
year special, maybe it's a 3
year grow appropriation that can
be evaluated in that way and
it's like a 25, you know, like a
10 to $25 million per year
investment.
How do we think about
Planning for a 10 year plus
period or trying to really
front, you know, front load
things. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative Small, I, that's,
I appreciate you framing the
task in that way and it, it
speaks to some of what we're
trying to unpack with the
questions that I laid out on
that last slide of, you know,
how might we best, um,
plan around funding needs for
multiple years at a time and
it's like taking the aquifer
mapping and monitoring program
as an example, um, when we were
working with the Bureau of
Geology at New Mexico Tech to
develop that part of the 50-year
plan and figure out what we were
going to set as an aggressive
but achievable target.
Um, as you may recall, it says
if we fully fund the program
consistently year over year, we
could fully characterize all of
our aquifers.
In 12 years.
And, um, that you may say, well,
what if we funded it twice as
much, could we do it in 6 years?
And what the technical experts
explained to me when I asked
them that question, we can only
go so fast based on how long it
takes to drill these wells, how
long it takes to gather the data
and put all of the pieces
together. So that is kind of the
accelerated path. Um, so I want
to make that point about sort of
how we're um trying to
Really thoughtfully arrive at
the how much do we need
answer in terms of how do we
budget over multiple years. Yes,
you could fund programs the same
level year after year after
year. But for these programs,
many of which have fluctuating
needs of spending one year over
another over another. Um, one of
the things we're trying to think
about in terms of a new fund or
expanding on an existing fund
and the relevant authorities and
mechanics is to make sure that
we have funding available for
programs.
Uh, that have a different demand
level one year over the over the
year prior or two years out. So
what if the Bureau of Geology
could needed 12 million
non-recurring in, um, pick year
0 on a timeline and the next
year they need 5 based on a
maintenance level and based on
the crews that they can get out
there and based on, you know,
all of these other things and
then the next year they need to
ramp it back up to 10. Um, so
are we setting, setting up a
program, a fund, and
that allows for um agencies and
programs to get the right amount
that they need when they need it
and use it most effectively. Um,
and the existing budget process
provides, uh, a certain amount
of flexibility and opportunities
to do that, including through
non-recurring, um, funding
requests, um, but if we are
looking to also invest some of
our existing surplus dollars and
or new revenue sources to
generate some additional funding
in the out years. Um, let's be
thinking.
About the agility that is most
appropriate to what we're trying
to get done. So that's in the
realm of what, what we're trying
to explore, Madam Chair.
Awesome. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And sort of final
question, um, any further
information on the fees that are
under consideration.
Um, good question, Madam Chair.
Representative Small, um, we're
still very much in information
gathering phase at this point.
Um, we are, um, looking at, you
know, when we, and, and we can
talk about this a little bit
more in the strategic water
supply session, I suspect
because it's more specific to,
to produce water and oil and
gas, um, where we need more
state level and programmatic
investment in, um, the
regulatory structures and, uh
Treatment, technologies for
treating produced water that
we're looking at the possibility
of new fees on the oil and gas
sector, uh, just as an example,
again, nothing that we're, we're
decided on at this point, but,
um, for those class 2 injection
wells that I believe you heard
about from the prior panel
today, the, um, there's no
volumetric fee attached to how
produced water is disposed of in
New Mexico, so at the same time.
We're trying to incentivize more
recycling in field, um, we're
looking at and have been talking
about since you all enacted the,
the, um, produce Water Act in
2019. In fact, um, what is the
role of some sort of a fee
structure, what, what would the
appropriate fee structure be,
um, as tied to the volume of
produced water that's disposed
or um even potentially, uh,
Transported out of state. So
that's an example, but again,
no, no decisions made at this
point. Thank you very much for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
think generally making it
possible, which we've done
through the Produce Water Act,
making it rewarding, which we're
exploring in other ways and
making it less financially
feasible to just simply dispose
seems to make a lot of sense,
so, uh, as a general approach.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Chair Small, and thank you
again for your responses. We've
got next representative Saranna.
You're next. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Actually, I have just a
quick one, the Water Data Act.
Uh, or the, the data, water
data, is that the, is that the
database we're looking at to
look at all the
Is that the one is that?
In the list of non-recurring
needs, is that what you're
referring to? Representative
Saraana on page, I don't know
what page it is. Page can't read
it.
Where it talks about
non-recurring funding requests.
Yes, yes, OK, just wanted to
make sure we were in the same
place and sorry the slide
numbers which exist are not
visible.
We, they are very tiny. Um, you
would need a magnifying glass.
So our apologies for the
difficulty referencing. Um,
it's, it's water data, um, in
the context of, uh, different
agencies, non-recurring requests
is tied to what the water data
initiative, which is a product
of the Water Data Act. Um, so
in, in particular, I know the
Office of the State
Engineer has some non-recurring
requests related to water data.
So depending on the agency, what
they're doing internally in
their agency is, um, meeting
their data needs and so that as
it everything feeds up into the
shared data repository that's
managed by the Bureau of
Geology, um, the, the shared
water data inventory is as um as
complete and as accessible and
as integrated as it can.
based on the resources that
agencies have. So, um, that is
agency water data needs um
related to the statewide water
data initiative. Do you have an
idea of what Madam Chair, do you
have an idea of what you're
looking at for, for, um, Madam
Chair, Representative Saranana,
I don't have that in front of me
necessarily across multiple
agencies, but, um, Deputy
Trujillo might be able to speak
to it with respect to Office of
State Engineer.
Uh, as one agency that's
included.
Yeah, yep, you bet. And I think
that we purposefully approached
this presentation very broadly
to make sure we were covering
the fact that multiple agencies
are working on these water
priorities. And an example
within our agency, the state
engineer office, we're seeking
additional funding for more
metering.
And monitoring so to be able to
measure the water that we're
we're using and then also for
our planning and education
programs to make sure that we
can, um,
Uh, implement the 2023 Water
Planning Act and uh resources
along those lines.
So ma'am chair, so eventually
you'll have it from everywhere.
We'll know where all our water
is all over our state.
Because it's going to be right
in this database, right, or
Madam Chair, and Representative,
yes, and I, I mean, I can give
more specifics on, on our OSE,
but we're trying to build our
water database, water's
database, a real-time measuring
and monitoring system are, um,
water planning and outreach and
those are the main, uh, special
appropriations that we would be
seeking.
Do you have a timeline? I mean,
when do you anticipate having a
complete database ready for
people to look at?
Um, Madam Chair of his own Sena,
I will follow up with the
committee on that information.
The water data initiative
recently released their annual
plan. I think just a few weeks
ago and so, um, I'll be happy to
share that with you directly and
and with committee staff so that
they can distribute it as well.
I'm just not intimately familiar
with the, the timeline. I know
it's, it's interim steps
building us toward, um, a number
of different milestones. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. We're going
to go on to Representative Lujan
and then Representative Ortez,
and then in this order, Senator
Woods, thank you for being
patient. All right, thank, thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, and thank
you to the presenters, um,
and, uh, I'm just putting these
numbers together and some of the
information and the things we've
been talking about, and I also
got to be um one of the
legislators on the task force
with the de um water plan, along
with many people that are here,
so.
It's good to see that we're
moving forward with how we and
how we plan things. Um, so a
couple of questions. How do we
work or continue to work if we
have been in con in concert to
share a transparent,
accountable, prioritize, um,
What, uh, and prioritize all of
our water needs.
With the executive and with the
legislature. How do we continue
to do that?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Lehane, um,
because so many of our water.
Policy priorities require
funding, and because budget is
policy, I think a big part of
how we continue to do that
together is through the way that
we tackle and talk about the,
the hard decisions around how we
prioritize state funds and um so
the the budget process ongoing
is a place to do that at the
agency level and with the
governor's office and our work
with, with the legislature on,
um, addressing budget needs and
um developing budget priorities.
For the next fiscal year and,
uh, how are we most effectively
going to use the available
dollars for non-recurring needs
as well. So I think that's,
that's a key way that we
continue to work together to
have those conversations around
where we where we put our
funding.
So a lot of this is going to be
uh what you were asked and where
we're going to take care of this
is going to be through the
budget process. Do you foresee
any of that, uh, any legislation
that's going to be needed to be
implemented for us to get to
the, the plan or to prioritize
your plan or plans of other of
legislators through the through
this budget process because like
you said, you're gonna you're
gonna have a huge amount that's
gonna be non-recurring. So
that's going to be critical to
us to understand.
how then, and then you also said
earlier that a lot of
We're going to see a lot of the
budget asks that are going to be
through recurring as well. Did I
capture that?
So this, this is going to be
really critical for us as we're
on HAFC and Senate Finance to
really understand, you know, uh,
all your asks because from what
I'm gathering here.
It's over 1 point just from,
from this presentation is over
$1.2 billion. So,
How, how, how are you going to
do that without additional
legislation or are you going to
have additional legislation?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Lujan, um, just
to clarify my earlier point
about agency recurring
increases, um, I, I know you'll
hear from OSE when they present
their budget to you, some level
of recurring increase in their
request, um, and, uh, for
Environment department it's
different. They're the only
requests you'll see from the
Environment department related
to increased funding for water
programs is going to be through
non-recurring, so it's gonna
vary by agency, um, and, and I,
I would not characterize it.
As a lot of the needs are met
through recurring, um, but some
level of need through recurring
and an example for Office of
State engineer and Interstate
stream Commission on a recurring
need is to more fully and
effectively implement the water
Security Planning Act, which is
setting up an entirely new and
improved regional planning
program for the state. So
there's a recurring need there
because that planning process
will go on a long time. Um, in
terms of legislation, uh, we're,
we're evaluating whether or not
um, you know, as I said,
On that final slide about do we
need a new fund or build off the
authority and purposes of an
existing fund, um, if we do
either of those, I, I anticipate
there would be a piece of
legislation to, to lay that out
and that would work through the
process. Um, and then on the
strategic water supply, we do
intend, uh,
um uh bill associated with that
which we can unpack further in
the next panel as well.
I really appreciate that. I
think that, you know, that this
is going to be really important
because one of the frustrating
things for myself, um, being on
HAFC is putting all these these
different components together.
I'd like to see a clear map and
how we are going to really be
integrated working with the
executive, working with the
legislators, and working with
our advocacy groups because I
know they're here and they have
some, they were part of the
whole task force as well, which
I really, um,
Really appreciated. I think that
was really well thought, thought
through as we, we put together,
you know, some of these
initiatives with the
originalization and all this
other initiatives that we're
getting out of that, um, task
force. I'd just like to see that
really, um, carried forward and
as we're, if we are developing
new legislation, but how that is
reflected in this budget dollars
because it is really, it can be
very confusing and it moves
really fast.
And so we want to make sure that
we're capturing everything so
the better we map out and the
better we all work with with all
the agencies to understand where
all those those fundings are,
are being asked and um.
We'll have a better outcome. I
think my last question, Madam,
is, when we're putting this all
together, how do we integrate
our educational institutes to
prepare next generation youth
for careers and develop um
Our physical efficiencies around
that as we're talking with
economic development yesterday
and all, you know, where we
implementing, uh, the career
pathways.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Lou Hunt for that
question, that the idea of
developing and modernizing the
workforce is definitely on our
mind and we love the idea of
partnering with our educational
institutions at the community
college here at UNM, the schools
around the, around the state to
be able to advertise the
potential work opportunities
that we have in our agencies and
train those operators in those
small rural systems train the
next generation of engineers and
hydrologists that are going to
get us through the next, you
know, the next few generations.
So it's a huge priority and we
would like to partner with our
workforce development folks and
our, um, educational entities to
do more of that. So thank you
for your support.
Thank you. And I think if we're
gonna.
We're going to do that. We work
with economic development as
well. They're they're saying
they're going into our
communities and they're getting
inputs and they're getting
feedback to what the communities
need and I think water,
especially in our rural
communities are essential,
obviously, but they're gonna
have a lot of input. We do have
some programs and I'll just
reflect on, um, Imora County,
um, in San Mi San Miguel with
Luna Community College, they put
in a lot of resources for their
curriculums and I'd just like to
know that we're taking advantage
of those.
Just there, but not only there,
San Juan, uh, college and other
areas where they are looking at
the future development for these
uh these skill sets and these
degree programs. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative. We've got
Representative Ortez, thank you
for your patience and uh Senator
Wood's next. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, thank you so much for
mentioning uh Esteban, Esteban
Lopez. Um, I think it's really
remarkable. This is the first,
um, sort of integration of water
systems under their regional um
planning act and it's, it's
exciting and I think it'll be
way more efficient financially,
especially for those of us who
to those water systems in our
districts through capital
outlay, um, really focusing on a
system that can provide better,
cleaner, um, water, potentially
even cheaper to to those users I
think is is really remarkable.
Um, so thank you for that,
Deputy Trujillo. I just have a
question I want to dig in a
little bit more around the um
that 11 million. I I would like
to understand a little bit of
what the coalition building
means is that for Indian water
rights settlements or is that
for something else like for
watershed groups.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Vortez, the, um,
the group that's working on this
program and they on these
projects has a long list of, of
priorities that they have raised
their hand, like I said, and
said, hey, we would like more
funding to do a better job of
this. So it's coalition
building, it's the restoration
work and trying to figure out,
you know, how to protect and
maintain those watersheds that
we know are critical to our
water supplies. So, you know, we
purposefully, when we were
Doing this financing plan
project we purposefully tried to
pick good examples that could be
utilized across the state. And
so thinking about in this upper
Rio Grande basin, who are the
partners that are, that are
working on these and they could
be environmental groups, asses,
the pueblos, the soil and water
conservation groups like a big
variety of groups that are up
there. How can we help support
their ongoing efforts and again,
kind of infuse some additional
federal resources to that.
If we can. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So that money would go to
uh those individual groups, some
of those members to participate.
I just want to kind of better
understand what they're asking.
Are they looking for money for
Existing projects or on the
ground projects that could
happen.
Madam Chair and Representative
Ortez.
One, it's still in progress, so
we're trying to, to work through
those exact questions with this
project and 2, it could be both.
It could be trying to do
something concrete or that's
more um capacity building. So
one of the two would, would be a
possibility. Great. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I, it's so
important that we get funding to
those groups that are doing that
kind of work. It takes time. It
takes expertise, um, you know,
there are lots of groups that
exist in Taos right now.
Watershed Coalition and other
Rio Fernando coalition and it
has taken a big infusion of
mostly philanthropic dollars,
um,
to bring people together. I
believe firmly you have to pay
for people's time.
Um, if you want good results
and, uh, and I think, I think
that's important. I think we
should support that at the state
level as well. So thank you for
that.
OK, thank you, uh,
Representative, we've got, did
you need a response? I took a
little bit of a moment here to
decipher it something in the
paper. OK, Senator Woods, you're
next.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Sorry I was late to the dance.
to be less tardy from now on. We
missed you, Senator. We're glad
you're here. That's what
matters. It's not how it
started, it's how it ended.
There you go. There we go. I
appreciate that.
Just a couple of questions,
ladies, uh.
State engineer, and if you've
covered this already, I'll go
back and look at the tape so you
guys won't have to answer them
again.
State engineer requests 9.74
million or 28.5% increase.
4 FY 26.
So
For salary adjustments.
And then,
He also asked for a general fund
swap.
From the irrigation work
construction fund.
That's pretty common, isn't it?
That you asked for that swap?
Madam Chair and Senator Woods,
good to see you. The, the issue
of utilizing the trust funds for
our annual budgets is something
that's been going on for a while
and we've tried to address that
in prior legislative sessions.
We're making a request this year
to try to address the fact that
we need to use those trust funds
for their intended purpose and
we're trying to get.
General funds back to meet the
agency recurring needs. I hope
that answers your question.
Sorry, sir. Well, I think, I
think,
explain real quick how you get
the money put into the
irrigation work construction
fund. It's uh, it comes out of
another trust fund, doesn't it?
Or it comes out of, they explain
that real quickly.
Now I might I might apply for
that for that air quality job
out in Clovis if I don't get
this right, sir, so, uh, excuse
me, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator Woods, I know the, the
staff are, are experts on this,
but it does come from, um,
revenues generated associated
with state lands.
That's my understanding, and
they go to many, many, many
different sources, including our
schools, but there's some that's
designated specifically for our
two trust funds at the state
engineer office and Interstate
Stream Commission.
In the Rio Grande Trust Fund is
the same way.
Correct, Madam Chair, and
Senator Woods. That's correct.
And so instead of having to ask
for this swap every year like
this.
Have we ever tried to put that
into legislation just to make
that happen automatically.
And that you may not have that
knowledge, but yeah, Madam Chair
and Senator Woods, I
I think what what happened in
prior legislator, legislatures
was they moved money from the
trust funds to cover our
operational budgets and we're
trying to correct that. In other
words, to try to go back to
funding our operations through
our, our general fund sources
and then using the trust funds
for the purposes that they're
designated for, and that's what
we want to get, get back on
track, sir. OK.
OK.
The um.
There's a request for
Special appropriations, 400
million for the Indian water
rights settlements. What rivers
are we talking about? The real
grand.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Woods, that's a request to fund
obligations that the state has
in connection with the completed
Indian water rights settlement
so far, and as I mentioned
earlier that we have 6 bills
pending in Congress right now
to, to get those over the finish
line at the federal level, they
would leverage on the order of
$33 billion coming into our
state to, to implement those on
the state side, we have cost
share obligations.
as well and they um are request
this year is to infuse a $400
million
pot of money to be able to cover
the obligations, the 6
settlements are include
Okeowing, the Rio San Jose
settlements for Ama and Laguna,
there's a Navajo portion
associated with that as well and
um.
Rio Hemes.
I think I got him.
A few years ago I was sitting in
a cap outlay meeting and I
suggested.
We use some of that money. And
I was browbeat pretty hard.
The um
What are we going to use the 9
million in the Bakers River
settlement.
words that come.
Madam Chair and Senator Woods,
um, as you know, we have
implemented several programs to
be able to maintain compliance
with our Pecos River Compact
obligations and so our funding
request is oriented towards
accomplishing that and
continuing the progress that we
have in that basin. So the, you
know, we have well fields that
we operate and we have um.
Coordination that's going on on
a daily basis in that in that
basin with the Carlsbad folks
and the Roswell folks and the,
um, water needs in in between as
well. So would you call that
just operational money?
Madam Chair and Senator Woods,
the, um, request relating to
that in that $900 category is
our capital, one of our capital
requests, I believe, and that is
designed not only to cover Pecos
River issues, but also Rio
Grande issues and general
maintenance uh river channel
maintenance that is a priority
on a statewide basis. We had,
um, for example, this, this past
summer we had tremendous
challenges in the charma.
River below Abiquiu, we had to
engage and fund some of the
river maintenance, um, work up
there, and then throughout the
middle Rio Grande, we're doing
channel maintenance and and.
Projects to make sure we can
continue to get water down to
our communities and to meet our
compact obligations there. So
that that figure covers more
than just the paycos, sir.
In the last question, Madam
Chair, and I know that
That this is not something that
you
Directly handle.
But we talked a lot about water.
Data
And we passed a water Data Act.
And yet we haven't been able to
get the different agencies.
To
From what I understand, Madam
Chair, it's a, a process of
The data set in one agency is
not comparable to directly
transferred to another agency
and we're having trouble
communicating within agencies to
even
Accomplish this deal.
in,
I am,
and I kind of right about that
Woods since the passage of the
Water Data Act, uh, our agencies
have been working to coordinate
on that effort and the excellent
representatives out of New
Mexico Tech are leading that
coordination effort they put on
a tremendous uh conference every
year and they recently issued
their this most recent report.
On the water Data Act
implementation and I, I agree we
have room for improvement. We
still have to be working towards
doing better, but we have made
accomplishments and it's on our
mind for how to make sure we can
modernize the information that
we have and be able to speak the
same language across across
agencies. So it's a real, it's a
real issue, and it's one that
we're working to address.
So we're getting closer to that
point in time. OK.
And, and that all leads to the
fact of the, the, uh.
The aquifer mapping and that is
I'm assuming that would all kind
of tie up together when we get
that accomplished.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Woods, absolutely that's
a request that's coming from the
experts at New Mexico Tech, and
they have made presentations
about the ongoing needs that
they would have over the next
several years to make sure we
can accomplish the goal of
understanding that and
characterizing the groundwater
resources that we have
throughout the state.
OK. Thank you, Tanya.
I, uh, I had some other
questions, but I noticed the
environmental departments coming
up on the next panel.
So I'll hold my questions.
them on that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Tanya. All
righty, we're going to, we have
one more here, Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, aquifer Macy, uh, for the
past 11 years, Dr. Kate Ziegler
has been, uh, mapping the
awkward first in northeastern
New Mexico. Uh, I hope that
whatever their funding comes
forth to support, she works with
New Mexico Tech and and some of
the other institutions. Uh, I, I
put a good portion of my junior
money towards that project one
time got it vetoed, uh.
Because it had the word study in
it and I, I'm still, uh,
dumbfounded at how that
happened, but,
but uh
it, uh,
I, I hope there are some
existing programs, and that's
the one that I mostly know of,
and actually that has 11 years
of data in it, and I hope we
continue that,
uh, the water Da Act, I worked
with Melanie Stansbury to get
that thing rolling. You guys
are, I'm sure aware of that.
And what we want is comparable
data.
Same format.
Uh, same location.
Well, I start a project and I go
on my computer, ought to be able
to go to that location, get my
regional water plan,
get the river flow which is
monitored daily by the USGS and
is readily available if you go
to that website, so it ought to
be able to all be
available to me on my computer
when I started a project at that
one site and uh
So
Thank you, thank you guys for
keeping on working on that. I
appreciate it.
OK, thank you very much. I don't
have anyone else on the list and
just quick for the sake of time,
I'm going to be fast on what I
have to say because we have to
move on to the next item, but,
um, just quickly, Tanya, on
your, when you mentioned the
settlements that are going on at
the federal level and so on, and
we're talking about funding to
accommodate those and so on
educate me here. Isn't it the
case where the settlements have
to happen first before we know
how much money to request as
part of those.
Settlements in appropriate these
funds. I'm trying to visualize
what it'll all look like. Tell
me about it.
Quickly. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and the, you know, the issue of
Indian water rights settlements
is near and near to my heart
have been working on it my
entire 30 years of working in
this practice, and I think the
reality is that they they take a
long time to negotiate and then
we have, we, we prioritize the
fact that this is a federal
responsibility and we're, we're
prioritizing the fact that we're
leveraging the federal funding
associated with these.
So the general practice is that
a settlement is negotiated at
the local level that does
include the federal government
and the tribal representatives,
but also the non-tribal
representatives in the state. So
that settlement is negotiated,
but then because of that federal
responsibility, it relies on and
depends on the federal
congressional authorization and
federal funding and so what
that's a required step. There's
also a court approval.
Process that's required at the
state level, we have, um,
Non-federal funding
responsibilities and
requirements that are associated
with that in some of the
settlements that are in place,
there is a concept called early
funding, so there are there are.
State funding responsibilities
that can go forward during this
congressional process to fund
the federal portion of the
projects, so there's no one size
fits all. We try to always
negotiate the best kind of um
program and the the best circums
the best conditions that that
meet the requirements on the
ground, um, that there are, but
we, um, we really appreciate the
legislative support for for
getting these.
Done at the at the state side.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
And one of the reasons, Tanya,
that I asked, thank you for
explaining it. I ask this is
because the first part of the
presentation had to do with your
part integrated water financing
plan and then Rebecca moved on
to the rest, but the main in the
beginning, main topic of
discussion was the partners that
you're gonna have, uh, in
requesting these funds from the
federal government, um, or to
implement what the funds.
will do and uh I guess one of
the things in my mind, and I
think you may have clarified it
is that your part that you
presented on this integrated
water financing plan is to ask
for federal funds. Rebecca's was
state funds. And so in going
back to the federal fund
portion, it says here that one
of the partners, at least one is
the state. So I was putting two
prongs in my mind. One is the
federal funding and one is the
state.
But yet this one in federal
funding says state also. So I
was just trying to visualize how
the budget would look like, um,
if something was funded, I guess
in this case it seems like we
leave those requests for this to
the federal government through
you and then move on as we said
with Rebecca to the state. Tell
me a little in the briefing here
brief short answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
yeah, I'll try to be brief and
clarify that. um, the integrated
water financing plan in the
slide that you were referring to
about who's involved, those 16
federal agencies plus state
partners, um, that is focused,
not, not really on the Indian
rights water rights settlements
piece, but rather um uh this
whole suite of federal agencies
that manage federal grant
programs and other sorts of
federal funding. Like the
Environmental Protection Agency.
The Department of Interior, Army
Corps of Engineers. Um, there's
all this federal money out there
that generally flows in um from
one federal agency to one local
or state entity that's the
recipient of the money. That
project and the state role in it
is to see how can we um change
the status quo of how federal
money flows into the state for
water projects and integrate an
EPA grant with a Bureau of
Reclamation grant with an Army
Corps of Engineers grant to take
the
3 grants, put them together and
fully fund a state priority. So
the state partners in that
integrated water financing plan
project, are there to guide the
federal partners as to what our
state priorities are, um, and
it's not just state agencies
that are doing that. It's um our
stakeholder and you know, tribal
partners and others who are
involved in that planning
process.
Thank you very much for
explaining that. It's clear
always that you can't explain
everything on paper, right? So
that's good that we can talk
about it like this and I'm gonna
move on, but I do have just one
thing that I have to bring up,
OK, on your um data, um, your
aquifer mapping the data we're
talking about for mapping and
monitoring, um, you're asking
for 100 or you need 175 million,
but it's for 12 years and I
Yes the the question that I have
is why would the aquifer mapping
take?
12 years I I guess I'm just
trying to think, it seems like
if we're going to map we need to
know what's what we're mapping,
what's there now so we can rely
on that data, um, like in the
most short time that we can so
we can use it for the future. In
other words, have a template,
the data we need, and then move
on from there. But is this
gonna, did you mean to say here
that it would take 12 years to
do this mapping or just the
funding request will spread out
for 12 years. Maybe you can
explain it.
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you for the clarifying
question and it's not a mistake.
It's 12 years because that's
what the experts, the
hydrologists and geologists say
is the fastest we could go if we
fully fund their work and their
programs. Um, I am not a
hydrologist, but what I can tell
you, they've explained to me is
that in part based on the
complexity of geology in the
state of New Mexico,
it the that complexity of our
actual geology leads to a high
complexity.
And how we drill, where we have
to drill, how deep we have to
drill, how many wells we have to
drill in a particular aquifer to
overtime systematically get all
the data flowing together for
one aquifer, for one basin that
we need in order to, as they say
in, in the, um, technical space
fully characterize that single
aquifer. So, and these are deep
aquifers and shallow aquifers,
freshwater and brackish, all of
that scope.
is included in that 12 year
timeline and 12-year estimated
cash need.
OK, thank you very much for that
and uh just a point of, um.
I guess a statement more than
anything from my end here is
that I visualize over a decade
here, 12 years, and so much
changes within that time. We see
changes from one year to the
next, let alone a decade and 2
more years here and it just
makes me wonder how much of what
we're going to do today is still
going to be useful and there
that we can depend on the data
accurate enough 10 years from
now to complete and continue
with this mapping. Do you know
what I'm saying, Rebecca and
Tanya.
Um, but I know what you've
mentioned about the hydrologist,
but tell me again, Tanya, and
then we move on. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I'll just add,
you know, we're working on
regional planning and I want to
highlight Hannah Riseley White,
who's here, uh, the director of
the Interstate Sream Commission.
We're working on regional
planning with communities around
the state to make sure they can
have reliable supplies of water
into the future and it's not
just this next decade, it's the
decade of the decade of the
decade after that, and the
community.
that rely on groundwater
resources. One is to do the best
job possible in understanding
the amount of water that is
going to be available for their
communities into the future to
help them decide how to best
utilize those resources. And so
I know, you know, the technical
experts are always thinking
about how can they do things
better, how can they use the
best available science to answer
that question, how much water is
available for us into the
future. Thank you very.
Much for that, Tanya and I can
see we agree that it has to be
where we do everything we can to
ensure that that we have water
forever. The future is forever,
and adequate water and clean
water, of course, too, as we all
want, but, um, the 12 years down
below in parentheses is what
confused me and it seems like
you're looking at if I can say
it and correct me as I'm going
to make sure I understand.
You're looking at planning this
and doing all this aquifer
mapping.
Continuously for 12 years and
then it would that mapping and
data you collect and monitor
should last for the future. To
me it would be.
Future would be many, many
years, or is that kind of what
you're saying here? Hannah's
nodding her head back there, can
I, is that OK, yes, tell me,
yes, so is it, yeah, Madam
Chair, I just wanted to respond
in that the 12 years is to get
us to a point where we can say
every one of our aquifers in the
state of New Mexico has been
characterized. We understand how
much is there, we understand
what the quality is, um, and
then there is an ongoing need to
then maintain.
all of that data and the reports
and analysis that comes from it
to ensure that over time as
conditions change, we're
continuing to maintain and
update the aquifer maps that
have been drawn. If it's 10
years ago that we characterized
a given aquifer. There's ongoing
data collection and analysis
happening over time to make sure
that at whatever point we're
making decisions about how to
manage our water resources.
We're relying on the best.
Possible aquifer data and
characterization available to
us.
Thank you. I think you've
clarified it very well in
indicating that you're looking
at for the future, maintaining
and updating consistently what
needs to be done. See, the way
we, I saw this anyway was it's a
one picture thing, one time
thing, and then just hope for
the future that this is
adequate. That's not how we
work. So thank you for
explaining it and I'm not gonna
ask any more comment because
we're running out of time. So I
want to say thank you for that
and we are going to move on to
the next um item.
Um, because we started so late
and this one is on strategic
water supply, uh, and you know
what, beef, yes, Secretary
Kenny, you can come up and let
me see who else I had here
before I let this other man go
from here, Rebecca, you're on
again and who else? I can't see
anymore. Sid Sydney, yes,
there we go.
Liz, OK, Liz, there we go. Thank
you. Yes, you can come up and
you know, before I do, this is
probably a little bit out of the
ordinary.
Uh, but I did promise this
gentleman who has been sitting
here in the audience when we
first walked in trying to grab
our sandwich in 10 minutes here
before we started here.
He asked if there was a
possibility that he could say a
few words. He said he would take
45 minutes, 45 seconds, not
minutes. Seconds. And so, um,
because he had to leave, um,
have something having to do with
his grandson, so I'm going to
accommodate his request because
I, yes, and I know he has
special needs and, and we need
to accommodate him, so yes, you
can state your name for the
record and my name is Bob
Wesley. I'm
retired systems engineer from
Las Vegas.
And uh thank you for giving me a
chance to comment.
Uh, I'd like to talk about
principles, that's principles
with an L E, not an AL on the
end.
That
Uh,
Treating bad water.
is not going to do us much good.
Unless we first
Take good care of our good
water.
And bad water.
Is
Blackish, limited groundwater.
Bad water is toxic produced
water.
Bad water is
Expensive imported water.
Good water is a river water.
Our freshwater.
Uh
Aquifers.
And we used urban water.
And
In order to take care of our
good water.
Please.
Fund
The
Uh,
fund the implementation.
Of the regional water security
Planning Act.
It probably needs to be
effective several times what the
executive has put in their
budget request.
Thank you for the comment, and I
think I've made 45 seconds.
Thank you so much for
accommodating our request to for
the time and appreciate your
comments very much. Thank you.
Now you can go take care of you
and your grandson. We're going
to move on to the item, um, that
we're on here and so good to see
you again, secretary, uh
Secretary Kenny and of course,
Rebecca and tell me your name
again to your left. I have it
here.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, my name is
Elizabeth Anderson. Anderson,
thank you, Elizabeth. OK, all
right. You can proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, um, I'm going
to start off our, um, joint
presentation. You, you should
have one set of slides, um, for
this topic and uh I'll start off
presenting, then turn it over to
Secretary Kenny and our state
engineer designate Liz Anderson,
um, will be available uh for
question and answer. So that's
how we'll proceed with our
presentation. So jumping right
in.
We're here to speak with you
again. I'm glad to come back
around to the water subcommittee
to talk about the strategic
water supply, uh, initiative
that the governor and some of
our agencies, um, first
announced and launched leading
up to the 30 day session, uh,
and that, um, garnered a lot of
discussion during the
legislative session this year,
both on the funding and the
policy side, and um we're here
to tell you a little bit more
about what
We've been busy doing so far in
the interim session, um, answer
questions and kind of lay out
the the broad strokes and
concepts around the strategic
water supply, including the
policy drivers for it and, um,
and let you know what, what
we're still working on and
things to come in the coming
months as as we prepare um an
updated proposal for the
legislature. So on the second
slide, uh, starting off again
with a 50 yard water action plan
framing.
Um, a bit of, uh, more detail
than what we talked about in in
the prior panel, but in the
50-year water action plan.
There's 3 buckets of priority
activities that the governor and
executive identified in that
plan. The first bucket is water
conservation, which we're not
really going to spend time on,
um, today, uh, the second bucket
is this one on slide 2, about a
new water supply and the third
bucket is
Washed and water protection
again, not the focus of our
strategic water supply
presentation. So I just wanted
to frame that we're in one of
the three buckets here around
the new water supply, and
there's 3 actions within that
that really relate together and
that we think of as the
three-legged stool of how can we
help to address our um
increasingly, um,
Uh
Uh significant uh changes in
water availability that the
climate science and data says
we're facing as a state through
increased edification, more
severe drought, etc. So in order
to explore new water supply as a
one piece of the puzzle for
making sure we've got a vibrant
communities and healthy
economies and um safe water in
50 years into the future and
beyond. There are these three
pieces that go together.
Um, the first is establishing
the strategic water supply,
which we'll talk about in more
detail on the next slides. The
second interrelated action is
the policy and regulatory
framework for water reuse and um
and also for um brackish water
drilling and permitting, etc.
Um, but predominantly on the
water reuse side and the third
piece is the science, the under
the underlying science around
aquifer mapping and monitoring.
Which we just talked about in in
the context of funding needs.
And we see these three things
are so interrelated, um, that
the strategic water supply as we
unpack that further is really
critically dependent on strong
regulatory and policy frameworks
that are informed by good data
and science and um in in
increasing and consistent
investment in the science
itself. And so, uh, mapping our
aquifers, characterizing more
our aquifers over the coming
years is really important for us
to better understand where is
there brackish water available
for us to tap into to meet water
needs and offset freshwater
demands and in what quantities
and at what depth. So what's
going to cost to tap into those
brackish aquifers. So that
mapping and and characterization
piece is really important. So
you've got a policy component
and funding and programmatic
component with the strategic
water supply married up with the
Policy and rulemaking for reuse
and the the underlying science,
particularly for our brackish
water.
So then on to the next slide,
um.
I wanted to just really quickly
frame before Secretary Kenny
explains the strategic water
supply and our latest work on it
in more detail. Um, why we're
here, why are we talking about a
strategic water supply for the
state of New Mexico.
And uh it's, it's the confluence
of these three.
Uh components in this Venn
diagram on slide 3. It's, it's a
coming together of preserving
freshwater at the same time
we're advancing a clean energy
transition, which in many of the
target industries and sectors is
water intensive and it's tied to
our opportunities to diversify
our economy as we do that to
make sure that we have thriving
economic sectors beyond the oil
and gas sector.
Going into, you know, the years
and decades to come.
And so where these three key
priority areas for the governor
and for our team meet is where
we find opportunities in the
strategic water supply. And uh
again, Secretary Kenny is going
to go through kind of the nuts
and bolts of it, but what we're
looking to do is use the state
policy and funding to advance
opportunities to leverage
brackish water treatment.
And putting that bracket treated
brackish water into new uses
offsetting freshwater supply and
um with appropriate scientific
and regulatory standards in
place advance produced water
treatment and reuse for needs
associated with that clean
energy transition and advanced
manufacturing and to do that in
a way that is strategic and that
shows that we as a state are
meeting our water needs.
At the same time as we're
steering these new supply
sources of water to these
priority areas, our clean energy
transition and diversifying our
economy. So that interplay
between those three things I
think is really important as to
why are we even having these
conversations in the first
place, not to mention the fact
that you know there are other
key policy drivers that that are
tied up in this. I think you
heard some about the work of the
oil conservation division
earlier.
From acting Deputy Ben Shelton,
um, and we have
Uh,
significant uh supply or um or
uh significant amount of
produced water that's generated
by the oil and gas sector in New
Mexico and uh and there's some
issues and concerns around how
that water is best managed
effectively. Some concerns about
induced seismicity. So there's a
number of different policy
drivers beyond these top three
that were able to get into and
and start to address with a
program
That is that of the strategic
water supply as proposed to move
us farther as a state to meet
these needs. Well again,
preserving our freshwater
supply. So, um, that's my
initial framing and I'll turn it
over to Secretary Kenny. Thanks,
Rebecca.
Uh, good afternoon, um.
Glad to be back in this water,
uh, subcommittee and, um, just
before I begin, I just want to
say that
we came out sort of fast and
furious in in and bold with the
strategic water supply last
year, um, we went through the 30
day session, we heard a lot of
input from a lot of different
people, and I think Fast and
Furious is the way we all want
to move on water, but scientific
smart policy driven, all those
under underscore.
Uh, what the strategic water
supply should represent for all
of us, and with that, I just
want to assure you that we are
taking feedback in on this
particular leg of the of the
strategic water supply, and we
continue to integrate and fold
in that information that we're
hearing from stakeholders, from
legislators, um, industry, and,
and just anyone who's who's
reaching out to us with, with
that in mind, and I'm going to
reference a document that I
believe was handed out to you.
We're gonna get to this a little
bit later, but just know that
this this document, um, a
feasibility study that came out
this week, I think is evidence
of, of us moving in a direction
where we're trying to integrate
feedback and we're trying to
solicit more feedback as we move
forward. But as we proposed the
strategic water supply, um, as
Rebecca just indicated, uh, are
we, did we advanced slides?
Thank you. Thank you for doing.
me. Um,
so the overview of
strategic water supply, um, I
think Rebecca laid out a a good
contextual way in which it fits
together, but we, we know a few
things that are just fact in in
the state of New Mexico that our
reservoirs and groundwater
supplies are just simply not
recharging.
Um, at any sufficient rate at
this point we're estimated to
have over 200 billion acre feet
of brackish water under New
Mexico, uh, a resource that we
haven't tapped yet as a state
while other states and countries
are looking into that.
Um, and we have nearly 2 billion
barrels of produced water
generated annually as a result
of oil field usage. So with
respect to the brackish water
and produced water, we'll talk
about those here, and I'm gonna
focus for a moment on produced
water and as Rebecca indicated,
you know, we do need a strong
regulatory scheme around produce
water and we have those rules
right now before the WQCC and
we're moving in that direction
to continue to add to those over
time.
If the commission adopts those
rules, but we also need to still
figure out what we're going to
do with produced water because,
and here's some just data that I
want to share with you that um
oil and gas and I think Ben
Shelton addressed this this
morning at in OC from OCD, um,
that about 65% of all the water
used in oil and gas operator,
gas operations, um, is about
produced water. So we've really
driven the focus to move,
produce water.
into the to offset freshwater
usage like we're really pushing
on that as a state that produced
water helped with the produce
water act helped with that
tremendously. But and that's
about 249 million barrels of
produced water that are in that
reuse uh category in oil and
gas. And if we were to push that
forward further if we would try
to get that 65% throttled up to
say 95% that would go from about
249 million barrels to about
364.
1 million barrels. OK, so it's
95% of the produced water used
back in oil and gas operations.
Here's the remainder. It's 1.9
billion barrels of produced
water that have a place to go
still.
So, so, a significant amount of
produced water, even at 95%
reuse still has to be managed
properly and you know, sitting
before you, you have the.
Wantity person and the quality
person of water in the state of
New Mexico, so we're, we're
sitting here together saying
that that 1.9 billion barrels of
produced water, we can't let it
affect adversely our.
Aquifers and we do have to
manage it properly, um, as a
state.
So I'm gonna just advance to the
next slide.
As, as we indicated, there's a
lot of produced, there's a lot
of opportunity for water reuse
in the state of New Mexico and
you know, as we target sectors
for what are high probability or
high highly likely to for good
water reuse candidates. Um,
we've identified that we should
really be focusing in on the
clean energy production and
storage projects, advanced
manufacturing, um, and then
supporting the, the work of the
federal government.
To as they onshore and expand uh
through various BIL and IRA, um,
legislation and recipients of
those funds, really ensuring
that they are using produce uh
sorry, reusing, uh, that they're
using, they're not using
freshwater, let's say it that
way. It's easiest for me to say
it that way, that they're not
using freshwater, um.
We want to see as much reuse in
the state of New Mexico as
possible and that gives us the
opportunity within the strategic
water supply to focus on those
brackish and produced waters. In
this, um, feasibility study, you
don't have to turn to it right
now and we'll talk about it a
little bit more here in another
moment, but I would just like to
point out that section 4.4 on
page 39 of this document, if you
just want to note that, we start
laying out how things like um.
Data centers.
Quantitatively could offset
their fresh water usage. So
we're trying to give you numbers
of freshwater gallons or barrels
that could be conserved by
switching to water reuse, so I,
I just wanted to highlight for
you while we're on this slide,
and while we're talking about
water reuse opportunities in
these clean energy sectors are
advanced manufacturing sectors
that that section correlates
strongly here actually all of
Chapter 4 does, but um, that,
that's a good reference point.
And I just want to give you one
more visual as we start to turn
this slide or turn, go to the
next slide.
Is that uh for just look at like
the energy transition Act as we
move to less carbon intensive
energy in the power sector we're
going to embrace things that are
inherently going to use water,
so do we want to continue to use
fresh water as ETA accelerates,
or do we want to focus on water
reuse as ET ETA accelerates. So
those are just some things that
we're really trying to draw the
synergies between our policy.
And uh legislative agendas to
come, come together,
uh, lastly, I think before we
turn into our, our last slide,
so we're on the overview of the
strategic water supply program,
um, options for structure and
really what we're trying to
highlight here is that, you
know, we're still soliciting
feedback. We came out strong
with saying that advanced market
commitments might be the right
focus for this and in using an
advanced market commitment that
was talking about the use of
Severance tax bond, um, funds in
the last session. It's not the
only option. There are other
options for how we fund the
strategic water supply. It's
often talked about in, in the
economics circles as do we want
a pull or push mechanism. So the
pole mechanism would be
something like an advanced
market commitments we pull
people along to that desired
outcome or we could kind of push
people and corral them into a
better a different economic
Um, and we're soliciting
feedback from uh yeah, we're
soliciting feedback on, on what
those models might look like. So
while we started with the
advanced market commitment as
laid out on the slide were also
entertaining other options on
how we should fund the strategic
water supply as we move forward,
getting ready for the 60 day
session.
That brings us to the very last
slide, I believe, in the slide
deck. Rebecca, am I turning back
to you or should we just keep
going? OK, um, this last slide
is probably the good jumping off
point for where we're, where
we're actually at and where
we're going, so you can see on
this slide there's 4 boxes, um,
that we're focused in on, uh,
We are in the first box as you
might remember from prior
presentations, we put out a
request for information and
received 50 responses to that.
Um, that was as we contemplated
going into the 30 day session,
how, how should we fund the
strategic water supply. What's
the art of the possible in terms
of uh brackish and produced
water. We have those 50
responses on our website and
they they were fed into our
feasibility study and help.
Shape that which we again just
released this week. The second
box is just that the feasibility
study where we, we summarized um
both through a contractor
researching the the technical
and economic focus of a
strategic water supply as well
as those 50 responses, feedback
from various stakeholders. We
pulled all that together and and
published this um document again
that's before you for public
input, uh, really.
Focusing on technical, economic,
and legal feedback is what we're
soliciting. It's open for 30
days as of this week, and we
encourage everybody who's
listening to take a look at this
document and and um give us some
feedback on it. One of the, I
think one of the things that was
missing in the 30 day session
that has now sort of started to
get answered is where how much
fresh water can we actually
save? We modeled it. I, I would
say in the 50 year water action
plan, and now we're present
some options based on the
current regulatory landscape and
thinking about the future
regulatory landscape of where
we're going in the state. Um,
finally, on, or I should say on
the 3rd bucket there, continued
discussions with stakeholders,
legislators, etc. um, we
started, we continued that at
the symposium that we had down
in Las Cruces. There's talk of
doing another symposium maybe in
Albuquerque here at these
interim sessions we're hoping to
continue the discussion with you
all.
About the strategic water supply
and um again, meetings with
different stakeholders to bring
that all together, um.
Yeah, uh, I'll come back. I know
Representative Ortez had a
question about that last time I
was in front of her. And then
finally developing legislation.
So we're at a, we're at a place
now that while this document is
out for public comment or public
input, we're we're going to sit
down and start drafting a, a
revised piece of legislation on
the strategic water supply as
referenced by Che Munoz and and
others I heard Rebecca say it,
that we have non-recurring
funding in the environment
department.
Budget for the strategic water
supply. I believe it went in at
$250 million. Um, and, and what
those funds look like and how
we're going to obviously that
goes in his general fund, um,
but how we ultimately put the
program together is still a, a,
a wet clay moment, as I like to
say, we're still shaping it
based on the the feedback that
we're getting.
Um,
I think that might be everything
that I wanted to cover here, uh,
but I'll just turn it back to
my.
Panelists and see if I missed
anything that they were hoping
that I was going to hit.
OK,
thank you. Thank you very much,
very eloquent and explicit. Um,
OK, let me write down a name I
have to put down here before I
move on and I don't want to
forget anybody, OK, uh, we're
gonna go on to Representative
Saraa, and then we got
representative Chatfield and
Senator Neville.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I think you're correct when
you last year when you brought
this to us, it was just rushed.
I even, I called and said,
explain it to me, explain it to
us, and we never heard back. So
yes, we did need an explanation
because we weren't just going to
give you money for something we
didn't understand. So my
question is, you know,
The gas and oil industry created
this toxic water. Are we asking
them to pay to clean it up at
all? Or is it just paying other,
other, other people. What what
are we doing there? And, and why
haven't we if we we're not?
Yeah, so, um.
Madam Chair, and, and
representative,
I, I like the, the, the, the
directness and simplicity of the
question you're asking and, and
I'm trying to think of how to be
both direct and simplistic in my
answer, you know, concise, etc.
Um, I think we have asked oil
and gas to clean up their
wastewater because or or they
produced water, um.
In the sense that the produce
Water Act gave them the, the,
you know, kind of gave them the
direction to reuse it, so they
had some obligation there, um.
There's also a a focus at the
federal level right now about
cleaning up produced water and a
study that's going on at the
federal level for an effluent
limit guideline, basically a
discharge of of treated produced
water as well that that just was
announced by EPA in the last
month or so, so they're focusing
on regulating that to get it to
discharge standards as well. And
then we are water reuse rules
are in
In fact, in some way that I know
some would argue with me that
that it's not that, but, but it
is in that asking them to clean
up and address their produced
water and and cleaning it up
that way. Um.
The other piece of this is that
we can regulate that and we are
moving in that direction.
There's also an incentive for
the industry to mind their own
produced water and figure out
how they can bring it up to a
spec that they can either
continue to use it or pull
beneficial minerals out of it,
um, which inherently does clean
it up, so.
Ultimately, we, we, I don't
think we ever thought we were
paying for it because the
original proposal was the use of
the severance tax that that
they're paying on their own.
You know, um, severing of that
mineral and therefore the
produced water treatment would
have been paid for by that or
with that approach, um.
So we're we're still in the,
the, the position of
Modeling this a little bit more
again with our feasibility study
and trying to figure out how do
we thread that needle. Um, we've
even talked a little bit about
the, the disposal of produced
water in in saltwater disposal
wells, you know, the state
doesn't receive any funding from
that. We permit that through
Mnerd those wells, but we're not
taking um a per barrel, uh,
disposal fee as the state of New
Mexico from that. So that's
another thought.
We're entertaining as well.
Rebecca, did you want to add
anything?
Um, no, Madam Chair,
Representative Serena, I was
going to add that last point
which I had mentioned in the
prior panel as well as one of
the things that we're exploring,
still trying to think about the
link between what type of um,
uh, industrial wastewater in
this case, oil and gas produced
water. We're talking about
treating and reusing and what's
the the right policy approach to
connect the the funding for any
such um projects and programs
back to the industry itself. So,
Um, that's very much on our
minds as we continue putting our
proposals together. Thank you.
One other question, Madam Chair.
So when it is recycled, how much
are we getting back? How much
produced water are we getting
back once it's recycled and used
again.
For
Do we know? It's not that
important if you don't know.
Madam Chair, Representative
Sean, if I understand your
question correctly, I don't have
that figure in front of me, um,
at the end of, uh, produced
water recycling,
uh, train, there's some amount
that is yet still needing to be
disposed of, uh, if, if that's
what you're getting at. I just
don't have the quantity, but we
could follow up with, um, energy
and minerals and, and get that
to you. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, move on to
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam Chair,
Had a chance to look over the 50
year water plan, uh, look
forward to reading the
feasibility study, uh,
I assume that this feasibility
study is pointing towards a more
Direct plan for the future, is
that true or?
Um, Madam Chair, and, and
representative, it's pointing
towards, um, what are our what
what areas of the state would
best be served by water reuse,
including treated brackish and
treated produced water. It's,
it's pointing in that direction,
um, it's also saying to the
extent that the state of New
Mexico is going to continue to
develop, um, it's, it's, it's
going to continue to focus on
its economic development, um,
sectors that are heavy water
users, data centers.
uh,
advanced energy, advanced
manufacturing
this is, this feasibility study
kind of makes recommendations,
if you will, um, in, in how to
do that more successfully.
So Madam Chair, are we going to
come up with a plan that says
next year we're gonna start
treating many gallons of water.
We need so many dollars to do
that, uh, next year we're going
the year after that we're going
to restore the watershed at the
head of the Rio Grande, uh, a
A pretty concise plan. Are we
going there sometime? And if so,
will we have some public input,
an opportunity for not
He
Everybody to for communities to
decide what they want to do. I
realize we have the regional
water plants. I don't know where
they are, how you
see them but I think that's the
reason for the water Data Act. I
participated in creating them,
but I haven't seen them since.
OK, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Chatfield, um,
the, uh, to your question of are
we, are we on, uh, putting
together a more specific plan
around specific projects and
specific locations in New Mexico
that need a specific amount of
funding. I think, um, in part
that's what we're aiming toward,
you know, drawing on all of the,
the input around what priorities
and water needs that we've, we,
we together as the executive and
the legislature of priority.
has over the past few years, but
when it comes to state level
action. There's so many
different types of local and
regional needs around water
issues, it is hard to gather up
all of those at a state level
and lay them all out in a single
plan and, uh, and then start
chipping away at it, right
through funding and that's
partly why I appreciate you
bringing up the regional water
planning process. So here's my
attempt.
Uh explaining how these things
fit together, OK? We're gonna
have, um, we're trying to move
some bold and strategic state
level priorities like funding,
different programs that are
called out in the 50-year water
plan, such as aquifer mapping,
such as the strategic water
supply, while simultaneously
funding and investing in the
regional water planning process
that is, um, underway, being
implemented through the
Interstate stream Commission
with input from thousands.
of New Mexicans and stakeholders
across the state and that as
those regional water planning,
uh, regions are identified and
the regional water plans start
to be developed, they're going
to inform from the local level,
from those experts. What are the
challenges? What are the
solutions, and how can we rely
on existing state programs and
funding sources to put that
regional water plan into action.
So we set the state
programs and funding priorities
in a way that once those
regional water plans mature and
come along, they can see what
trust board here, strategic
water supply over here, the
strategic Water reserve is going
to help us address this. Our ag
water conservation programs are
going to help us address this,
and it starts to fit together
like a puzzle. So that's my best
articulation of how these big
picture initiatives ultimately
get put into action at the local
level with input from
the people who know their region
and their water resources the
best. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Rebecca, that
that puts my mind at ease
because since we started this
process. I just keep like
waiting for that thing, uh, you
know, where do we come from?
Where are we at, and where do we
want to go? Uh, that's the
regional water plan's job, and
this is more of a 50,000 ft
level type of.
Document in in in that that I
can understand and, and that I
did not understand, so
thank you. OK, thank you very
much, um, representative, next
we have uh Senator Neville, and
then we've got our chairmall who
um has some questions and then
we got Representative Lujan and
Senator Campos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, we
didn't, I hadn't heard the word,
maybe it's in there somewhere,
but we haven't talked about
adjudication.
And how does it fit into all
this? We don't know who owns the
water or if it's not all figured
out, doesn't that need to be
resolved in this, in this
process in some form or fashion,
form or fashion. I stayed
engineer, I guess.
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Neville, that, that's certainly
part of the process. There is a
process for evaluating whether
or not a well could be drilled
for a bracket to retrieve
brackish water for the purposes
of the strategic water supply
and um and so as part of that
process that goes with the state
through the state engineer's
office, they would evaluate if
there's any impacts to other
wells, other water rights, um,
they would evaluate well
construction. There's all of
these different components that
are built in
And just like with with other
permitting processes.
But are the where are we at on
the adjudications around the
state? I know ours is pretty
well done, but it's because it
wasn't that far off, but it's
still the last time I heard
anybody say it was still years
and years before it's going to
be done.
It depends, yeah, that, I mean,
a lot of the Indian water rights
settlements are driving
um driving some of those
discussions, but there's,
there's a lot of work left to be
done for adjudications, OK. The
other thing, uh, Secretary Kenny
mentioned, for example, a
disposal well charging a barrel
fee or whatever if on a you'd,
you'd permit the well, the
injection well.
And I, it makes sense to me that
you it costs you $5000 10,000
dollars, whatever to do the
work, you would charge for that
that amount to get the permit
issued by the time you did the
research or whatever you need. I
don't have any problem with
that, but what is the
justification for charging the
barrel charge?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, um,
The justification would be that
we're looking at new ways at
water to to fund the 50 year
water action plan, conservation,
as well as um.
Things like the strategic water
supply. There it was clear,
Madam Chair, and senator even
with um representative Serina's
question and what we heard
during the the 30 day session is
the funding mechanism for the
strategic water supply, should
it be severance tax or should it
be general fund, or should it be
an a fee industry pays, should
it have a driver behind it that
causes more conservation from
the industry as well as greater
recycling rates.
So there, there's a lot of
policy, I guess, behind thinking
about a per barrel fee.
I'm not an oil man, but I do buy
a lot of oil when I put it in my
car and it costs $3.25 or
something to do that now. Any
any unnecessary charges just
adds to that, and I just from
the consumer standpoint, I was
just concerned that if, if it
was not a necessary charge. I
understand the goals you're
talking about achieving, but if
it's not particularly doing
that, if it's only a charge just
to generate funds for the
department. I'm not sure I agree
with that, but I've just trying
to understand what the
justification.
That's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Did you
need a response, Senator, we do,
would you like to respond
quickly, please. Thank you Madam
Chair and Senator, I appreciate
your input on that, um.
We're we're looking at
everything. I think in the last
panel you heard that we're
trying to think of how do we
sustain funding, um, and, and
not just rely on general fund
and I think this goes into that
bucket of being creative and
looking what other states and
and the state, this state could
be doing differently.
But I understand your point.
Thank you very much. We've got
Chairman Small and
Then represent Luhanna Campos,
as I said. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you all very, uh.
Very, very much, um, first
really excited to see the
feasibility study the draft.
Thank you for releasing it. I
think there's, I've seen uh a
lot of work to engage to refine,
to explore and take in all
input, which is great. It's all
that is what we should expect
and ask for and we see it time
and again delivered particularly
in this water space, which is
great. Uh, 2, I wanted to go
back to something that um Ms.
talked about infrastructure
director,
um, that is the idea that even
if sort of 99.9, say 100% of
water used in oil and gas is
shifted from fresh or sort of
non-treated produced water
sources to produce water.
There's still a large leftover
amount that, uh, that wouldn't
be utilized for.
That purpose.
I, I forget that sort of ratio
or the sort of
general amount that you gave and
so I wanted to ask about that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Small, um, yeah,
so that piece and on slide.
Or, um, where we talk about the
water sources. The last bullet
there says nearly 2 billion
barrels are data based on
2023 levels is 1.9 billion
barrels to be more precise, of
produced water is generated
annually beyond what can
potentially be reused in the oil
field. So that is based on a
scenario of 95% if we get the
oil and gas sector in New Mexico
to reach 95% of water um for
fracking is recycled produced
water and we're at 95%, not 100%
based on the need to use fresh
water through certain parts of
the drilling.
process to protect um freshwater
resources underground. Um, so if
we were at 95% reuse which our
experts say is about what we
think we're aiming for to
maximize, produce water
recycling in the field. There's
1.9 billion barrels of water
that's got to go somewhere and
the majority of it today is
being injected and um in
underground injection disposal
wells in New Mexico or in Texas.
That's right. And with a great
deal of that and the
Previous hearing showed that
that the majority of that
actually being shipped to Texas,
um, so, uh, that's super
helpful, Madam Chair, I think
that.
Underlines for me and I think
just sort of really focuses us
all that there's a very
important standard that we're
going towards and goal of reuse,
but that there is such a massive
delta even after we reach that
first very important goal.
Um,
That that sort of.
Without action is a no action is
an action, right? No action
means more water going on the
highways headed down, you know,
down these deep injection wells
either in New Mexico or in
Texas, and Secretary.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Chairman
Small just going back to Senator
Neville's point, and it, it's
causing me to think here a
little bit about your question
and Senator Neville's point
about a per barrel disposal
cost. So just generally speaking
you would hear from industry
that 55% of their operational
costs are with the movement of
water.
So with 1.9 billion barrels out
there, um.
That that there's probably a
good economic study to think
about that if you had to move
your water from New Mexico to
Texas versus pay 10. I, I'm just
making this up so I know I'm
gonna get quoted, but I, we've
not talked about this, but let's
say it was 10 cents a barrel
disposal fee that the state was
collecting to in order to manage
and dispose of that water here
versus having to put it in a
truck and move it to Texas, you
know, your logistics cost of
moving it may be more expensive
than.
Your disposal fee here. So those
are the kind of economic um.
Iterations that we're trying to
get our hands around so that we
can successfully figure out how
to solve the, I'll say seismic
environmental problems we have
while at the same time fund
conservation, strategic water
supply, so I, I wasn't thinking
that way until you both asked
questions that kind of got me
thinking about it, but those are
the kinds of things we're really
looking at. Got it, Madam Chair.
Thank you. That's super helpful,
and I think um the fact that
we're having this in an open
conversation, uh, I think is
very.
Positive and helpful and shows
that were, you know, working in
ultimately a collaborative and
very open way trying to
understand and then share these
massive challenges that are also
really important opportunities
and you know, things that were
dealing with every single day
we're gonna be dealing with more
of them, both from a freshwater
scarcity perspective and that
sort of the
amount of both produced water
and brackish water and that
you're helping us tackle them,
we're in here with the budget
director and incredible memos
from LSC to sort of really work
on, uh, uh, an approach I think
is very or continue working in a
successful way on on work that
we've all been doing for a
while, but to take a very big
next step. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
My thought was I'm sorry, my
thought was if, if you're not
actually incurring a cost.
Then you shouldn't be charging
whoever, the oil company or
whatever, a disposal fee because
that comes back to me, the
consumer.
And I think we have an
obligation to try to protect the
consumers and not just generate
dollars all the time. I mean if
they're necessary, go for it,
but if it's not necessary,
that's all. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
All righty, we're gonna go on to
uh Representative Lujan and then
we've got Senator Campos, the
representative of Chatfield, and
as we indicated earlier, the
time, um, to that we will be out
will be 4:30 as indicated on the
agenda. So thank you
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you to
presenters, um.
Uh, this.
Really impressive. I'm glad you
gave us this information. So I'm
going through this I'm a couple
of questions I'm just gonna get
into it. How many gallons of
produced water are in a barrel.
How many gallons in a barrel.
Mad, Madam Chair and I
represented 42 gallons or in a
barrel.
Thank you. I've been looking for
that through this data. It's
just going, it's just indicating
barrels and all that
information, and then I'm going
over, Madam Chair, in this
report that we received. This is
why I'm looking at the um.
This report and the page.
39 through
42, it looks like, and it's
giving us the examples of the
use of oil and gas, um, um, and
the savings and estimated
freshwater savings on each
example that you're going
through. So,
It's telling us how much fresh
water per gallons that were
you're referencing here, but how
many
Gallons of the produced water
are going to be used in each of
these examples, I guess is what
I'm trying to estimate because
those are two very distinct
things is that referenced
anywhere that I can find Mr.
Madam Chair. Yeah, um.
Madam Chair and representative,
and I know you just got this and
we're happy to kind of go over
it with you in more detail for
sure, um, but essentially in
each of the examples that are
laid out here, you'll see
exactly under the example
there's there's an estimate
about how much fresh water would
be saved in gallons, that would
be a replacement for, let's say
another type of water, whether
that's treated brackish or
treated produced water coming in
and offsetting that, so they're
they're kind of.
One for one just generally
speaking, um, with the exception
maybe of the example of the wind
turbine where uh we didn't list
it in terms. I think we just
listed it as 105,000 gallons of
water conserved per wind turbine
foundation or footer installed,
so that's making the assumption
that you would replace
freshwater used to cement and
hold the turbine in place with
something like treated.
because you're treated produce
water.
Thank you, Madam Chair, what I'm
trying to get out here is, is
that if we have 42 gallons per
barrel, we have, I think it says
here 2.
To billion or 3 billion, 1.9
billion barrels.
Right now that are are um being
stored. But by the year 20 or
through the year 2030 we're
gonna have about one.
100 million barrels per year, so
about.
Yeah, about 1 billion barrels a
year, so.
My, my, my leading to the
distribution if it's going to
fulfill all these needs and how
you, you, you got these numbers
which I haven't really flushed
out, which I'm gonna probably do
tonight, um, but I'm just
wondering because some of the
things that I'm hearing managers
that we, this is a fine finite
amount of water of the produced
and brackish and and all
combined, will it meet the
demand for all these things that
you're, um,
You, you're going through here
all these examples through these
pages that I mentioned. Is it
going, is it going to be able to
be sustainable is what I'm
asking, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Sure, please. Thank you. Yeah,
Madam Chair and representative,
there's a lot of ifs, you know,
if we get data centers, if we
get winter, if, if, if, if, um,
I think we have.
A
We, what we do know is our
freshwater resources are
exceptionally finite, and we
need to recharge those and
conserve those, so this is, this
is the pathway in which we can
do that.
And just my very final one is
the other concern that I'm
hearing, I need a little
clarification because I've been
hearing through other
discussions that we're gonna
We're gonna offset some of the,
the water that we have
introduced some of this produced
water once it's cleaned up into
our, our natural water streams
and systems. Is that, is that
true, Madam Chair, Madam, Madam
Chair and represented yeah,
Madam Chairman representative,
um, we have the, the proposal
that we have before the WQCC is
pilot projects. We have not
proposed discharge standards uh
in our rulemaking. The federal
government is moving in that
direction with their
study, um, but, and this, this
document is, is focused on non
dis I believe this document
totally is focused on
non-discharge, um, but I could
be wrong if I'm not thinking of
all 60 some pages. And if, if I
might quickly just clarify,
Madam Chair, very quick, and
Representative Liu He, um,
that because the feasibility
talks about both two sources of
water, treated brackish water
and treated produced water. The
um the potential near term
opportunities for
Use applications of treated
brackish water could be a a a
longer list of potential end
uses then we would be allowing
through regulations for treated
produced water, right, because
the, the public health concerns
and the, the contamination
concerns associated with those
two sources of water are quite
different. So just something to
keep in mind as you review the
feasibility study. Thank you. I
have other questions after, but
I appreciate the answers. Thank
you, and we're going to move on
to Senator Campos. We have
Representative Chatfield and
then Senator Woods.
Senator, thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and of course to the
panelists, thank you very much
for the presentation.
Uh, a few things and I was
thinking as we were talking
about the 50 year plan and of
course we're dealing with a
feasibility study as well.
A few things that come to mind
and I go back to uh
Representative Chatfield and of
course Chairman Small in terms
of um how do we get this
information out, put together
and ready for legislation for
the session that's coming up in
about 120 days and then from
there to deal with that during
that 60 day period, so rather
than go ahead and take a look at
the 50 year plan today, the
issue would be over the next 2
years, how can we
Put together the uh legislation,
the information, seeking the
resources and using the
resources that are readily
available, um, to get some of
these things started. That's
usually the base and the
foundation of studies as we uh
as we move forward. So I'm gonna
leave that question open to any
of you who wish to answer that,
and Madam Chair, just in brevity
after that, um, I'll have a
couple of, uh, short statements
to make, if I may so.
The panel, please. Thank you.
OK
Madam Chair of Senator Campost,
thanks for the question and
thinking so practically about
where we go from here, um, and
briefly, I will just say that um
the work that we're doing right
now that Secretary Kenny
mentioned with the feasibility
study out for your review, for
public review, um, is to really
turn our attention to
legislation and as we um put
together the pieces of a
proposed legislation that, um,
is in line with the governor's
vision.
The strategic water supply is
informed by public input, the
science and the data, and the
economic analysis in the
feasibility study, um, we're
going to be thinking very
critically about what can we do
in the upcoming session to move
this forward and to the extent
that there might be a multi-year
process to continue to develop
and evolve the program. I think
we all understand that that's,
that's part of the reality of
how new big things happen. um,
but we're very um focused in
right now on what do we need to
do and what can we
Do working together with the
legislature to move this program
forward in in the upcoming
session and starting in January.
Mr. Secretary, and of course OSC
designate, I don't know if you'd
want to go ahead and respond to
that, uh, but if not, I, I, I
just have a couple of
statements, but, but so you're,
you're comfortable with, with
that remark and if you will with
that direction or there's some
things here that we also need to
consider,
briefly, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator.
Um, I 100% agree with my
colleague in the governor's
office. I, I would say there's
externalities that we can't
account for today. What will
happen with various, you know,
the federal election, what's
going to that, how is that going
to shape water policy? how is
that going to factor in on
brackish and produced water, um,
and, and other.
Externalities again that we can
make a best guess on today and
move forward with um with some
certainty, but that would be my
only addition.
OK, uh, did you want to respond
briefly, state engineer, Madam
Chair, Senator Campos, yes, um,
I would just say that as I, as I
said before, you know, there's
already a process in place with
the state engineer's office for,
for being able to retrieve the
brackish water and use the
brackish water. So that's,
that's one piece that's already
in place and then, um, just to,
just to elaborate a little bit
further on, um, Senator
Neville's question previously
about adjudications. I don't
know if you were going, pointing
at that with a
The brackish water piece, but,
um, but brackish water does not
need to be adjudicated with the
deep wells, so just wanted to
make sure I fully captured that
too. Thank you. So, Madam Chair,
if I can just just briefly in
terms of a couple of statements.
The first is as we grow as a
state, they're uh some of our
past state engineers who have
quite a uh, you might say a a a
chest of um experience that we
can call on, so we mentioned
Stein, uh.
A while ago, so Stan Lopez and
then we have uh Mike Hammond and
we have John D'Antonio, we have
uh people that uh truly
understand this that have been
working, if you will, on the
plan and of course tying it into
the governor's vision.
If, if we can do this because
again, the time that we're
talking about in order to go
ahead and make this transition,
uh, it's just a matter of months
and so that's the first part.
The second part, Madam Chair,
members of the committee as we
move forward with the resources
that we have if we don't
obligate those dollars uh to the
one of the top priorities in the
state, and that's going to go
ahead and be water use, uh, and
we all know, if you will,
surface water, the aquifers,
the, the water systems.
The uh the dams, other places as
we continue to go and deal with
water. Uh, there's still a lot
of work ahead of us and I just
really hope that uh to the
panelists as we go forward that
with the resources that are
necessary with a deepening of
the vision that you all already
have uh that we're able to go
ahead and do that and
subsequently, Mr. Chair and
other members of the committee
as we move forward and Madam
Chair, that we do have, if you
will, policy, resources, and
most importantly, if you
Well, some of those initial
steps prepared so that in the
next 2 years our governor will
recognize and be known if you
will, for the progress that
started with that 50 year water
plan, so.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much,
Senator. I'm well said and thank
you for your questions too. All
righty, we're gonna go on to
Representative Chatfield and
then Senator Woods, you're
getting ready, right, Senator
Woods, after Representative
Chapfield. There we go. Thank
you.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for allowing me to have a
second question, and it, it came
to mind, uh, uh, when Mr. Chair
was, was asking some questions a
while ago. So what
Is the seismic are the seismic
issues mostly caused by the
removal of fluids
or the re-injection of fluid.
Injection. OK, yeah, Madam Chair
and um representative the
injection for sure. OK, thank
you.
That all that was so short.
OK, Senator Senator Woods, all
that preparation. Let's hear
from you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
My question is this, I don't
have any doubt that we can do
it. We can clean the water up.
We could even figure out how to
get rid of the brine that's
left, and I'm talking about
produced water. I have no doubt
that all this comes at a cost.
We've got to decide, I'm
assuming whoever.
Cleans the water, owns the
water.
There's the first thing.
They're gonna have a cost in
that water.
They're gonna need to try to
sell that water to someone, why
would I, as the
End user of that water.
By a higher price than what I
could pay.
A water, other water supplier
for.
So as the state now going to get
in the business of
Paying to have the water refined
and then
And then market the water
themselves.
What, what's the end plan for
this, I guess is what I'm
asking. There's
All that can be done, um, all it
takes is, is money, no doubt.
But what's the end player?
Madam Chair and Senator Woods,
um, thank you for the question.
The, the, the the first the
feasibility study is aiming to
It is aiming to solicit
additional information on what
are the market mechanisms we
should do, or, you know, should
employ and then how should the
state of New Mexico be
incentivizing, should we, and
again, should we invest in
infrastructure? Should we invest
in the finished product? should
we do nothing but create
regulatory certainty, there's a
myriad of options that are
available. Our initial proposal
was that we would um have an
advanced market commitment and
that would be that we would
enter
Into a long term contract to
procure the water but not by
infrastructure that aligned with
the way state, um, that's that
aligned with what Bond council
advised we could do in terms of
thinking of water as a
commodity. That's one model.
It's not the only model. To your
point of why should you use less
fresh water and pay more for a
different type of water.
There's, there's again, the,
the, the sort of transactional
discussion we're having, but
there's also a broader
discussion going on with.
investors with, um,
you know, uh, boards and and
industry is looking for ways in
which they can reuse more and
figure out ways in which they
can gain value added commodities
from the treatment of this
water, so it's not always oddly,
I'm even though we're sitting
here talking about the strategic
water supply and water, it could
be that the lithium, it could be
that the um radioactive
materials that go into nuclear
medicine could be
Something that are more of a
commodity than the water itself,
so they may have a driver to do
something different with what
they're pulling out and the
water becomes a collateral
benefit, if you will, and we're
talking about it as the sole
benefit, so, so just keep an
open mind of how the markets are
going to change. Um, and then
finally, you know, until we put
a real value on fresh water in
the state of New Mexico. We we
we're undervaluing our greatest
resource every single day in the
state, and I think that
That is truly what we're kind of
not talking enough about is how
do we continue to promote fresh
water for its highest and best
use and make it not something I
know you're from the ag industry
and make it something that is a
true commodity and it's put to
its most beneficial use for for
New Mexicans.
Thank you, Senator, good
question. Even when you come in,
you said you came in a little
bit late, but we didn't even
know because when you came in,
you made all those good comments
and asked great questions,
educated all of us.
Yeah.
Yes, thank you, Senator. OK,
well, believe it or not, we are
done for today in this
committee, subcommittee, and I
hear the other subcommittee that
we have going on is still taking
place. So, um, we will come back
tomorrow and Yes,
and there is a social event at
the law school, maybe Charles
can explain it. I don't
remember. It's it at 5:30 or 5.
I don't have the details. OK,
thank you. So, um, I think you
all have.
Some paperwork on that or an
email or yeah,
there we go. Thank you and
thanks to the panelists too for
all your work. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
