Of our health and human services
meetings in Porteli.
is going to start now. We're a
few minutes late, but
Um, we have this morning.
Uh, reports from the legislative
Finance Committee staff from
Sarah Diny's program evaluator
and Kelly Clint, the principal
analyst, both from the LFC
staff. Welcome. Thank you for
making the drive. Did you come
in last night or this morning?
Last night.
That that's good, good move.
So we're we we're we're, we're
eager to hear your, your report
and we have uh PowerPoints here,
you should have two PowerPoints.
The first one you should have,
should say evaluation recap
programs supporting children and
families.
OK, great. Thank you for the
introduction. Again, I am Kelly
Klundt. I'm a principal analyst
with the Legislative Finance
Committee. I had, uh, oversee
agencies such as the Early
Childhood Department, Department
of Health, the aging and
long-term Services Department,
Veteran Services department. So
if you are a committee member
who are interested in those
policy areas, I am your analyst
at LFC and with me today is
Doctor Sarah Dinis. She's been
with LFC for many years and
she's done some of our most
important and um
Really meaningful evaluations on
the Health and Human Service
areas, so she's a real expertise
on the data, on the outcomes and
the impacts of these programs.
This presentation is a recap in
two ways. Um, we're gonna look
at some of the past evaluations
that we've done in the Health
and Human Service areas. We're
also going to look at the
programs that have some of the
biggest cost centers and
impacts, and we're going to look
at some of the policies
regarding those programs. Now,
when you think about this
presentation, which is going to
lead before your secondary
presentation with Rachel and
Nathan. These are your upstream.
Intervention prevention services
that we're focusing on the
things that the state has so
that we can prevent families
from hitting that point of
crisis. And if we implement
these well into fidelity,
hopefully we never reach that
point of crisis. That doesn't
mean that the programs within
Rachel's purview and
presentations don't also need to
be very intentionally
implemented and they need to be
targeted towards evidence-based
programs that we know that work.
Because when things do go wrong,
the way we do those programs
really matters on changing those
outcomes.
So if we turn to our first page
in the presentation.
This is just a visual to see
some of the primary, secondary
and tertiary programs, framework
for our maltreatment prevention
in the state of New Mexico, so
you'll see that our primary, um,
services for prevention are
really in the early childhood
department, the public education
department, the Department of
Health, and now the Healthcare
Authority, formerly known as the
Human Services Department.
If you turn to your next page.
You're gonna see a chart that
represents what the early
childhood system in New Mexico
looks like. So the way you read
this, that arrow at the very top
is the age range of children
that the program serves, so
prenatally through + 5 years
old. So you'll notice that
childcare assistants that first
purple block at the very top,
starts just after prenatal, so
children are eligible within the
first few weeks of life, and
then that goes all the way until
they're 13 years old.
And what childcare assistance
is, it's a subsidy for parents
so that they can afford
childcare so that they can
either work or go to school, and
that subsidy, uh, depends on
your income and your activity
for eligibility. Right now, if
you're at 400% of the poverty
level or below New Mexico, and
you're working or going to
school, childcare assistance is
basically free to you. It used
to be totally free for the last
few years. We had no co-payments
because of ARPA funds, but
that's being pulled.
now and it's going to be a 5% of
your income as your co-payment,
which is still lower than the
national recommendation of 7%.
You'll see other programs on
here like home visiting where we
have professionals go into the
home, um, early, hopefully
prenatally to help coach the
parents or the primary
caregivers on developmental, um,
they screened the families for
additional needs. They provide
coaching. They provide, um,
auxiliary services once the baby
is born, they could help with
lactation support, they can
screen for any possible
behavioral health needs that may
occur.
So that's a really good in-home
service, but it's not a care
option. They don't leave the
child with that person. That
person is coming in to support
the family.
You have the WI program, you
have, um, Idea Part C, which
most of you may have heard of as
fit. That's an early
developmental delay program,
Head Start and early Head Start
are for low-income families to
receive childcare that's
federally funded, and then of
course we have the New Mexico
pre-K and early pre-K programs
which are for 3 and 4 year olds,
and those are completely free
for families to enroll, no
matter your income or your, uh,
working status.
And with that I will turn it
over to Doctor Dents.
Thanks, Kelly. Uh, for now we're
gonna move to the next slide.
And what you'll see on this
slide is a list of some programs
that we're going to be focusing
on today. Those include our
income supports program that
include programs like TAF and
Snap, but also other programs
such as Lehi, which is a program
to help with utilities, uh,
expenses, uh, Medicaid, which is
obviously for health care, as
well as some other more specific
programs. Uh, when we're also
going to talk a little bit about
our ECCD home visiting programs,
and our childcare assistance
programs.
For each of these programs,
we're going to dig into the
funding of the program.
The impact of the program and
our current uptake uh situation
with that program. Uh, with the
idea that these are the key
issues in order to see how the
program is working in our state
today.
Uh, so, uh, with that we'll move
on to talking a little bit about
the general funding, which, uh,
Kelly will tackle.
Thank you. So on our next page,
you're going to see a chart that
I'm sure many of you have seen
several times, but it's the
early childhood funding history
by program and it looks like a
stacking bar chart like this.
And that's just gonna show you
the really significant
investments by a program that we
have been doing over the last
more than a decade, so, you
know, when I started working at
the LFC we were spending a
little over $100 million on
early childhood programs, and as
you can see now in our current
fiscal year, we're closer to
$700 million. So that's quite a
bit of growth. A lot of that has
happened in the childcare
assistance program and in the
pre-kindergarten program. Um,
some of it has happened in the
visiting program, but really for
home visiting, we need to be
thinking about federal revenues
that are not being leveraged at
this time that we could leverage
with the current amount of
general fund that we have and
that's a real important thing
the state needs to focus on.
The next page is just kind of a
excuse me.
A chart showing how much we've
had total Medicaid growth and
expenditures, and so you'll see
how much the general fund has
grown, um, how much are base
federal funding has grown and
our expenditures.
With that, I will turn it over
back to Sarah.
Thanks, Kelly. Uh, so now we're
going to talk about each of
those programs that we, uh,
highlighted here. So the first
one we're going to talk about is
income supports. What you'll see
on this slide is that New Mexico
has a relatively generous income
supports package if you look at
it comprehensively across all of
the different types of income
support that we offer as a
state. Uh, if you look at, uh,
our income support package as
well as our minimum wage
adjusted for cost of living. We
have the 2nd largest, uh, income
support package in the country
next to Vermont. Uh, and what
this means is that for most
Individual, most low income
individuals. Uh, if they apply
and are enrolled in all of the
types of income supports that
are available. Uh, they likely
are able to, uh, meet the basic
cost of living in our state. Um,
the family groups that may
struggle with this are
individuals who are single
individuals who are unmarried
with no children, as well as a
married couple.
Moving on to the next page,
we'll talk a little bit about
home visiting.
And for home visiting, what
we've seen is we have had very
large increases in funding.
Specifically from from FY 17 to
FY 22. The funding for home
visiting increased over 200%.
However, enrollment only
increased by about 25% of that
by 53%. Uh, and additionally, as
Kelly had mentioned, uh, we
should be trying to leverage our
Medicaid funding more for home
visiting and you'll see on the
bottom chart that uh the number
of families receiving Medicaid
for home disease, roughly 79
69%.
Of the total, uh, enrollment in
me in uh home visiting, but only
12% of those families, uh, were
paid for using Medicaid funds.
Mr. Chair, I would like to note
for the committee that the LFC
is actually going to have a very
targeted discussion about
Medicaid home visiting at our
August hearing in Riodoso. So if
any of committee members are
interested in delving deeper
into that piece or have a
hearing coming up and I would
welcome you all to be there for
that conversation.
And now we're going to move to
our last program area for in
regards to funding which is
childcare assistance. What
you'll see here is our income
eligibility for child care
assistance has steadily
increased, uh, with a relatively
large jump from in 21 where uh
we went from 200% of the federal
poverty level to 400% of the
federal poverty level for
childcare assistance.
Additionally, we've seen that
our average monthly cost per
child has increased
significantly from FY 15 to FY
23. This is driven both by rate
increases, and
Other shifts in the system. And
lastly, at the bottom chart, we
want to talk a little bit about
where our growth has happened in
childcare assistance. And what
you'll see is in FY 19, the
majority of families had an
income between 76 and 135% of
the federal poverty level,
whereas in 2023, we see that the
growth in childcare assistance
is predominantly been for those
families that previously didn't
qualify. So those families who
are at 200% of the federal
poverty level and above.
And I will note financially, um,
when it comes to the state, once
you once you hit a certain
income level, those families can
no longer be billed to federal
revenue sources. They are only
state general fund. The Federal
revenues for the childcare block
grant requires that the families
be at 75% of the state median
income, and that's the
eligibility for those. So the
lower income children are
receiving some of the federal
block grants was the uppers are
mostly paid through state
general fund.
Or um the trust fund.
Could you just translate the
Um
75% of the median income, how
that would equate to where on
the federal poverty level does
that hit me, I don't have it off
the top of my head, but I'm
happy to look it up and circle
back with you.
Uh, this may help the, uh, on
slide 3 for a family of 3, 100%
of the federal poverty level is
about $26,000. Um, so it would
be
Right around 1,920,000 at 75% of
the federal poverty level it's a
state medium income, the state
median income. I'm sorry. So
yeah, yeah, it was obedient, so
I don't know what the median is.
That's the problem.
Something like. So, Mr.
Chairman, the state median
income right now is about
58,000, so 75% of that is about
44,043,000 and and and how does
that compare then to the Federal
poverty level is 26 for a family
of three, a family of 3.
So yes, for a family of 3, so
that's 100%. So we're at 400%,
so that's um.
92,000 probably would be paying
all the way up to about, let's.
Yeah, not 200% of the federal
poverty level. Yeah,
it's a previously it was around
those would naturally meet, um,
around 175 200, but that can
change, um, but around those
ranges.
Great. Thanks.
Moving on to our next, uh,
Topic area we'll talk about
overall uptake of these income
support and other support
programs. Um, uptake is defined
as how many individual eligible
individuals are actually
participating in a program.
And what we see in our state is
that our uptake is relatively
low for a number of these
programs. Uh, and the main
exceptions are childcare
assistance and SNAP.
Uh, in 2021, the Department of
Finance and Administration
conducted a survey examining
what barriers, individuals face
in enrolling in these programs.
And the biggest barrier they see
is that there is a belief that
uh these assistance programs are
only for those who cannot work.
But there are other barriers
such as being
Aware of the program or having
difficulty in applying.
And when we think about uptake
for income support programs.
There are a number of programs
that are that our uptake is very
low, specifically TAF and
unemployment insurance in our
state have very low number of
individuals who are using those
programs who are eligible.
Medicaid and SNAP have slightly
um more positive story with most
individuals where I eligible for
Medicaid enrolling, but not
necessarily all. And for Snap,
we have one of the highest
uptake rates in the country.
Can you, could you repeat that
one? Sure, so in New Mexico we
have one of the highest uptake
rates for SNAP, which means that
we have one of the highest rates
of individuals who are eligible
for SNAP, participating in the
program.
Uh, when we think about home
visiting, what we see is that,
um,
Relatively few individuals are
participating in home visiting.
Uh, if you look at the at the
chart on the page, the red line
is the percent of our
population, 0 to 4, who are
served by home visiting. The
yellow line is ECCD's goal and
the blue line is our total
population. And so we're only
serving, I believe, roughly like
5 to 6% of the total population,
whereas ECCD has set a goal of
around 50%. Uh,
I just wanna make sure we
clarify this is just Medicaid
home visiting. We're serving
about 5000.
Oh, sorry.
I am corrected. This is all home
visiting. So of the 5000 we're
serving in all of home visiting,
only about 400 are Medicaid home
visiting. 440 last year, 440,
um, the fiscal year that just
closed.
And then the last piece on
uptake that we want to talk
about is childcare assistance.
Uh, so within childcare
assistance, according to an ECCD
survey, 49% of families could
not access childcare when they
needed it. And this is largely
more due to, uh, an
infrastructure issue, not having
enough childcare centers,
specifically for young children,
children under age 2.
Um, and one of the other issues
that I wanted to point out is
that, uh, usage of childcare
assistance is lower for families
making less than $50,000 than
for families making between
50,000 and 100,000, meaning that
our lowest income families are
the families that are less
likely to use childcare
assistance.
OK.
All right, and so now we'll move
over to talking about the
overall impact of these
programs. What we're seeing
broadly speaking, is that we're
not getting what we would expect
from programs likely due to
implementation. Uh, for income
support packages, what we see is
that despite a generalist, a
generous benefit packages, uh,
New Mexico continues to have
persistently high poverty with
our state ranking in the top 5
for the last 20 years, uh, for
home visiting, we're seeing that
our models, uh, while they have
um
Thomas in leading to specific
outcomes that we are looking for
as a state. They're often not
being run to fidelity, nor is
fidelity being monitored by the
department. And for childcare
assistance, what we're seeing is
that while we're serving more
families than ever before. These
families are not necessarily the
families with the lowest income.
Uh, moving to the next slide to
talk about income supports. Uh,
if you look at the map, you'll
see that when you look at the
supplemental poverty measure in
the country by state. New Mexico
actually has close to average
supplemental poverty. These this
is looking at the poverty rate
when you include all of the
different benefits packages that
are available to individuals.
However, because we have such a
generous benefits package, if
you look at the bottom chart,
what you'll see is that there is
a plateau for families when
they're trying
To increase their own income,
uh, such that it's very hard to
get, uh, to make enough money
to, uh,
Surpass the benefits cliff or
plateau, if you will, for these
families. And so that can keep
people, uh, using these services
again and again rather than, uh,
leading to them to have an
income that is self-sustaining.
Uh, one positive thing that I
wanted to point out is that uh
in the past year, the healthcare
authority reinstated the cash
assistance transition program
for TANF recipients to help
those individuals who are making
slightly more than the uh
eligibility limit, uh, which
allows them to receive benefits,
I believe up to 100 or 150% of
the federal poverty level. I can
double check those numbers if
that would be helpful.
And then the last piece we want
to talk about here, or sorry,
moving on to the next piece,
which is home visiting, um, home
visiting has an impact on child
maltreatment in our state. What
we see is that um,
For New Mexico families who are
using a McVe funded home
visiting program, which means
nurse family partnership or
parents as teachers, which are
too.
Uh, established evidence-based
programs. Uh, the maltreatment
rate in our state is
significantly better than the
maltreatment rate for the US and
the families who are enrolled in
those programs. Um, and if
you're in any home visiting, you
will likely have a lower
maltreatment rate than our
average overall, about half of
them of treatment rate.
But what we see is that these
data can be muddied because the
families who are actually
participating in home visiting
are usually the families who,
uh, there's a selection bias.
They're choosing to participate
in a program. Uh, additionally,
the other concern that we
potentially have is when we look
at our discharge reason and the
number of families completing
home visiting. So right now, we
see that most families who are
leaving home visiting are
leaving because they didn't
engage with the service. And,
uh, in 2023, only
About, um, correct me if I'm
wrong, about 7% of families, uh,
Fully completed home the home
visiting program according to
their home visitor.
Um, and the other thing I want
to point out is some models have
a higher rate of completion than
others. And so those are the
probably the models that are
implementing more towards
Fidelity and so we need to be
monitoring that as a state.
I just really want to hone in on
this, um, especially as your
next presentation comes. So we
have, there's different models
in New Mexico that home visiting
falls under, which is the
curriculum, right? You might
have a curriculum for healthy
families in America, that's a
home visiting model where you
might have nurse family
partnership or you might have
first born. Many of you know
these models by name. And each
provider can select their model
that they are gonna deliver to
the families, but not every
single one of those models.
Delivers the same outcomes. So
for instance, the model parents
as teachers is really focused on
educational outcomes, and that's
great. But if you're looking to
reduce child maltreatment in
your community, that's not the
best model to select for your
community to reduce child
maltreatment. You want to opt
into healthy families America,
nurse family partnership, um, or
Rachel's gonna have a, a
presentation on this later too,
and so I really, as we think.
About this, we need to be really
cognizant of the models that
were selecting and funding to
make sure that we're opting into
those programs that are going to
change the outcomes that you all
are focused on and that those
models are implemented with
fidelity and monitored with
Fidelity, which we're not doing
right now.
graph that shows the the rates
for completion of the home
visiting by the various models.
What is standards? What is that?
Is that a model or is that, Mr.
Chairman, so most of you are
aware about the um home visiting
accountability Act, which was
um, when was that past Claire?
2011, we have the real expert in
the room.
Um, and that has a standards
base saying that if you want to
be in a home visiting program
and you don't want to
participate in a national model,
these are the standards that you
have to at least be the bare
minimum to implement. So those
are non-models, but standards
based on legislation that are
law right now.
In other words, we have some
programs that don't fit one of
the national models, but to
provide home visiting, meeting
some kind of state standards,
correct, and that's what you
mean by standards, yes.
Mhm
OK.
Um, and so.
You know, we're going to talk
about this more in August, but
to have
Home visiting providers moved to
Medicaid is not a light ask. And
we haven't necessarily built
some of the infrastructures to
support them that they need, for
instance, you can't ask a
standards-based small program to
purchase the healthy families,
families America curriculum,
stopped doing their home
visiting, train all their staff,
and then reimplement in the hope
that they'll get billing in the
future, right? There's things
that we need to do to maybe pay
for that.
Curriculum, give grantings so
that they can do the training
and then they can implement.
These are small, some of these
are small providers that
couldn't bear those costs, but
these are the transitions that
we need them to do so that we
can get those outcomes. Medicaid
billing is also complicated. We
all know this, right? And some
of these providers aren't able
to bill Medicaid themselves and
so we need to think about
centralized building or
administrative support to get
those Medicaid dollars in the
door. We have a really robust
home visiting network.
But we haven't really developed
the tools to reach the goals
we're setting for ourselves to
receive those federal funds.
Right, so we have a couple more
slides left in our presentation.
The next one is looking at the
impact of childcare assistance
in our state.
And uh.
The overall impact is that we
see that child care assistance
does not necessarily improve
child welfare education. These
are findings that we've had in a
couple of reports that the most
recent one was from 2019.
However, what we do see is that
childcare assistance does
improve families' income, uh,
likely workforce participation
for select groups, which is
shown in the graph on the right
where you'll see that the New
Mexico uh women with children
under the age of 6, their
workforce participation has
increased very steadily since
2018, potentially uh correlated.
With the increase in our child
care assistance eligibility
limits. And we also see that
childcare assistance uh seems to
improve our childhood
vaccination rates, uh, which
makes sense because it is one of
the requirements to participate
in childcare is that your child
is either vaccinated or has an
exemption from the Department of
Health.
Uh, and so we're gonna move on
to our conclusion for this
presentation, which is that, uh,
we see that New Mexico has
significantly increased funding
for our child and family support
programs. Uh, and this has been
done largely across the board.
However, one of our main
challenges is the way that we're
implementing these programs, and
that's potentially leading to
low uptake as well as a
reduction of the impact, uh, for
recipients. Uh, so with that,
oh, Kelly, yeah, just like one
closing statement is that, and
we're seeing this across all
state agencies
See you all have grown state
budgets enormously in the last
few years and money in some ways
is not as big of an issue.
Implementation is where we're
really struggling, um, and so as
you think about this, it's
really executive implementation
and fidelity to what the
outcomes we want to get that we
really need to, you know, hone
in on focus. You guys have done
a great job of increasing the
funding to the program, and now
we just need to make sure that
they're the best programs that a
family can receive.
Great, let's go to the
committee. I'm sure there's some
questions representative. We'll
start with Representative Vinson
and just work our way around.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I don't
see a number on this page, but
the impact on the, uh, most
individuals who participate in
home visiting do not complete
the program. And you mentioned
that the families don't engage.
Are they not engaging because of
the paperwork?
Mr. Chair,
Uh, I think there are a number
of potential reasons why they're
not engaging. Usually these are
families that have participated
in at least one home visit. And,
uh, what they're seeing is maybe
they're not feeling that their
home visitor, uh, reflects the
current values or is uh meeting
with their specific needs are at
that time. Some of that is
likely surmountable by the
agency, right? It's making sure
that we're helping providers
understand how to engage with
different types of families,
helping providers understand the
needs of their.
community, um, do you have an
additional moments, Kelly. Yeah,
um, we also have some really
interesting system quandaries
that we're going through, like
we have home visiting providers
that have wait lists and so they
can't engage the families even
if the families come to them and
that's a big part of that is
because we're not bringing in
the federal revenues. We could
be bringing in $300 million more
dollars tomorrow if we were
implementing these models and
had these, um, programmatic
supports and so a family
They may want home visiting and
may not be able to get it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That just
resonates with me right now
because with
With the stuff that we have
going on, the crisis we have
going on in.
Lincoln County with the fires
and the floods and everything.
When people go to get individual
assistance they're so
intimidated when it comes to
paperwork and they try and they
give it their best shot and when
they're denied.
They automatically stop. And
what we've been trying to do is
I've been trying to follow up
with them.
And um, and then they tell me
that, you know, the, the, the
paperwork side of it was
intimidating. So what we're
encouraging people to do is get
with them and help them navigate
through the paperwork and make
sure that when they leave, that
everything, every I is dotted
and every T is crossed, and then
they feel a little bit better
about it and then we follow up
with them and they go back and
and they are accepted.
So, um.
I, I always think we can do
better. I always, I know we're
doing a good job at certain
things, but we can always do
better.
Yeah and Mr. Chair, if it's OK
if I respond? So that, that for
sure is a problem in a lot of
home visiting is not a very
intensive paperwork, um,
depending on the model. There
are some models that have high
curriculum, but like we have a
model called Family Connects
that is a universal touch, and
so a lot of those is a family
just signing up and then the
home visitor will come in and
collect more data from them in
person, um, but it doesn't have
like an income barrier for the
most part depending on the
model, it doesn't have.
Like you don't have to bring in
your, your
Um, tax slips, you don't have to
approve a lot of other things.
So luckily this is one of the
more nimble enrollments. I would
not say that across all of these
programs, but home visiting in
particular is not particularly
burdensome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
didn't see the, the vice chair
hit a timer, so I'm gonna ask
one more question.
I'm very observant. The timer is
off. OK. So anyway, the other
question I had was, uh, on
childcare, you put 400% um of
the poverty level below the
poverty level. Why 400%? Why is
that number? Why is it 400%, not
300% or 500%.
Uh, I don't think we know the
specific reason that was what
we've heard is what the
executive decided. Um
when it was enacted, I think it
was the highest eligibility
limit in the country.
Would that be an average?
400%.
Is that where most people fall
in? No, that is far above the
average family income level in
New Mexico, so it's basically,
we, we would consider it mostly
universal
because most families fall under
that criteria.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, it's
the median income is 40, you say
48,000 a year, 400% would be
almost $200,000. It would be
185 $190,000.
Yeah, I was just looking at
every one of these graphs I look
at it's just headed up. And when
does it, does it ever come down?
I don't know.
It just it just continues to
climb more and more and more and
more and more. And what it, why
is it keep climbing and why is
it not coming down?
I think that one did come down.
They just reduced it to didn't
you say they reduced the
On you put a co-pay in is what
you did.
OK, thank you.
Um, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. A couple
of lines of questions, um, on
the uptake on home visiting.
Um, that graph seems
The the home visiting seems.
Pretty static over
7 years.
Um,
And the, the goal
From ECECD is
static
I'm wondering why. I mean, is
there a problem with the home
visiting.
Is there an implementation
problem?
Are the families not receptive?
Uh, thank you, Chair, uh,
Representative, what we've seen,
uh, in regards to home visiting,
uh, first, I would say that this
graph might be a little bit um
skewed because we're trying to
cover the whole population who
is eligible as well as the
relatively small number of
individuals who are using the
service. So we've actually seen
a growth of about 50% over, uh,
5 or 6 years. Uh, but beyond
that, what I would say is there
are implementation problems in
that we are trying to use
Medicaid to uh help.
Grow the number of families who
can use the program, right? And
what we've seen is that the
administration and providers
have been slow to adopt Medicaid
home visiting for a number of
different reasons, some of which
Kelly has already touched on,
including the infrastructure
needed and the capacity building
needed for providers. Uh, beyond
that, I would say that um.
A number of times we've heard
that there is maybe a stigma
associated with home visiting,
and I think that's something
that has decreased, uh, over the
years, um, and we've also heard
that families have difficulty
engaging in the service. Um, and
I think some of that's having
families understand the value
immediately. There are a number
of different ways to get there.
Uh, some of it is making sure
that, uh, some of it can be done
through incentives. Some of it
can be done through
understanding what that family
needs in their first visit.
Maybe it's lactations could
support and so they can get a
lactation consultant in there.
the next day. Um, but trying to
help families see the immediate
value and having families don't
have to deal with waitlists and
other barriers would help with
that. Do you have additional?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
66% is extremely low.
Um, especially for a state like
New Mexico where we're always
talking about.
The severity of of the families
in poverty, the, the growing
number of families in poverty.
I think educating the public
might help.
Um,
I'm not sure how the department
would want to go about that, but
I think.
Educating these families on the
benefit, um.
would go a long way in removing
the stigma.
Um,
We, we saw that, um, in the
veterans community, a lot of the
Vietnam vets didn't want to
apply for benefits. Once we
started educating the families.
On the benefit.
Um,
We started to see an influx of
of claims coming in against the,
the VA, um.
Going back a few pages to
funding for income supports.
I just had maybe a a
A different question. I have a
lot of senior citizen centers in
my community and your little
graph at the bottom.
Um,
I think that the little guy with
a cane is.
Senior citizens.
People with disabilities, what,
what programs I've, I've had a
very difficult time finding out.
What benefits are available.
The seniors and seniors with
disabilities.
Um,
I'm not sure that you want to go
in depth into all the benefits,
but if you could direct me
where?
I could go to find these out
cause I, I meet a lot with
senior citizens.
And the different senior centers
and and nursing homes.
And I get that question a lot
and.
I mean, I'm kind of embarrassed
to say I'm
I'm not sure. I'm trying to find
out, so if you could direct me
where I could find that
information out.
Your representative, we can
definitely do that. Uh, I'm
scrolling through our report to
see if I can find a quick uh
list, but otherwise Kelly and I
will email you with a list. Um,
I know that there are a number
of programs through the aging
and long-term Services
department. But beyond that,
there are also additional
subsidies or benefits that
individuals who are over the age
of 65 can receive through things
like Snap. So we'll reach out
with with information to you.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you very
much. I would, I would really
appreciate that and I'd like to
be able to get back to.
My seniors with this
information.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez. Representative Cates,
thank you, Chair, and thank you
for your presentation, um.
Let's let's start on the, yeah,
your slides aren't numbered
let's see, 1234 on 4 reoccurring
early childhood funding history.
Uh, you have a blue childcare
assistance and Blue Fit. So
which blue is the fit funding?
Hm.
It's my eyes. OK.
All right, it's the green. OK.
Um,
Then let's go to.
So is it my understanding on uh
two more slides after that
income supports that the average
New Mexican receiving income
support package.
is receiving more than the
national average. Is that what
that is telling me? What that,
uh, uh, Representative Kate's,
uh, chair, what that is showing
is that if you were to receive a
specific number of income
supports including making the
annual minimum wage, uh,
receiving paid family leave, as
well as getting some of the net
federal and state benefits
including things like earned
income tax credit, you would be
receiving up to $43,000 which is
significantly above the national
average, especially when you
Adjust for cost of living.
Thank you. So, um, I, I am
familiar with, um, home visiting
and, um.
I
I guess, um, and, and, and I
understand this is not the
question for you because you're
not overseeing home visiting
programs, but I often said, you
know, I understand that they
don't need the level of
education expertise as case
management and the and
therapist, fit providers, but we
had such a low bar of
individuals going into, uh, a
very vulnerable family's home.
asking them very personal
questions, um, that.
This now somewhat relates to are
we um.
Are we picking the providers
that are not, you were saying
that we don't have, we have
providers who will have
difficulty and need support on
how to become a Medicaid
provider cause it's not just the
billing, you have to have a 258
page application to be something
like that, um, to become a
Medicaid provider and so are we,
and I understand some of our
small communities, that's,
that's the choice we have, so I,
I just
I want to clarify, that is one
of the issues that you've
identified, is that correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair, um
Representative, that report will
also say that a simplified
streamlined application for home
visiting, um, providers to do
one time instead of to all MCOs
independently as a
recommendation that Dey is
making to the healthcare
authority.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. So it,
it seems to me like we have a,
uh, so let's go back to my first
is you said.
We are not meeting federal
standards and therefore we
cannot maximize our federal
dollars. What are those federal
standards?
Uh, uh, Chair Representative
Cates, I believe there may have
been some miscommunication. It's
not necessarily that we're not
meeting federal standards for
home visiting. It's that we
haven't, uh, the providers
haven't necessarily, uh,
completed the enrollment process
nor build the capacity so that
they could do so easily.
I still don't understand, Mr.
Chair, and I'm sorry, what is
the enrollment process since
we've been providing home
visiting for 10 years,
longer, longer, yeah.
So to receive federal funds, the
model of home visiting has to be
approved by the CMS, OK, in our
waiver. And previously we had
two models, um, that CMS
approved us to receive federal
funds for, for implementation of
those models.
Those models were parents as
teachers and nurse family
partnership. LSC had made a
recommendation to the executive
that we needed to broaden those
models to 4 additional models,
so healthy Families America,
Safe Care augmented, uh, family
connects and Child first. Now,
we don't have many providers.
This is the newest waiver. We
don't have many providers
implementing those specific
models. And so if you're not
implementing those models, you
cannot build Medicare.
So to be able to do that, we
have to provide the support for
programs to either transition
their entire program to that
model or open a new module or
subsection of their program to
deliver those models. You don't
have to completely, you could
still do a standards base and
then have healthy families
America and bill for that. Um,
and so that's the kind of
transition we're trying to go
through is to move the providers
in a supportive, non-scary way
because this is a scary.
For the providers to get them to
implement curriculums that are
eligible for federal
reimbursement. OK, thank you so
much. I just want to reclarify.
So we for CMS we originally only
had 2 programs that were
eligible. We have additional 4
that could be eligible, so as in
as a state we are implementing
home visiting programs that are
outside those sex.
Outside the 6 approved
curriculums of providing
services for families and
they're having problems
transitioning. So this, the, the
statistics look like there's
issues with families wanting the
service, I would say this may be
a provider issue in being able
to identify the right providers
and giving them that support. If
We have, when you talk about
changing the culture and
educating families and things
when they talk to another family
with a bad experience, who may
not be as educated their
providers or have this strong of
curriculum in place. So,
Um, when you apply for a
contract under one of the 6
approved Medicaid curriculums,
is there any sort of grant
process with the state or a
startup funding to provide the
curriculum because I know you
have to have the training, you
have to have the booklets, you
also have to have the forms.
It's not like you can go and
make copies of the forms you had
to have them, um, and, and it
does become very expensive.
Yes, Mr. Chair, we do have
startup grants, um, I do think
we could do more to to provide
that startup support, um, and to
do more to make it less scary to
providers to want to switch over
to those curriculums. So 22
things I want to get, this is a
really interesting conversation
and I am so thankful for it. So,
um, back to um representative uh
Martinez, the, the referral
point is really important, um,
and
So it has to be from a trusted
referral, um, so your medical
provider, somebody in your
community who is maybe a
community organization that's
really trusted by the community.
Those are the types of places
that we see successful referral
and enrollment, um, back way
back in the day when home
visiting was new, home visitors
would set up a table outside of
Walmart and say, Hey, you, you
look like you need home
visiting. They probably don't
feel great. Um, so yeah, the
referral point is
Really important implementing
models that work for the
community's needs and
implementing infidelity and
getting our home visiting
providers who want to do the
best service possible, realizing
that these that Medicaid home
visiting is coming, but we are
gonna support you financially
and administratively and all of
those things to move this
program forward. Referrals are
mostly happening. We actually
see last fiscal or FI 23, we saw
6500 referrals from the MCOs to
home visiting and in 400 people
were served, so the referrals
are happening and there's a
breakdown between referral and
service. So real complicated but
super interesting policy stuff
that I think we can make
movement on.
I just got to jump in here with
something when we started.
Trying to get Medicaid to pay
for home visiting. We were going
on.
What happened in England, where
it's, it's it because you're
under the National Health plan,
you get it. It's considered to
be a benefit. It's not
considered to be a sign that
you're a terrible parent.
And, and, and, and so I think
what you just said is the key to
this whole thing. The MCO's made
a referral for that comes across
to the family as there's
something wrong with me that
they picked up on and they're
sending this person to check up
on me.
Instead of, here's something
that you get if you have a
child. This is what every family
gets in England. That's where
they, they, they view it. And
instead we've we've somehow
stigmatized home visiting.
Which is kind of the, and I
don't, and I don't know what the
solution is because if you, as
long as you got the MCOs in the
middle of it, they don't get
anything from home visiting.
They're doing this just pro
forma to check off the box, I
think, because they don't see
the benefit to their bottom line
down the line.
They just see it as, oh, this
is, this, we'll make a referral.
So they send a referral, but
there's no, there's no person,
there's no case manager who's
actually met with the family and
explained that this would be
really helpful to them or
anything like that. I don't
think that's happening. That's
the breakdown. And so it's no,
it's, it's amazing that 400
families accepted being
stigmatized.
Also, I mean the same thing goes
on with Kara. I mean, if, if,
if, if the Cara families
The plan is home visiting. This
is like, well, OK, here she
comes, she's checking up on me,
uh, we've got to somehow change
that, that perception of what
home visiting means that it's,
it's a benefit, not a, not a uh
evidence that you're a bad
parent, yeah.
Does that, does that ring a bell
on I on? What do you think?
Um, so yeah, we think about this
a lot and that's why one of the
programs that we had written
into the waivers is Family
connects, which is a light
touch, universal model with the
thought of every child being
born could receive this light
touch and it's just, it's just
part of the system and then if
you need something more
intensive, then you will be
handed off into a more intensive
curriculum.
Yeah,
the welcome wagon. I think that
that everybody gets it. Yeah,
that's great.
Ah.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize. I was late this
morning, um, but I've been
trying to think, um, as I'm
listening to comments, Mr.
Chair, and some of my questions
were asked, so I appreciate from
my colleagues. Um, I, I just
wanted to, before I lose the
train of thought, going up to
400% of federal poverty level, I
think is part of what you were
just talking about, Mr. Chair.
It, it's, we shouldn't have, um,
if we really want to implement
this, there's no income issue.
It should be for every new mom,
new parent.
New person, right, that they
have access to the service, um.
And when you look at other
models as such, what happens in
in England, it's it's open.
And if you, if it's not needed,
but you still make the outreach
and offer assistance and it
gradually maybe wears off, but
Mr. Cherry, you know as well as
the rest of us in here that the
medical model we are in is a
whole different setup of what we
do, um, and it relates back to
what we're trying to do with
childcare assistance.
Um,
The uh
I was just writing down
comments, but one of the um
OK, I'm trying to put my
thoughts here, um.
And I, I, I noticed that one of
the questions had been asked, of
course, about
Um,
The referrals from a trusted
source.
And again, I think that goes
back, um, Mr. Chair, to where we
talk about um the different
healthcare systems where new
family, you know, babies are
coming into the system. So it
goes back to the insurance
companies, of course, which
Medicaid quote unquote is
Medicaid, but it's still an
insurer, right?
But it, it looks to see S2 in
the system, how other than
through management, you know,
talking to the doctors, um.
etc.
I, I just think there's maybe a
communication, some
communication that needs to
happen, both because they
receive a chunk of change, most
of the healthcare providers, I
mean, they want Medicaid. We
administered on behalf of the
feds, but that to me is the
carrot. And so how else and of
course, we're the legislatures,
so we have to rely on the
executive to kind of push this
forward, um, is working with um
Secretary Armijo, and I think
also Secretary Allen and
Groginski, because
And even I would think, Mr.
Chair, as to how, you know,
through the Children's cabinet.
how can we think
And maybe put forward a plan
since we hold the carrot with
regards to money.
And granted we have a new
turquoise plan that's come into
place, but there's always
amendments that can be made and
such to it in figuring out, Mr.
Chair, part of that carrot, um,
that we continue to push um the
MCOs.
To actually include this as part
of what is normal,
um, but that's, that's another
conversation for us to talk
about, you know, even with the
Office of super, you know, ASI,
I think that's another person
entity that should be part of
this. Um, if having a
conversation and figuring out
how do we do this so for for.
We know that families who
receive
Even if it's just a few visits.
They also know behind in their
mind that there's somebody in
some place where they can go.
And make a phone call.
Right, just in case an issue
comes up, like when you go, um,
like when the kids were sick, I,
I kept that number for to call
the nurse hotline.
You know, do we utilize that
anymore? How, how prevalent is
that for somebody just to make a
phone call and that person who's
on that phone line could then
say, well, have you heard of
this particular, um, outreach or
support program for parents. I,
I just think there's some other
places um that we could go back
that are part of the system in
each of the MCOs has a nurse
hotline.
Or you can go on, so I just
think there's some little small
things that we could begin to.
To kind of move this forward
when we talk about home visiting
and support systems because it
is stigma.
Um,
I'm just trying to think out
loud, Mr. Chair, so you know.
This is something maybe for our
next meeting, um, to put some
ideas together. But I also
wanted to mention, I think this
is even a good presentation to
bring forward to the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force, because
it also relates back to CYFD and
what we're trying to do with the
Children's code, it's, it's all
a process together about
changing the definition of
neglect.
Because if we're criminalizing
poverty and whatever we define
as poverty, you know, having,
um,
Home visits is part of that
support system too, so it's just
kind of this intermix of all
these different programs that we
currently have, Mr. Chair, but
who's talking together? Who's
working together, even amongst
us as a state within the
executive. So I think there's
still a lot more outreach that
we need to do like yesterday.
Um, these are just thoughts, but
as I'm going through this, this
may be, um, I would just
recommend if you all would like
to maybe do a short presentation
in front of the Senate Memorial
5 Task Force because it also is
the basis of a lot of the other
issues that we're trying to
address in CYFD with the crisis
and such. There there's a whole
host of other
You know, big things that I
think this is important for. So
that's all.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. So I
just wanted to kind of like uh
piggyback on what um the chair
said about doing universal home
visits. So when I had my first
son in Seattle, Washington.
Everybody got a home visit. We
were not on Medicaid. We had
regular health insurance. My
sister-in-law and I had our kids
probably about a week apart.
And we both got home visits.
Someone came over, asked
questions, gave us resources,
um, and I'm not sure how the
decision gets made or how or
what criteria they used, but she
continued to have a home visit
and I didn't and I was a little
jealous in terms of like feeling
left out and, you know, not paid
attention to.
But I think, uh, you know, I
really agree with the idea that,
you know, it needs to be
universal. And even with Kara
families, I mean, we, you know,
that piece, well, you're not,
you're not getting a home visit
because there's something wrong
with you, like we said before,
you're getting a home visit
because we want to make sure
that your child is healthy and
you get what you need. So I
think we really should shift
over to that model.
Um, I don't have a sense of how
right now, I guess some families
get um.
Referred um because they're on
Medicaid and you know, there
could be a family that is on
health insurance, has regular
health insurance, that really
needs it also.
So I think there's lots of
reasons why we should, we
should, you know, look at that
and really make it universal,
especially if we're looking at,
um, going after federal funds
and expanding the program and,
and sort of shed, um, you know,
dropping a wider net.
Um, the one other thing that I
do have a question about um.
Has to do with child care. Um I
noticed in your, in your, um,
presentation that there are
13,000 slots for 42,000 kids
under the age of 2.
And I have 4 kids. They were all
in childcare and finding child
care for a child below 2 is
practically impossible, um, and
there are times when you take
your child to someone be at a
daycare home, um, I usually use
daycare homes when my kids were,
you know, smaller.
When they were babies and you
always had in the back of your
mind, you know, they can't tell
me what's going on, so I don't
know, right?
So my question is, you know,
what are we doing in terms of a
state? Well, two questions. What
are we doing in terms of the
state expand capacity.
And is the reason that there are
only 13,000 slots, does that
have to do with the fact that
child care providers are not
paid well, and does that have to
do with the fact that the
reimbursement rates, even though
they've increased, we've, we've
been behind so when you increase
something, you're still behind.
Um, so those two pieces,
reimbursement rates and wages.
Are those factors in terms of
our ability to increase the
number of childcare slots.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is, I, there's a lot of
things that keep me up at night
and the things that I want to
that I think are some of the
most important things to help
our state move forward and
infant and toddler slots is
pretty much at the top of the
list on that. We have pretty
broad coverage for 3 and 4 year
olds and 5 year olds and then
school age, of course, in
school, but when it comes to
infants and toddlers, those are
the hardest slots to find for
anybody, and those are our
highest risk population.
because they can't advocate for
themselves, they're little, you
know, and, and those are
sometimes the points where
parents are most stressed in, in
that time of, you know, child
rearing. And so we are currently
working on several things we
appropriated 25 million in the
last legislative session to
expand infant toddler slots, um,
capacity, and so we're gonna try
and do what's called infantileer
contracts, that's rolling out
this year. We're hoping that
will increase the
by at least I think it was like
1300, which doesn't sound like
enough, but it's, it's
something.
Um, when it comes to uh your
second question, which was, I'm
forgetting on now
oh rates, rates are some of the,
we have some of the highest
rates in the country when it
comes to our highest quality
childcare assistance of
five-star center. So for a
5-star infants were paying over
$1500 a month for a single
infant.
Um, but in
Family care settings, which is a
large chunk of our providers. We
aren't paying nearly that
because it's all based on what's
called the state childcare cost
model. So the state used to do a
different, um,
System to determine our rates. 3
years ago we moved to the state
cost modeling and we're only one
of three states that use that
now, and that's basically a
research project where they go
in and they have all the states,
childcare providers, whether
you're a home care provider or a
center-based provider, and you
give them the inputs of what it
costs in your business to to
provide this service. And then
that informs our rate structure
to pay for childcare assistance.
It is not necessarily
a 1 to 1 ratio like if it says
it costs me.
It's just random numbers, $10 to
provide this service for this
child all year. We know that
that's what it costs and the
rates may be set at like 8 or $9
so it's not necessarily the
exact match, but we are highly
informed at least on, on the
cost for that. We have been
trying to increase the teacher
rates cause we know that, um, we
don't want people living in
poverty, um, being the teachers
in the classroom and having
other do other tertiary.
jobs or being stressed about
other income because then they
can't focus on their classroom,
um, and it also helps prevent
turnover. We know that teachers
having longevity with children
improves outcomes rather than,
you know, changing your teachers
consistently throughout the
room. We had seen in previous
evaluations that increasing our
rates wasn't necessarily
increasing teacher pay. It was
not flowing down to that piece.
Um, we need to update
Now, um, and to make sure that
that is still true, but in
response to that, instead of
just doing rates, we also do
supplemental pay so that early
childhood teachers can um get a
secondary pay from, um, it's
implemented through CNM and get
like an extra $3 an hour or $4
an hour, depending on their
experience level, their
education to supplement their
pay so that they're living,
hopefully within a manageable
range.
Can I just sorry.
I just wanted to add one piece,
Kelly to what you were saying,
um, in regards to uh uh wages
for, um, childcare providers,
some other states uh include a,
uh,
A minimum wage that you must
have for your teachers in order
to get specific ratings on our
quality improvement scale. So,
uh, if you wanted to be a
five-star center, I believe it
was in Vermont. You need to be
paying your teachers a specific
wage. And if you do not do that,
you are, you, you cannot be a
five-star center. And so there
are other incentives that we
could add to our current
structure in order to increase
pay.
I, I think that would be great
if we could do that, um, and
then on
Doesn't have a page number on
it, but on impact it says child
care assistance does not improve
child welfare education. Can you
expand on that?
Sure, so in, uh, uh, chair
representative in 2019 we did an
evaluation looking at a number
of different outcomes for
childcare to see what what was
and was not being impacted by
childcare and childcare
assistance. And, uh, we have not
seen any data to show that
childcare assistance directly
impacts child welfare. There's
some anecdota out there that
shows that if you have a child
in a home that's undergoing
stress and you're able to have
that child, uh, go to a
childcare assistance for respite
almost that that.
Can maybe reduce some of the
stress for the families, but we
haven't seen that correlate to a
specific out like hard
inferential data for education,
we examined whether childcare
assistance, uh, was leading to
changes in our child's reading
ability as measured through the
eye station and we didn't see
any impact of childcare
assistance regardless of star
level on reading. Um, but we did
see other other positive
benefits.
That's interesting.
Can I, is it OK if I add one
more thing? So when we're
thinking about these programs.
Each one of them, um, impacts an
outcome in a certain way. So
childcare assistants may not
impact child maltreatment or
child education, but it does
improve economic stability and
ability for people to go to work
or go to school. Pre-K really
affects long-term educational
outcomes, home visiting really
affects, um, a plethorara, but
it could be child mal reduction.
And child maltreatment, home
stability, um, behavioral health
needs, and so when you guys are
thinking about the outcomes that
you want to change, if you want
to change educational outcomes,
you want to put your money in
pre-K. If you want to change,
um, family economic stability.
Some money would go into
childcare assistance and if you
want to change health outcomes
maybe or try malt treatment, you
put it in home visiting and so
it is in the braiding of those
programs together that you get
kind of that overflow effect but
you can expect the
All of these programs are
everything to everyone, and you
have to focus on if your
priority is this, making sure
you invest in that program,
that's going to, um, affect that
particular outcome.
OK, thank you. And then my last
question is, um, is there any
plan to increase, um, the
amounts for TANFF and general
assistance.
Chair Representative, I have not
heard of anything that doesn't
necessarily mean it's not in the
works, but it's not something
that Kelly or I are aware of.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Just Mr. Chair, on the point
that Representative Chavez and
you were talking about adding to
that mix like a basic income.
Because we can give bits and
pieces of what we're talking on
the mosaic, but how we
distribute maybe that early
child, you know, the tax credit,
instead of one lump sum, how do
we distribute?
Differently, a different mode
because
Remember back under COVID, even
though it was a child tax that
we, when you filed your taxes
again, it had to be subtracted,
etc. But when families had that
for 6 months at whatever it was
$200 per child or something that
actually was money that could be
used then and there to help
offset costs. Um, so I think it
may be just a different way that
we also have to look, Mr. Chair,
of how we distribute, um, that.
Whatever, you know, something
about that because that also
coupled, I believe, with what
you just mentioned that
Representative Chavez was
talking about is also part of
that, that movement that we can
help with. So it just want to
add that. Thank you.
Good point. Representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you so much for a good
information, some of it.
Um, hopeful some of it like
dang.
Um, yeah.
Well, we, we get plenty of dang
moments up here, so, um,
I'm looking at the home
visiting, the impact page and
obviously, um,
Uh, the family nurse programs
are our partnership is.
According to this graph is
graft, not graft. Whoa, that was
at a Freudian slip,
um, it's the most successful.
Or at least the most popular, so
my question is.
I mean, we know that that's a
nurse and so we know that we're
short of nurses. I'm wondering
if the other programs have
You have to have a professional,
um, sort of.
Background, or, or some extra
education or something and if
that's my first question, I
guess, uh, Vice Chair Thompson.
I would say that it depends on
the model. Um, some models use
peers, so parents and teachers
have two different pathways. One
is for you to be a peer, a peer
parent who can uh become a home
visitor. Other pathways require
specific types of education, uh,
for nurse family partnership,
the requirement is that you're a
nurse for some of these.
Um, the requirement is to have
some, uh, background in in early
childhood education or to be a
social worker. So it depends on
which model you're looking at as
to what that specific background
is, but almost all the programs,
I think all the programs require
some type of training before you
go into the home. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. So, so with the
nursing, you have a healthcare
background, obviously, that's,
that's, I guess that's what I'm
trying to get at is it the the
professionalism, and I don't
mean that necessarily a degree.
way, but the professionalism
that they have a good solid
background in child development
as opposed to, you know, a 6
week course or whatever, is
there any data that looks at
the, the,
Qualifications of the provider
in satisfaction or in uptake.
Chair and Vice Chair Thompson, I
don't believe I have seen that
data. I think that now that
we're doing the PDIS there may
become some data that would help
us understand a little bit more
about both the salary of
individual uh home visitors, as
well as with those
qualifications are, and then we
could tie that to specific
outcomes. So maybe I'm gonna
completely post it here, but
maybe some families who have a
home visitor who's been in the
field for
10 years and who's making
$80,000 maybe that home visitor
is delivering a higher level of
service than others, but that is
something that right now is pure
speculation. OK,
thank you. Um, it's just
interesting that we, we have to
find some answers and I worked
for a total of 15 years with the
Laguna Division of Early
Childhood. It started out with,
there was a head start and there
was a fit program, um, when I
first came in and by the
And we had uh we well we added
childcare and then that
childcare became early Head
Start, but all the the head
start early Head Start childcare
and fit programs were all
seamless. I mean, it was we did
things together and, and
admittedly, Laguna is a very
small community with, you know,
with their little, with their
villages, but.
People really wanted to be part
of the of the programs. I mean,
you know, everybody's kids went
to Head Start. People, people
had their kids tested to get
into fit because they saw, I
mean, we did, we did playgroups
twice a month, so.
We really got a, a positive
outlook from the community, and
I think that's important, um, as
someone stated before, you know,
the acceptance that this is not
because you're bad or
inadequate. This is, this is
what our community does. This is
how we take care of our kids and
so I think the PR is going to
have to really change, um.
You know, the, the idea of
someone coming in to, to look
you over as opposed to, you
know, help you show you ways to
interact with your kid and all
that kind of stuff, so it's, I
think it's going to be a
paradigm shift that this is,
this is positive stuff. This is
supportive stuff. This is not
cause you're not a good mom or
cause you, you know, your kid
has a disability, but
I do, I think back and if we
could just create Laguna all
over the state. We'd be, well,
Laguna has since fallen off of
that, but um.
Uh, I'm I'm, I'm frustrated and
I'm, it's, we have so many
capabilities and this is where
we're gonna really have an
effect on crime in the future
and on special ed need and on
homelessness and substance use
and we have to get it right and
we have to get it right 20 years
ago. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
and thanks for, I mean this is
really meaty stuff, lots, lots
of for us to, to chew on over
the, over the next few weeks.
Um, I keep thinking.
We've, we've structured this
this wrong, uh, the Medicaid,
uh, home visiting, we structured
it wrong.
and I, and I, and I remember
when we first got it started and
they made their after it was
eligible for Medicaid funding
and they came CYFD was in charge
of setting it up and the, the
woman that came and made the
presentation to the committee
talked about how they were going
to start and I think they
started over here on the east
side, I think in Portalli or.
Clovis somewhere on the east
side, one county just to test it
out and, and it, it, it never
really got.
Incorporated into the Medicaid
program. It was always a CYFD
program that tried to get
Medicaid funding into it. And it
seems to me if it's going to be
paid by Medicaid, we damn well
ought to give it to the MCOs.
Make it part of their.
Part of their responsibility
that they that we expect you
when a baby is born in your
program to provide this and you
should pay for it and you figure
it out. Don't leave it up to
CYFD to find a provider to try
to, you know, get eligible for
federal match or whatever, um.
I just don't know how else to do
it. They have no, you know, we
said, you said they'd made 66,
6500 referrals last year.
Well, that's, that sounded like
a big number except that how
many babies were born under
Medicaid last year, probably
close to 20,000.
You know, 80% of the kids born
in the state are born in
Medicaid. We, we could just
about do universal childcare if
everybody born in Medicaid got
home visiting, no questions
asked. You didn't have to apply
for it separately or anything
else. It was just part of the
package that came with prenatal
care, delivery,
All the perinatal services and
home visiting. That was it and
you got to pay and they could,
they could get paid for it and
then they, they would find the
providers to do it. What, what
do you think of that idea?
Um, so I, I want to clarify that
the, that data was to make a
point of like referrals are
happening and we're not
necessarily engaging, but
there's a caveat to that data
that I want to be really careful
about. The referrals at that
time, there was only 2 models
available to them to refer to.
Nurse family partnership and
Pat, and those were only being
implemented in two real
locations, UNM and they were
starting it up at YDI and so
NFP.
has a very nurse family
partnership and if he has a very
stringent criteria for you to be
able to enroll. So even if they
referred them if they, if those
family had, it wasn't the first
child or if it wasn't uh early
enough in their birth, they
weren't eligible for NFP's
model. So they may have made a
referral and it, it was just not
gonna work with their models.
They may have gone to Pat and
those programs did not have the
service capacity to serve those
10,000 kids.
That's why we added more models
with more criteria eligibility
and to broaden the spectrum to
allow for those to flow down
better. So there's some system
things that we're working on
that I hope to improve those
numbers. Um, I, I do think
leaving home visiting in the
communities is actually really
important because it allows it
to be near the community, by the
community, and a little bit more
trusted, um, as, as not
necessarily
Government coming into the home
and that can be scary for
families, um, but I do think
some seamlessness is definitely
called for, which I think is
what you're looking for. Like it
shouldn't seem like a slog to,
you know, but you know, we don't
have, we don't have every family
getting a case manager. They
have a care coordinator or
whatever they're called, and
that's at the MCO level. I mean,
we've structured this thing in,
in a way that really doesn't
lend itself to
Getting the right services to
the family when they need it.
Um.
And, and I just don't foresee us
being able to have.
Uh
I always have to stop and think
of it, the healthcare authority,
um, higher case managers who
would be in the hospitals,
although that's what CYFD is
doing. They're they're trying to
hire navigators who would be
there. Those navigators could
become a resource, uh, I mean a
referral source for uh home
visiting that may that
ultimately may be the way to
reach more families because you
know, 20,000 babies born in
Medicaid in the state sounds
like a lot, but I'll bet.
Santa Fe, Albuquerque, and Las
Cruces had 15,000 of them.
You know, those three
communities, if you had, if you
had somebody at the delivery
room of all part of the delivery
team in every, in every one of
those hospitals, you get a lot
more referrals, uh, to can
carry, you might not be able to
cover, but you have to rely on
the pediatrician to make the
referral. I, I, I.
I just think we need to somehow
find that seamlessness that you
spoke of to make this really
work, um, until then, it's going
to be handing it off.
Here's, here's a referral
source, you know, and, and if
you want home visiting, you can
get it here, but it, it.
There's no incentive for the
MCOs to do it right now. Did you
have something you want to say,
Do I wanted to make. Thank you
so much, uh, chair. Uh, what we
saw when we did our home
visiting evaluation last year,
because there were a few
providers that have a strong
enough network to uh make sure
that their pediatricians and
their uh prenatal care staff are
doing referrals. And in those
communities we're seeing pretty
positive results. Uh, one of
those is the UNM clinic. Uh, so
at UNM
A number of their uh
obstetricians refer to home
visiting and uh having that
referral that is in-house,
right? So they can refer to the
home visitors who are across the
street at UNMCDC and then they
can immediately see families is
a very seamless transition and
is a positive way to do this.
And I think um I will also share
anecdotally what happened for
me. I mean, I used home visiting
with both of my children, uh,
our, um.
Our bro center referred us and
referred to every single person
in the class. It was, it was
seamless. They had somebody from
growing up in New Mexico come in
with a clipboard and say, please
sign up for whatever services
you would like and had a whole
array of services that we could
just check a box for. And so I
think there are many systems
that are out there that are
successful and we just need to
bring those to more communities.
Yeah, that, I think that's good
and I, and I'm hoping that, you
know, we're still in the early
phase. It's been 10/10 years,
but still of trying to get
Medicaid, it's only been about 8
years, I guess, 4 or 5, I don't
know, not, not as long as all of
that, but, but the, the, the
point you're making is a really
good one. And the other thing
is, just because your, your
family has lots of income
doesn't mean that the mother
Couldn't be going through
postpartum depression or
struggling somehow with her
career identity, motherhood,
identity, you know, role, all of
that stuff gets mixed in there
and can impact the child's
development, which is ultimately
what we're we're really after.
I do it on that point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
thinking back to my boys are in
their 30s, so it's been a while,
but I, I remember before you
could get discharged from the
hospital after having a baby.
You had to watch a video on car
safety on car seats, etc. um,
and so I wonder if we, if we
could come up with a good.
Video for lack of a better word,
um, for that, that families had
to watch and sign off on that
explains what these programs are
and and makes them less
stigmatized and you know, when
you realize everybody has, you
know, every new family has to
watch this and, and kind of.
Break away from that. So then, I
mean, referrals would still be
great and all that, but the
families have some information
to go with and the planting of a
seed that this is not a negative
thing, just a, just a random
thought.
Better ways of marketing the
service, uh, Senator, you, you
had a comment. Just Mr. Chair,
on this too is um and we also,
it took a while to get the
community health worker
promotora
engaged and actually to be
accepted for payment, right? So
I think seeing how we're
utilizing, especially in
communities, um where there's a
Spanish speaking or others, um,
but the promara had been for
here as you know, Mr. Chair, for
years, um, asking for
recognition for the services
they provide, but.
They still, they too are one of
those trusted persons in the
community, usually a woman, um,
but they speak the language and
understand the culture.
And that's and it's not just in
Albuquerque, but it's in Las
Cruces and other communities
where I think if, in other
words, we don't have to go back
out and create a whole new
position. I think we have some
existing.
Um, positions, places where, um,
We have some trusted individuals
in the community that actually
are being recognized through
getting payment for their
services too, so just wanted
just to, for those who are
listening also, we do have some
um.
Professionals already who are
out doing some work. Thank you.
If, if only the promotoras were
evidence-based, turn it.
Yeah,
that's, um,
if, uh, first born, the FB on
your, on your chart.
That wasn't one of the 4 new
ones you mentioned.
Is that right? No,
Chair,
first born has yet to meet the
evidence-based standard for
McVe, and so it is currently not
eligible to be Medicaid
reimbursable. There is a way to
get some federal funds for
firstborn, which is that McVe
allows for 20% of their funds to
go to promising programs. That
is something that we have yet to
do as a state.
And, and the first born is the
one that uh Catholic Health
Initiative does, uh, Alan Armio
that.
Well, this is, you know.
In a way discouraging but in a
way, you know, there's an
opportunity here that we just
have to figure out how how
better to take advantage of it
and to make this incredibly
useful service, more fully
utilized. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and yes, did you have a final,
just a final thought, you know,
I'm sorry if it feels we don't
feel discouraged, we feel
hopeful that there has been a
lot of investment in these
programs. What we hope to leave
you with is that you have done a
big part
this and getting the money to
the door and now it's about
monitoring the executive
implementation and making sure
it's a quality implementation
and choosing those programs. So
that's what I could leave you
with is, you know, we've put the
money in, now we've got to
monitor that these are being
implemented well into Fidelity.
I did have two other questions
that I, I forgot to ask, why are
they, why did they put the
copays back in, certainly we
don't, we have plenty of money
to cover that. We don't need to
save.
Money
Um, Mr. Chair, so the we used
ARPA money, non-recurring
federal revenues to cover copays
for a while, um, and then we
restructured them so that
they're only 5% of the
families's income. So, um, and
then ECCDs um subsidy will cover
the rest. Um, there is some
research that shows that co-pays
do help families, you know, um,
participate in the program.
Oh, good, uh, additionally,
beyond what Kelly had already
mentioned, one of our steepest
benefit cliffs uh was childcare
assistance because um families
would be going from not having
to pay $1500 a month to having
to pay $1500 a month as soon as
they crossed over that 400% of
the federal poverty level
threshold. And so we, it's
helpful and best practice to
have a like a sliding scale for
programs such as uh such as all
of our income support programs.
So that there isn't a steep drop
off and so for SNAP and
childcare assistance, it's
actually most, most beneficial
to have those uh graduated
declines. I mean, to me, 5% of a
$10,000 a month income.
You can absorb that, but if
you're struggling and you only
have, you know, you're, you're
at minimum wage job, even a 5%
co-pay is going to be perhaps a
barrier to participating in.
Yeah, I do want to clarify that
the lowest income people still
don't have. It's uh I think it
starts at like 200%. 0, OK, well
that helps. That helps. That's
good. Then the last question I
had was yesterday we had a
presentation fascinating
presentation from Falling
colors.
Do you all work closely with
them? Do they, is, is there data
available to you all because
they, they have the non-Mdicaid
service contract, administrative
services organization contract.
And the information they
provided us was, was really
very, very helpful and, and one
of the things we asked them was,
do you work with
Legislative Finance Committee
staff on this and they said we
would be glad to, but have, have
they ever worked with you or do
you work with them?
We have
Attempted to work with them in
the past for a number of
different dashboards and we have
gotten some uh prototype
dashboards, but we have yet to
work with them in a way where
we've gotten consistent data.
Yeah
OK. Well, thank you. Thanks very
much for the presentation.
And then our last item on the
agenda today is um from Nathan
Ekberg and Rachel Mercer Garcia.
Uh, two other, uh, LFC staff who
will talk about prevention and
early intervention for abuse and
neglect.
Mr. Cheer
May I ask that you ask your last
question to all the stakeholders
that, um, for the next couple of
meetings all the stakeholders
listed on following colors
following colors as
as the customers, the clients
directly on whether or not those
relationships are successful.
Thank you.
OK. And you already have the
handout for this passed out to
us so.
Go ahead, Rachel.
Am I on? All right, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
morning. Um, my name is Doctor
Rachel Garcia. I'm an LFC
analyst, um, and we handed out a
directory for you so you can
kind of know who, who we are and
what we do. I'm the fiscal
analyst for CYFD as well as
workforce-related agencies,
workforce solutions, um, and a
variety of others. Um, and with
me at the table is Nathan, and
I'll let him introduce himself
and then give you an overview of
what we're going to talk about
today.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members. Uh, my name is Nathan
Ekberg. I'm an attorney by
training, uh, but I've been with
LFC for over 10 years and uh new
to this role as analyst for your
committee, uh, for the last few
months.
Um, and we're going to be
talking from a presentation that
looks very similar on the front
page, but this one says child
maltreatment prevention and
early intervention. And so Kelly
and Sarah kind of laid the
foundation, talking to you all
about programs that broadly
serve families and children in
our state and are really um
intending to ensure that they
don't come into contact later
with the system. Nathan and I
are now going to go deeper into
programs specifically.
Related to interventions when
high levels of risk exist or
when abuse or neglect has
occurred, um, at the very back
of your presentation, uh, it
looks, oh, we have a tiny
version, but yours is bigger.
There is a chart that gives them
program descriptions. I call
that to you uh out early on
because we're going to go a
little bit into the weeds and
talk about specific programs
where we have them or where we
don't, and so if you would like
to
Quick reference about what those
are. I call that um on the back
page.
Um, if you turn to slide to kind
of what we're going to talk
about today in our presentation
is an overview of research
related to evidence-based child
maltreatment programs. We're
going to talk about Title 4E and
the Family First Prevention
Services Act that provides an
opportunity to states to invest
in prevention programs. We're
going to talk a little bit about
alternative multi-level
response. It's also called
differential response and our
state's implementation as well
as
Our implementation of the
comprehensive addiction and
Recovery Act, or CARA. I'll kick
us off and then halfway through
our paths to Nathan.
If you look at slide 4.
I'm going to point you to data
that is probably very familiar
to you, but it grounds us in why
we're having a conversation
about preventing and intervening
in child maltreatment. Um, so if
you look at slide 4,
the first three charts pull data
from the Federal Administration
of Children and Families
reporting. I acknowledge it lags
about 2 years, but it's one data
point that we have that allows
us to compare our context to
other states. One of the things
that you will see is New Mexico.
pretty consistently has a higher
rate of first-time maltreatment,
um, about 12.7 for every 1000
children in our state. And if
you break that down, as you all
heard, um, you've heard a
variety of times. The vast
majority of that is actually
neglect in terms of what is
reported for substantiated cases
of abuse and neglect. That is
not, we are not unique in that
kind of trend. It is quite
common across states to see
neglect to be the most commonly
substantiated case of
or neglect. You will also see
that New Mexico has consistently
had a much higher rate of repeat
maltreatment. That is a measure
of whether children have a
substantiated case of abuse or
neglect and whether there is
another case within 12 months
and we consistently have a
higher rate than other states
and that has persisted for some
time. If you look at the last
chart on that page, Children
subject to repeat maltreatment.
That is a performance measure
that we specifically track for
CYFD. It's one
The key outcomes for our system.
And so we have more recent data
there. What you'll see is that
while we had some improvement
during the pandemic years, that
number has ticked up in the last
couple of years, and now it's
about 14%, um, so, uh, of
children who have a
substantiated case of abuse or
neglect will have another
occurrence within 12 months. And
for that reason, it's very
important that we as a state are
looking at how do we prevent
child abuse
Neglect, and how do we intervene
in evidence-based ways when it
occurs to prevent it happening
again.
Um, so that's kind of the
context. If you look at slide 5,
we also talk a little bit about
childcare. Uh, I'm sorry, foster
care. You've, you've left
childcare. We're not talking
about child care anymore. We're
not talking about foster care.
Um, and one of the
recommendations LFC has made
over time is to move our
interventions upstream in the
system and try to invest early
on. Foster care um comes with
very significant costs. It comes
with significant costs to the
state.
You'll see here, um, one year
of, of foster care for a young
person is about 20,000 $21,000.
That's a figure we estimated a
couple of years ago, so it may
be higher. Um, and if you
compare that to in-home
services, that's about $3700.
Um, foster care is also costly
for children and their
experiences. We know that
research suggests that simply
the interaction with the foster
care system is traumatic for
children, um, and his associated
With experiences of of
separation, loss, and further
behavioral health challenges,
and so it's really important
that we are intervening early to
try to prevent that really
heavy-handed challenging
experience with the foster care
system.
Um, another data point that
might be helpful context for you
all is that the vast the
majority of children who enter
foster care will ultimately be
reunified with their families.
If you look over the last 5 to 6
years. Um, the goal, the goal
related to reunification is
about 50 to 60% of children in
foster care, whereas adoption is
about 25 to 30%. So again, if we
can find evidence-based ways to
intervene and really
Sure that foster care is used in
only, only when absolutely
necessary. There's a benefit
there, and if we intervene with
families when maltreatment has
occurred, we can prevent future
interactions with the system.
And so what Nathan and I will
talk to you today about our
specific programs that research
shows work in doing that, in
preventing or intervening in
cases of abuse and neglect.
So if you look at slide 7, this
is that same kind of framework
that you saw Kelly and Sarah
talk through. They talked
through that kind of primary
prevention tier. Those are
broadly available programs
targeted um not specifically
targeted but available to
stabilize families. We're now
going to move down that kind of
pyramid and talk specifically
about programs that are designed
for cases where they risk
already exists, or
Where abuse and neglect has
occurred and and what programs
kind of work um to intervene
there.
Um, one of the things that I'll
point out is as you move down
the pyramid, there are fewer
agencies involved, so while the
healthcare authority in ECECD
are providing kind of those
broad population level programs.
When you get to instances of
abuse and neglect, that's where
CYFD is really positioned in
statute to be the agency that
intervenes.
All right, if you turn to slide
8. I'm gonna walk you through a
chart um related to
evidence-based programs that are
specifically designed to address
abuse and neglect. And if you
take two things away from what
Nathan and I say today, I hope
you hear kind of two themes. One
is that if when we look at the
array of services and programs
that are specifically
evidence-based and targeted to
families that are high risk or
have cases of abuse and neglect.
That is where we have some gaps
in our state when it comes to
the service array so we're gonna
get a little bit in the weeds on
what programs we have and what
programs we don't, but that's
kind of a theme. We are, we have
some gaps when it comes to
evidence-based programs
specifically targeted for those
families. The second thing I
hope that you take away is that
implementation, kind of as you
heard from Kelly, really matters
when it comes to what we're
implementing and how, and some
of these programs involve kind
of the intersection of variety
of systems.
And so getting implementation
right also really matters.
So what you'll see on slide 8 is
a cost benefit analysis that we
have done over time related to
programs that specifically have
a positive ROI when it comes to
intervening in cases of abuse or
neglect and specifically looking
at the outcome of preventing
child maltreatment, and if you
look at that chart, I realize we
are LFC. We talk about things in
terms of dollars and cents, but
when we talk about ROI, what's
beneath those numbers are
people's experience.
So the blue bar on that chart is
an ROI related to the the
individual benefit. And that's a
measure of the benefit to the
individual. That translates to
life experience of things like,
um, avoiding lost earnings. When
it comes to the orange bar and
we're talking about taxpayer
benefits. What that translates
into lived experience is things
like the avoidance of future
interactions with systems like
foster care or corrections, and
so I
realize when we talk about a be
a taxpayer benefit, you know, of
$11. That really means a
prevention of interaction with
future systems. And so what
you'll see in this chart is an
analysis that comes from the
results first model about some
of those programs.
If you look at the chart for the
ROI programs, we have a few of
them operating in the, in the
early childhood home visiting
space. So for example, we have
healthy families. America has a
program that exists with an ECE
City home visiting, we have
parents as teachers, we have
nurse family partnerships. So
ECD ECECD is implementing some
of these programs and some are
expanding.
Um, if we look at CYFD, we don't
have the operation of programs
on this list currently. And so
when I say there are gaps in
services available, that's kind
of what I'm talking about here
is that we don't see those
implemented, and we'll talk more
about that. For example,
alternative response has a very
high ROI, and Nathan will talk
about it more, more deeply. Um,
you all in statute, I believe
the legislation may have been
carried by floor leader Chasy to
establish
Differential response, also
known as alternative response
and statute occurred several
years ago, but it has not been
implemented in an evidence-based
way to date. Uh, and so, um,
Kelly mentioned to you all, if
you look at the second chart,
um, you know, home visiting
programs are designed to serve
different populations. They have
different intended outcomes and
so you can see in the chart on
the right, some of the specific
programs that are targeted to
preventing or reducing child
maltreatment. Those are
Programs like nurse Family
Partnership, Healthy Families
America and Safe Care.
Um, so if you turn with me to
slide 9, it kind of reinforces
that point that I was just
making that when we look at home
visiting or in-home services
programs. They're designed for
different target populations and
have different outcomes for
families. Family connects, for
example, is a home visiting
model operated by ECECD. It has
an ROI of about $1 but it's a
universal program. It's kind of
light touch home visiting. If
you move down the spectrum,
nurse family.
Partnership tends to be targeted
to low income first-time
parents,
families, women tend to enroll
in the 2nd trimester. It has a
very high ROI, um, and that is
because some of the outcomes are
specifically associated with
preventing child maltreatment.
Then if you move down the
continuum, safe care is a
program that specifically
designed to target parents who
either are at risk of or have a
history of child abuse or
neglect. It's an evidence-based
program and has a high ROI, but
again, it's that family
connects. It's a different model
for a different intended
purpose. We don't have safe care
currently operating in New
Mexico and that's an opportunity
that we have to get some of
those models up and running in
our state.
Um, so kind of the key point is
we need a broad service array
and we've got some gaps when it
comes to some of those really,
um, targeted programs.
Um, he turned with me to slide
10. I'll talk a little bit about
Title 40, um, of the Social
Security Act. Title IV is a
section of the Social Security
Act that addresses foster care
and the federal government
several years ago kind of
acknowledged that it was paying
for foster care, but really
needed to do a lot more in terms
of preventing interaction with
the foster care system. And so
in 2018, the federal government
passed the Families First
Prevention Services Act, which
allows
State and tribes with approved
plans to claim federal
reimbursement for certain
prevention services for eligible
populations. Um, and the Title
4E Prevention Services Act
specifically outlines what those
eligible populations are. Those
are children who are a candidate
for foster care is what, um, the
language of the federal law
says, and those are children who
may remain safely at home with
the receipt.
Of evidence-based services or
programs that are identified in
a federal clearinghouse states
do have some broad latitude in
defining what it means to be an
eligible candidate for foster
care, um, but this program is
really targeted to a specific
population. It's not kind of the
broad kind of home visiting
opportunity. Kelly described.
And then the second eligible
population is a child in foster
care who is pregnant or
parenting.
Um, so, uh, this law was passed
in 2018. New Mexico has
developed several potential
plans, but to date we are one of
only 5 submitted plans that has
not been approved by the federal
government. There are 46
approved plans either in states
or tribal governments, and so
this is a real opportunity for
our state to implement
evidence-based programs and get
the federal government to pay
for it. Um, so that is when you,
when you think about
Mr. Chair, opportunities, this
is a big one.
And if you turn to slide 11, I
will call out um that title for
you and the FFPSA, which is
quite a mouthful, we'll fund 3
specific types of evidence-based
programs. They've got to either
be mental health and treatment
services programs, substance
abuse prevention and treatment
services or in-home parent
skill-based programs or home
visiting and the programs that
states identify have to have a
certain type of evidence-based
rating.
a federal clearinghouse. There
are about 80 programs in the
Title VV clearinghouse, um, and
that clearinghouse gives
programs a rating of promising
supported or well supported.
So we've got to do these types
of programs, but if we do, the
federal government will pay for
it.
If you look at slide 12, this is
just a graphic that we pulled
from the capacity building
center of states that gives you
an overview of what are the
other pro what are other states
implementing when it comes to
these evidence-based programs
within Title 4, about 68% of
states are implementing programs
that are in the wealth supported
category that is programs with
very rigorous research that
suggests that they prevent or
intervene in cases of child
maltreatment. Those are programs
like
Um, FFT functional family
therapy, which you heard about
from the Medicaid program,
multi-systemic therapy, home
builders, um, which is an
intensive family preservation
program, I imagine familiar to
you, Mr. Chair, from your time
at CYFD, um, as well as a
variety of others. So this is
what other states are doing.
If you look at slide 13, um CYFD
shared with us, um, the, the
most recent draft of our state's
Families First plan. It's been
submitted to the federal
government. They received some
feedback
and I believe in July of 2023
and they are working to address
that feedback. But what we've
presented in this chart for you
are what are the programs that
we are proposing as a state.
We implement um.
When it comes to Title 40.
And what you'll see in the plan
is this CYFD is proposing 3
programs that they are currently
implementing that includes
keeping families together, which
is, um, this is the rental
assistance program that exists
within CYFD, um, family resource
centers and family connections.
What I will note is these
programs are not listed in the
Title for a clearing house.
They're, they're not evidence,
they they don't have kind of the
muster of evidence-based
programs, and they likely won't
be eligible.
um for reimbursement for, for
Title for you.
The plan also outlines a variety
of programs, um, and designates
ECECD as the implementer of the
evidence-based programs. Those
are programs like Healthy
Families America, Safe Care and
family spirit, um, which are
evidence-based home visiting
programs.
I will note that the the ACF
feedback that we reviewed and
CYFD provided to us notes a
concern from the feds about kind
of how will that work? Um,
because the target population
for Title 4 is Children at
imminent risk of foster care
involvement and so the plan
essentially proposes a referral
to ECCD to be the implementers
of this program, but Title 4
also requires the monitoring of
safety in these cases and so
this is one of the
Places where there is potential
risk, um, because the plan
essentially involves a referral
to ECECD.
And I will also note, um, it's
our understanding that some of
these programs don't currently
exist at ECECD. So specifically
safe care, um, is not a model
operating in New Mexico right
now, um, those CYFD got an
appropriation a couple of years
ago to set up a unit within the
agency. It it it's not operating
right now.
So that's sort of what is in the
state's plan in terms of
summary, you turn to slide 14,
um, I kind of reinforces what I,
I previously mentioned that the
what is currently proposed in
terms of our plan, um, doesn't
have CYFD implementing new
evidence-based programs, but
instead proposes ECECD as the
implementer of those programs
and so there is a risk when it
comes to monitoring those cases
that could potentially be
referred.
And
we also call out on this slide
several programs that previously
existed in New Mexico that have
rigorous evidence and research
about their ability to prevent
and intervene in cases of
maltreatment that the state is
no longer implementing and those
we could do, um, so for example,
Um, homebuilders isn't currently
operational, but has a very high
ROI. It is an intensive family
preservation um program and it
involves kind of going into the
home and working deeply with
families where abuse and neglect
has already occurred, but foster
care may not be needed with with
an intervention. Similarly, safe
care, a home visiting model that
is particularly targeted to high
risk families is not currently
operating within CYFD, but
REC 9 might be an opportunity
for partnership to implement and
then triple P level 4, again an
evidence-based program related
to child maltreatment previously
operated in New Mexico and is
not currently. So these are kind
of three examples of additional
things we could do, um,
particularly CYFD could do when
it comes to evidence-based
programs that work um when it
comes to preventing and
intervening in child
maltreatment.
Um,
And so if you turn with me to
slide 15, um,
I we outline here sort of what
are some of the appropriations
and funding sources that exist
to get things off the ground.
You as a legislature have made
several appropriations to CYFD
that were sort of designed to be
bridge funding. So to get
programs stood up and running so
that we could either build
Medicaid, um, or Title 4E
Prevention services. So we
outlined what some of those are,
um, and CYFD FY 24 operating
budget. You all made a
significant increase to the TANF
transfer.
And you can see the language
there for that appropriation
really designed to get programs
up and running, specifically
evidence-based prevention and
intervention services that tan
of appropriation was increased
by $1000 for the FY 25 operating
budget and then for the last two
years there's been language with
House Bill 2 that flags 7.6
million in general funds that's
really supposed to be a match,
um, for programs that are
evidence based and could be
billed.
Uh, similarly, we outlined
several special appropriations
that were also designed to be
sort of startup funding capacity
building money to get programs
and services off the ground and
you all are very familiar with
the $20,000 for behavioral
health capacity. Um, I will note
that we've done some analysis
and it does look like some
spending has now occurred within
that appropriation, within the
last couple of months. Um, but
the spending has not really been
um.
For purposes that will result in
more behavioral health
providers. So we have seen some
spending for things like family
resource centers, um, it is how
CYFT is currently paying for the
group home, um, which is not
eligible for Medicaid, um, but
that really is not the creation
of new behavioral health
services. So that, that is um a
continued concern. There was an
appropriation of $1000 to build
capacity for safe care and FY
24.
Directly to CYFD but that
appropriation was unused.
Um, and FY 25, um, within the
grow, there's $3 million over
the next 3 years also kind of
intended to build capacity for
evidence-based prevention and
intervention services that could
eventually bill either Medicaid
or Title 4, though we note that
there were governor vetoes of
the words, evidence-based
Medicaid and Title 4. so now
those dollars could potentially
be
used more broadly. Um, so that's
sort of a summary of the
resources available to build
capacity for some of the
programs um that I mentioned.
I'm gonna pass it to Nathan,
who's going to talk with you all
about differential, uh,
response, also known as
multi-level response, also known
as alternative response.
Thank you, Rachel and uh Mr.
Chair, I'll pick up on
slide 17.
So differential response is a
response to referrals to child
protective services, that is an
alternative to a traditional
investigation, which is focused
on substantiating or proving
abuse or neglect, um.
Instead, if the safety of the
child is not an imminent
concern, the alternative
response or differential
response conducts a family
assessment with the goal to
engage the family, uh, determine
strengths and needs and
determine a plan without
requiring a determination that
maltreatment has occurred or if
the child is at risk of
maltreatment.
Differential response is
response is not just a referral
to outside resources. It's a
continued sustained support from
a CPS caseworker, and safety
monitoring continues throughout
that process. So if you look at
the figure here on the slide,
there's sort of 8 elements of
differential response. If you
look at number 5, there's
requires no findings or entry in
the central registry, which is a
key function of this uh model.
Uh, 6, assignment to DR can be
changed, um, so it's really
fluid and responds to the needs
of the individual family and
individual needs of that family,
um, and number 8 services after
the assessment are voluntary.
So that's one of the key uh
features as well.
If you turn to page or to slide
18.
LFC analysis, as Rachel
mentioned, using the results
first model, estimates and a
return of investment of $16 for
every $1 invested, an estimated
reductions in child maltreatment
of 2%.
Uh, the legislature passed
differential response statute,
but New Mexico has not
implemented that, um.
To the uh specs of the statue
and you can kind of see that in
the figure there on the slide.
So if you look at the blue
boxes, that's the model for the
way differential response
operates in most states and
really that's the method that
can really have the intended
benefit of reducing protective
services worker caseloads and
improve outcomes. However, if
you look at the red arrow, the
dotted arrow that kind of points
to the red box. This is the way
Mexico is implementing um
differential response. And
really those cases are being
offered to those uh cases that
are screened out.
Meaning not an accepted report
of abuse or neglect, um, again,
unlike other states.
Um, again, differential response
has the opportunity to address
some of the lows related to
investigations shifting the
focus uh based on the level of
risk. However, based on the way
it's implemented that may not
actually be happening.
Uh, turning to slide 19.
Uh, in FY 25, there was a grow
appropriation for implementation
1.4 million annually for 3
years, so 4.2 million in total.
Um, and that's for, uh, to pilot
an expansion of differential
response statewide as it had
recently been targeted to only a
few counties.
Uh, New Mexico should seek
technical assistance to
Um,
And it really found.
That um after New Mexico enacted
its Cara statute, which was in
2019, uh, child protective
removal of infants from the home
due to substance abuse fell
below national rates.
However, at the same time,
families have not on average
experienced changes to their
safety or well-being.
So overall, the program
evaluation found significant
implementation gaps and the need
for integration and coordination
across agencies. If you look at
figure one here on slide 21. I
know it's, it's a little blurry
and hard to read, but I can walk
you through it. Um, that first.
figure there on the left side of
the slide.
Um, shows the way the process
worked before Cara went into
effect. So if there was a
substance exposed infant in the
hospital, a report of suspected
neglect or abuse was made by a
mandatory reporter such as a
social worker, a nurse, or other
healthcare professional.
And then CYFD would decide
whether or not to investigate.
After New Mexico's uh Kera law
went into effect. You can see
the process gets a little more
complicated when there's a
substance exposed infant in the
hospital, a plan of care is
developed at the hospital. That
plan of care then goes to the
care coordinators and to see why
the NDOH um.
COFDND which are notified and
receive a copy of the plan of
care.
From the care coordinators goes
to the outreach and follow up
with families and CYFD and DOH
follow up.
Um, with an initial out at the
initial outreach is
unsuccessful.
The only way a report of
suspected neglect or abuse is
sent to CYFD is if someone
separately from this process
submits a report to Sky and then
CYP decides whether to
investigate. Um, just something
to note, a report of suspected
neglect or abuse to COFD is
different.
Uh, from COFD receiving a
notification of the plan of
care. So CORD receiving that
plan of care in and of itself is
not a report of suspected
neglect or abuse. Nathan,
could you go back over this 11.
A plan of care is developed at
the hospital. Yes, Mr. Chair. By
whom?
So a plan of care is developed.
By a healthcare professional and
that plan of care is intended to
ensure the safety and well-being
of this substance exposed a
newborn by addressing the
treatment needs of the child and
any of the child's parent
parents, relatives, guardians,
family members, or caregivers.
Um, so that plan of care is
The
Essentially the the uh newborn
is not supposed to leave the
hospital until that plan of care
is developed and signed by the
by the parents. Yeah, it's just,
it's just it's.
healthcare professional employed
by the hospital by the MCO,
by I mean.
This is where everybody's in
charge, so nobody really is
doing it that's the fear. That's
right, that's what we found, Mr.
Chair, and we also were able to
talk to frontline workers,
nurses, and caseworkers that
work in the hospital, um, all
reporting different levels of
training that they received, um,
and knowing how to fill out
these plans of care, um, you
know, whether or not they could
even identify the baby as being
exposed.
Uh, to a substance. So as you
mentioned, yes, there is a wide
variety of the hospital, um,
workers that are helping to
develop these plans of care, and
there is a wide variety of
training.
Then the other, the other thing
I'm I'm clear about is why doOH.
Why is DOH in the middle of this
there.
They don't seem to have a clear
role a service that they provide
that's crucial or anything, I
don't know. Yeah, Mr. Chair,
that's a good question. I think
the way it was set up in statute
was that DOH was um.
Part of the process they also
were tasked with creating a an
annual report on the
implementation and outcomes of
CARA. So, um, we'll get to the
slide a little bit later that
shows kind of all the players
involved in this process, but
DOH is one of them. HSD is one
of them, um, just a wide variety
of, of, um, players in the, in
the game, if you will.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, may I just ask a
quick question and so kind of
tagging on what your question
was of who is helping to develop
the plan.
How is the parent to be engaged?
The mom.
Yeah, that's a great question,
Mr. Chair, and Senator Lopez,
um, the parents or the mom
specifically or even relatives
are specifically uh supposed to
be involved with the uh
development of the plan.
So they are essentially given a
list of resources, a list of uh
treatment options, um, ranging
and we'll see um those on slide
23 as well that they basically
get to choose from and so once
the family uh in coordination
with whoever is helping them
make that plan chooses which um
options they will pursue that's
put into the plan signed and
then they're released. However,
there's no follow up as to
whether or not they actually
follow
through with those, um, you
know.
Issues that they planned.
And in many cases, um, we found
that, um.
Families left the hospital
without even knowing that they
had a plan, so it's not a
perfect system, obviously, and
um there's not always that
coordination between the uh care
coordinator and the family. And
Mr. Chair, the reason why I ask
this is if the, the mother.
Um, has a substance abuse issue.
Usually you're in the hospital
for 24 hours, maybe 48 hours
before you're gone, you left,
right? You're out of there. So
Mr. Chair, that's an awful quick
return.
Time for this interaction to
happen, um.
Unless you had a C-section, then
you're there another extra day
if you know, lucky to try and
recover from having yourself
ripped open, um.
The, uh, I know just cause I had
a C-section, so I'm kind of
like, yeah, you, you were ripped
open to have your child, um.
But Mr. Chair, you get an extra
day in the hospital.
Um, but I, I, I'm just thinking
of this as to how.
Insurance and other entities
also force the issue for the
mother to be out and it's just a
very quick response time that
you have because if the mother's
in denial.
That she has a substance abuse
issue.
If she has issues of abuse
that's going on at home.
For whatever the reasons are,
she may be in denial or afraid,
um, so I think there's other
issues as to how quick of a
response time.
Um, and I'm just, just putting
this out, um, and maybe you'll
have more information on this
too, but it's just a question
that comes in when we talk about
how quick is this.
plan to be put together and the
reason why I asked that too, I
had a safety plan with a member
of my family when she came into
ours and CYFD never responded to
that safety plan either. 6
months later, we were still
going, what, where and who, um.
So even if the hospitals are
supposed to be doing this,
Mister Chair.
I just have a lot of questions
on that because 24 hours later
you have a child, you're
supposed to be out 48 hours max,
you know, depending again on the
severity of what's happening
insurance costs, hospitals are
trying to get you in and out. So
it, it's just what time frame
and how, because that's intense
if you're supposed to get family
engaged. Again, if the mother's
supposed to.
Agree and come to terms with
what's going on in her life.
It's, it's that we're asking a
lot to be happening within that
24 hour 4824 to 48 hours
especially if mom.
Um, is unable.
To come to terms with what's
going on.
Mr. Chair, just
I'm just sharing some thoughts,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Senator Lopez,
thank you for that. That is
definitely an issue that we
flagged and um uh just some
follow up on that. If, if the
parent is, um, not, you know, in
a state of mind where they can
work on that plan of care. Um,
it is designed so that, uh,
family members, household
members can also be involved
with that and um oftentimes we
saw that grandparents would come
in and be involved with the
making of that plan, and then
they would be involved with it
for, you know, a period of time
after the release from the.
Um, another thing on that is uh
HSD recently announced a billing
code that has become available
to hospitals to build for the
development of the plan of care
and other care-related um.
Expenses, which may, you know,
be an incentive to hospitals to
spend more time on training and
um and implementation really of
the CARE Act and making sure
that they're um.
Really spending enough time on
the implementation of these
plans.
And did they do that? Did they
come up with the billing code,
Mr. Chair, yes, my understanding
is that that became effective
July 1st.
But
That would only be for Medicaid
eligible.
Which I guess is the vast
majority, but
Yeah
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
continuing on slide 22.
Uh, these are the three key
findings that we found in the
evaluation, we've already kind
of touched on a little bit of
it, but uh the first finding,
and I'll go through these
findings, um, slide by slide, so
on slide 23 our first finding
the vast majority of carrot
families are not receiving
support services or substance
use treatment. Uh, if you look
at the bar chart here on the
slide, you can see the different
uh services that are offered to
families when they are
developing that plan of care
with the care coordinators.
Um, so you could see it ranges
from anything from childcare to
um, uh, you know, uh, Matt
services, home visiting, uh,
smoking programs, and if you
Uh, look closely at the chart,
you can see that only roughly 1
in 7 cara families is receiving
substance use treatment
services. And again, you know,
what triggers this whole process
is the fact that the child is
born substance exposed. Um, but
very few of the families are
opting for a substance use
treatment services, um.
So families, this is uh an
optional program, so families
often decline referrals to
substance use treatment and
uptake of other service
referrals is mixed with families
are not necessarily being
referred or participating in
evidence-based services, um,
even when families do accept
services, the state does not
regularly track whether families
follow through with the
treatment and services. Um, so
even if, you know, the family
leaves promising to engage in
these services, um, there's no
guarantee that they actually
will
Uh, infants stay on the plan of
care for their first year of
life. Uh, however, neither
statute nor nor rule define what
successful completion of a plan
of care means. So even after
that first year of life, um,
many of these families could be
experiencing the very same
issues that um that they were at
the beginning of the
implementation of the program.
Um, additionally, current state
statutes and rules do not
include procedures for creating
plans of care before birth,
limited prenatal supports and
case management to care of
families. Again, this goes to
Senator Lopez's point, if these
plans were being developed
prenatally, there would be a lot
more time
um.
And
You know, there could be a lot
more thought and effort going
into
Uh, preventing the child from
even being born substance
exposed in the first place.
On page or excuse me, slide 24,
our second finding.
Cara related uh case management,
screening and identification of
substance exposed newborns
should be improved.
Uh, New Mexico's Kerala does not
include monitoring of family's
follow-through with plans of
care, um, as I mentioned before,
which is a recommended best
practice.
Uh, New Mexico hospitals are
under identifying substance
exposed newborns by up to 40%.
And differ in screening
practices?
And again, plans of care are
established at birth rather than
prenatally.
Uh, hospitals often submit care
plans of care with missing
information, uh, which could
lead to insufficient case
management.
And many families are not even
aware that a plan of care was
created for them, as I mentioned
before.
Uh, 13 states but not New Mexico
require their state's child
welfare department to monitor
the implementation of plans of
care to ensure steps are
completed by the parent.
Um,
So that goes to that first
bullet here on the slide.
Um, and in terms of under
identifying, um.
Uh, universal screening is not,
uh, implemented here in New
Mexico, DOH notes without
universal screening, newborns
can suffer from delays in
maternal substance use treatment
or may not be identified at all,
um.
So if you'll turn with me to
slide 25.
Uh, the care system remains
complex with potential
duplication and integration
gaps, and this is the slide, Mr.
Chair, that I mentioned would
kind of show the the key
players um in the process and as
you can see, it's again, it's
difficult to read. It's a little
blurry, but I think the point
we're trying to make here is
just how complicated of a
system. Uh, this really is when
you, when you really drill into
it.
Um, as the graphic highlights.
The system highlights a variety
of roles and responsibilities
across agencies and uh we found
a lack of coordination and
significant gaps in
implementation. Overall, LFC.
Uh, recommended that HCA
actually be the lead agency.
Um, as opposed to CYFD.
Um, as
Um, as a reminder and as we kind
of mentioned before, 70% of all
babies born in New Mexico are on
Medicaid, um, and the car number
is actually higher than that,
uh, care coordinators are
already positioned to engage
with families and ensure they
are able to access services and
the state already pays $140
million for care coordination
through MTOs, um, however,
outcomes are not measured or
tracked. So when New Mexico was
developing its career
legislation, COFFD and other
state agencies.
reported that CA implementation
could be fully funded through
federal dollars.
Um, however, uh, following the
Carra report, um, despite our
recommendation that the program
be moved to HCA, uh, CYFD
proposed 20 additional staff.
Uh, as Karen navigators.
Um, at the time they're already
31 each at DOH, HSD, and CYFD.
Um, so this really does kind of
point to the issue of
duplication of efforts, uh, for
example, care coordinators at
HSD were established as a
frontline staff to interact with
families. And again, the state
spends $140 million dollars
annually on care coordination,
uh, but a lack of specific
outcome measures and gaps and
integrate and but there are a
lack of specific outcome
measures and gaps in integration
across agencies.
Um.
the current uh situation is CYFD
is hiring, uh, they're going
ahead with their plan to hire
Kara Navigators, um, I think, I
believe they're looking at
hiring 17.
Um, so care coordinators again
are the first point of contact
with families, and it is unclear
who does what to get families
the services they need. Uh, CYFD
navigators are also proposed to
follow up with families to
support their access to
services. So these new Kara
Navigator FTEs, I think will
In theory, um, do more to
actually get the family from the
point of preparing the plan to
actually getting the services
that they agreed to.
So on slide 26, these are some
of the key recommendations and
progress on whether or not these
recommendations have have been
implemented.
So as you can see, uh, there are
a lot of um.
Kind of X's showing that there
hasn't been a lot of progress,
um.
The first one there was that the
legislature should consider
amending statute to include
references to implementing
prenatal plans of care. Again,
that goes to Senator Lopez's
point, um, you know, that would
allow more time to develop these
plans and help ensure that fewer
infants are born exposed to
substances. However, there has
been no progress on that.
Uh, we also recommended adopting
statute that would make the
healthcare authority, the lead
agency for CARA.
Um, and FY 25, 1.9 million was
appropriated to HCA related to
career implementation.
Uh, however, there has been no
legislation relating to carrot
changes, um, as, as recommended.
Um, I won't go through all of
these, but you can kind of see,
um.
That there hasn't been too much
progress.
Um,
Uh, yeah, yeah, so, um, I guess
the second to last, um, the
recommendation was direct MCO
care coordinators to monitor
completion of specific action
steps and services agreed to by
the family and the plan of care
and notify carer navigators, um,
the healthcare authority did
issue a letter of direction to
MCOs directing the placement of
care coordinators in certain
birthing hospitals and requiring
specific care coordinator
activities prior to discharge
and requires care coordinators
to submit follow-up assessments.
And create a transition plans,
um.
CRP has posted.
18 carat related positions and
has hired one to date.
So as of July 1st.
Um, so I think that concludes
our presentation, uh, Mr. Chair,
and we'll stand for questions.
We'll leave you kind of with the
theme that we started with when
it comes to uh a service array
and the existence of
evidence-based programs that
research really shows address
child maltreatment. We have some
gaps, um, and also what and how
we implement and so, you know,
we highlighted where a lot of
these things require integration
across systems and, and we have
some implementation.
gaps.
Well, thank you. And, and Cathy,
do you, do you mind making
yourself available in case
there's some questions?
Uh, Cathy, uh, uh.
Phoenix Doyle is the
Uh, deputy secretary of CYFD and
she's overseas family services
and Kara and I would assume
family services includes the
differential response, all of
that is part of her thing. So
it'd be good to, if you have
questions, you can address them
to the, to the LFC staff or to
Cathy, and we'll find out what,
what, what a foot and, and
what's going on now, what's
what's planned and, and how we
might be helpful. Senator Lopez,
we'll start on your side.
this time and come around, you
ready to, you have a question?
No, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for this information on
black and white, well, color
too. Um, what I was gonna ask
though, Mr. Chair, um, the
handout looks kind of blurry to
me on page 25.
Um, for how you've mapped out
the care system.
So either it's my eyes or um if
you could, if there could be a
um maybe email to us so we could
have a clearer copy or maybe if
it's on email it's much more
clear than what my eyes are able
to decipher.
Just because system um.
It would help me to see a little
bit more and and be able to
read.
What the arrows and everything
else are are showing. Mr. Chair
and Senator, just on that, um,
the entire report is posted on
our website. Um, we could also
email to you that chart. That
figure is included in the report
and it is uh it is.
Clear. OK, much more easy to
read. Now I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, this is uh what
you shared with us today is um
really important and needed
information, not just for us,
but I think for the public to
also um look at, read through.
And um.
I think try to understand a
little bit more when we talk
about.
What the role is of the Child,
Youth and Families department,
but how the whole system when we
talk about prevention and early
intervention for children in New
Mexico.
I am
I guess, um, when we look,
everything costs money and we're
always looking for ways to make
sure that we can cover the
costs.
It, uh, you know, Title 4E I
think does have many
opportunities that we have not
and hopefully we'll be taking
advantage of in many different
ways.
Um,
I, I have too many questions,
Mr. Chair, on this at this
point, we could go on for, for
ad nauseam for a little bit, but
what I did want to um look at is
on page 15, where I made a few
more notes, and this is talking
about our appropriations.
And when we were talking about
Especially listing on um under
special appropriations, the $200
million that didn't get spent
and I think we've expended, I
think 10 million back. Was there
a breakdown on that, Mr. Chair?
Um, so, Mr. Chair, Senator
Lopez, um, prior to the last
legislative session, very little
had been spent. You all
reauthorized the total 200
million um but separated it
between HCA and CYFD and
provided some specific language
that it should be used to build
capacity for evidence-based
programs. Some of that language
was vetoed. Um, what has
happened to date is, um,
Prior to this turn of the fiscal
year, um.
HSD sort of transferred 17
million of that 20 million over
to CYFD and sort of said you're
in charge of the plan, um, we
have seen some spending um in
the last couple of months. Um,
so when we last look about
looked about 8 million either
encumbered or spent, um, and we
could get you a follow-up
breakdown as to where that
spending has occurred. Some of
the key areas are those that I
mentioned. One, the, the
revenue.
So for the group home that has
been created, um, family
resource centers, as well as
some direct services that
probably would have been
eligible for Medicaid, but we
can get a breakdown of that for
you about what now spending
spending looks like. I
appreciate that, Mr. Chair, just
because it gives us another
picture as we look at funding
for this next.
Um, fiscal year that's coming.
Um, so I would appreciate that
information. And then the other
thing, the other.
Maybe a partner, Mr. Chair, when
we talk about behavioral health
provider capacity, um, last
night we had an opportunity to
visit the FQHC here, um, in
Portales, and as Miss Ammerman
had mentioned, there's like 200
entities across the state of New
Mexico.
Right, that are FQHCs. And if I
remember I heard that last
night.
And I know here they're actually
getting an optometrist, which is
like, wow, for this community in
this area because there are
none, right? So they're gonna
have their first real live
optometrist who's already booked
out for 102. They haven't even
opened, that they already have
102 appointments for to to
provide services.
Um, Mr. Chair, I also know that
other FQHCs across the state
also have a behavioral health
element or could be utilized.
As behavioral health providers
in the state of New Mexico, so
it's not looking to having
actually to go build a new
building, but maybe there could
be an opportunity of sharing
space within our FQHCs across
the state of New Mexico, which
already are part of that first
line of defense for health in
many different ways, and I just,
um.
And maybe there are many who are
providing, but I know of one in
the community that Senator
Ortizipino and Representative
Chavez that we have with First
Choice, they have been offering
um mental health service,
behavioral health, right? Um,
it's not utilized enough.
And where else across the state
do we have information about um.
How we could use utilize the
space that's already there, um,
because I think that would be a
really added value and benefit
for those providers who may be
looking for space and such, but
I think there's a way to develop
a partnership.
Um, especially when we're
talking about behavior health
provider capacity. I think we
already have something, Mr.
Chair, that we need that that
could be utilized, um, and many
of our FQHCs, of course, are the
first line of defense where
families will come in for
prenatal service, um.
Exposure to the health care
system that may be the first
place where they come, which
would be an opportunity if we
can have some health um behavior
health providers that are
already there, which I think
would be odd. And again, I don't
know, Mr. Chair, because I'm not
aware of what the whole system
within our FQHCs. I have a hard
time saying that of, you know,
where the the gaps are too. So I
just wanted just to throw that
out for anybody else in the
universe who's listening, uh,
who may have some information
for us, um, but I appreciate.
This report. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Representative Thompson, I don't
have anything, Mr. Chair. A
representative Kate.
I, I thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for your presentation,
um.
And slide 25, it says uh uh
recommended Kara, um, go
underage uh HCA.
Who recommended LFC and win.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Cates, uh, yes,
so that was a recommendation by
the LFC and that was uh made in
the evaluation that was
published in October of 2023.
OK, 2023. Thank you. And um
You said that um.
That CYFT agreed to uh hire 20
care coordinators. They did hire
17 so far. Um, are they, no, is
that not what I understood. Uh,
Mr. Chair Representative CYFT
has posted positions, 18 were
posted. As of July 1st, 1 had
been hired. I imagine, Deputy
Secretary Phoenix Doy might
share more recent updates, but
those were.
The updates. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Let's get an update from
her since she's here. What's the
current status of the higher
hiring of the navigators.
There's 3, we could have other
chairs up there too plenty of
chairs.
Yeah.
Don't all leave.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, we
did have 18 out and I believe
half of those have now been
hired, the other half are in the
process within the state. It can
take a bit, um, to get those
going, um, so we're able to get
more in the metro area that we
have been in some of the rural
areas so we're working on that
process.
Thank you sure uh uh thank you,
Deputy Secretary. If you could
explain to me, so is it 20 care
coordinators altogether or was
it 20 additional care
coordinators. I heard that, you
know, you've posted for 18,
you've hired over half of them
since July 1st, what, what is
the, the rollout plan on all the
care coordinators.
So the rola la. These are
navigators and so it's not a
care coordinator. I want to make
sure that we're all clear on
that the navigator's role is to
visit the family, go into the
home, handhold basically to get
supportive services. So, um, the
ideas that we rolled that out
statewide and that's what's
going to be more of the
challenge in rural areas, but we
have, I think 50% of our care
plans are in the metro kind of
Santa Fe area, so we feel.
Um, we're glad that we have
those that we have and just so
everyone knows, there's about
100 care plan plan plans of safe
care that are done each month.
Um, and so with those, we have
some that accept services. We
have some that do not. We have
some that are on the fence. Um,
it's also important to note that
while the mother may not may not
be doing the plan and the the
grandmother doing it, then the
mother may report she didn't
know she had a plan because the
grandmother did it so I think
it's important they have a short
window in that in the hospital
to do the plan of safe care. So
that's why we need to know where
they're at so we can go visit.
And follow up with what I call
plan of safe care phase 2, and
say, OK, now let's do a real a
plan that's gonna support you
and it's not just a check box
with a lot of resources, which
is what the old care program,
how it was designed. So in a
nutshell, they're doing
intensive case management with
families to connect them with
resources. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, so that, that's great thing
that you uh clarified
But
it's CYFD's plan as of right now
is to hire 20 navigators.
For 33 counties, correct?
So, um, Representative Kates,
Mr. Chair, the
Yes, due to funding, so the plan
would be more if we had more
funding. We took the TAF dollars
that were given to us to create
these positions.
And I thank you, Mr. Chair. I
have one other question, and I'm
not really sure if it's LFC, um,
we actually probably need a
pediatric, uh, I would like to
uh the, we we talked about
universal screenings at the, at
the any birthing centers,
hospitals, per se. What other
universal screenings are taking
place for infants.
On birth.
Sorry, Mr. Chair Representative
Kates, are you referring
specifically infant screenings
that are related to substance
exposure or other types of
screenings like the vitamin K
thing. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
The quick answer would be yes.
So you referred to, um, the
universal screenings uh
regarding the substance use and,
and the
Difficulty in them, but I am
trying to assess that we already
have many other universal
screenings done at B sites,
whether it's the vitamin K or
the hearing
where uh we're number one in, in
the country identifying children
with disabilities. Now that's
under the age of 3, it's not
necessarily at birth, but, um,
I'm trying to figure out what
other universal screenings are
already
In place
In the birthing centers, um.
To figure out why is there a
barrier to this universal
screening.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Kate, thank you for clarifying
because yes, you are correct.
There are other screenings that
occur with newborns, um, at the
point of birth.
Um, what the evaluation
highlighted is that we don't
have a universal screening for
substances and it's specifically
recommended the use of Et the
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment as a
potential tool um for universal
screening. We know that it is
occurring in some places. I
gave birth at a large hospital
in Albuquerque a little over a
year ago, and I recall being
screened um through what I know
to be expert, but we did not
find that to be universally true
in the evaluation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So is
Esper a
Questionnaire, is that the
screening or is it a blood test?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Kate Espert is a verbal
screening tool.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative, um.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Vinson,
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the information. I mean, it
almost went from bad to worse
for me.
Um,
I, I.
So I have a bunch of questions,
um.
I don't even know where to
start.
So let's look at um slide number
10.
And we had gotten this
information and I don't remember
where it was in one of our
committee meetings, I believe,
but it's the Title 4E family
Families First. The plan, um,
and today you all said that the
plan was actually submitted last
year, July of last year.
Um, New Mexico is one of 5
states that doesn't have an
approved plan. Why is it taking
so long?
Mr. Chair, uh representative
that
I don't have a solid one word
answer or is taking longer
because we're working with our
federal partners to understand
what they're really looking for,
um, when I came on board, the,
the plan had been developed
already, um, and submitted and
then we had a change in creating
our family services division and
the uh our federal partners are
aware of that, and they wanted
us to to redo it to make sure
that we're incorporating.
All of the different, uh,
prevention areas and everything
that were completely redoing, so
the, the plan will look
different based on the feedback
that we've gotten, but also on
the changes that we've made
within the department.
So they wanted us to, to make
sure we got settled on what how
we're doing family services, and
then we can go back and resubmit
the plan. Yeah, but it's taken a
year. That's what I don't
understand.
That's a long time.
The other question that I have
is um the this document, page 10
also talks about um.
Tribal governments, um,
submitting plans, have any of
the tribal governments in New
Mexico submitted a plan? Do you
know?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
last I checked the title for the
federal website, they had not.
Uh, or, um, no tribal
governments in New Mexico had an
approved plan, the federal
website doesn't necessarily
track every submission.
And then on, on um page 13,
there is a um notation in here
about the safe care. It's a home
visiting program. It's um easy
And then on, on um page 13,
there is a um notation in here
about the safe care. It's a home
visiting program. It's um ECC
the early childhood is
responsible for it, but it's not
been there it's not operating.
Um, do you have any idea why?
Uh, so, Mr. Chair
Representative, probably one
nuance is that the plan proposes
ECECD is the implementer of Safe
Care, um, 2 years ago, CYFD
received an appropriation to
establish a safe care unit, um,
but that money wasn't unused and
so how to reconcile sort of the
integration of different
agencies. I'm, I'm not quite
sure. Um.
What has happened? Is anybody
taking the lead on that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
again, um, that's a little bit
unclear to us as well.
Um,
So on page 14 there are plans
that you speak about that CYFD
could reimplement.
Under the under the uh CYFD
column.
Um, Triple P, level 4.
is a prevention tool for some
at-risk families, and it's not
being utilized.
Um, and apparently it stopped 10
years ago. Is that, is that what
it says? And do we know why, um,
I'm assuming.
Do we know why that one hasn't
been picked up again?
Mr. Chair representative, I'm
not sure and I'm not sure why
exactly it was we stopped. I
imagine you all may even have
deeper contextual knowledge as
to why we may have stopped
Triple P, um, but to date it's
not operating.
OK.
And then the other question that
I have is on page 19, why are
we, if there's all this unspent
money and CYFD.
Why are, why are legislators
asking or being asked to um.
Give grow money.
For pilot expansion. I mean,
it's 1.5 million annually for 3
years. I mean, uh.
And,
and we're to me it seems like a
waste because if it's not used
that money just reverts back.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
will clarify there were those
two different pieces of the grow
that kind of we're both new last
year for all of us, um, this is
the section of grow that was the
€3 appropriation that wasn't a
specific uh legislator grow
appropriation. So when CYFD
submitted their budget last
year, um, there were
LFC looked at sort of what is
historical spending look like,
and, and made the recommendation
for the overall operating budget
to be flat. But in this case,
there were a few specific
initiatives that appeared to be
evidence-based and so moved um
money for those implementations
into the grow to do two things
one, so that they could be
piloted and 2 so they could be
evaluated and tracked. So in
this case.
That 1.4 million annually for 3
years wasn't a specific ad, but
it was in steady movement from
the operating budget to a
three-year pilot so the money
could be tracked and evaluated
for outcomes over time.
So has that process, Mr. Chair,
has that process already begun
in terms of um what pilot and
When it's gonna be, um, when
it's gonna start up.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
yes, we have started, we're this
specifically for the multi-level
response or differential
response or alternative
response. What? It's a response,
the response,
um, we are working closely with
Casey family program. We've
developed how we want our
infrastructure model to look.
We've been able to go through
the case loads and how they need
to look and we're going to need
to be able to do it statewide.
We now know that we're going to
need 115 FTE to be able.
To do that and we've just gotten
that this week. Um, so we're
really looking at.
neglect cases specifically and
how we can look at those and and
prevent those from going down on
investigation path but rather
into the multi-level response.
And so I think we've made
significant progress in working
with Casey family to get these
identified because that's what
we need to know is how is it
going to look. The next step is
building out that job
description, how that's how that
will look. So it's moving, I, I
think at a good pace. um, Mr.
Cher, did you say 150 FTEs.
115 based on the number of we
have about there would be on
last year's data there would be
11,000 cases that would be
coming into the state that could
be geared toward differential
response if we look at neglect
only and not emergencies so we
have to be very careful in which
ones we select, but um, I'm
basing it on that with a
caseload of 10, um, obviously we
can kind of look at our model
and see how that would look, but
we wanted to know what does it
look like?
Statewide, obviously this money
will not cover 115 FTE. So then
we would have to say, OK, is
this, are we gonna do metro only
or do we do a whole region like
the Northwest region which would
see fewer, that's what we're
still working on right now, but
the we've think we have the
infrastructure decided now.
OK. And Mr. Char, you said that
you, you're building out the job
description.
So what kind of qualification
skills are you looking for
education requirements are you
looking for for these positions?
Mr. Chair, Representative, we
would be looking for a
bachelor's degree, um, social
work is always a preference, but
we also know that we look at
psychology, we do look at
sociology, some of the like
degrees, um, and, and how that.
How we build out for New Mexico
because that's it's hard to get
only social work for any of our
in-home services and um to to do
these type of.
OK.
And what's the projected start
date?
For the project.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um.
That's harder to give because of
how some of the state systems
work with hiring. We hope to
have uh identified.
A
Our goal is by January when
you're back in session is that
while there's no way we could
have it up and running
statewide, but that we have all
these pieces in place, and we
have some positions that the
pilot sites identified in those
positions out.
So we can start that that's our,
our goal. OK. All right. Um, and
then on page 23, we're talking
about Kara. Um, I wrote some
notes in here about families who
decline.
Um, do we know why they decline?
Is it because I know what you
said 11 piece is denial, right?
Mom might be in denial, but are
there other reasons that the
family might decline treatment?
Is there is transportation is an
issue, um, childcare an issue. I
mean, are there things that is
work an issue? Um, I mean, what
are the other reasons that they
decline and how are those
addressed?
Mr. Chair, Representative, uh,
absolutely transportation is, is
an issue that we've seen also we
know that we have limited
services and someone, while they
may say yes today, because
there's a wait list, and then by
the time they're able to go, or
say in 4 weeks, it's a no, it's
a decline, um, also folks don't
want people coming into their
homes or they don't have a home
for them to go into and then
they're scared they're gonna
lose their child, um, because.
Or couch surfing or what there's
a variety of reasons of fear and
shame and just a a lot of
different reasons that occur. So
Mr. Chair, who maintains contact
with the family between the time
that they leave the hospital and
the time that.
Maybe they're going to be
engaging in services. Mr. Chair,
Representative, that would be um
the care coordinator if they've
developed that relationship and
they're the family wants to be
with them or the navigator, but
the, the, the big thing that
we're watching is that someone
is maintaining that relationship
with the family.
OK.
So like I have a ton more
questions, but I'm gonna ask
just one more.
Um, and I don't remember where
it's at, but there was, oh,
the incidence of child
maltreatment, reoccurrence.
So my question is, has there
been any data gathered in terms
of the relationship between the
skill of the worker.
And the incidents of
maltreatment.
Does that make sense?
OK, so Mr. Chair, representative
Chavez, um, there is a body of
research within social work
practice that does indicate um
that the presence of social work
licensure um does result in
better outcomes within the child
welfare system. Those include
things like time to permanency
relationship with family
engagement as well as incidents
of maltreatment. I am unaware
though that any specific
research or evaluation has
occurred.
In New Mexico using our data,
our families, our outcomes. Um,
Mr. Chair, I just thought of one
more. So I know that in New
Mexico from time to time there
have been consultants, I guess,
who have been hired to review.
Um, cases.
Have we had any conversations
with those consultants?
About this, this question that I
asked.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, um, within our capacity
for as LFC we have asked over
time for some of the access to
information related to case
reviews, um, but have not been
able to access that type of
information. So while um that
may be existing in other pockets
for us as staff, we, we don't
have access to that type of
information, Mr. Chair, why not?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
we've received sort of different
um rationales as to why um
across this spans multiple
administrations. I, I will
clarify, but primarily concern
related to the sensitivity
related to the cases that may be
involved.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent
be representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I wasn't gonna say anything, but
you got me all stirred up,
Representative Chavez and, uh,
You know, I just, it's
frustrating. It's so
frustrating. I can't even
imagine what how frustrated you
guys are.
On rolling out a plan and I've
literally, we've been talking
about this for 2 years that I've
been here, probably longer for
you. And
Why is this such an issue?
On rolling the plan out and why
can't we get it together and
we've had, you know, all of
these ongoing failures and
We
What recommendations do we have?
Are we following
recommendations? Is there
recommendations if we continue
to mess up?
Why can't we learn from those
lessons?
And you know, the crisis, our
children.
The children are the crisis.
And we need to prioritize this
program and.
I've tried to wrap my mind
around this program is there so
much bureaucracy in this program
that it can't be unveiled?
Mr. Chair,
And I'm asking whoever wants to
answer that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the, the CRE program
specifically.
I, I do not think that there's.
Um,
I think we're getting it
unraveled now. I think we're on
a good path, um.
I know that we're making sure
that everyone understands what
their role is, so we're to the
point of duplication, we're not
duplicating and, and ensuring
that we're seeing families and
seeing children, um.
To say that we're rolling it out
quickly.
No, I know we need to roll it
out now and I'd love to say that
we're able to roll it out
statewide and, you know, we, we
get into every home and we get
into every home quickly, and
that isn't the case.
But we are doing better than we
were, and, um, we continue to
look at how do we improve, how
do we improve? Because you're
right, if we know we're failing
here, then why do we continue to
do it? And so we can't continue
to do those things and so we
have to keep talking, we have to
keep collaborating with each
other and have a clear path
forward in everyone is on the
same page, and that's what we're
working toward.
And Mr. Chair, I, I just, I
don't know why I feel
because I'm in the, uh, Health
and Human Services during the
session, it makes me feel
personally responsible.
I feel personally responsible,
and I think that this, this
committee should feel personally
responsible for laying out that
program.
And what can we do to help you?
I don't, uh, we want to expedite
this. We want it to happen
today. We, we want it to happen
6 months ago or a year ago, and
I, I just think that we really
need to look at ourselves in the
mirror and reflect that, you
know, our children are not OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a
lot to say, but um I think just
for.
For next time I'll make sure
I'll Sarah for.
Well, I have a few and uh I'll
start with, um,
I'm still trying to get my head
around what would be the
advantages of funding home
visiting through 4E rather than
through Medicaid, isn't the
match better for Medicaid, so
Mr. Chair, um, one key thing
about 4E is it is a pairer of
last resort. And so one thing
for the state to think about and
consider is how do you kind of
braid and blend funds, thinking
about what specific models are.
Funded through what program? So,
for example, safe care, um,
regular old safe care is
eligible. I'm sorry, Kelly is
going to correct me. I get these
two mixed up all the time. Safe
care augmented, is eligible for
Medicaid reimbursement. Safe
care, not augmented, is not. And
so we could think about as a
state, what are the different
program models available and how
do we kind of blend and braid
fund. Another example might be
Title 4,
could pay for home builders.
That is a program listed within
the Title 4E Clearing House.
That could be a revenue source
for home builders or Triple P,
that kind of thing. So it's
thinking about what are the ray
of services that we have, um,
what uh populations do they
serve and how do we kind of
blend and breed funding. The
title for prevention, um rate is
the, is the state's FMA rate. So
again, we could
Potentially get the feds to pick
up the majority of the uh the
cost just with Title 4E instead
of Medicaid, but it's the FMAP
right? So it could change over
time, um, but that it is the
state's death map. Oh, so 4 E
for these prevention because we
were
two days ago we heard about 4E
for social work education and
that depended on the penetration
rate, which was, you know, very
low. I mean it was 49%.
Yes. So, Mr. Chair, you are
correct. Um, this is for the
prevention services
specifically. It's about 75%,
um, right now about the same as
the Medicaid, so I mean in terms
of federal resource it's as good
as Medicaid. That's correct. The
one clarification is Title IV
does require be the payer of
last resort. So we kind of need
to be very strategic about what
services, what programs, and
kind of braiding those things
together.
Um
Is so this this question is for
you, Cathy, is, is the state
looking at the at the uh safe
care home visitation model, is
that one that
So, Mr. Chair, when I came on
board at CYFD. I did look into
safe care and when I contacted
them, they were very concerned
for New Mexico to do safe care
because they'd tried it before
and we're not successful when
they did that home visiting
program. A piece of that is
because of the how it's
structured the workforce
required was not in place. The
infrastructure was not in place
at all in New Mexico to be able
to do it so there were providers
trained and then the
Safe care curriculum model was
abandoned because it wasn't
successful. So in order to
reimplement it what I've asked
is what do we need and how would
we do it in order to make sure
that we can do it to Fidelity,
and we can sustain it rather
than training a lot of providers
on a model and then they can't
sustain it. So, um, because I'm
trying to learn from our lessons
learned, so to speak, from when
it was tried before with home
visiting throughout the state.
Um,
any indication from the feds
when our
Families First plan might be
approved or?
How long have they had it? Let's
put it that way. I mean, how
long will they sit on it, Mr.
Chair? They don't have the
complete rewrite as we were
adding the differential response
and how we're doing it, that
will be submitted in the next 10
days or so, it's going up and
then, well, hopefully we have
captured everything they believe
that we're doing, um, and we've
redone our um definition of
what, uh, for foster care
candidate. They, we were too
broad.
First, um, and now we want to
stay broad enough to be able to
capture our our children and be
able to utilize um make sure
that as many children as
possible would fall in that
prevention definition of.
So we we can claim it
eventually. And, and are you the
one that has to do this rewrite?
And do as
assigned,
right? Yes,
now back to our LFC staff on
page 15.
Uh
I mean, this is where the two
presentations this morning tie
together. Here we took another
15.8 million from the 10 of
block grant.
And are using it for something
else I mean probably very
justified use of tent of money
except that we have one of the
lowest Tiff benefits in the
country.
And we keep raiding the 10 of
block grant instead of giving it
to families, we're giving it to
departments.
Which incidentally have plenty
of money. I mean, we've got
plenty of money right now. We
don't need to raid the federal
money for this.
EC ECD got 10 of money to do
childcare, which I just, I
wanted to pull my hair out.
They've got a $10 billion fund
now. And we're reading the 10 of
block grant instead of giving
more money to Tanner families.
could you explain the rationale
for why we keep doing that and I
know you say we, but, but
really, the LFC staff are the
ones that cook up these schemes
and then sell them to the LFC
I know that.
Uh, Mr. Chair Kelly, if I say
anything you might add to,
please chime in. Um, I think in
particular these TANF funds, um,
were viewed the transfer to
CYFD.
Initially was viewed as a bridge
to be able to build capacity for
things that would be
evidence-based and then
ultimately Bill 4. So if you
look at the language on that tan
of transfer, things like family
support services, family
preservation services and
evidence-based prevention and
intervention services. The idea
initially was that those could
be a bridge to build capacity to
get the programs up and running
so we could draw down federal
Title 4. The second is some of
the uses of those TANF funds are
really in line with the purpose.
Um, intended for, for Tanna. So
things like supportive housing,
support for youth who are aging
out of foster care who are at
high risk population. The money
just flows through CYFD and
provides some of those
supportive services. So I would
say those are some of the, the
rationales for the use of TAF in
that way. Kelly, where'd you go?
She's behind you here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd also
like to add, yes, we do use TA
for childcare assistance we have
reduced that over the years. We
used to also use it for pre-K
and home visiting, and we took
it out. We no longer send TANF
to those and we use other
revenues to healthcare authority
was stopped to get that name
straight. Is the welfare
department asking for increase
in the tiff benefit, the monthly
benefit, you know, we'll have to
wait till September till they
they when their budget request
and we can.
See what their intentions are
for those revenues. I mean, talk
about a preventive service if
the family had enough to live on
that that might be the best
preventive service, but
Mr. Tro would have been carrying
over balances in the TANFF
program for some time.
OK, then I had a few other
questions. Let's see, uh, oh, is
Casey family helping? are you
actually getting somewhere with
them? Are they, are they coming
in and helping you shape the,
uh, the differential response?
Mr. Chair, absolutely. They're
coming in person actually to
even help us. So, so that's been
really beneficial. Uh, great,
good.
Then slide 22.
Oh, I know, slide 22, yeah.
I
And I noticed last year the
department asked for money for
family services division in the
LFC's response was, well, you,
you have money left over, you
really don't need these
positions, uh, you could
transfer the money. Why don't we
just give them the money? We've
got plenty of money that if she
needs 19 navigators or 10.
How many did you need family
differential is 120 for
differential response. 15115's
give them the money. We've got
plenty of money, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, I would
encourage CYFD to be very
thoughtful about their budget
requests this year, um, and I
think they have more continuity
um than they did at this time
last year when it comes to
putting that together. I would
note that while the LFC
recommendation did not include
an operating budget for CYFD.
This is connected to
Representative Chavez's.
question. What, um, the LFC
recommendation did was move the
funding for the programs for
family services into the grow.
So while the budget
recommendation was not create a
family services division and
funded division, but fund
prevention and intervention
services through the groves.
One, so that we could pilot them
and track outcomes. 2, so we
could clearly see where the
money was going and where it
would be spent, and 3, because a
lot of those services should
eventually be able to build
either
Or E or Medicaid and so it
provide a bridge. So there was
about 18 million put in the
grow, um, for CYFD, um, for that
reason.
OK.
The big chart on the Carra
program page 25.
Was it, was it the law, the way
we wrote the law?
Did that, is that what gave the
hospitals the responsibility for
writing the care plan? Is that
we actually say that in the law?
Mr. Chair, we believe that is
the case. statutes sort of
outlines the different roles and
responsibilities and um there's
some codified and administrative
code.
Could the navigator write the
plan?
Yeah, not, not, not, not, I
don't mean under the law. If if
the law says the hospital has
the right to plan, but I mean,
potentially if we change the
law, could the navigator be the
one who writes the plan, Mr.
Chair, yes.
And that's why I'm calling it
Safe care plan Phase 2.
You know, here's, here's the
deal care coordinators sounds
like they really know what
they're doing and they really
know, but they don't even live
in that community.
They're in an office in
Albuquerque.
Aren't they? I mean, the
insurance companies, these 4
MCOs that have this contract
hire at 75,000 a year, so they
rated our CYFD staff. I, I can't
tell you how many former CYFD
social workers now work as care
coordinators for the MCOs
because those salaries were
$20,000 a year more than they
were pulling down as CYFD
workers.
But they
They don't know the families.
They're in an office and all
they know is a a computer screen
with some information. How are
they going to establish rapport?
The reason nobody follows
through on these services is
nobody, they don't know who's
providing this plan to them.
They don't trust a plan
developed by somebody in
Albuquerque when they live in
Socorro or
Corona or wherever the heck they
are. I, I just think that the
only one that they would have
that we have a fighting chance
of getting them to actually
follow through with this
referral is if they know the
person that developed the plan
for them.
If, if, if there's some kind of
personal relationship that
they've developed with that
person and that's going to be
these navigators. Those are the
only, I mean, the hospital
social worker is never going to
see them again.
They're in and out as Senator
Lopez said in 24 hours now,
maybe 48 at most,
but that hospital social worker.
is not going to have any kind of
ongoing relationship with him.
The care coordinators in an
office in Albuquerque.
Far away from them won't even
meet them in person.
The coordinators don't meet the
the families in person and MCOs
can really, really clear.
Correct me if I'm wrong on that.
The only one who they will see
flesh and blood.
And, and, and maybe establish
enough trust in.
I hope they're getting
motivational counseling
training, uh, motivational
interviewing training so that
they build some hope that when
you say you really do need to
get into a 12 step program where
a substance abuse program or
whatever it is, that there's
enough.
And then that person is there in
person and can follow through.
I, so I think the care court, we
ought to write them out of the
plan. There's no, there's no
absolutely no reason to include
them in the plan.
Uh,
I don't know, to me, all they do
is say no to requests for prior
approval. I don't know what what
else care coordinator's job is
it's lost all, all, uh.
It's lost all real relevance to
the lives of the people that
they're working with. You want
to correct me?
You know a care coordinator who
really does know their people
that they,
you know, there's, I think.
Um, the hospitals don't
continue, they have too many
things going on within their,
their business as you mentioned,
but I just wanted to throw one
more thing in your suggestion
is, you know, we have public
health offices in every
community.
Um,
The new mom has to still take
the the child right for a wild
child checkup.
So wherever they go for that
well child checkup, especially
in some communities it's usually
the public health office or an
FQHC where they actually have a
provider to go. That may be
another option as to where um.
The contact is made for
continuity, right, to check on
this and public health offices
are overseen by the Department
of Health.
Well, then maybe that's why we
wrote the DOH into, I mean, I,
otherwise I see no role for DOH
in this whole thing. I mean, one
other complexity. I'm sorry, did
you have a response, Rachel? Mr.
Chair, I was going to note we
agree and have concerns about
care coordination, um, in any
given year, the state spends
upwards of $100 million on care
coordination, and we are unclear
about the outcomes that we
receive, um,
From that service because we
don't really track outcomes. Um,
one of the key recommendations
from the care evaluation was to
have boots on the ground. And so
I don't think we are in
disagreement about that need. I
think, um, uh, Nathan, correct
me if I'm wrong, but I think the
recommendation to move to HCA is
the lead agency really comes uh
from a place of potentially that
the care coordinator may be best
positioned to then navigate on
behalf of the family, access to
services.
To things like substance use
treatment, but we are not in
disagreement that boots on the
ground are needed. What I would
add in terms of a potential risk
for duplication is that while
CYFD is building up the
navigators, um, HCA has also
directed care coordinators to
play a different role when it
comes to families. So, um, we
can make sure you have the
electronic version of this, but
we link the letter of direction
um that HCA sent to the MCOs
that directed them to one.
have in-person care coordinators
at the largest birthing
hospitals, um, to initiate some
of those plans and follow up,
um, with Kara families. The
letter of direction also
outlines specific activities,
those care coordinators are
supposed to do, um, within
certain spans of time, but I
think the risk you are naming,
which is, but what about the
actual outcome for the family
still exists and so the key
thing I hope you take from what
we shared is sort of.
You've got a really complex
system with a lot of different
players who are all doing
things, but the integration will
probably really matter when it
comes to the experience of the
family and are they able to get
the services that they need.
Well, it's hard to say. I, I
think CYFD is, you know, uh, the
navigators who would be working
for CYFD or are more appropriate
than a care coordinator hired
by.
The MCOs, even if they're
directed to be there in person
because we don't have anybody at
all there right now and they're
just being hired, so I think
hopefully between the two we
find somebody, a warm body to
actually be at the hospital when
the baby is born because that
that the clock is ticking is
ideally if they were to come in
early for prenatal care, but a
lot of these moms don't get
especially the caram moms aren't
getting prenatal care. They're
showing up.
Maybe never have have been seen
by anybody by the time they get
there. So, uh, and, and as far
as the 33 counties, I think, I
think 19 or 20 navigators is
going to be an ample number
because most of the counties
don't have hospitals that
deliver babies.
The whole northeast quadrant of
the state, there's not one
hospital in that whole area that
delivers babies, so no reason to
have a navigator sitting in a,
in a hospital in a, in a
community that doesn't have any
births going on. The births are
in probably a dozen.
Maybe 15 communities in the
whole state, but I would think
probably a dozen at most.
Um, so I, I think you've got an
ample number at least to start
and, and let's let's see, but we
do need to revamp the law, and
we would love to have some
guidance.
Coming up with a draft for a
revamped car law, uh, that would
be really helpful. Uh,
Representative Vinson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Rachel, I was just gonna ask
you.
I wanna, I wanna throw CYFD uh
uh uh safety raft or something
because I, I really do believe
that this program is drowning
them and.
Would you have a recommendation
where that program should go?
Mr. Chair.
Just because it's on my mind and
I'll think about it all the way
back to Lincoln County if I
don't ask the question.
I'm asking, I'm asking you,
Rachel. So then, Mr. Chair,
representative Vincent last
year, um, in the CRA evaluation,
the LFC recommendation coming
out of that program evaluation
was to move the lead agency to
the healthcare authority, to be
in line with the public health
orientation that the law
envisioned. I recognize there
are different perspectives on
that, but that was the
recommendation last year.
When you see somebody flailing
around, Mr. Chair.
It's human nature for us to go
help them.
And I like that recommendation,
so.
Thank you.
Representative Kates and then
Representative Martinez. I just
thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, for
all your comments. I mean, uh,
you just really be able to
circle it around and and focus
it. Um, I'm, I very much
appreciate that.
Um, I do support, uh, Senator
Lopez's idea, especially in, in
yours as well with the HCA if uh
the use um some of it is just
cultural and because CYFD
culturally has a uh a legal
custody element to him and the
healthcare authority does not,
um, I think that we have a
better chance of participation.
I
to circle back once just to say
it out loud, especially for
those who are Zoom, but maybe
the LFC, maybe don't we we saw
today and nobody really brought
it up,
uh the chair mentioned a little
bit, um,
on TF and, and you had a slide
about the low uh utilization of
TAF and I just say Tanna, I, I
have provided services for women
with co-occurring mental and
substance disorders.
In the past, and um, 1 of
Benefit is so little and
requires so much, so much hours
of training, which means getting
childcare and for only, and if
we keep taking money out of the
TAF to do these other things
rather than actually providing.
The benefit, I mean, it is
narrow for those who don't know,
it's a very narrow definition.
You have to be women with
children, you have to go through
hours of of uh job training and
education, which I'm all for,
but there's other places where
they're getting them and
placement and support, they're
not getting that from TAF. It's
just a hoop they have to jump
through for what, $300.
A month or something, something
that, you know,
I know it may be helpful, but um
when you have 3 kids and you are
the caretaker at home, it is a
very limited benefit and I never
understood why this state gave
so little in their tan of
benefits, um, it's starting to
recognize that it's because we
keep depleting the pool, um,
with these other programs, uh,
so I appreciate that you brought
that to the attention of.
Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative Cates
and Representative Martinez.
Just real quickly, uh, 2.
Issues on, on the issue that
Senator Lopez brought up.
Is, has there ever been a plan
to do a warm handoff from.
The hospital
To one of the service agencies
whether it's HCA or CYFD.
Um,
It would just seem like a fairly
easy.
Fix to do a warm handoff.
So that that that family is
tracked.
Through the system instead of
Dropping them off.
A cliff when when they walk out
of the hospital and then having
to grapple to try to get back
into the system.
Um, just, just an idea. Second
thing is there, there is
obviously a lot of concern.
From LFC from the legislature,
from everybody on this panel.
I think Representative Vincent
said it perfectly. We want to
help.
And stop the flailing of this
agency we want to.
Create a path to success, but.
As the agency, is anybody
following the recommendations
trying to put a plan together.
Or is the flailing going to
continue over and over again?
Because it seems like good
plans, good recommendations by
LFC good ideas from the panel.
is, are any of these things
being taken back to the agency.
And a plan developed to try to.
Right the ship, maybe um.
That's
Just my 2 cents for the day, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, thank you,
Representative, and thank you
all.
For the for great information.
Um, I just have one final
comment, Cathy. I hope the
navigators will wear little.
Jackets or.
Some kind of identification that
does not say CYFD on it
that that would, that would
immediately start to, you know,
put them on the wrong footing,
something like uh.
Para program navigator or
whatever, but, but to make clear
the distinction between your
division and the protective
services division.
Unfortunately, it's just such,
been so stigmatized these days
that it immediately starts it on
the wrong footing.
So we have recommendations from
uh LFC to
Change the current program to
the
Uh, healthcare authority, we
have Senator Lopez's
recommendation to put it in the
health department. We have my
recommendation to keep it in
CYFD, uh.
Anybody want to recommend ECD
corrections.
No, OK. No, we won't do any of
those. So we have a variety of
perspectives on the committee,
but uh I think we will come up
with a redrafting of the of
incorporating many of the
recommendations that you, that
you made and uh uh.
And, and I, I, I really do think
we have to take it away from the
hospitals. That was an
unnecessary complication to have
the hospitals somehow
responsible for a care
coordination plan that.
They will never
as soon as the family goes out
the door of the hospital, if,
if, if Medicaid is going to pay
them, they're, they're happy.
They, they, they have no further
responsibility, uh, so, yeah.
But
But thank you all for coming.
And members before you leave, we
do have some public comment
online.
I don't think, is there anybody
here who wanted to make public
comment?
OK, we have 2 people online.
Anybody want to guess who the
first person on Light Net? Yeah,
Nat Dean is online.
Good afternoon, Nat.
I.
Oh.
Um
That.
Thank you, Ned. It's always good
to hear from you.
Uh, Laura Lynn Violanta from
NMC.
And, and members, there is
lunch, uh, uh, before you hit
the road, if you want to grab a
lunch, there's lunches there,
and that's for everybody in the
audience to help yourselves.
Yeah, probably too, there's an
extra one for your family.
Laura Lynn, are you still there?
Oh good.
Thank you very much, Laura Lynn.
And with that, members, I think
we've, we've exhausted
ourselves our our.
Resources are dwindling rapidly.
We can, we can tell, but there
is lunch to help um restore your
energies for the trip home. Uh,
we will meet again next, next
time we meet again, we'll be in
Socorro at the end of the month.
and um be square.
So I hope to see you all back
there and hopefully uh several
other members that usually are
with us representative Herndon's
car broke down so she couldn't
be with us now, so hopefully she
can be back in Socorro. Thank
you all for the uh Doctor
Moyers, thank you for the
hospitality. Please convey to
the university how grateful we
are for everything you've done
