Good morning, everyone. Some
microphone working.
Alright.
Ah, welcome to legislative
Council. Uh, starting first
thing in the morning for a
change where we're all fresh and
bright And here we are, So we do
have a quorum.
But I will first, uh, ask for
approval of the minutes which
are in your folders
in the opposition seeing none we
have proved our minutes.
Yeah. So we were going. We're
going to start with our stuff.
working group recommendations
from our district office
staffing.
Let's see here. Okay. My first
page. Here it is.
At the last Legislative council
meeting on March 25th.
We asked. Our chief clerks are
Chiefs of staff, the Legislative
Council director to work on
policies, procedures and
recommendations for District
office stuffing.
So they've been working on that
each of you have in your folder,
a copy of recommendations that
they are bringing to the
council. We're not gonna vote on
those today, but we're gonna
have a full discussion and make
sure we hear from everyone and,
uh,
We will take that up. Then again
at our next meeting, which is
June 24th.
By the way, we would like to
have that meeting started. 930
also
So everybody can sort of see if
that works for us.
Uh so I'm going to turn this
over to our director who will go
through.
This copy of suggestions that
they have come up with.
So Mr You will start a soft
Good morning, madam President.
Mr Speaker. Members of the
Council. Um, thank you. Good
morning.
Um
As
The protest mentioned Madam
chair that the there was a staff
working group to look at
district staffing.
Um, and just so you're aware
there were
Still working groups for two
other reasons. One is the
director search.
And the other one was like
classification compensation. So
the
AH, staff working groups have
been quite busy since March,
25th on coming up with
solutions the or coming up, at
least with drafts for your
consideration and
recommendation.
Um, the director search has been
posted.
Um
And so that that's underway as
well.
With respect to district office
staffing, you should have to
page handout That's basically an
outline.
And this particular working
group was made up of the Chiefs
of Staff in the majority
minority from both the House and
the Senate, along with the
Chiefs of staff for the
presiding officers.
And both cheap clerks and
myself What we came up with in
terms of, um
Um
Considerations for you proposed
policies and recommendations is
that each member may hire a
district legislative aide de L.
A. For short on a full or part
time basis, It would be a
classification level E
Midpoint is around 63,000, the
de Ellas would provide support
to include those things listed
on there. I won't go through
each one, but it varies anywhere
from administrative work to
policy as well.
They would work in the
legislative district. You're
around. There was a question as
to whether or not they come up
to work during the session, but
if their district staff
The consideration was that they
should remain in the district.
The chief clerks would maintain
the responsibility and oversight
of hiring.
Legislative session staff as
they do now, Uh, the majority
minority officers in the House
and Senate would hire District
Office Liaisons d U L S
They would assist the
legislators and the de Ellas
with training. They'd be a
resource. They would be at a
classification level G the
midpoint for that is around 81
5.
Each member well would have the
ability to formally opt in or
opt out.
And there was there has been
considerable discussion about
that. If the member opts out,
the question is what happens to
that funding? What's the status
of that funding?
Ah, and just for your
information, there was
discussion about whether or not
Leadership office could
Um, in place of the member hire
somebody, or whether that
funding would just simply stay
with leadership office, Uh,
members may decide later to opt
in.
Or a successor legislator
through election or resignation.
Remember may decide to opt in,
so there was some discussion and
there were some consideration
about how to handle that that I
think
Is something we would, um
Expect to continue discussing
and bring back to you, Um, at a
later meeting
The D L. A. C would be allowed
to travel in state and they
could
Up to three interim committee
meetings per year out of the
district with the understanding
that for the most part, they can
observe the interim committees
through the Webcast.
Now. The timeline proposal. Um
Is because we're in the middle
of an election year, there was
consideration about what whether
or somebody who's running for
election should be able to hire
staff. So the recommendations
are that an incumbent that has
no general election opposition
could hire D L A beginning on
September 124.
Obviously, this would be an
incumbent who won the primary or
didn't have opposition in
primary.
But if they have no general
election opposition, they could
hire somebody beginning
September 1
Incumbent with general election
opposition who retains the seat
who wins the election.
Could higher on December 1 2024
And a newly elected legislator.
This year, November would be
able to hire the L. A beginning
April 1 of 25 after the session.
This could provide some ability
to stagger, Uh, staff in, um
And then, lastly, the leadership
offices in the council service
may begin hiring District Office
liaisons.
Human resources I T accounting
and other support staff
respectively on July 1st.
Ah!
The job descriptions for the
Douglas and the D. O. L s, you
know, will be forthcoming.
With respect to funding on the
second page.
As you're all aware $6 million
was appropriated in hospital,
too.
Ah, after startup costs and
salaries that money would be
evenly divided or evenly split
by 100 and 12 District staff.
That includes salaries and
benefits. I T furniture
supplies, office space and other
items.
The just informational startup
costs for just the I T hardware
and software would be
approximately $350,000 for 100
and 12 standard sets of
equipment and applications.
The year round costs for dlrs
and Vols
Would exceed $9.5 million per
year. Um, the current $6 million
obviously.
Minus the startup costs would be
insufficient.
However, supplemental funding
uh, could be included in House
Bill one at the beginning of 25
regular session.
As well as the year round costs
for district staff in fiscal
year 26 and then additional
staff for council service to
provide evidence support for
district offices.
Would be approximately $1
million per year.
We're looking at about 9 to 10
staff, mostly united, thr and
accounting.
Ah, um
That's not in our budget right
now, so we would come back to
the council at the next meeting.
Asking that that funding be
provided or allocated out of
interim expense funding, which
requires this committee's
approval. This council approval
Uh And then after that, it would
be year round. It would be, um,
recurring operational expense.
So the last thing that we are
recommending is that any
policies and procedures that you
adopt at the next council
meeting
Would be reviewed in 2026.
Allowing you about two years of
implementation and operations to
assess how it's working and what
Uh, revisions would be required.
And with that, madam chair, I
stand for questions. I think the
Chiefs of staff and the chief
clerks who were on the staff
working group are here as well.
If I need assistance in
answering any questions, Thank
you.
All right. Thank you so much.
Mr Speaker. Thank you, Madam
President Raul. I just wanna
thank the staff all of our
chiefs and a new role for
pulling this together. I think
we are leaving and bounds, Um,
ahead of where we were even a
year ago with these discussions,
and I'm glad that we're in a
very good place. Uh, I wanna
highlight the fact that this
work came out of
Um, our our staff or our experts
if you will, and it is a really
well thought out plans so Ah, I
hope that everybody gets a
chance to go through this. And,
um, I expect that we will be
able to vote on this on at the
June 24th meeting. Thank you,
Madam President. Thank you.
Next, representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Raul, Um
You mentioned HR staff.
But I I do appreciate, Um Madam
chair and Mr Speaker, uh, the
way that the staff did
collaborate. I do appreciate I
think, I think, um, very happy
with the overall attempt to come
up with something that
Um, would work for everyone.
I'm a little concerned.
About
The oversight.
Um, I know you mentioned HR
staff.
Um, but
Seems how staff will be would be
hired directly by each member.
I am concerned about, um, not
everyone who serves
Uh, as a legislator as a
legislator.
Um
Maybe has all of the wherewithal
to manage a staff.
Um
And what I mean by that is their
laws and things like that. That
That are in place that maybe
some of our members might not
have the expertise to deal with.
So, um so Raul
You're you're you mentioned that
some of the staff would be HR.
but what actually oversight
Over the staff.
Would HR have. I'm not sure that
there's any actual authority.
The way the way that it's being
presented to us, could you?
Maybe you could help alleviate
some fear on my part.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative leader Montoya.
So we we, we
Neglected to put it in here. One
of the first things that would
be critical is training.
Training of both legislators and
the district legislative aides
training on ethics
Considerations of governmental
conduct Act procurement code.
those kinds of things those
would be critical to ensuring
that everybody is trained to
extend possible and like you
said, you're this process would
in essence, make a number of the
legislators.
Employers they would be
selecting the individual.
We're expecting that member
would be responsible for, um not
just direction but also, uh,
oversight in terms of, um,
discipline. Um, termination if
need be.
HR staff would assist with that
process, but we would expect
there would be considerable
training on what employment laws
Govern. Um there's some
differences. Legislative staff,
for example, is not covered by
the Fair Labor Standards Act.
They're not covered by the
state's personnel Act there at
will. Employees that would still
apply here, so those kinds of
things would need to be covered.
One of the reasons for the staff
working group making a
recommendation on hiring
District office liaisons.
Is so that there is somebody in
each of those caucus leadership
offices.
To work both with to work, not
not both, but to work with the
district staff person.
The member and our HR in terms
of making sure that there's
oversight as you said, training,
support and the like, uh,
I don't know if that answers
your question completely, but
that's that's the direction that
we had considered in how we
approach this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um Mr
Darcy Aga.
Um
I know I had some members.
Who were hoping for an option of
Um, the ability for are the the
liaison to maybe have more.
Oversight, not just
Not just be a liaison, not just
have training.
Or and or support.
Um
Help.
For a member where I'm
concerned.
Madam Chair and Mr Speaker that
Some of our members might
forego.
Um, even hiring staff out of
Out of the
Fear of managing the staff or
Um and and feeling like they may
somehow
Personally end up with some sort
of liability.
Since it's not really as Mr
Brigance said under the state
Employee.
Code.
So
Just maybe a
Potentially putting themselves
in a position of
Um, other than
What we all currently face from
potential liability. But beyond
that,
Um
In hiring and firing and it's
done.
Clumsily.
So there's just some concern
there about that, and I and I
know that there was a request.
And I think it was in the
initial draft that staff had
That there was an opportunity.
For the liaison.
To, maybe maybe be able to hire
And be in that position.
Instead of the instead of the
staff member or instead of the
legislator, and I'm I'm not
exactly sure. I know there was
some discussion. Initially, it
had broad support.
And then I think that support
dwindled. So I'm not sure if
anybody could speak to why that
support dwindled, but
I found out about it kind of
after the fact.
Um so I don't know if Mr Bursey
Aga if you could address that,
or if maybe
Madam Chair. If you could
address that, or the speaker,
I'm just trying to find out why.
That was that was a comfort
level.
That for some of my members that
I I think would allow them to
take advantage of a staff
member. I'm afraid some may
forego
Madam president and
Represent Montoya, one of the
things that came up in in
subsequent discussion, and it's
just one issue that I can think
about, offhand that we
discussed.
Was
That, um
With that.
Having the ability of that.
Liaison.
Or somehow the caucus hiring
somebody.
With that, then?
Place a number of legislators in
the position of saying that
sounds like a better option.
I will allow the leadership
office to take care of that.
And I'll stay out of it. I'll
just provide direction.
That'll put a lot more pressure
on those leadership or caucus
offices.
To run.
Whatever number of of district
officers there there may be out
there. That was one of the
considerations about why we
thought that should be, um
Considered again. Um one of the
things that that we did want to
recommend, is that
Because this money is being
Evenly divided among 112
legislators, districts.
So every, um
Congress would have
That respectively ratio number
based on their, UM
But that money would stay there
that it would not go away would
not go back. It would not, it
would probably revert at the end
of the year. Just like our year
round budgets do
But that would still be an
ongoing recurring expense, even
if it's not spent.
Because that legislator might
change his or her mind.
Or a subsequent legislator, Um
ah, who comes in after an
election or resignation may opt
in May want that, so we
I felt that it was important for
that discussion to be amongst
the Legislative Council.
Um, about what to do with that
unused money. Um, and what?
That's one of the reasons we
want to make sure that this was,
um
Revisited in two years. This
policy
I thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Bursey. Aga, I guess offline,
Mr Speaker, I might and and
Madam Protein just have a
discussion. I
I'm not sure if that might not
be an option that we won't want
to talk about directly. I even
if that meant that that person
took on a higher position in a
supervisory role
There might
I'm not saying that we make that
the only option But if that were
an option, I think that
Um, uh, At the very least, there
would be some oversight, direct
oversight through ST HR rather
than
Just training so I'll talk to
you offline, but I do have
concerns.
That just some of our members
might not be.
Prepared to take on
That level of responsibility and
then
Their district would then suffer
because they would be maybe
maybe forgo the help and then
the district suffers and I and I
don't think that's what we want.
I think we want our districts to
be able to
Have the staff and I. It's one
of the reasons I wasn't 100%
against the idea.
Of staff because I think the
staff could use I think our
communities could use
That help, but
If it's just left up to the
members themselves.
I'm afraid because that level of
responsibility some of our
districts might suffer if they
opt out.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Roll.
Well, thank you for bringing
that up. Um, there has been some
discussion about having a small
subset of a council meeting
between now and June 24. So at
the end of our meeting, if that
seems like a possibility, then
we'll we'll move forward with
that so that we can have those
conversations.
Next on the list is Senator
Padilla.
Thank you, Madam President. And
thank you, Roland. Thank you to
all of the staff that worked on
this. I was reading through this
and I couldn't be happier with
what you've already come up
with. So thank you very much for
all of that work and moving us
further down the field of
getting this done. I agree with
the comments that were made, and
we do need this help in our
districts. It's just hard to get
it. All done. So this is
fantastic. Had a specific
question role. I don't know if
you was was there any thought on
how the district offices will
actually work from a logistics
standpoint?
So while I might be in the
central New Mexico
Um
Metro area. My district is
rather vast. It's almost the
entire southern end of the
burning Leo County from and and
and so was there any thought on
that like how these offices will
actually be situated? And I know
there was a lot thrown around
the last time we met and had a
conversation on that. But do you
have any insight there?
Thank you, madam President and
Senator.
The
We did discuss that, and that's
one of the reasons the issue of
having a district office liaison
came up.
Um, that would be to assist the
legislator, for example, in
selecting a location.
We do have a consultant firm
Architectural Research
Consultants, which had already
done some work on identifying
where that office might be
located.
Understandably, some districts
are quite large sum encompass
numerous several counties and so
looking for a centralized
location.
But also we put in there that
the, um staff maybe
May be able to travel in state,
including three interim
committee meetings.
Um
It would not.
We didn't
Finalized.
Uh, um, position or
recommendation on
How the space would be located.
A lot will depend on
What is available? I can tell
you that in talking with GST.
Their facilities Management
Division says there's really no
space.
In state buildings anywhere in
the state that they just don't
have it.
Um
However, cities and counties
were a little bit more open.
They said. They had some space
as we're universities and
colleges. They those indicated
those four counties,
municipalities, universities,
colleges, um, that they would
probably have space available at
minimal or no cost. It's a state
function. It's a public body
function and and
So that that's a possibility.
It's an issue of just getting
staff hired.
And then literally getting on
the road or getting in contact
with those public bodies to
identify that space, But I think
the part of the idea is to make
sure that the member whose
district
Would have this person.
Might be in the best position to
say.
The location might be better
placed here than there, so that
would be the member would be
included in those discussions
And so, madam president and
enroll Thank you for that, so
you could feel you know,
feasibly have like an individual
office for yourself or an
individual.
State senator's office. Then Mr
Necessarily mean that my office
is going to be located, You
know, with three other senators
in that building If it works
out, that's great, But if it
doesn't we are at least with
what you outlined. So far we
would be able to locate an ideal
spot in in an individual
legislators district.
Correct and the of the ability
of having an individual office
or a regional office.
It was not. It was not one or
the other. Understood what works
Best for
The members themselves and their
logistics. I like this plan even
more. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator. Next we'll
hear from representative Ream.
Thank you, Benedict.
Rule. One of the things I was
interested in that was speaking
with a legislator from
Washington or actually from
Oregon, and what they do over
there is they give a stipend to
each
Legislator above about $25,000.
And they can use that money to
hire whatever staff person they
want.
And the legislators. Senator I
was speaking with
He hired his wife, and as we
know many of us that, um are
here. You know you're
Um, spouses involved almost as
much as you are. But I was
wondering if you looked at that
issue at all.
Madam chair and representative.
About what that actually came up
last year when the study was
being conducted because the
focus group did I identify a
couple of states that had a
similar provision.
I think one of the concerns with
the stipend is that the
Constitution says no other
compensation per quiz it or
allowance that would have to be
addressed before a stipend could
be issued. And if I'm not
mistaken, I think in one state,
I don't know that it was Oregon.
There was a as I understood it.
the member the legislator was
able to receive that money where
there is called a stipend or
some other compensation.
He or she could use it as as
they saw fit.
But if it wasn't used, it was
considered, um taxable income.
So I think there's a number of
issues and I think after the
study last year and further
discussion that was
Kind of taking that.
Yeah, it was pretty much taken
off the table, mostly because of
the constitutional concern.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brown.
Making, Madam chair. Thank you.
Roll thank the staff for the
work they've done on this, um,
had some of the same concerns
and questions that Senator
Padilla had as far as the
facilities. Um and we looked at
Are. Are we looking at the cost?
Because the cost for
Place.
Yeah, Senator Worth wanted to
renting office space here in
Santa Fe. I'm guessing the cost
would be a lot more than it
would be in jail.
Ah, madam.
Chair and Senator, Um
Again during the study last
year, the cost of space was
looked at
And when they came up with their
estimate of about $14.3 million,
and then we counsel service did
our own
More than back of the honorable
but our own spreadsheet on what
that may cost. Ours came up
closer to 14.9 million, figured
somewhere between 14.5 to 15
million to fund this for an
entire year. 112 officers and
like
It did include space.
Um
With the understanding that some
space may come dirt cheap. Um
and and free or minimal cost.
And some space may may be
expensive.
That gets all tricky if we
divide this up by 112.
Uh, but we think because members
are in different places it may
even itself out. It's something
we have to look at further and
that's why we would want to
start July 1 with liaisons and
our staff and probably a
contractor, looking at
identifying and finding space
and entering into agreements
with
Counties, municipalities
universities.
And if the state has any space,
which I doubt, um, looking at
that as well, Thank you, Madam
Chair and, uh, Director. I
I think that, uh, we did a
search on the
State having space right and
that that really wasn't maybe
works in one or two districts,
but not really statewide, right?
Because I I don't think the
state has any space in my
City, let alone my district. So,
um yeah.
That's correct.
So are we looking at then? Um
I don't think on the on the
space and I think that's
something since we're not
really. This doesn't really deal
with facilities today.
Um
Which I'd love to to see what
what That proposal is going to
be, Um, but I think it's
something we really need to look
at.
As and I don't think that
portion
Can be divided equally. I think
it's going to have to be
something that's looked at, You
know, maybe you know a maximum
square footage type thing to
where we just have to go with
again. It's gonna be a lot more
expensive than Santa Fe than in
Rio, Rancho, even in real answer
limited amount of space in here
and
And so it just seems like as far
as that goes, that's not going
to be something from you will be
divided.
So you might. That might be a
little harder to determine and
maybe for the first year we
would need to put a little extra
money in there just to have some
padding. After the first year,
we would kind of have an idea of
what that would be.
Are more solid idea of what that
would be, but
Mhm. Oh, madam Chair and
Senator. Thank you for bringing
that up. I think that may be
appropriate if we were to just
divided evenly.
Uh, among 112 and perhaps
Add some additional funding in
case there are places where the
cost is higher than than what
that particular leadership
officer can accommodate, because
there are some locations that
may not have any municipality or
or university space and you have
to resort to private when you
also have, you know, like
there's benefits in my area
where you know me and
represented Martinez.
Our districts across in several
places, and we could actually
work together to do an office if
we chose to, or, you know, I I
could see actually have three
representatives whose districts
are in my district. Um, and if
we wanted to, we could actually
work together to find a more
central place that we can office
together, so those types of
things would actually help with
some cost savings or even
Allow for a little more office
space if you had
You know, multiple
We come assistance or AIDS?
No. I think the facilities is
more of an issue for me right
now. I do. I appreciate the fact
that
That we didn't decide that we
all had to share one in a region
because
Yeah, are good friends, but But
our our staffs are probably
gonna work on two totally
different things just because we
have different priorities. You
know, this is Is this going to
be? Uh, yeah, well, you know, we
have different priorities. Um,
and that's that's good. That's
that's the way things work. I
wouldn't want to office with
serendipity, and I'm sure he
wouldn't want to office with me.
We can go out and have lunch
together. But, yeah, anyway,
just as an example I you know
there. There's some I wouldn't
want to office with. Um and
There's some Republicans I might
not want to office with.
But not not Alan. Alan is good.
Martinez nous. He's good ones,
anyway, Um, dressing
on Mondays at the office. We
could we could, you know, Katie
and I could have maroon Mondays,
But you know, just I just, you
know.
We'd like to see the whole
picture. Um and, uh but I I do
appreciate the staff. Um
I've had a lot of people asked
me in the past, whether I would
want to be paid and I said
before I want to be paid, I'd
want I would want staff.
That's to me is more important
than being paid is to make sure
that constituent services side
is covered. He is going to be
making sure that we're our staff
is doing
Staying out of the political
side of it, and I think that's
gonna be the biggest
Yes, you
That we need to make sure of
And I guess I wasn't really
completely understanding. Madame
chair.
Um
Represented Montoya's
Wine on the the the staff.
Wouldn't they be similar to like
what we have in session where
they would be state employees,
So the HR would be done through
your office, would it not?
To make sure all the legal
documents are done correctly to
make sure the pay is done
correctly. That would all be
done through.
Your office. Would it not? Yes,
madam Chair and and Senator.
That's correct All of the HR
stuff administrative accounting
that would be taken care of by
the Legislative Council service.
That's correct. I guess I was a
little bit confused on the whole
issue of
Liability.
Two.
A legislator.
I don't know what liability I
have when I have staff during
the session.
I know it's going to be under a
different umbrella, whereas
that's under the clerk, but this
would be under lights counsel
correct would provide the same
protections with an honest any
state employee with
Matt and Madam chair and
Senator.
Uh, when staff is
Higher during the session.
they're hired under the most of
the staff is hard into the
budgets of session staff.
And mostly, it's the chief
clerks who hire them. So the
chief clerks have responsibility
for oversight and providing
direction in the light
discipline. Termination if need
be.
Yeah. Um, Some of those are
hired at the request of
legislators who have used the
same person over and over. But
they're they're generally hired
by the chief clerks we assist
with, um, Payroll. The HR HR
issues that come up and the
like, so that that won't change,
I think would represent. Montoya
was alluding to his
This.
Could be
Looked at as
A turning a legislator.
Into a public body, because now
the legislator has staff
As office in the district, um,
can provide some direction and
there may be some implications
of that legislator now becoming
an employer. So it's one of
those things that that would be
part of the training and part of
HR looking at that very closely.
To make sure we know what that
role is and how it's laid out. I
don't know if that if that's
okay, the trying to understand
the point thought about that
before. So, madam chair, um and
and represent and Senator
Brandt. That is the concern. We
are now turning a legislator
into a supervisor.
During the session.
We're not in the role of
supervisor. They work for us.
There are AIDS, but they're
hired by the clerk's office. And
HR has
Their level of oversight, but
HR is believed would still have
oversight the way I'm
understanding it to some degree
on but
From the standpoint of hiring
firing, and that's what
completely on a an unpaid
legislator.
Who's not necessarily trained to
be a manager.
Thank you, Madam
Senator Brown. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate that
latitude. Thank you,
Representative. I I was I hadn't
thought of that side of things.
Um
I guess we could write a law. We
have that ability that we could.
You know, I don't know. Give
ourselves limited liability or
something like that. We cannot
comply with certain things like
Um
But it seems like to me that we
could mitigate that.
Yes, you
I mean, honestly, if I have
someone hired for several years,
and then I decided out of the
blue, I'm going to fire him.
They're still going to have the
same rights as any other
employees through the state.
Um
Unless we're gonna make them at
will employees.
Madam Chair and and Senator.
Yes, these would be at will
employees because all
legislative staff is that will
excuse me.
The
Because they're not subject to
the Federal Fair Labor Standards
Act and not subject, the State
Personnel Act. And so they are
at will I'm at will.
All right. Thank you. That
actually helps me to understand
that there at will think that
alleviate some of that concern
for me. At least Thank you,
Manager and senior branches for
your information that the
speaker sort of reminded me that
he and I do that right now we've
got these two chiefs of staffs
that we can for tomorrow. We
think about that I've been a
supervisor and a manager many
times.
Yeah.
Okay. Next representative
pedigree.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Ralph. Uh, for the work
that you've done.
Um
Madam chair. My first question.
To roll would be. Is there more
detailed documents? Minutes from
y'all's meetings that we could
get our hands on?
Madam chair and represented
note. This is a draft summary
outline of what we discussed
there. There's nothing more
detailed that that that we have,
um we did, uh, passed around
some drafts among staff, and we
did this. We finalized this in
the last few days. Uh, we do,
however, plan as, uh
Madam chair mentioned earlier.
We do plan to bring this back in
more detailed form at the next
council meeting. What I can
commit to you, though, is that
Will email that to the council
members.
At least one week before the
meeting, so you'll have a chance
to review it before we come in
because this basically was
dropped on your left this
morning. So I understand that
question.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
madam. Sure, Um, your first
bullet point on page one talks
about full or part time.
Classification level, the
midpoint 63 to 26. Madam chair,
Raul. Do you envision that as as
just say.
I found the right person and
felt like I could do this. And
in 50% of the time I still have
that same flexibility on the 20
hour week of paying 63 to 26 a
year or do you see this
differently than that?
Madam chair and representative.
The 632 to 6 numbers, the
midpoint for that
classification. So if somebody
was hired
Halftime they would get 50% of
that as their pay.
The classification compensation
plan that we have
Um and we'll discuss that, I
think in just a bit.
One of the things we're
recommending, and it was. This
was discussed at the last
meeting is that
Staff because we have adjusted
the classification compensation
range of significantly that any
legislative staff that is hired
is hired at no more than 70% of
the max rate.
This amount 632 to 6 is in that
neighborhood.
I can't remember if it's a
little bit above a little bit
below. But one of the
recommendations were making only
classification compensation is
that nobody be hired at more
than 70% of the max, which is
close to the 63.
But I can't tell you exactly
what that percentage is off the
top of my head.
I don't know if that answers
your question, but yes, it would
be prorated based on a number of
Hours that somebody is working,
and we have had
Um
Half and three quarter time
staff. Uh, 20 hours or 32 hours
a week. Um
And, um
And then we just parade their
respective benefits.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you roll. So when you say pro
rate, the perspective benefits
we're not talking in the whole
benefit package. We're just
talking base pay.
Base pay. Um, their insurance
would remain the same.
Their cost on that there might
be a little bit lower because
we're making less, but their
leave would be adjusted. So
instead of earning the full
Amount per month That somebody
does now Someone get somebody
get starts.
With the Legislature they
started and I think 1.5
Days per month.
And, um
That would be adjusted. If
somebody's halftime then they
would get 0.75 days a month that
that's the kind of benefit that
would be prorated.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all so
Just try and close that off.
From a
Private industry standpoint.
Please. These nude
Strictly AIDS.
Would be salary nonexempt.
So, in other words, have a base
salary.
But they're held to a 40 hour
week.
The salary exempt person.
As long as you come into work
every day, whether you put in
your full hours every day, eight
hours every day, you make it all
up at the end of the week.
Their benefit package remains
the same.
The salary nonexempt would be
based off their total 40 hour
week. Would that be correct?
Madam chair and represent Can I
ask what you mean by exempt and
nonexempt? Salaried exempt means
that you're not based off of
your actual hours. On a daily
basis, You have to hit an
average number of hours over
whatever the pay period is the
salary nonexempt. You're only
paid daily based off your hours.
And if if you only work four
hours on one day, you get paid
four hours. If you work, 12
hours the next day, you get
eight hours, plus a
That's four hours of overtime.
Okay, madam Chair and
representative.
All legislative staff.
Is salaried.
And they do not punch a time
clock there expect to do their
work. They generally expect to
do at least 40 hours a week, But
I can tell you that most of
legislative staffing throughout
all of the agencies were usually
more than that.
Um, the only ones who are hourly
and could get
Over time. Our building services
staff. There are the lowest paid
individuals and we often have to
have them work. Some overtime
come in on weekends or stay late
because of activities and the
like that we we have after
hours, so those are the only
ones that are hourly. But other
than that legislative staff is,
um
Exempt from that.
Our league. Um over time.
Process.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, bro. Um
On the first page. Last bullet
point, this says leadership
offices and legislative council
may begin hiring District Office
liaisons.
In HR Support staff,
respectively, on July 1st.
If I read this leadership
offices, which would include
majority and minority offices on
both sides are going to be
expected to hire HR support
staff.
And if that's the case, Madam
Madam Chair and and Raul, Where
do you plan on office and those
people?
Madam chair and representative.
That's a good question. We're
right now in the process of
reconfiguring one of the areas
in our office so we can
accommodate some more staff.
We're reconfiguring space. The
architectural drawings are in
process.
Um
We're struggling for space. I
don't know how else to say it.
We We don't have the space.
We are probably going to have to
look at some office and or space
sharing and in some cases, maybe
allow some people to work from
home if we don't have the space
Um, we can probably find some
temporary space. But during the
interim
But, um
But in terms of during the
session there we bring them all
back in. So spaces are
consideration. And there's a
facility that you subcommittee
that I've been in contact with
about how we handle that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you roll, so just so I
understand. I am reading this
correct. Our leadership offices
are gonna be expected to hire HR
support stuff.
Madam chair and represent no.
Let me clarify leadership
offices.
Maybe again. Higher and district
office liaisons on July 1 and L.
C s may begin hiring HR and
other support staff
respectively on July 1 so we'll
hire the HR support staff,
including accounting and some I
T staff.
The leadership offices would
only be hiring District office
liaisons those liaisons would be
working with alright. HR
Accounting I t staff one
Perfect. Thank you. That bullet
point is confusing at best, Um
Madam Chair and
Role.
If I go through as I go through
the math on everything that's
outlined here
Salaries and benefits
legislative costs. D O. L s and
H R. I'm at 12 million without
space.
And that's not being extra. Lee
conservative.
And so
And you're thinking that space
is only going to cost statewide.
An additional 4 million. Is that
what I understood madam chair
and represented just to clarify
your time, but District office
space? Yeah. Um, we believe
based on the analysis that
architectural research
consultants did that there are
public bodies out there.
counties municipalities,
universities that would have
space at minimal or no cost
available.
We had a number of them who
responded to Arc, the firm, um
that that kind of space that
would be available.
We do believe that
We're probably looking at about
$15 million
For the first year just and that
includes start up costs on I T
equipment and the like.
Which is running would run about
$350,000. But on an ongoing
basis we're looking at about $15
million for staff.
Um
And office space and the like So
That
That's our best guess right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair for your
patients. I just have
Um
Two questions left with respect
to that.
Bro. You talked about
potentially being able to work
from home.
Is there going to be an issue
with respect to staffing on
residency?
And
Um
In other words, can you hire
somebody from out of state?
That's never here and then let
me finalize the questions and
you can put it all in. Bundle it
up.
Um from a private
Business standpoint, if a
business donated
Staff to the Senate or
representative.
Could there be a potential way
of looking at that from a tax
incentive standpoint?
In other words, there's no
there's there's no available
space at the county officer,
City officers or something like
that. Instead of having to
actually pay for it. You can
actually give the business and
the tax incentive for that.
And, um
I would think, you know.
Taking that the other way around
with the number of state offices
that are still working remotely.
At least in South and Bernalillo
County space wouldn't be an
issue.
So wrap it up with that. I do
appreciate your time. I
appreciate your patience with me
If you give me any thoughts on
those
Madam chair and representative
out of state.
Employees is a problem.
It's a problem because of tax
issues, particularly income tax
issues. The FAA not only frowns
on that they pretty much don't
don't allow it.
We have, however, have hired
Um out of state staff or
session.
Under contract.
That week. We can do
Um and we had we have
Two.
Contract staff that we worked
with.
At the council service. One is a
drafter. One is the word
processor who live on a state,
but they're on contract.
And that's permissible and it's
only for short term, you know
for the session, primarily
Um, the hiring
Staff employees.
That is problematic because of
the tax issues, the income tax
issues and that actually is
happening in other states.
Because the pandemic
Had a lot of people working, um
from home, and someone decided
to move somewhere that was more
convenient.
And that's creating income tax
issues with states who have it
don't have it, etcetera.
Your last question about if a
business donated staff or that's
some kind of tax incentive. I
wouldn't not staff Thank you
opposite. Thank you, madam. I
would not
I don't want to enter a guess.
At this point. I would rather
take that back and research a
little bit more about what that
might provide for space. Thank
you for that clarification.
Thank you, representative. Next
we'll hear from senator worse.
Thank you, madam. President and
I just want to start by echoing
Speaker and leader Montoya just
the process that got us here is
important. And I think the fact
that the staff
Built this and work together
something similar to what we did
when we hired a chief clerk.
Um and I just feel like it. It's
worked well and has gotten us to
a good space that's certainly
still needs to be shaped, but I
just wanted to echo that.
Ah, just a couple of questions
about the D O. L's Are you
envisioning one per caucus? Or
is this going to be
proportionate and the reason I
bring this up?
I could see in the Senate. You
know, we've got 27 Democrats 15
Republicans. We have 24 Let's
hypothetically 24.
Of our members decide they want
to proceed forward and in the
Republican caucus, it's only
five.
I could just see very different
scope in terms of the amount of
work.
There's going to be required. So
it's curious what she ols and
whether that's also going to be
proportionate to so much better.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator, Um
We did not discuss that
specifically, although the
question came up about how many
members might opt in versus how
many members may opt out.
The just the idea of having a
district office liaison came up.
The latter part of our, um um
our discussions because there
was a recognition that the
conchas officers, we're going to
need some assistance.
Coordination and liaison between
their office. Our HR accounting
etcetera staff.
And the member
Him or herself. I think this is
something we can certainly take
back and look at
Uh, and see how to address that
Because you're correct. There
could be a significant disparity
in terms of the number of
district officers that I d O l
with support in one caucus
versus another happy to take
that back. So I appreciate that
memory. I also think that as we
kind of work through leader
Montoya is questions about what
happens when members don't want
to do the hiring.
That also would directly impact
the D O l I mean, you could
conceivably have a d O l, who's
then managing 10 different
Individuals and a whole
different scopes. So I think we
need to look at that.
Ah!
I agree with
Senator Brandt about facilities.
I do think that's gonna be
tricky. And I guess are you
envisioning that the member
Has the decision about the
facility, or is this going to
again be done by the D O l and I
bring that up because I could
certainly see
You know, there's a there's a
Office down at City Hall that
could work, but the member
decides they want to have
something far different.
And I'm just curious if if
you're envisioning that being
done by the member
Madam chair and Senator. Um we
discussed that we felt that it
would have to be coordination
effort between the D O all the
member and and our accounting
staff. Um, HR. Excuse me, d f A,
um, has a white paper that we
look at referred to often that
talks about what is in the best
interests of the state.
So that it would have to be
taken into consideration as
well. A member's preference
would certainly be weighed in.
But depending on the cost the
accessibility to the district
and the like.
I think all of those factors
have to come into play so we
would look at that.
Just ban president. I appreciate
again, I think represent
pedigree also brought up some
really good. The specific
there's going to be a lots of
little
Issues that need to get work
through and I'm it would be good
to have
Whether it's the director of the
council service at
Doing that kind of procedural.
Decisions that have to get made
to implement this versus us
trying to do this. Um, I just
think that's going to be an
important step to. So that's all
I have. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we'll hear from
representative Alkon.
Thank you, Madam Pro Temer no
long, long time ago.
Yeah.
I'm going back to history. I got
elected magistrate Judge and, uh
immediately I was the presiding
judge.
And suddenly I'm in charge of
nine different people are
working under me. Not only that
I'm supposed to supervise the
other judge.
And, uh, however, the
administrative office of the
courts
They have an HR department.
The time I had a problem, I
would just pick up the phone.
Call HR at AOC.
Um what the problem was and that
government takeover and I had
nothing to do with anything that
happened after
It was really simple and easy to
do. I had no problems with that.
So that is what is things that
you can think about If you're
worried about
How are you going to happen?
Because sometimes we'll hire
somebody.
You think it's the best working
person that you can work with
and find out? Suddenly that
You are on hold different
levels.
And you can't work with that
person so
You got to HR that HR. Handle
it.
Okay, That's just my
recommendation and because it
worked good. They were really
great when I was there.
Uh yeah, Question. The one
question that I have took a
couple of questions is and these
employees will they qualify for
benefits and B R a
Madam chairman represent Yes,
they would. They would be like
any other state employee. Let me
back up. It would be like any
other legislative employee that
receives the same benefits that
all state employees have.
Only difference again is that
they're not subject to the
federal
Fair Labor Standards Act, and
they would not be subject to the
state personality. Those are
statutory exemptions for
legislative employees.
Thank you.
And the other question, Madam
Protein is a
What are you doing? Is there any
provision for the committee
chairs?
You got a committee chair?
That's in charge of not only is
this his or her district, but
now they're in charge of
everything that falls into that
committee.
Which takes a lot of extra time
We were talking to somebody.
some some legislators and some
other states that got said but
salaries whatever telling me and
because I'm the chair of this
committee, I get 25 grand a year
more than the other legislators.
Wow. But anyway, I just
wondering if there's any
provision for staffing on
The chairs of committees.
Okay. Madame Cheron
representative. Are you talking
about standing committees or
interim committees or both?
Pretty much actually, a man
approached him. It would be the
even the committee standing
standing committees with have to
look at because everyone of them
carries extra responsibilities.
No.
Anyway. How are you that your
brain
Thank you, representative. Next
we'll hear from represented
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Bursey, Aga. Thank you for all
the work that went into this
Hmm.
Um, I am looking forward to a
little bit more detail.
But I do have some questions.
Um
These these individual
positions.
Um
My initial question was
loyalties or they are. They are
the loyalty to Legislative
Council. It's a loyalty gonna be
to me or they gonna be able to
work.
Uh, political activities.
Um
Because there's there's laws and
not being not being subject to
the state Personnel Act kind of
alleviates some of that.
But are they if
You know, I didn't hear you said
The part of the duties would be
organization of town halls.
Um
Are they going to be able to
pass out signs are they going to
be able to do
Other activities.
How is that gonna work that
That's one of my chief concerns
is
Are they loyal to the state or
the loyal to me?
Madam chair and representative
that that's a good question. We,
um have in
I thought we had it in the other
hand out, but it's not there
either.
The
The idea of hiring a district
legislative eight.
Would be similar to the
leadership staff that has hired
now the council policy states
that
Uh huh. And staff member and a
leadership office.
Is an employer, the respective
chamber.
But it works.
Has the direction of and the
pleasure of the member so the
member can decide he or she no
longer wants once that
individual working, remember
that individual staff would be
terminated.
Um, and that member would also
provide direction on what to do.
However.
The code of conduct, which is
based on the state, Um, on the
governmental conduct Act.
Ah does would not allow
Electioneering.
And that's one of the things
that we've discussed. It's not
in here specifically, I wish I
had
Remember to put that in here.
The idea is that we would
prohibit election nearing.
The policy would so that staff
would not be, um
Doing any activity in terms of
fundraising campaign activities,
putting up signs.
Taking contributions in the
light. They should steer. Steer
clear of that.
The town halls.
Are supposed to be open to our
constituents and given district
That's the expectation that that
member would help with setting
up to the town hall getting out
a notice information posting on
a website somewhere in the lake.
But that
Individual staff would not
should not be.
A, um
Political politically
affiliated. Um, individual with,
um
Having to do anything with the
campaign election areas, so to
speak.
Thank you, madam Chair in Mr Mr
Bursey Aga that
To me, that's very important.
Because it goes to
Um
Not only the ethics of that
employee, but the ethics of the
member
My fear is that those lines get
blurred.
You know, some big donor comes
into the district office with a
big check.
Um, we just need to be really
careful. And I would hope that
As the process moves forward,
there would be cleared.
Guidance.
On that, Um
You know, because if you have an
employee that
Works for you that that employee
is you know if you work closely,
they there's a loyalty.
Going both ways.
So I think if it's if it's
actually
In writing with clear
definitions and clear
responsibilities.
It will help those lines from
getting blurred. Just another
quick question. Um
Madam Chair, Mr Bursey Aga
during the session.
What's the plan? Are they going
to stay in the district office
or they're going to come up with
us?
Um
I didn't see anything in the in
the paper that you handed out
that deals with that. Could you
kind of
Explain that to me.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative actually, on the
first page.
The 12.
The 3rd and 4th bullet.
But the third bullet says dlrs
will work in the Legislative
District Year round so they will
not come up for session. Chief
clerks would continue to have
the oversight of hiring
legislative session staff for
the members.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Bursey, I gave didn't catch
that. I even put a little worker
there didn't
They just that part.
I appreciate the answers. I
appreciate the hard work.
Um, I know
Doing something like this is an
extremely heavy lift because
there are so many variables that
you need to look at.
But I do appreciate the work
that's gone in. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next. We'll hear from
representative Writebol
Corriero.
Thank you, madam. Pretend and
thank you Roll for your and the
working group for all the work
that went into this. I'm
particularly excited.
Because I've had the
opportunity, Madam Sheriff.
Of having worked in the Texas
House of Representatives. Um
while back I was the, um,
legislative assistant and
constituent services
Person for the representative.
And we had district offices.
And year round. And of course,
we had 100 and 20 Day sessions,
and they actually with
Without the district offices. We
would not have been able to
function. Um
As well as we did, and so having
been in those two worlds coming
here and then being on the other
side, Um it's been completely
frustrating.
For me as a representative, This
is why this makes this very
exciting because, as I envision
it represents what I envisioned
in terms of what we talked about
District and district offices as
well as, uh, having year round
staff.
I see.
How we need to understand this
better is that once we've gone
through our partisan elections
We are represented. We are
elected representatives of the
entire district.
Constituents comprise everyone.
And so the beauty in this is
that
Our constituents services and,
of course, the organization of
Town halls, the things that you
described as part of what the de
ellas would be doing.
I think would begin to
Create an atmosphere.
Of much more cooperation.
And much more understanding as
it
Relates to our ability as
legislators to represent
everyone.
Of all walks of life and of all
partisan beliefs, and everyone.
And so that's what I think is
the beauty of this and having
been entrenched Madam chair in
the community as a community
organizer. This is one of the
most important components is
being able to advocate and
represent everyone.
And so I think that we remove
that partisanship.
Um, cap.
That
We've been entrenched in and I
believe madam chair that has
Inhibited our ability.
To move a lot further along
during our legislative sessions,
So I think this is gonna be a
great opportunity for us to kind
of reduce that level of, um
Partisan divide that we face
when we come and represent in
during our legislative process,
So I really wanted to say that
because I think it's extremely
important that we look at it
that way. And that will also
help in my opinion, mitigate the
issues that were described by
colleagues, um, represented
Pettigrew and Martinez and
others.
Ah, about
Crossing that line.
I think that we then demonstrate
to our constituencies that they
can trust.
That we know when to
Uh um.
Not cross any lines and that we
know how to uphold the letter of
the law to the fullest because
we take that oath to represent
everyone in our district, So I
don't know how else to emphasize
how this is a perfect
opportunity for us to be able to
begin to mend that, um, divide
That is kept us from moving
forward in a lot of different
ways.
Madam chair. That's one. I want
to have a question. I've heard.
I came in a little bit after
your presentation. But did I
understand that, Um
We would be amenable in terms of
the district offices.
To sharing shared space with
other public facility.
Outside of universities and
colleges. For example, if I and
I do want to have a role to play
in hiring the eighth, and I do
want to have a role to play in
the shared office because it's
important because I'm I'm
completely I'm sure all of us
are entrenched in our
communities, so we know our
communities best and I'm
Asking about community centers,
Um, community community senior
centers that are owned and
operated by local governments.
Um, could that be considered as
a shared space?
That's one question.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative.
If it's actually any space would
be available. What we want to
make sure is that it's a space
that is, um, appropriately
located in the district.
That the cost is advantageous to
the state, whether it's minimal
or no cost or reasonable amount
based on availability.
And and certainly if a senior
citizen is center, as you say,
is run by a local government.
And they have space and it's
something that can be
accommodated. Certainly that can
be used. So thank you, Madam
Chair. So what I was looking at
is when I said shared, it would
be at no cost. For example, it
would be a nice size.
Room or that could be divided,
however way we want to set it up
within that center, so it would
be a so we can look at no cost.
There's no legal, um,
prohibitions on that.
Madam Chair representatives.
It's no cost from a public
entity that that would be fine.
Okay. Thank you. That makes it
even much more workable,
particularly in my district,
both from the district office
perspective as well as the
hiring and one just the final
point. Um, it really is
important to have, Um
legislative aides from the
district.
From the district that
Are
Uh, um, Knowledgeable.
Of
Of our district. So having
someone that's a constituent
that's been, uh, that has the
availability. All the other
factors involved is critical.
And that has the type of, uh um
World view shared view.
Of what? I just described what
we should be doing and that's
representing on.
Of our constituents, Then I
think that is incredibly
important again. We're not
talking about political offices
or partisan offices. We're
talking about district offices
that represent, um, the entirety
of our district. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you.
Thank you, representative. Next
we'll hear from representatives.
Japan Ski. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Mr Speaker. I will be
brief, Mr Bursey, Aga.
I just want to compliment all
the staff on this excellent
outline. I think it really
wouldn't when the district
staffing
Was imagined. You know, there
was really going to be a need to
blend this absolute commitment
to public service with
accountability, and I think the
structure that's been laid out
here really achieves that, Um
Compliments on that. I'm sure it
wasn't an easy process to
envision this.
Um, I just wanted to make a
quick comment on the timeline.
Um, I would really recommend to
the
Working group that you all think
about some kind of
Um, I don't know It's an
alternative process or safety
valve kind of mechanism for
Um, members who may have
opposition but have a competent
staff person that they've
identified. They may have the
willingness of that staff person
to agree that this is a term
position. Potentially, that's
something they could sign.
Um and I
I say this because it strikes me
that the districts
Represented by individuals who
have general election
opposition, maybe the districts
and the need of the most support
because there will be so many
demands on that members time
going into the fall. Um and I
think we wanted
While I understand not wanting
to hire a bunch of people for
short term positions, I think
you will find that there will be
some members that have
identified someone that is
willing to say, take a position
that might last four or five
months and service to that
might last four or five months
in service to the community, and
I think they should be given the
opportunity to pursue that, um,
so whether that's
A certain set of conditions that
that must be mad or maybe the
individual district legislative
aide works for the, uh, the
caucus office, um, directly
rather than the member
Um, I'm sure that there's a fix
that could be envisioned for
that. And I think
Um
There are a lot of issues
coming. Um
Over the summer and in
preparation for a 60 Day
session, and it would be very
valuable for incumbents to have
Ah, some support in developing
doing the policy research
working on scheduling
correspondence, making sure that
those districts have a chance to
weigh in on some of the upcoming
issues in the special session.
Um, So I wonder if there's a way
to just create kind of a
This is the timeline on less.
123 conditions are fulfilled.
Um
By the member that may have
identified someone so that madam
Chair I would just ask that you
will take a real hard look at
that because I think that will
be something that a lot of the
members will want.
Thank you.
Thank you Represent Chandler.
Thank you, madam chair and
really appreciate the hard work
And I think the framework here
is is very good. I just have a
few kind of detailed comments
and questions one. I want to go
back to this incumbent versus
non income or incumbent with
opposition incumbent without
opposition.
I'm an incumbent with
Libertarian opponent.
And if we went with this
proposal, I would not be able to
hire someone to help me
throughout the whole summer as
I'm chairing, C, C J and getting
ready for chairing House
judiciary because by that mere
fact, and that means my
constituents wouldn't get the
service that that they deserve
just as much as
Any other members. Just
happenstance who doesn't have
opposition or it's an open, you
know, So I think I think that's
not a well considered proposal.
Um, my constituents need the
service. I need support for C C.
J Heavy Committee, and this year
it's particularly heavy given
the other issues that the
governor has raised, so
Um, just speaking personally, I
know not every member has that
kind of responsibility, or, um,
you know, workload, but I just
want to drive home. I don't
think it's fair to distinguish
between those with opponents and
without and I also think we
should try to improve on the
timeline. September. 1 is late,
and I think we should try to
start at least August 1st or
even July, 1st.
So that people can hit the
ground running and start working
and get some stuff done. And
this is just I'm not sure I
understand the specially if we
have someone in mind who might
be able to, um, take on the
responsibilities to assist us.
So with that, thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions.
Senator Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair and you
know, I'm in a similar vote with
Representative Chandler and and
you know, the
I don't think we can move it up
before September, though, Let's
council needs to have time to
get everything in place. We're
not even ready to vote on this
today. So I think September
gives the time they need, um
I do think that anyone that's
running again should be any
other comments or
Thank you, madam President just
for the folks that are watching
the 13 people around the state
that might be watching us. And
then there are those in the
room. I do understand that
Jared's working on placing the
staff recommendations online so
that they can be publicly
viewed.
So thank you for that, Uh,
I want to also add my thanks to
what the staff really has done
for us, sir.
Our director of L. C. S R chief
clerks, all of our chiefs of
staff.
So I believe we've we've gone a
long way towards having a policy
that we all support. This has
been a really good conversation.
I appreciate the issues that
were raised. Um, we certainly
will go back to the staff to
look at this. Um, but I
anticipate that we may have a
small committee of leadership to
look at what they come up with
before June 24th.
Um, probably should talk to
other members of caucus and then
we will probably convened
Leadership subcommittee sometime
before June. 24th were not
really ready to put this online.
There are changes that we talked
about. We might be able to put
some of it online center for the
So and we will have, um
We will send the copy that we
come up with two members before
our June 24th meeting.
So, um
Any other comments, so we're
going to let this stuff work on
what we talked about today going
to get leadership, both parties
both chambers together to look
at final copy, and then we will
send that out to everyone week
before June 24
Alright, everyone know right
with that.
Okay again. Thanks to the staff.
Not only did they work this
during the week, they worked
weekends and nights. You know, I
thought the cheapest staff at
two little babies she had put
those babies together and then
come back to the phone. So this
has been a hard lift, and I'm
just grateful. It's the power of
having staff.
Yeah.
Alright. So thank you, Mr Bush.
Iago will go now to our
Agenda. Let's talk briefly about
interim committees. We have two
interim committees that we need
to look at now. The majority of
them the rest of them. We will
look at in the June 24, but we
have to interim committees that
are working earlier in July, 1
our courts, corrections and
justice because of the possible
special session and
A lecture chats. So, Mr Bursey,
aka, if you Will it is there.
Thank you, Madam President. Um,
as you said LHs and CC Jr
meeting earlier for a couple of
reasons you allowed LHs. We need
a approval. Basically Percy CJ
to do the same in June in May
and June. Um, I've asked both
Xander Dawson, whose staffs LHs
and Nancy Martinez
Whose staff C C. J each to give
a brief presentation on their
work plan. Um if they have any
revisions or tweaking the
planning at all, we'll bring it
back at the June 24th meeting.
Uh, and with that, I'll ask
Zander first.
Thank you, madam President and
as a rule, Raul said, I'm Xander
Dawson. I'm the lead staff for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
Um it's gonna be a busy interim
for the committee. Uh, the first
three meetings are going to be
focused on three specific he
issues the first is going to be
child welfare.
Hmm. The second is going to be
access to health care and the
health care workforce and then
the third will be behavioral,
health and substance use after
those first three meetings.
HHS will cover you know all the
usual topics aging in long term
services disabilities
pharmaceutical drug prices? Uh,
you know all the normal LHs
stuff. Um, throughout the
interim LHs is going to meet an
Albuquerque Taus. Poor tallies
Koro, Silver City, Rio, Rancho
and then Santa Fe to wrap things
up.
And, as Raul said, Since this is
kind of early, if any new things
come up, I will come and present
any changes to the work plan at
the June meeting. Thank you.
Thank you questions.
Alright, so
Senator Brown. Thank you, ma'am.
You're not really a question.
but if you need any help on the
rear Rancho site, let me know
I'd be glad to help out.
Sure. Good place.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Brandon
District and we did approve this
extra days in our last meeting.
So thank you for that.
And next Nancy Martinez.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of committee. My name is
Nancy Martinez. I am the lead
staffer, C. C. J. And I am here
to propose the courts,
Corrections and Justice
Committee work plan, meeting
schedule and budget.
Uh, before I began, the
committee is requesting
additional meeting dates. Those
states are June 5th and sixth
and June 26th and 27th.
With those states. The committee
will discuss the intersection of
the justice system with mental
illness and addiction assisted
outpatient treatment. Competency
regulation of pan handling and
other items that will
potentially be addressed at the
upcoming special session.
To the extent we know and those
meetings will be held here in
Santa Fe.
I post all all that fun stuff.
In addition, the committee
proposes to discuss probation
and parole, either with your eye
test motor vehicle crimes,
governmental ethics housing,
including the legal barriers and
the landlord tenant relations.
The meeting locations for the
committee of RS follows and
Santa Fe for the July meeting,
Albuquerque for August Espanola
in September. Ah Las Cruces and
October and Back in Santa Fe for
the final meeting. The committee
is also requesting $5000 for
expert testimony. And with that
I stand for questions.
But thank you so role.
Usually we do all this at the
end of June. Are we like doing
this now? And then we won't do
it in June, or we just here to
say okay for the June
Madam chair. This would be an
approval for the June meetings
for C. C. J. Both Xander and
Nancy will be back and make
their presentations. It'll be
probably just as brief in case
there are any changes. But for
now, this is mostly just for
June. Okay, so we've already
approved LHs last month, so I'll
take a motion to approve that
you extra June meetings for
courts, Corrections, justice and
the funding for expert
testimony.
Senate.
Oh, you have that motion here.
Question representative Alkon
for questions, followed by reps
in a rowboat caviar. Oh, thank
you, madam. Protest. Um, I am
just hoping that we continue to
the June 1/5 6th meeting to June
6th and seventh because the
fifth is the day after the
primary.
I know that I am not going to
have the energy on the fifth to
drive down here.
And probably a whole bunch of
others. If we could just have a
day of rest before we get down
to see CJ, I think it would be
nice just hoping that we could
make that change. Ready Protein
already tried to change those
meetings. Representative. I
don't think they're changeable.
Maybe they could start at noon
so that you could sleep in a bit
and then driver
Um, a better better protest and
the only thing that's going on
is L A just is is really none
that on all four of those days,
so we wouldn't be, uh, changing
anything other than our date.
I've already tried it. I would
smack down if they agree to
yours. I'm gonna go back to mine
so
Uh, we could ask the chair.
Well, I'd like to accommodate
members, but, um
You know, we have a lot to do,
And there was a strategic
thinking because you know, we
had it in the first week in June
and then the third week in June,
thinking there would be two
weeks in between if we got
feedback from committee members
on proposed bills or whatever
we'd have time to do it, So I
mean luck tint to change. We
will start at 10 on the on the
first day and
I just want to point out to my
dear friend, chair of house
labor that
He's more than happy to call for
a M meetings. I'm certain that
he will have the energy after
his campaign to be able to make
it to our meeting.
Okay. Ripston Rebel. Cafiero was
just offering a second to the
motion. Don't care. Thank you
Don't really need seconds is
what we've been determined after
reading Mason. Some of us are
still doing it.
It feels good second, it's fine.
All right, So we have a motion
to approve the courts.
Correction. The Justice
Committee
Any opposition to that approval.
Sing non approved that
Uh, last on our agenda is
another, uh,
Ah!
Incredible wrote something else
before we get off interim
committees.
Uh, I believe Mr Speaker. You
had some appointments to
announce. Thank you, Madam
President Raul. Um I will be
appointing representative Jerry
Hembree as an advisory member to
courts, Corrections and Justice
Central Committee.
And representative Hall Advisory
to courts Correction and Justice
Interim Committee as well as
radioactive and hazardous.
Thank you. Thank you, Uh, so
last on our agenda is actually
it's not last and let me say
this, uh, speaker has requested
a very breathe executive
committee meeting at the very
end, so everybody will just stay
in their seats, except for
everyone in the audience.
We will. We will convene to
discuss compensation. Oh, so but
A very similar work group has
been working on our
compensation policies and we
have again a
Suggestion from them. That's in
your folders. If you'll pull
that out, and I will, uh
Refer to Raul to explain things.
Thank you, madam Chair and
members of the council. Uh,
At the last council meeting. You
adopted the compensation plan.
Uh um, that is now in place.
And, uh um
You asked us to go back and and
in concert with that expanded
compensation plan to look at
some policies as to how that
would be used and worked out. So
one of the goals is to recruit
and retain qualified,
experienced and dedicated
legislative employees.
Ensuring that policies and
guidelines are followed as
adopted by the council.
That we are able to offer
competitive salaries to recruit,
hire and retain employees and
providing some flexibility to
meet external competition or
demands.
Now, One of the things that
we're looking at doing is is
that prior to filling a
position, ensuring that the job
description be reviewed for
relevancy and updated
accordingly.
Um, the other is that job
descriptions should be reviewed
every five years for relevancy
by an outside consultant. That's
one of the things we discussed
there is that we have a number
of job descriptions. Already,
however, some of them may be a
little bit outdated.
Nobody programs the computer
anymore. People develop
software, those kinds of things,
but really, to ensure that the
positions or slaughtered in the
appropriate classification or
level.
And that would be a
Heavy lift with everything else
that's going on.
For the Classification
Compensation Committee, which is
the Chiefs of Staff. The chief
clerks, the directors of the
agencies to do to review them
all.
So we're recommending that
perhaps that be done by an
outside entity we believe that
could be done and probably paid
for out of interim expenses. But
we'll get more information on
that later.
With respect to employees salary
increases.
Um, the
Excluding the cost of living
adjustments that the Legislature
provides to all legislative
staff and some most cases, it's
to all state employees.
That the increases would be
based on budget capacity. The
employee's performance
Um
And that it and that the
respective agency director of
approve them as well as the
employee's supervisor.
Salary increases specifically
for the directors, the cheap
clerks and the Chiefs of staff
would be subject to approval by
the leader of the respect of
chamber.
Or the leadership office or the
committee chairs of respective
statutory agencies.
Um
And we want to make sure that we
maintain parody.
Um and so we were looking at the
following guidelines that the
supervisor would consult with HR
to look at suggested salary
increases based on experience,
education and skills.
That salaries employees within
the first calendar year of
employment would not be
increased by more than 5%.
Um, the
The staff would would reconvene
to make recommendations on
compaction and parity between
the 1st and 50 years of
employment before reaching the
maximum compensation that was
Um
I'm not sure why I kept that in
brackets. I think I forgot to
just remove them the salary of
an employee who's been promoted.
Would be determined using the
same policies as new hires.
And then an employee with more
than five years of New Mexico.
Let's save experience that is at
the compensation, Max may
receive an increase of up to 3%
annually if that individual is
above the maximum based on
budget capacity.
The employees satisfactory
performance conducted by the
supervisor and then
authorization by the leader of
the respective chamber office or
committee chair.
With respect to new hires, Uh,
once the Canada has been
selected and offered a position,
they would again the hiring
manager would work with HR, um,
to determine a salary range
commensurate with experience,
education and skills.
And that a new employee would
not be hired at more than 70% of
the compensation maximum.
Unless the hiring manager has
been authorized by the leader of
the
Chamber or leadership, office or
committee chairs.
Of the respective agencies to
exceed the compensation.
maximum, um and making sure that
there's budget capacity for
that, but that some
demonstration of the following
being met prior to Mexico
legislative experience prior
relevant experience in the
legislative setting, like a City
Council County commission or
other state legislature.
And qualifications that
substantially exceed
qualifications of existing staff
in the same or similar
positions.
Or other considerations,
including the level of education
credentials, specialized
knowledge that's relevant to the
position and the like. Um
One other thing, we decided to
try to standardize would be
tuition reimbursement.
We believe that the council
would encourage employees to
enhance their job skills and
career through higher ed.
To support this provided there
that there are, um available
funds. We the
HR. The administration of of the
different agencies.
Would provide tuition
reimbursement for somebody who's
been unemployed for at least one
year and again that's
availability of funding and
could be at the discretion of
the employee's supervisor and
agency director in consultation
with the CFO. The tuition would
be for attendance at accredited
institutions in New Mexico.
Um
And it would, um, those would be
prioritized unless there's some
demonstration that it's more
feasible for somebody to attend
an out of state institutions
through virtual attendance.
Ah, again, depending on funding
agency may reimburse up 200% of
the tuition cost.
Um, less scholarships, grants or
other financial assistant.
That's assistance has been
received, as well as tech
laboratory, other fees and
textbook costs.
Um, the employee would be
required to complete a course
with a great level of C or
better.
Um, And if they don't, um, make
that or if it's incomplete or
the like, and the employee would
not be eligible for
reimbursement of that particular
course.
Um, they would be required to
complete and sign a form
agreeing to the reimbursement
provisions before that, this
person could be issued and we're
looking at reimbursement, so the
reimbursement is provided after
the fact after the successful
completion of the course That is
how it is laid out in the per
diem and mileage act that
affects all legislative
employees as well as state
employees.
It does provide for
reimbursement, not payment up
front.
Um
And if the if there's a break in
service or the member or the
staffer leaves within a year
after the employee may be
required to reimburse the agency
for up 200% of the cost that's
already been paid.
Um
And it could be offset by
withholding
Funds if if, if necessary,
although other collection
remedies may exist.
We did discuss some other
considerations regarding leave
policies virtual or work or
hybrid work policies accrued
leave and the like. Um, I think
that's I think we're we feel
that we should put these in
place first, and continue the
conversation on the lead.
Virtual hybrid or recruit leave
on an ongoing basis, and like
the district staff policies,
bring that back, probably in a
couple of years to see if we can
standardize those because right
now
The LCS has a set of policies L
E. S C has their own loc has
their own.
Rather than try to merge all
that right now, in the middle of
doing this, we just feel would
be better to let those work out.
come back and revisit that at
some later point.
And with that, madam chair
members, I stand questions.
So roll if you'll answer this
one for me first under three new
hires.
When you're talking about the
new employees being hired at a
certain rate.
You say unless the hiring
manager has been authorized.
So you have committee chairs of
the respect to statutory agency.
Where are those people?
Madam chair. That would be you
and Speaker Martinez for the
Legislative Council for me.
Oh, that's it for, um
Um
Or is it also the chair?
Apologize civilians CNN in terms
of the 70% if I wanted to bring
in somebody higher than 70%.
If I found an individual who has
all those qualifications, and I
felt like I wanted to hire that
individual at, say, 75 or 80%. I
would go to the, um, the chairs
of my committee. That would be
both of you up.
Similarly, uh, Charles salad
director at LFC would go to his
chair and vice chair.
Or ability to hire somebody to
higher than that rate. Elliot's
see direct would have the same
ability as well.
Right?
Yeah, thank you. Questions,
comments.
Gosh, I guess we're all talked
out the
legislative staff. Oh,
Madam chair. The The only thing
I would add. Is that like the
district policies, these are
draft. We need to bring both of
them back to you more in a
policy format, like the
Legislative Council policies are
laid out. These are really just
outlines that we had worked on,
um over the last several weeks.
And like all of you have thanked
the staff. I would like to thank
the
The director is the chief clerks
and the Chiefs of staff. We did
a lot of work, and I think our
most productive meeting
Was a week ago. Today we all met
here. We just decided it was
difficult to go through this
process over Zoom and we brought
everybody in and we'll probably
have to do that again for both
of these, but we had much more
success doing it that way, then
trying to do it on soon.
Thank you, Roland. I have one
more question. Um
The last bullet under employee's
salary increases.
Now we certainly
I want to
Keep people that worked for us
for a long time. Years doesn't
seem like a long time. I'm we're
trying to ensure that people
have been working with us for a
long time. Get, uh, get a salary
increase.
Uh, I don't think five years is
what we ought to start that at
So, Madam chair if I can address
that, just briefly, Um
A couple of things is that this
would only apply if somebody had
hit the Max.
If
If we're, um
If we're going to evaluate and
revisit and update the
compensation plan.
At least every two years,
possibly every year and look at
cost of living costs of labor.
The percent increase that the
Legislature appropriate to all
staff and
I forgot there was gonna
Those are three main ones. We
expect that the compensation
plan will continue to grow, and
it would take probably more than
five years before somebody hits
the Max.
Because I think
Considering raises for staff you
need to consult with
Chairs. Leadership HR to make
sure that we keep parody and
people are, you know just
automatically given a raise and
that so that we can ensure that
parody, I think would be a while
before somebody hits that.
The other thing I would add,
however, is that five years has
become quite a long time.
From the perspective of that it
we see a lot of staff, leaving
At certain. Um, um, positions
certain levels after two or
three years. I know that LFC has
lost a number of staff.
Two executive agencies.
Um because of their training. We
have lost the number of
Attorney staff attorneys bill
drafters and like, UM, because
they get offers elsewhere, and
so, um, that's part of the just
the overall looking at this
process. So you're right. Five
years doesn't seem a lot like a
long time. We actually started
looking at this about
10 to 15 years before giving
these but we also realize that
staff isn't staying around that
long, and anything we can do to
help recruit and retain would be
helpful, so we'll continue to
look at this.
I mean, I think part of the
reason staff. It's not sticking
around just because of the
salaries, which we have
significantly increased last
month.
Which we should mean. We want
people to want to work for us,
So I think what you're talking
about is what's happened in the
past when we have not had good
salaries increases, so I think
because we have significantly
increased salaries that there
should be 10, not five. That's
my personal opinion, because I
do think that people at that
That stick with us longer than
five years are the ones that
this is designed for. So thank
you, Madam Chair and you're
right. And we're very
appreciative that you put in the
money in the feed bill to
provide that and you approve a
compensation plan. Only thing I
would add in that at the risk of
something like I'm debating with
you.
Salary is hugely important.
It's a short term.
Uh um.
Fixed to some degree, it helps,
But in the long run I from
personal experience, I can tell
you I'm more often lose staff.
For work Life balance.
Than for salary. We have offered
people more money to stay, and
it often comes down to work Life
balance, and that's why I have
tried to hire more staff to
balance out the work a little
bit more, so we need to take all
those things in consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Alright anyone else So we are
now on going to go into a brief
executive committee meeting? Um,
cocktail, Take a motion from the
speaker movement. Sure.
So any opposition to that okay,
seeing none. Thank you. All
everybody, especially those
great staff, people that have
worked with us so hard for
leaving.
Chair unless a if you can just
not go too far, just in case
