Hey good morning to everyone
well it wasn't realized it was
all but after ten good to see
all of you thank you to CNN for
the hospitality and the great
room and and just offering to to
help us out here uh now that
that and the face in the
transition to their new building
so thank you so much and uh
before
we do I am going to have here a
week yes thank you before we do
I am going to have the members
introduce themselves for the
webcast and that then we can
proceed so it would start on
their sand senator okay good
morning madam chairman vice
chair thank you very much i'm
senator michael pavil
been spending twelve years
coming to this meeting on the
south end of our kirkian now i'm
here on the northern development
a little bit of traffic to get
on up here but that's that's
great
represent their sent district
fourteen which is large part of
the southern portion of bernalio
county I do service the senate
majority whip and i've been
voting member of this committee
almost the entire time thank
you.
Good morning grew more medical
survived your representative
here garcia this representative
in mexico I represent house
district sixty nine will cover
parts of some one machine this
will be a burner deal interest
is nice being here today
hope we have a productive day
thank you.
Good morning no madam chair in
vice chair and good morning to
everyone again though state
senator robert though bobby jave
on salaries and senator district
six which encompasses part of
the salam was really well said
affair and towers better what
senator by the adding mention is
we're going to miss going to
barrel that was quite a
there was quite a treat after it
yeah but he's coming up with
some different names now calls
who hear of it we are going to
miss that there were so nice to
be downtown and
I guess it's so as they say
changes always constant though.
Thank you again
thank you saturday I right we're
gonna go to this and now and
representative good morning
madam chair seems we just saw
each other a vice chair members
of the committee those in the
audience and those viewing my
name is but the broadband cover
yet on a represent house
district thirteen which is the
far southwest quadrample
opposite of where we are today
so i'm happy to be back here
thank you very much
yes thank you representative
representative kits thank you my
name is representative kathleen
kates and welcome to district
forty four this is my district
um and I am all of koralis are
used to the river down to I
twenty five but nor is it was
said i'll norte and parts of
rear rancho welcome and if you
need a place to eat here we have
lots of great restaurants out
there.
Good thank you representative
next thank you madame chair and
committee this is listed
unreasonable as a district
thirty nine silver city new
mexico had a nice beautiful
flight coming up from silver
city so covering the pretty much
a southwest right now grant
catering and evaluate one
pricing and I will barming
community it's a beautiful place
where copper comes from thank
you for having us here.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee and and
audience i'm state senator jerry
or t c pino I represent district
twelve that's basically downtown
and alva kirky and then about a
dozen presidents west of the
river that district your course
is uh has been split up in the
little tiny pieces and and will
now be part of the number will
be a part of a new district that
created in rearrangement taylor
ranch happen sand of all happen
burner leo county so district
twelve as i've known it and
represented it for twenty years
won't exist after december
thirty first.
We just got back from three days
in silver city three three days
of meetings with health and
human services committee so if
if i'm a little gruggy this
morning uh it's just because i'm
still trying to process all of
that information but I always
look forward to these meetings
they they hate to ever miss them
so thank you
thank you senator thank you so
much for that I I did see that
you were going through out there
and it's never an easy job thank
you are ever going to move over
to representative andrea remail
thank you for joining this rep
hi good morning chairman
members of the committee
audience i'm andrea from
northern center county
city of santa fe walker valley
through into the city of us in
your line for sovereign public
let's talk about housing.
Good to have you with us
representative my vice chair and
great coach
thank you a madame welcome to
all the members in everybody
here I have the author of being
device chair this committee my
name is representative in the
sale corn a nicer participant in
mckinley county.
Thank you vice chair and judge I
always call him
and then I have to say judge rap
vice chair
thank you all right my name is
nancy and I am senator nancy
rodriguez santa fe district
and I have chaired and coached
this committee for almost twenty
well twenty nine years now
actually so i'm happy to be here
and we're getting ready to roll
again so thank you.
Thank you thank you for a low
represent reminded me ok
attorney for like three.
Thank you you know these
individuals follow us to our
committees and get things
prepared way early for us so i'm
so appreciated and and great
thank you.
Gonna go to start on right away
central new mexico community
college and the remarks open to
remarks in precedent hartsler
couldn't be here she over
extended herself like many of us
do so olivia is here to be with
us thank you for for being here
you're the live yes the vice
president of finance and
operations and many of you may
recognize the living she worked
with us at the favorite good way
thank you.
There are sorry if that read was
off
good morning madame chair and
distinguished committee members
it's really a pleasure to be
here and to welcome you to
cannons work first training
center I know this is very far
north so sorry about that will
we'll try to get browsed a.
To create a a little cafe in
here how is that senator pidea
um but we we are very honored to
have to house you
I will say that the work that
you do in providing and
overseeing quality
affordable housing for only
mexicans is is very honorable
and I know that this
organization in this committee
has a lot of history and
experience so just it's
australia pleasure to be here a
c n m has a very similar uhm.
Vision and mission that's in
line with I believe with housing
new mexico and that is to change
lives and to build community and
we do that through leadership
and education for our late for
learners and our partners and
through innovation and and
education and training so it's I
I feel like there's a lot of lot
of synergy here with the work
that you all do and the work
that CNN doesn't our community
were both economic engines at
this state and i'm really proud
to be a part of this
organization what I wanted to do
is take to take a couple of
minutes to brief you on a really
exciting program that cnm offers
every year and the reason I want
to like to tell you about it is
because we'll be requesting some
funds that the subcoming
legislative session but I think
it's something that is exciting
I think you'll find it exciting
if you don't already know about
it.
Every april cm hosts hundreds of
high school and community
college students from across the
state so see in him host this on
behalf of the state of new
mexico
for the annual new mexico skills
usa leadership and skills
conference students put the
skills that they've learned to
the test in various competitions
in the areas of electric
welding.
Plumbing and other each back
trades and so you have business
and industry representatives
acting as judges for this
competition and also those those
industry reps provide invaluable
career networking opportunities
for the students the goal of the
skills usa organization is to
bring students together
educators and industry
professionals to help address
the skill to work for a shortage
in our state
this year more than eight
hundred high school and
community college students
competed then this competition
that was the largest
participation ever that we have
seen which is really exciting
especially after covered where
we saw some of our are in person
programs I go away for a while
so it's really really good to
have this program come back
rory and that included more than
three hundred women in that
competition which is super
exciting because we are trying
really hard to recruit more
women into the trades and so
that was exciting to see so a
students who win competitions
qualify for the national skills
usa championship through skills
usa chapters at high schools and
colleges across the state there
also opportunities for students
to participate in leadership
conferences another additional
networking opportunities so
skills you are say is an awesome
program it is a great recruiting
tool.
For cnm to attract more students
into the trades industry which
helps us address the skilled
work force that needs that we
have including for residential
construction so that kind of
brings out full circle here our
current level of funding for a
skills usa is not sufficient to
meet the growth that we're
seeing in the program so if this
upcoming legislative session
will be pursuing a research park
I smt
research and public service
project request through eighty
there are psp and so we will be
asking them to support us to
continue to grow this really
invaluable program for our state
and for our economy and so
with that I just think you again
for allowing me to welcome you
and I really send a regrets on
behalf of president hurts there
for not being able to be here
today she is out of state today
so how I hope you have a
productive meeting and welcome
to CNN thank you allevia
appreciate you very much and and
thanks for mentioning that you
will be coming for funding for
this rsp that we talked about
rps be
and down let me just ask the
members do you have any
questions for a livia before we
move on to the next item anyone
yes represent thinking of chair
I on just the recruitment and um
the interest do you follow the
same numbers of recruitment into
the trades that were seeing in
our universities and others are
four percent increase in.
College educated education
interest in our state I just
wonder if the trades are seeing
the same growth spurt you know
there was a low in interest in
trades for a number of years and
I think that there is now a
resurgence in interest on behalf
of young people and this program
the fact that we side eight
hundred percent of the summer I
think is one really good
indication that we are starting
to see more interest again but
really it's on us.
To a generate that interest and
make it exciting again and I
welcome you we're building a new
trade's facility because cnm is
you know is that this is a roots
you know where we are tbi and so
we are starting to double down
on those roots and so we're
building a new cutting cutting
edge state of the art trade
specially to do that is to get
people in young people excited
about the trades again but we
are starting to see a resurgence
and around.
Thank you
they could be at representative
robot cover yet thank you
medical charge thank you very
much for your presentation i'm a
big found as I said for years of
arm central new mexico at all
community colleges in general I
think it's a great stepping
stone
um towards careers as well as
hire it if those were the
choices so my question are
i'm not quite sure if I remember
the report from cnm.
How are you interfacing with our
local trade unions.
In terms of apprenticeship
programs and placements.
A member cable I I know there
are relationships with the
unions I don't have any details
to speak to it so i'd have to
get back to you with with those
details but I know that there
are representatives from the
trade unions that interact I
regularly with our division of
our course
trades are a sorry work force in
community success yet so
there is that relationship and
i'm happy to get more
information on it thank you I I
did understand that there was
that relationship and I just
whatever information you can
provide to so we can assess the
effectiveness and how well that
relationship is rolling out
because as i've said previously
about that relationship it
serves as a model
and we need to be modeling
successful programs so am it
with the aa absolutely well and
the relationship that we're
building where three arantia
public schools I think is
another opportunity for us to
partner with other organizations
to get access to more students
and learners to go through these
programs yes the pipeline and
pathways incredibly important
for a state thank you so much.
Thank you very much bringing a
heck go to represent a kates and
representative to us thank you
madame chair and thank you very
much for your presentation thank
you for hosting us today
this is so vital to our
community this facility
specifically umm I have a
personal live for cn as well my
father
his dream was always to become a
teacher so his retirement job
was teaching each back at cnm
for the last three years before
he died and so thank you I would
like to have if you have any
updates on the claboration with
the rear rental public school te
school up further up in district
forty four in the rear ranter
area
where what classes you currently
teaching I know that you are cn
is overseen a curriculum and the
programs for adult learners why
the public schools are doing
that for the high school
students as well and so can you
give us any updates on that
project yeah so think you
representative in it's good to
meet you and so yes the so we
are offering welding electrician
and construction trades
currently for all rearing to
public school students and
that's program has been up and
running for about a year now and
we are also right now in the
process of adding um digital
media to that as a slight of
course is available to them and
I believe that there's also
interest in adding some film
programming as well so it is
something that we're really
excited about it hasn't been a
ongoing for it that long so but
we look forward to presenting
some outcomes to that in the
coming years but at least it's
been up and running for about a
year and we are offering those
courses that are real rancho
campus and because it is you
know the campus that rearrange
and public schools as building
is still being renovated so my
understanding is that should be
complete within the year.
Amp and then CNN is building a
automotive
mechanic building that'll be up
coming in two probably year and
a half that will be up and
running as well and then we'll
be moving all of our automotive
mechanic programs to re around
you at that time.
Thank you madame chair that
includes a ev maintenance as
well in fact that's probably
going to be one of the prank
premier programs for that is
that correct that is correct yes
so I will just one last comment
and see you know we took we talk
about abstain in our lanes and
that is difficult for different
agencies or different
educational systems to do a
clarity of effort this is a
wonderful calling card between
private sector unions are
excommunity college cnm and a
public school distract all
coming together to be able to
offer opportunity from fourteen
to policy past forty
so thank you
thank you representative caters
representative devastating that
we have senator gone silence
thank you manager I just thank
you president is it **** right
vp pity a jackson i'm sorry well
I was reading out their site
is filling in okay well thank
you for your presentation sorry
I listen to everything except
for that in the
anyway I thank you for what
you're doing here my quick
question is do you have any form
for it wait of
checking because of the lack of
labor participation you know the
rates are seen do you have any
sort of placement data that says
hey this is after we they go to
our program they getting
permanently placed in there is
any data any research on that
that we could see that that
cause I think this was great I
just want to know
are we getting the data that
shows that we're moving in in
their correct uh direction
think you madam chair and I
represent a sizes in your
specifically asking about a
placement data with respect to
the students they are seeking
the trades his man through your
trades in order are you do you
have any follow up that I can
see you know they go through our
program and this you know other.
Local businesses or whatever
they're being placed are for
full time employment or even
part time any sort of employment
we were we would I have what I
can tell you regard with regard
to the outcomes for these
graduates is that the the salary
that they are receiving upon
graduation ranges from fifty to
eighty thousand dollars there
among our highest paid placed
graduates and I can also tell
you that we have weight lists
for these programs and a big
part of the reason that we have
weight lists is because we
struggle to find the faculty
that can teach for levels that
we need so
I know that the demand is there
and I know that the jobs the
really high paying jobs are
there but we do I think we can
do more and we're right now
we're strategizing as to how to
recruit faculty because as you
can imagine um as representative
it's is is disgusting sometimes
the people that are teaching are
doing it because of the labor of
love but they can make a lot
more money in the private
industry doing this uhm so we
are trying to recalibrate what
we're paying these individuals
and had a recount and be
innovative particularly with the
unions and in other ways to
think about doing it but I can
get you information I heard your
question and I will I will get
few specifically in terms of
placement but I I know it's
really really high it's one of
our these are their most high in
demand programs as evidence by
some of the salaries and the
weightless that we're seeing
thank you my last question is
part of the is there any
participation on I think i'm
gonna pick up off of some of the
other questions on the private
sector where they are saying he
i'm gonna sponsor an individual
in help them go to the school
you know necessary I have
someone that I want to train I
have an employee that I want to
see them in or graduate up to a
better level or a higher level
and I are you seen some of that
where they come to the school
and or possibly have a
participation deal for
sponsorship.
Are using some of that madam
chair representative tries as we
we absolutely see that largely
with larger employers like intel
so that is one example of how
employers are coming to the
table to sponsor students and
through our programs the other
way that we see it is through
our CNN foundation a lot of
private instruments very very
interesting these programs are
they'll they will give the
donate after scholarships for a
students and to be used across
the board emergency housing
state different types of
supports to students to help and
be successful in these programs
I say those were the two that
i've seen um.
But there are a lot of work for
funding opportunities right now
that you that you may know about
that we're trying to think about
creative ways to
use that money to support the
trades as well that's great
thank you very much voucher
thank you so they're going
service
thank you all manager enough
thank you again for your.
What a beautiful facility and
then no yesterday we were at
your other side the monthly
building then as so
a representative but they sell
collateral and my service were
walking in this morning.
And I just mentioned to her only
the students or person that
doesn't want to go to higher or
two college anymore doesn't
because there's so many
opportunities to such really
nice problems and facilities
that.
You know what a gift to our
state compared to or we were
saying fifteen twenty years ago
I know that so you know quite an
accomplishment for our state in
order to have a this available
but what I was gonna ask you
with some at the very beginning
and if you don't have an answer
that's fine you have mentioned
that you would be coming to us
for funding and do you know how
much
yes madame chair and senator
contallers four hundred and
twenty two thousand is our
request right now in front of
each day for the rpsp
process it's an expansion of an
existing our psp so hopefully
we'll get their support m.
And if we if we don't get that
approved then we'll will come
through a different process may
be through the grill process or
some other funding mechanism
that use you available.
So they would too what
percentage of an increase
it really transforms that entire
rpsp so it's going from seventy
thousand currently which is just
a really small um it's a women
in trades event to helping to
find our skills usa program so
it's it's a huge jackets from
seventy thousand to four hundred
and twenty two thousand.
Okay and
madam charity really applied to
you for them common that you
made of trying to elevate and to
recruit in more females into the
whole scenario oh the last part
that I have is so are are you
doing anything with a
firefighting.
Training of verified in
preparation nor.
Yes madam chair center regards
others we have a full array of
first responder i'm training
partnerships with the city of
albuquerque and other local
public agencies so yes we have
that and those uhm you've been
to our montoy campus and we're
course trading center those
programs take place on our osa
campus and if you ever get a
chance to to go out there and
take a look at some of those
training facilities that's where
their primarily housed.
But i'm sure the list parties do
they cornate with the state
forestry and you was forced.
I meant i'm sure period I am not
sure about that but i'm happy to
look into that for you if you
like.
Well i've just mentioned though
you know so as I very strong
suggestion is some last year
refunded to units
however hot shot units to the
state of new mexico and one is
in most figure someone is in so
coral matter the way I see it
and in the way I know how the
operation of though.
He was forced in the state
forced in the blm work we
probably could have six of them
in our state you know and.
Uh also you know you talk about
economic.
Development economic engine you
know that would be a very good
employment specially for.
A lot of individuals that don't
want to work full time but you
know here say you part time or
you know can be full time also
and then from here it would be a
resource to deploy individuals
to other states during the
firefight insistence.
Okay I will take that one thank
you very much thank you manager
thank you senator alright I
don't have any questions that I
just want to say thank you once
again please pass honor great
appreciation to our president I
sure well thank you very much
thanks for your great work okay
a members i'm gonna skip one
item for just a moment because I
want to go to the approval of
the minute since we have a point
number thank you thank you said
in the silence motion for
approval we have a second sandra
padea anyone opposed
past
thank you for that never going
to go on to executive director
is he had noticed and he's got a
target about the
thank you izzie
good to see thanks for all your
good work
thank you madame chair and
members of the committee i'd
like to start off by again thank
in the CNN for a hosting this
meeting here today
we have moved into our building
now have a couple of punch list
items that are going to be
worked on over the next month or
so but we do plan on having our
next meeting of this oversight
committee at that the new
building they're still looking
forward to that
we have a few items on our
agenda today in some way I take
the opportunity to thank that
the partners that are here that
will be presenting to you with
some of them traveled from a
other states to get here so I
really want to thank them for
coming in and doing that for us.
What i'm gonna do today is
provide you an update on the new
mexico housing trust fund there
were some follow up questions
when I made some comments it are
last meeting so I wanted to
follow up on those then also
give you an update on the
listening sessions that were
having across the state
so if you go to behind tab two
go past the cover page and you
got a page two your seat the
funds that will be updating you
on today we had a thirty seven
and a half million dollars that
were made available to us that
was that the first uh
allocation if you will under the
severance text ones that became
available to us in july of uh
last year we also had thirty
four million dollars that just
become of a low to us a couple
months ago in uh in july and
then there was a fifty million
dollars there also became
available and july of of this
year if you total all of those
together uh that would be a
hundred and twenty two
million dollars.
Our board
allocated those funds to various
activities and categories
that all highlight here it's
create more housing uh was one
of the activities the other one
is built home ownership and
wealth.
The other one it is.
Preserve existing housing and
then the other one creates table
housing environments those
activities who are
actually approved by state board
of finance or some specific car
rules or activities that can be
used with severance tax bonds so
we work with the state for the
finance and their bond council
to make sure that the the
activities were providing where
error consistent with what our
is allowed in the severance tax
points.
If you got to page three you'll
see a map there that shows you
and I think the specific
question not last month was a
where these housing cross when
money's being allocated so you
can see their where those funds
are being allocated in the uh
track that the population
centers of the state there are
some counties that have received
under a hundred thousand dollars
i'll give you some details on
those here in a little bit in
the following pages on what
those counties are uh so some
work to be done in those
counties to try to get more
funds there but we do operate as
an agency through partners so we
need the partners to actually
apply for the funds so we can
get them uh funding there but
you can see the eighty million
dollars out of the hundred and
twenty two have been already
awarded and some of those funds
eighty four million of those
funds were just became available
to us a couple of months ago in
july so there's a great need out
there and our partners are doing
a great job of a applying and
putting those funds to work.
If you go to the next few pages
that you're going to see a long
last in page four five.
Six and seven.
And eight of all of those awards
that were made to many different
agencies across the state
they are total.
You know the eighty million
dollars that I mentioned
so you can have that as
background information for you
all over jump over to page nine
which gives you a summary of how
much went in to each of the uh
counties there so you'll see all
of the counties
noted on their uh in
all of the counties heaven
received funding under this
program you'll see you know
bernaldio county probably being
the top when they're with the
highest population there
at seventeen million dollars
there.
What a little tricky on this is
that some of these funds that
were allocated by a border where
allocated to programs that are
state white programs and some
were allocated to agencies that
are doing regional type work uh
so keep that in mind as you look
at some of this data here but
all of those numbers are add up
to the eighty million dollars
that I mentioned a little bit
earlier
with them further broke it down
if you got to page ten of under
reach of the activities that I
mentioned earlier which is a
bill to homeownership and wealth
by county so it shows you how
many county is obtained funding
under that particular activity
or activities that's twenty
seven of the thirty three
counties.
Uh create more housing by county
uh you'll see there that there
was a.
I think one two three four five
six seven seven different
counties that obtain funding
under that there was page eleven
uh page twelve uh you'll see all
of the counties that receive
funding under that I think there
we list.
The we have your if you.
Cava sharpey you'll see that to
navigal nation is included in
there as well at the top of the
right hand column they receive
some funding in there as well
for some weatherisation so
there's going to be an
additional entity listed on
there there are a couple of
counties catering being one of
them and so coral bean another
that under this particular
activity have not received any
funding from the housing trust
fund.
In that create the stable
housing environments by county
there are two counties uh donate
a county and so correct county
that received funding under that
to the one and donate a county
as to build a permanent
supportive housing of some units
there and outside a new award
that are bored just made our
last board meeting last week I
believe in the night in so
quarrel there was for uh a new
development attack between so
coral and tier see it's in san
marcia so small non profit
that's doing out housing for
homeless veterans uh so
that they were really looking
forward to they fed a lot of
success over the short period of
time that they've been there and
this funding will really help
them expand and do a lot more
there.
But manager the only other thing
that i'd like to mention is that
we have some listening sessions
a total of six that were doing
across the state three of them
have been completed one in
roswell uh gallup and espanola
we've had good these are
regional listening sessions and
we've invited legislators
partners and other stake holders
elected officials to attend
these uh they've been very good
sessions and we're learning a
lot we have a three more that
are coming up the next one is in
las cruces on the tenth so
hopefully we can get some of you
there are i'm looking at
representatives that are
hopefully that a day freeze up
for you and we'd like to have
you there with some other folks
from the silver city area
we have one on santa fe on the
thirteenth of november and in
the following day on the
fourteenth one here in alberto
key as well and won't be calling
you if we have one of those
sessions is in your area to
remind you about it and
hopefully we can get you to to
attend the forum is a was the
listening sessions design so we
can learn from the community and
their needs and there's a lot of
that going on and then also
educate them about the programs
that we have that could be
potentially used to meet some of
the needs in their area for
madam chair with that dollar
taking questions you may have
thank you is there for your
continued in assessment work on
behalf of new mexico and
providing affordable housing we
have representative andre ever
married first thank you thinking
madame chair i'm think to you is
the always for the updates and I
i'm i'm just curious um out they
get another we had historically
make for
our from our trust funds just
curious how that management is
working
is there an increased capacity
to be able to manage that fund
and
attach to that was any of that
funding used for a disaster
relief.
Madam chair and representative
the uh.
The use of the funds is going
very well and I think you know
one of the things that i've
mentioned I
in the past is I think that the
capacity is a function of the
funds that are available prior
to this hundred and twenty two
million dollars we were getting
sporadic funds here and there
and all of those funds were
being used a hundred percent as
we started getting these new
funds we've at we're at the
stage now at the hundred and
twenty two million we've already
awarded eighty million of that
and some of those funds are or
was at eighty two million just
became available a couple of
months ago so I think the
capacity will uh grow as the
funding of streams grow so that
that's going well with our
partners out there and
internally with step as well
we've allocated a couple more
staff to help oversee that the
housing trust fund.
With regard to money's being
used for disaster relief we have
several sources of funding but
there was funding from this part
here I believe I from the
housing crust when there was
recently allocated to reduce off
or ten homes that they are built
in there we have other parts of
funding that that we receive
congressionally that are also
being used in some of the other
areas I hope that addresses your
question I have couple more
thinking madam chair
pivoting over to the linkages
program and so the opportunity
that may be available within the
housing trust for transitional
housing is there considering
what we're trying to do across
the spectrum of housing is there
an opportunity there that where
we might be able to actually
look at new facilities or
expanding that program further.
Madam chair and representative
are romero.
We we get that we're very
grateful for the money that we
get to from the state for
linkages their program is going
well with a few bumps here and
there is there's a case with
most programs
that you have to work through
the.
The funds that we receive under
the housing trust one cannot be
used for rental assistance for
the link it just model that we
can only have a could net would
not work there.
There is for his building
facilities for people that are
currently in the link you just
program can rent that is
something that that we can do
and I will say that some funds
were recently awarded to a small
organization in southeast part
of the state that they're
looking at the purchasing homes
that need rehability having them
in making him available for
people that are on vouchers
which would include the link and
just folks hopefully we can do
more of that across the state
and I would say that the large
portion of the funds that have
been awarded have been for
rental developments which could
be rented to these folks that
are currently accessing the
linkages program.
Ah thinking madam chair I would
love to continue to incentivise
that opportunity being that the
need is so great for
transitional housing anyway that
we can allocate if it's more
funding that's needed or if it's
more capacity citing these
different areas that would be of
great interest I think and
helping us alleviate our
homelessness issues in the state
um
couple more questions just
pivoting over to the home
ownership funding with down
payment assistance is there
being the kind of creates this
sort of artificial interest in
um or inflation rather in the
cost of housing because we have
that assistance is there an
opportunity to perhaps.
Um
use that funding for new and
additional build out if it's not
being used or if we are
unfortunately incentivising
higher priced housing with that
um
down payment assistance.
Madam chairman representative
romero I think we would
definitely one of the
presentations a little bit later
on today we'll talk about that
the down payment assistance to
some extent we have I actually
made some awards here recently
from our board for development a
single family home so that is
going on not quite at the
capacity that we want it to yet
but I think we've seen some
momentum so we are hoping to see
more of that uh going on in a I
do think that down payment
assistance programs because the
as you know with the interest
rates being as high as they are
and they've kind of tapered down
a little bit over the last few
weeks
in the high cost of homes in the
medium price really going up
that are is putting a lot of
home ownership out of reach for
me families that we try to serve
so the dump payment assistance
helps and get into those homes.
Great so so long as we are able
to allocate and sort of spread
it out I have a couple more
questions but all follow off
line
or mister chair.
Okay
well
you mr chair and thank you
mister lenders for your
presentation I have along the
same lines thank you
representative because she asked
several of the questions that I
was going to ask but I want to
know a little bit more about
the down payment and systems and
so i'm i'm just along the same
process I am wondering how we
can or how do you measure or
assure that
we're putting families.
With that need assistance into
affordable housing for the long
term so it's a big concern
because
one thing is to get in and get
approved
and then the other is how do you
sustain that and how you sustain
it is based on your income your
capacity to build on their
income maybe career whatever but
these families need to
understand um
or or should be counciled I
guess
for the long term and this is to
avoid um the foreclosure
cycle that we went through as a
state that we still went through
when I first got elected was a
period of time where the
foreclosures just didn't senator
by the end my district was the
highest and state so I want to
make sure that we're putting in
are all of the safeguards.
That to prevent that from
happening that's question number
one
madam current representative
regardless of a yellow we have a
presentation a little bit later
on that to speak specifically to
that so many punt a little bit
rather than tell you that
uh our progress to require home
wondership counseling up front
in the north of closure rates
are while they happen or are
very low but all that renewal
now in jefferson address that if
you don't mind for their full
you'll get a bigger picture of
the problem
thank you then the other
question I have is um
capacity building and technical
assistance and going through the
distribution sheets
obviously there are smaller
communities that either receive
very low amounts or no amounts
of funding so i'm wondering I
know you're having the listening
session so that's building
partnership hopefully building
relationships
but how is how are the cugs I
think i've asked this question
before and others that are
um regional capacity building
technical assistance groups
assisting you in helping assist
these smaller communities in
going after these funds cause
there's a huge aussie need for
example I know siebel accounti
still has a big need and there
big need for bolts
rehabilitation as well as new
housing.
Madam chairman representative of
all couple year old the the cogs
we we agree or a great uh
resource across the state we've
actually allocated some funds to
uh several of the cards uh the
one in santa fe the.
North central in a media money
car beat other they have several
programs are they doing a great
job
I don't know that I can color
our point person with the ****
which is defective been our
point person is done that what
you're sitting behind me all
attends a lot of the card
meetings and so we've trying to
form partnerships with them and
they've been very supportive in
it helped us develop
relationships in in their areas
uh so definitely we agree that
there are great resources will
continue to create a faster more
partnerships with m and I have
them helpless in their
communities thank you and I
bring that up because I had a
recent conversation with
preservation I think it's all
set up um that are consistently
were were short changing
ourselves in terms of funding
going towards capacity building
and technical assistance that's
an area where she continues to
say that we need to build more
of the funding that goes towards
those two at well the one in the
same efforts so I just wanted
you to be cognizant because a
lot of I know you are a lot of
these areas.
Overlap with her particular
region soul I know we're doing
good things in some reading
regions but then and i'm looking
at some of these distributions
we probably could build more
thank you mister madam chair if
I may on on that point in
representative of all cover yet
we totally agree and just want
to thank brazilia who sarah is
she may be listening she
actually helped facilitate that
some awards and funds that went
down to the silver city area for
some of the single family
development out there that i'm
sure representative that also is
very familiar with so thank you.
Thank you very terminated and
actually my question may be for
you more madame chairman than
for mr nondashbut
the figures that that are shown
here they don't yet include the
money that that that will be
getting from the set aside that
you passed in the session do
they
miser chairman the numbers that
we got in here yes they should
be for the twenty twenty four
sound page two the thirty seven
million five hundred and thirty
thousand and then also for
fiscal year twenty five those
two are from senate bill one
thirty four from your from your
home what is the percentage of
two and a half percent per
sponding capacity so those those
are pretty much guaranteed
although the the specific amount
will fluctuate depending on
what's available for seven texts
do we have an estimate on the
twenty six yeah
do you know from the live sea or
they have they given you any
figures about what the total
severance tax package next year
might be and then what would two
and a half percent of that would
be
made chair and uh should or t c
p not a norable
behind me she may I I think for
twenty six I think it's like
going to be slightly lower than
the thirty four million dollars
I don't remember the details.
Madam chair and senator I don't
call me on this number is my
recollection is about twenty
nine million dollars that would
become available
around thirty million yes mr
chat am I say this are two as
that we have a new forecast
coming up also and so that's why
we don't have the final but it's
very close to that thank you
well I bring it up because it
may be that in addition to that
set aside
given the state's situation we
may want to add some more to it
so cause I would hate to see a
summer drop off in our
commitment to affordable housing
so I just bring that up to to to
make their point in for us all
to keep an eye on that thank you
thank you for that senator I
know you've been a great
supporter and proponent for
affordable housing and we very
much appreciate you are want to
state that I did also include in
their thanks to the help of my
colleagues and an additional
fifty million dollars last year
for or so the affordable house
in trust fund for the mf to
administer but that was a non
recurring amount the good thing
is that overall mfa leverages
every dollar of these managed
that we allocate an up to twenty
nine to one in return so that is
admirable and I know that this
will go along way sometimes as
twenty six to one sometimes
twenty nine to win as we have
seen on the past but that's
pretty huge when you think about
how much you can do to leverage
these dollars so thank you very
much and we are going to go back
to there to support you know if
you have any further questions
senator you're down ok
representative caters thank you
matter of chair and thank you
senators for that discussion
that's very exciting and I like
that you're keeping our feet to
the fire I do have some
questions but I want to bring
back to our earlier discussion
I strongly
I disagree with my very
respected representative who
said that are down payment.
And closing cast assistant
program is adding to and
fleeting the cost of arms I do
not see that inflation is
inventory and need an interest
rates it's not on down payment
and closing costs assistant that
is a great it is not a program
there is
um supporting a lot of effort
for our unhoused population but
it must certainly is
for our first time home buyer
fixed income veterans and a very
much appreciate it
and I see that it works every
day so I hope that we don't
dismantle that i've heard make
sure that they'd stays safe
very much so I I also appreciate
my representatives to them I
left me and and her comments as
well and looking for those other
opportunities for different
programs I wanted to ask you a
question about.
Uh
let's see that the
create more housing by county on
page eleven what what does that
mean I know that you briefly
talked about it but
it doesn't look like very many
county user participating maybe
that's because we are following
where the population is or
because it's such a new program
can you tell us briefly about
how individuals are accessing
this money.
Madam chair and representative
kits this one specifically is
for new development of single
family housing so these are the
few awards that we made on a
single family development site
so no it is fairly new and
something that we're seeing some
of minimum but not quite at the
stage where we when it this is
not account for our
first time home buyer program
where we are financing you
construction this is actually
awards made to developments or
developers to develop
thinking there is this for like
infrastructure to be able to uh
incentifies developers to build
home if we if we at the state
are investing in the
infrastructure that is needed
madam chair and representative
cates and some cases yes as an
example the the tous number that
you see there they're going to
be using the for some
infrastructure and then a line
of credit to to build homes in
some cases the infrastructure is
already there just going to use
that as a line of credit to
build the home soil very from a
war to award.
And and thank you very much
month management chair and thank
you is he I I wanted to also now
go to slide twelve just briefly
to
um.
Discuss about this program
preserving rehabilitate
affordable housing by county
so are these individual
rehabilitations to ensure
security and safety for
residents within their homes
make sure that their accessible
so they're not going to
assistant living programs ten
times more expensive is that
we're these funds are being used
madam chairman representing
catesties all very as as well
some of these are weathers I
wear the rising homes making a
more energy efficient in some
cases it could be
put in ramps and modifications
into home for people that want
to age in place in some cases
there could be r restoring our
community program where we have
a
entity is nonprofits or for
profits purchasing an abandoned
or for a close tomorrow rehabing
it and put it now for sale back
to somebody that's a lot of
migrant income so they will very
in in some cases they are multi
family developments that are at
a stage where they'd need some
rehab and as you know
in most cases it's cheaper to
rehab a
place or an apartment complex
than it is to to build me you so
it really varies in this
category pretty diverse set of
programs or activities that are
being conducted thank you thank
you as in thinking manager so in
the.
Um
how are we marketing this are
these only for county minister
ball state
starm multi family dwellings or
are these in private sector
apply for these fines as well to
show that they've updated by
widening doorways putting in
ramps grab bars things like that
so that they can stay accessible
madame chairman representative
case that we're not also very so
we have a any other partnership
or entities out there are
eligible to apply for this you
know local governments are for
profit nonprofit
a tribal government uh mentioned
to fail some of this is that we
have on tribal lens as well so
it really varies it it is is not
required to be a non profit it
can be for profits and we have
examples of awards that we made
across the spectrum okay thank
you very much it is very
you've hit both my issues here
than someone program as I just
want to thank you you know
helping
our residence and new mexico
states safely in their home arm
a being able to invest some
projects like this or so much
cheaper than assistant living
programs they have more rights
then if so many of their homes
the might be aging but their
homes are not keeping up with
the as they're they've been
built before those standards and
so uh this is just a great
program and I would like one
more question is there I know
that this has been a.
One of the less funded programs
that mfa has are there are
additional finds that you are
seeking now that we are trying
to identify older places to
invest in
or do you feel like the funding
has been adequate.
Madame chairman representative
cater there is a huge need out
there so while we are very
grateful for the monies that we
received and that recurring
funds in the fifty million from
from last year uh it's not
sufficient to meet the need
after so we we will be coming to
you next month or some
additional funding requests at
his next legislative session
we're kinda working through that
although better what that the
ask will be but definitely need
for a additional funding to be
able to do more across all the
activities
thank you very much in thinking
manager thank you representative
we have representative here you
go sierra and then we've got
representative to assess
I thank you madam chair thank
for the presentation on the
lines of president gate was
asking is it look residents
what going on that loss alan
would count me and bring the new
country to the biggest winners
of the moneys they're both the
seventeen million of a piece and
you know like I looked at
similar countries a hundred and
forty five thousand in all these
numbers are really offset you
can explain that I know where
population but it just a
coincidence richest colonies in
the senior mexico were
benefiting more than anybody
else in the state.
Madam chair representative
garcia i'm in a let roben come
up here in a speak to that when
they're.
Madam chair and representative
or see I apologize because that
is a mistake in the slide the
amount that went to las almost
county as actually about four
hundred and thirty seven
thousand dollars so it is not a
will correct that site in the
packet and and get that back to
loc staff that seventeen million
does not accurate.
Run that by me on the top please
so you you stated that burning
or county and last one was
county received both seventeen
million however it's a it's a
mistake and must almost county
only received about four hundred
and thirty thousand dollars so I
I apologize for that error
that that's the big mistake yes
I can like a sixty million
dollars
you know when we go off as a
committee what we're reading
here you know mistakes are
mistakes but that should be
corrected before it came to this
point that i'm looking at
numbers away the for much money
in other communities other
counties are struggling to do
anything and in order like you
said I understand that it's a
mistake but you know this
committee just goes over with
what we read you know we don't
know the mistake was not a
mistake without said that madam
chair thank you
thank you representative with
gap representative tarasses next
thank you madame chair
thank you for the presentation
or
yeah I noticed that it was it's
just the same numbers but on the
office I can't okay
yet so obviously we have the
obviously got a big housing
problem in inner mexico but and
some of these questions that we
were asking when they're
developing
madam chair is in robin are they
prefabs is of what they're doing
right now is prefabs that are
being built in these
developments that we were
talking about earlier.
Madam chair and represent if
there are so I think we have a a
couple of examples where it
could be pre fabs or
manufactured homes in other
cases our site bill tomsa
believe the ones in that in
silver city may be manufactured
hundred preferred
so it it'll really vary but I
would say probably that's the
minority the preference is
definitely the minority of those
development so madam chair is in
rabbit so these some of these
still on it's just so that I can
get wrapped my might around it
are we're working with mobile
home so that we can get quick
housing is that would that in my
understanding that right when
you said mobile house are you
having developments were they
can then get mobile homes in
their death or did I
misunderstand that madam chair
and representative that also
said I would say that the mobile
homes are modular homes
manufactured homes are these
slight or that the minority of
those are being built uh I think
silver city may be an example of
where and I forget the number of
homes if it was sixteen or
twenty four that are being
placed there but I would say
that's the one that's probably
only manufactured home so the
the rest would be site built
okay and and thank you manager I
just I didn't understand I may
be a missouri heard you so no
it's I think you're you're you
know we appreciate all your work
I I kind of smiled when will you
they say that do you have enough
money and I said while I think I
think the skies are limit on the
need here in a mexico the last
thing is obviously it's it's
good to have a very good
relationship in a swankog and I
think that helps us in in
southwest and mexico so we
appreciate all the work that you
do not in area and the
partnerships that we have with
uh ourselves and car
thank you very much mountain
great thank you representative
before we move on a month ask
representative of able to
introduce yourself for the
record and also representative.
And the nine
year no new house got it yea
thank you
thank you madame chair for that
recognition umm i'm
representatives and the
apparently I represent district
seventeen on the northwest
massive albuquerque closest to
cotworth mall and real right
show in the river so thank you
for that and I just wanted to
mention madame chair as I was
listening to the two thousand
one I saw um stephanie garcia
richards on tv night before last
talking about
some land that the trust is
donating for housing which I was
very happy to see because i've
been asking about that quite a
bit is what lands the state owns
and how we can contribute to new
housing the other thing that I
was discussing with the senator
pedia is when we did when we
belt alba cricket high
we had to change out the water
and swore lines because they
were not big enough to handle
the capacity and one of the
issues that I that I see a lot
probably in the smaller
communities is that they don't
have the infrastructure and I
think representative keeps
sprout it up earlier but I think
that that is something that we
definitely need to be thinking
about as you know how do we help
this smaller communities
developed these properties when
they don't have the capacity so
thank you for that manager.
Thank you very much
representative where you're
going to go on to represent it
on you thank you
thank you madame chair I guess
i'm representative john unornio
from and the nineteenth district
you're now because the
paragraphs the international
district and I did have just one
really quick clarifying question
on that slide nine cell if less
almost got four hundred and
thirty seven thousand and the
seventeen million did lincoln
county get is the linking county
amount correct or did they get
the last alliance amount.
Sorry rabinet
get your steps it
thank you madame chair apologize
again for the error on that
slide let me just pull up.
To.
Uh so madam chairman are
representative of validate that
number I think it is around the
same amount because they're
listed here in numeric call
order but I will bother date
that as well
ok great thank you thank you
madam chair
thank you don't have anyone else
on the list so thank you is in
damn robin and we're going to
move on to building home
ownership opportunities jeff pay
no here here jeff and then that
renew where is renewed okay and
so brian I can't get all during
it guesses brian began thank my
god thank you already so we're
reader hear you
from you.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee we
would like to begin today's
presentation was some incentive
comments from one of our
participating lenders.
Brand began is the area manager
for c m g mortgage mr guide has
been in the mortgage lending
industry for thirty plus years
and has utilized housing new
mexico programs throughout his
career i'd like to point out
that cmg mortgage is currently
in our top five producer lists
with a hundred and forty eight
loans purchases fiscal year it
is our partners like mister
began as that contribute to the
success of our single family
programs and we would not be
able to do that without their
contributions and at this point
i'll turn it over to miss began
thank you
what yes would I could begin
with the borough testimonial
video and then we'll pass over
to mister that's okay
okay fine thank you
many excited because.
Thank you.
Good morning madame chair
distinguished committee members
my name is brian began and i've
i've had the privilege to help
home owners in the state in
mexico since nineteen ninety two
others been a lot of challenges
you know in these thirty some
years that i've been been doing
it i'm currently the early
manager of c mg home loans or
national company and our branch
is located we have a branch
located here and in ross will
the mexico and a branch in last
crucials as well.
Oh.
I can tell you that as as an
area manager a lot of my
personal success and there's
success of cmg home loans is
comes from are strong
relationship with with mfa
throughout the state they are
the cad list the first time home
buyers and and when we think
about first time home buyers we
have to really look at that
how the process works it's
important understand the role
the first time home buyer play
in the growth and vitality of
the market
first time home buyers are the
foundation I know what's a
healthy housing market is built
so we have to look at this room
when the first time home buyer
comes in they buy but they buy
this home right here the seller
then buys this home and and and
a ripple effect comes into play
and so it's very important that
we take care of of the first
time home buyers and give them
the opportunity to buy homes as
a matter of facts and january of
two thousand and twenty three to
august thirty first of two
thousand twenty four m f a
helped four thousand six hundred
and sixty six families by homes
throughout the state
you know that that fee alone is
is is amazing but there are
challenges for first time home
buyers the challenges that they
face are significant and growing
one of the biggest challenges is
that gap between income growth
and rising home prices so from
two thousand and eighteen to two
thousand twenty two new mexico's
medium household income increase
from forty eight thousand and
fifty nine dollars to fifty
eight thousand seven hundred and
twenty two dollars
that is a rise of twenty two
point two percent
during their same time period
the median home price home price
in our state served from two
hundred thousand dollars to
three hundred and six thousand
dollars that's a staggering
fifty three percent increase and
when home prices increase at
more than double the rate of
income it becomes harder and
harder after the everyday
families to afford homes
so the the number one obstacle
for purchasing a home is down
payment.
As we heard lease a talk and and
the thing that it's down payment
the median rent for a single
family home here in abercurchy
right now for a single family
homeless two thousand dollars.
If we look at our median income
there the two thousand dollars
plus planned bills and kind of
live in paycheck to pay check
the ability to save for down
payment is is is very difficult
and a lot of times it's just
impossible and that's why this
program with them if a is is
this so vital and basically just
distinct kind of given
understanding how how this
program works let's just use
that three hundred thousand
dollars purchase price and a
typical fh loan you have to put
three point five percent down
which is ten thousand five
hundred dollars
and then on top of that
disclosing costs involved with
purchasing home and that's just
estimate four thousand dollars
so on a person is going to have
to come in with fourteen
thousand five hundred dollars
the you know it's tough to say
that amount of money what's what
mfa has done as now they have a
third mortgage that we get which
is ten thousand dollars at a
zero percent interest rate that
goes to reckle towards down
payment so that automatically
lowers that the mortgage
instantly and then there's a
second mortgage that comes in
play which takes care of our
closing costs so are in many
circumstances a home owner can
buy their home with no money out
of their pocket which is huge
and that that that keeps their
the ripple effect going allowing
these people to get in there and
by their homes.
Another aspect is the
competitive interest rates right
now in that same f a m f a l
interest rates are at five point
seventy five percent that's
about a point lower than what I
can offer somebody outside of
this mfa program
heard **** freddy they have
what's called loan level price
adjustments and what that is is
that the rather year as they've
determined respected and it
could be credit score it could
be down payment amount and what
they do then as a bump up that
interest rate depending on that
that particular credit score for
instance so for a six twenty
credit score and do an f a long
we're probably looking above
seven percent maybe seven and
half percent right now in
today's market this is what's
great about him fay as well you
can have a six twenty credit
score you get five point seven
five percent you have a you have
a eight hundred credit score you
have five point seventy five
percent and so these people can
are getting then now and and
have a lot more opportunity for
affordable housing.
About I get asked a lot what you
know what do I see coming in the
future of a lot of the quote and
quote experts in our industry
are are projecting that interest
rates are probably to drop to
the mid the lower fires possibly
in the forest the middle of next
year what does that mean for for
home buyers the national
association of realtors state
that for every one percent that
interest rates grap five million
new home buyers will come in the
market place and this is
nationally but a lot of people
have been sitting on the
sidelines waiting for interest
rates that come down what does
that mean for home prices then
when you have more and more
people going for that one house
yes home prices are going to
continue to appreciate you know
through this and so this is why
it's so important that we have
programs like this and in the
fan I know reney and I work
handed hand a lot of times and I
know there's not anyone as
passionate as he is and helping
first time home buyers it's not
just a job he's very passionate
and what he does and he helps us
out to
drastically so in summary as we
look at the future of our
housing market it's clear that
first time home buyers are key
to keep in our market healthy
and growing the challenges they
face as we discuss rising home
prices the struggle to save or
down payments safe for down
payments and affordability gaps
are real but with a help of
problems like what is after by
mf we can make homeownership
accessible to more people.
The ripple effect that first
time home buyers create
strengthens are entire market
allowing more families to move
into homes and meet their needs
and dreams that's why i'm
passionate about working with
them afe and why believe that
together we can continue to make
a real difference in the lives
of home buyers across the
mexico.
Thank you very much.
Thank you brian already
next really thank you brain if
we could advance the slightly.
Here's a summary of some of the
first time home buyers don't
first time home buyers are just
a single family program that we
currently offer i'd like to take
this opportunity just briefly to
go through those for the benefit
of the committee members before
turning it over to jeff to
phrase some statistics so you've
heard brown talk about our first
time home bear our first
mortgage as we've we've referred
to it as first time it's a
thirty year fixed rate mortgage
it's an affordable option for
first time home bars that is a
requirement and when we what we
defined a first time home buyers
are person who has not owned a
principle residents for three
years there are exemptions to
that rule there are certain
senses tracks that are referred
to his target area so that
there's a first time fire
exception for that there's also
a veterans exception so a better
end that is able to prove that
and provide documentation is
also does not have to be a first
time home barred to be to
participate in this program.
That first mortgage can be
combined with two optional down
payment assistance options if
the bar needs it d staple of our
down payment assistance is our
first down to that provide in
amateurising loan it does bear
an interest rate it has flexible
terms borrow can choose ten
fifteen or thirty year terms
depending on what it's their
budget and it provides up to
four percent of the purchase
pricing down payment and closing
classes
assistance then through the new
mexico has been trustphone you
for
brand talk about our third
mortgage this is another
optional down payment assistance
it's called first down plus and
it provides a flat ten thousand
dollars it is a zero percent
loan it is an amateurising month
so they do have to make monthly
principle payments or fifty five
dollars but where else were you
going to bar ten thousand
dollars for zero percent.
That intolerant between those
two their borrowers can get in
order to fourteen to seventeen
thousand dollars and down
payment assistance which you
heard brand talk about which is
about where the borrowers need
to be without having to come in
with their additional funds and
would help leave so get into her
home but we don't only help just
first time home buyers with an
advance of site we have other
programs to home forward as a
program that's designed for non
first time home or for that
first time home bear that
doesn't exactly meet the
qualifications because our first
time home by our first time has
income restrictions purchased
price limits that establish
federally that we cannot play
with.
So for those folks that are just
over the case they're able to
jet we are able to offer them
this program home for it again
it's a thirty year fixed rate
mortgage and it also has an
optional down payment assistance
that we report referred to as
home for dpa which staffered
down payment assistance now this
one can only be used to cover
the down payment not any closing
costs and it provides three
percent of the sales price of
purchase pricing assistance and
again the borrow has two options
for it for the pure payment
terms either a ten or fifteen
year chairman.
Another program that we doesn't
get a lot after this and get a
lot of attention as our
partner's program and in that
case housing to mexico purchases
loans from nonprofits are
specifically mostly our
businesses with habitat of new
mexico that find those one so
habitat will find those so
typically zero percent we
purchase those loans that
provide to habitat those
additional funds to do the next
project of the next time.
With that that concludes my
portion and jeff off passed over
to you
all right you've just a couple
slides to show you just the.
Our first mortgages uh this was
through july of this year
we have expanded about four
hundred and sixty one million
dollars and helped almost two
thousand
people with first first
mortgages down payment
assistance is higher because as
running mentioned are many bars
are able to get a second hand a
third mortgage but we've
expanded about a little over
twenty two million.
And then partner's program is a
program that sa
is starting to become a much
more popular with have a test
for humanity we've done four
long sum so far this year and we
are budgeting for many more in
the coming year.
Um I wanted to just mention a
couple things based on some of
the discussion in question that
the questions that were
talk about earlier in and then
and and we can answer any
questions you might have
we do require a counseling home
by counseling for all of the
first time home buyer.
Folks are delinquency rates we
measure ourselves with comparing
against the fha delinquency rate
for purchases
purchased loan delinquencies are
higher than rifan outs
delinquencies a reference bar
has had experience with the
mortgage and there much usually
much more successful purchasers
have a little bit higher
delinquency rate we find that
are delinquency rate is
typically below the favorite and
that's what we kind of bench
mark ourselves with.
And while we sometimes we think
well if if a delinquency rate is
eight or nine or even sometimes
ten percent in a bad market that
that's high and it it may be
high but ninety percent or or
ninety two percent of the bar
was or making their payments and
and are able to afford their
homes.
Um and we as a as housing agency
are really quite flexible within
the rules that we have to abide
by for the different long types
in trying to help people if
they're in trouble
the other thing I would say is a
I I just wanted to mention that
in the last three or four weeks
we've had two training sessions
with the new mexico manufacturer
housing association.
Uh with them to
let them know about our single
family development program and
the funding for that they could
avail themselves off or
creating building lights that
other than manufactured housing
could be placed on so the sec
the second of those two what
happened yesterday and we had a
lot of interested parties that
do have some projects that
they're trying to bring forward
so I I just want to make that
comment anyway without I think
we can answer any questions that
you might have.
If we have difficult questions
oh there was one more slightly
apologized this this slide shows
the
use of our ability to issue
mortgage revenue bins with the
authority that were granted from
the state that till call him
shows the.
The percentage of
a funding that we do through
bonds and that's that is the
what's funding the first time
home wire program the gold color
is tba or just the typical
mortgage market.
Uh and because of the finding
that we've received
through the new mexico housing
trustphone we've been able to
provide down payment assistance
if you see for that program if
you see a twenty twenty two that
program almost went away because
of the
disfunction in the mortgage
market during that time but with
this funding we've been able to
bring it back and we're able to
help more people so apologize it
just want to assure you that
that production and how
important it is that we're able
to issue a mortgage revenue
balance.
Thank you very much for your
work your presentation of latin
information
do we have anyone in the
committee or on the committee
that has any questions
ok represented last as I don't
have anyone else on the list now
I do okay good thank you all
right representative assessment
then we have representative
and representatives and the
about everyone the one else one
other person reps they come then
proceed representative thank you
madame chair thank you for the
presentation that i'll start
with
the mobile home development you
said you're you're doing some
site bills obviously you don't
you don't
notice you don't
find mobile homes rate and and I
would imagine you don't do that
simple because of the of the
depreciation problems is that an
accurate
matter madam chair and
representative we finance
currently we find out real
property so the manufacturers
homes have to be on a permanent
foundation
so manager so is it i'm just
going off of what I just heard
as far as development you get so
you're doing development so that
we can get mobile homes on there
and and I have at least in my
area been seen madame chair
where
some of the inspections have
been a problem that slow down
the cl in order to critical
acting
because of the lack of of those
inspections have you seen that
throttle state in has that been
addressed as that have you seen
a change in that
then i'm turned representative
there are that is a big topic
my understanding what we see
both multi family and single
family as it really depends a
lot on the location and the
local.
Government authorities there are
some that
have a reputation of being a
little slower in there are some
that have a reputation to be
much more efficient but it
varies a great deal based on the
location
on manager I think and thank you
for your seating that I think
that's a big problem if we're
trying to you know get housing
out there and it takes you three
months to get your your
certificate argumency for
whether it's a you know site
built home roots even a mobile
site inspection I think that's
something that may be you know
we just need i'm sure you've
reached out to
see cidem and and maybe
I don't know the answer i'm
gonna sit here in and try to
make this in up but I think we
need a partner somehow with some
of the minutes parties in and
our deputies other inspectors to
try and help maybe without load
especially in rule the maximum
think it's they guess prickle
were a little slower
moving on I just think manager
that we're going to continue to
have this issue it's can be hard
to change this um this is why
statement you can call correct
me from wrong um
worse we don't have the supply
which is a homes to to have set
up you said it perfect I mean
everybody's going to come as
soon as the interest rate drops
also now demand goes up the
supplies not there price goes up
and we're just going to be in
this vicious cycle until we get
more housing done and so
and then we look at madam chair
people of new mexico they want
to move to meant new mexico so
they're leaving california let's
see the seller home for a couple
million bucks come down here and
it by a bargain and then your
neighbor sees he below your sold
his house for four hundred
thousand bucks I can do that too
and so we're going to be in this
vicious cycle
where were
your work is.
Awesome I love what you guys are
doing but until we get our
inventory rates up until we get
real development of developers
and I think was committed
manager
I think the legislature needs to
and in one and we get in these
were getting these conversations
of hey we shouldn't be helping
maybe these developers because
they're just it's just part in
their pockets but the reality is
if we don't bring in developers
to start building houses.
We're going to continue so
you've just been in the swashing
machine just going round and
round and round you'll give your
participation rates in
participation rates will start
shrinking just because ten
thousand bucks will only go so
far as a as a cost of housing
goes up and so I I think our
biggest challenge here is avina
legislature work together on and
recognizing that if we don't
bring in developers and we don't
fix this to say our rcid issue
of of inspections for one you
know
you know giving it that is an
example we don't work on a land
use codes we don't use some some
of those things we can work a
little bit on that just to get
open up that market and start
building and putting people in
housing no matter if it's some
mobile home site built multi
dwelling um you know barbets
whatever and that we have to
have also a balance of of
housing for people that can't
afford anything in their own
fixing comes and those that
can't afford but don't want a
whole house that want the
maintenance in the indian deal
with that but i'm just retired
here and I just want to have a
place so it's just kind of a
statement is there anything that
you could kind of help me or
rapport I threw a bunch out
there cause I don't want to take
a lot of time so um
if you have a statement to
anything that I on anything I
covered.
Thank you you can proceed to
respond and there were a lot of
questions in one as he mentioned
so try to be brief please thank
you madam chair and
representative
I do think that and just very
quick comment I do think that
it's a very critical economic
development issue that different
communities and and counties
probably need to look at housing
as an economic development and
to try to recruit.
Uh developers and people it does
take a while to get a a project
going and we do see a lot more
interest in development and
we're seeing more projects
coming forward so thank you
mental charm before I finish I
just I think there's one last
lot thing i'd like to see is my
dad was a contract amount chair
for many years he retired
because the lack of of the work
first participation that is a
key thing because we
this contractors aren't able to
build and when you see my dad at
his love to work at seventy five
finally see no most and he was a
hard worker and still had as
mine but couldn't get the labor
force you can see that in its
ripple through new mexico we
have to fix that problem they
can manage your
thank you very much
representative that tarasses and
now we're going to move on to
represent a category do have
representative but real and
representative robot comma yet
after that so mindful of your
time please thank you very much
represented if I was for your
good work too
yes thank you
I didn't understand that making
thank you thinking madam chair
thank you I do want to thank
your presentation I love love
love this program i've worked in
support of housing I now work as
a license realtor I can't tell
you how many first time home
buyers am a grants fixed income
veterans who are now we're
looking to settle down that i've
been able to use this I want to
just make sure because there
were the most knowledgeable in
this room about these programs
and yet there's still so many
mess information so I want to
clarify um i've i've had these
programs these are for people
who qualify for loans who have
um acceptable credit ratings who
have jobs who are ready but they
may not have been able to save
the money they were working
families they don't have fifteen
thousand dollars sitting in the
bank or more.
And so I was able to get a phd
in a and a home at one point for
after his earnest money ninety
seven dollars she writes the
table for home ownership which
is so much more rates than
rental and so thank you so much
I wanted to ask you a couple
things one is I will say that
when I bring families and for
these loans
we also were time year is it
because you do run out of money.
There are times like you're in
the middle of the year and
they're like in the they just
went down or in that they just
ran out of these so um are you
are you
are you looking for more stable
funding not necessarily
increased but stable finding
that i'm chair and
representative
that was a problem last year we
used some
covered error funding for some
down payment assistance but
because of the consistent
funding that the legislature in
the governor have given us we're
able to fund this programs
continuously
so we can always use more money
but but we we should not be
running out of funding thank you
manager thank you so much for
the answer and thank you
governor so we talked about the
manufacturer homes I haven't
been but i've heard a lot of
information about it in this
very exciting.
Um I understand that because
tiny holmes are on wheels they
could never be eligible to have
like a long term mortgage for as
we are evolving in different
kind of multi
housing situations
there are out there in rural
areas especially without water
or utility access where you can
have a half acre put have a
concrete tabs and uh share and
hold water in solar panels and
things with the development
night of the tiny homes with the
development of the
infrastructure ever be eligible
for this kind of funding or we
still looking at possibly in an
fa for or something like this.
Now i'm sure representative that
is something that we're trying
to collaborate with the finance
authority or they have received
funding to help with the
infrastructure we do have
infrastructure and construction
loans and so I guess we would
look at that based on the
circumstances ultimately the
the finding the financing or
payment for the ultimate home is
what's going to pay off a
development loan so there there
needs to be some sort of end
finding to be able to make that
work but we we are currently
talking to a developer that has
a concept for some tiny homes
whether it will work or not
remains to be seen but we are in
some ways limited by the by the
mortgage industry
in their requirements for for a
acceptable
units to to lend on.
And thank you very much in just
one last comment just for people
understanding our housing crisis
I am not going to go into the
whole history of why we are
here because I know we are
limited on time but just for
those who understand that the
house increases based on need an
inventory and twenty twenty in
the greater albert kirky area
which is are obdious as
population and our biggest
amount of housing the greater
alberturkey association of
realities there were only in
twenty twenty one there were
only six hundred and eighty
homes for sale in twenty twenty
one today we are at two thousand
two hundred and twenty eight
homes we really should be at
forty eight hundred homes but
i'm just letting you know what
we're doing is working it's not
fast enough it's not big enough
but we are on the way to where
we need to be thank you thank
you for your parcel comments
representative representative.
Madam chair thank you
and I certainly don't want to be
hit every day counter but
you know listening to these
numbers and uh.
Just knowing the situation
especially in I mean all over
the state um
you know it just.
It seems like the american dream
has become an american nightmare
and you know unless you have the
money and the bank you're you're
gonna be forever in a rental
but as I think about this
manager I was thinking you know
what about condos I haven't
heard you guys see anything
about condos or you know
attached town homes or things
like that
and I just wonder about that
because you know we need to
start thinking that everybody is
going to have a single family
home and gonna have an acre or
whatever the lot is because
they're not making any more land
and I was you know I I think
about this a lot
then I just wonder
the size of homes that you were
talking about
what are they about twelve
hundred.
Square fee or something like
that.
I mean a thousand
this couriers manager
representative I would know the
average for our whole program
they can very uniform from five
hundred square feet all the way
to two thousand square feet it
just depends on the area with
that.
Families needs current needs are
do you do you know what the
average is where I do not I can
get this I can try to get those
figures I don't know if we
collect the square footage for
all of the
you know I just think I mean
there are some really nice town
homes up and I think about the
development of the city a lot
because I was worked in out for
many many years but like up
around the golf course in royal
dell or so area there's some
really nice town home
developments that are older but
have been there a long time and
their various established
neighborhoods
and I you know we keep thinking
about a single family home on a
single family laden and you know
it's just
I mean with our population
especially as our population
increases hopefully you would
get more more jobs and album
kirky in were more competitive
economically
we really need to be thinking
about a different maybe a
different type of housing that
can be offered and it's still a
single family.
Kind of home I guess you could
say it's not exactly a single
family helmets it's a different
density but I think that we need
to really be talking about that
is you know and when you've
think about comparing
a manufacturer at home or of a
mobile home.
Even a mobile home to a town
home the value of a town home is
going to increase over time the
value of a mobile home probably
doesn't increase at that same
rate and so i'm just raising
that issue because I have a
cousin that lives up north his
he grew up in alva kirky he
moved to he wanted to be off the
grid he moved to a small little
community up in up around a
treacherous.
And he started he built a home
with three rooms they start he
had a beautiful piece of
property can afford to build the
whole house but he built it so
that he could add on to the home
over time I go to its house now
every whenever I can get up
there
and he added on a great room and
he added on you know
several different partitions to
this this three room home and he
has a beautiful home now and I
just think about you know
sometimes we need to think a
little bit out of the box amount
of chair is that we're or
constantly talking about
everyone having a single family
home but.
It just may not be the same
american dream that we envision
and so I just wanted to raise
that issue thank you.
Thank you very much for that and
represent the absolutely we need
to move in whatever direction we
need to go to make sure we have
enough affordable housing units
and I I think the apartment
complexists that are built also
contribute to that but that's
rentals again as you say so
candles and town would be really
beneficial thank you for that
representative robert kayette
thank you madame chair and
so I guage what.
How effective we're addressing a
need in our state
not so much by the established
sources of data but sometimes
more from the advocacy
established sources of data so I
keep close tabs on what the.
National arm
low income housing coalition
gathers in terms of their data
because that kind of assists me
in being able to evaluate what
we get from
and reports so I just want to
stayed a few facts here and it's
kind of a long the lines of what
representable rego and chair of
the just mentioned.
Sixty eight thousand one hundred
and eighty.
Households or twenty eight
percent in new mexico are
considered extremely low income.
Twenty eight percent sixty eight
thousand one hundred and eighty
household.
There is a shortage of rental
homes affordable rental forms
and available affordable homes.
Then the amount of forty one
thousand ninety.
When other important point the
average income limit.
For a four person extremely low
income household.
Is only twenty seven thousand
dollars twenty seven thousand
seven hundred and fifty they had
the average income for a four
percent family.
The annual household income
madam chair need it to afford a
two bedroom rental home and
hurts fair market value is forty
five thousand three hundred and
fifty nine so if our average
income is twenty seven thousand
seven hundred and fifty but it
takes forty five thousand three
hundred and fifty nine thousand
I mean fifty nine dollars.
To afford.
Renting a home.
That's a huge gap so that just
substantiates what
representative or on the
charities indicated so the need
in new mexico.
Is.
Sure we madam chair we love to
have affordable single family
housing we know that there is a
need there to there's a there's
young families that are career
pathways that have the income
they just need that little extra
push or maybe some non
traditional families however the
greater need in our state.
Is rental housing.
For extremely low income doors
extremely low income where they
living.
Who are they living with how
many families are living
together.
That's the gap we need to be
filling one last fact madam
chair.
In the chart and I wish all of
you would go to the low in-
national noincome housing
website and has a state by state
breakdown.
That should guide us.
Policy makers as well as
implementers of where we should
be taking our arm filling our
gaps.
It states that thirty nine
percent.
Of our households extremely low
income households are actually
in the workforce.
But they're probably having to
work twenty three jobs just to
phil to pay rent and household.
Twenty six percent of those
extremely low income housing are
seniors.
Between the two they comprised
the vast majority including the
twenty percent that are disabled
so think about it thirty nine
percent
extremely law income are in the
work force.
Twenty six percent or of those
are.
Elderly and then twenty percent
are disabled all in the
workforce.
And they are extremely low
income so they can't even afford
more than half of their income.
Is designated.
Towards just rent.
And there's still not a forty
ninth because multiple families
have to live together in order
to for just those two or three
or four bedroom rental housing
so for me I agree we're focusing
a lot of our programs which is
good because we have to make
things accessible.
But we're not addressing the
extremely low income need for
housing in our state and we have
still the highest poverty so
there's a direct correlation
madam chair and that really
saddens me and I agree we need
to look at alternative.
Ways in which to house are
population you won't find the
majority of these part the
figures that I just gave you
necessarily in the homeless we
don't even want to go to that
data yet that's a whole separate
data but
what didn't would concerns me is
that filling those needs so I
have one question that relates
to your presentation but I I
wanted us to be cognisant of the
general conversation that we're
having my questions do you have
a way
of.
Determining.
How many at new housing
developments.
Or actually
being developed
as investment properties by
individuals versus
single home owners.
Jeffy money answer the easy I
think you had you won't speak on
that so can you do that thank
you.
Thank you for for all the
information that you provided
are at mfa we address the full
continual of housing from
homelessness to homeownership in
right in the middle if you will
is a rental development so a
couple meetings ago we covered
the programs for rental
development to address the very
low income folks that are not
ready yet to be home owners just
a couple of quick dataset
information we currently have
fifty two different developments
across the state in one phase of
construction or another form
this is rental development about
just shy of forty nine a hundred
units that are being developed
across the state in twenty one
different union supperities in
fifteen counties so we're a
obviously not not enough to
address the full need but
definitely a lot of efforts are
being made to just to the points
that you made
so and with regard to seniors
just yesterday we had a
ground breaking and there might
have been the the media that we
saw the commissioner garcia.
Richards
at the state land office is
leasing some land to sole
housing and the development
there I think it's eighty two
units for seniors so definitely
a lot of need there being
addressed to the extent that
funding is available the more
funding is needed with regard to
data on developments I think we
we have data that we have
available in our house he needs
assessment that was presented a
couple of meetings ago on the
number of permits that are being
issued but I don't think we can
distinguish between that and how
much are for investors and how
much of its for home ownership
so I hope that addresses your
question.
I am do recall thank you madame
chair and thank you mister I do
recall the report on the rental
units and.
And and I understand that we're
breaking ground and that we
have.
We have those accessible are
becoming more accessible um
however the safeguards guard
rails whatever you want to call
him need to be in place to
ensure that again the
development of those affordable
housing rentals
remain number one affordable and
then.
Increasingly address the in the
investor owned is not just for
single family on owners that
also for those that are going
into the multi unit
um developments that's really
important how we.
How we monitor that up for lack
of another term how we monitor
that because what i'm hearing
and in our district and the
senator can vouch as we drive we
have lots of developments in
west gate area.
The west gate area however those
new developments are not
affordable to the vance majority
of my the constituents in that
area.
So if there if you have
constituents in the west gate
that have been living
generationally there.
The.
We want them to be able to move
into.
Those housing developments that
are occurring all over wescape
but it's not the whiskey
residence there's still living
with their mom as in the propers
in the moment and public house.
That.
That they then got all now
because they got there they
entered their home ownership
back and certainly period
of affordable and they now own
it.
That's what we need to be making
sure that we are making homes
accessible to not necessarily a
migration of households that can
afford that's exactly what
happened in old wescape.
If you try if you examine the
history of all the scape madam
chair vs the new escaped we're
having a repeat of a cycle of
over lack of housing.
Affordable access to I mean
access to affordable housing and
single family housing so that's
my point so that we can just
because I think it's a pattern
around the state madam chair and
I hope that we can keep a gauge
on and monitor how that works so
we can avoid for closures thank
you madame chair thank you for
your comments a representative
cabinet or I am going to have to
move on because we've got
another item here we don't want
to lose our form also so thank
you for your answers for your
work and we're going to move on
to report on bonds issued
finance and strategies and
market update david where are
you david all right
and minutes you I remember mean
I saw you and when I was walking
in so
okay thank you you can proceed
in smoke
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee it's my
pleasure to introduce me to chew
from rbc capital markets and
david jones from csg advisors
mean as the managing director
for rbc in this capacity mean a
represents rbc as housing new
mexico senior manager and
underwriter for our single
family bond program she brings a
wealth of knowledge to this role
and together with the entire
team at rbc leads the pricing
for our quarterly bond issue and
says on the market and helps
housing new mexico secure
attractive financing that we
pass on to our borrowers across
the state
david is the chief financial
officer at csg advisors a
national municipal advisory firm
david and the team at csg
actors housing new mexico's
financial advisor providing
guidance on both our single
family and multi family bond
insurances advising on best
execution and supporting staff
and the ongoing responsibilities
and analysis related to issuing
mortgage revenue balance meaning
david have each been working
with housing in mexico for more
than a decade they have been.
Terrific partners the housing
new mexico sharing their
experiences working with other
housing finance agencies across
the country providing regular
macro economic updates and
informing our strategies uh to
assist home buyers in new mexico
ever more effectively.
Alright thank you great yeah
thank you alexander this is
david jones thanks madame chair
and and member some of the if
you don't mind forwarding the
slides i'm going to mean is
allowed me to go first today so
I can.
Rap up here
yeah one more slide if you could
i'm sorry keep going maybe until
the next presentation.
The.
Great okay then one more I will
be where I start thank you
i'm not sure here this is really
kind of the trends that we've
seen across housing finance
agencies and like alex said our
firm case you advisers we work
with
around twelve thirteen state
housing finance agencies across
the country so we're familiar
with how everybody's financing
their programs and and some best
ways to do that but we've talked
about a lot of these trends
already today you're aware of
them mortgage rates have come
down but they're still high
house prices are too high at one
bit of data I found to on this
is that house prices in new
mexico up fifty one percent
since the start of twenty twenty
this is federal reserve data but
incomes are only up ten percent
not a surprise but just you know
hard data to what you're seeing
on the streets every day
uhm loan rates are lower and
ineffe and housing to mexico is
able to provide lower mortgage
rates to first time home buyers.
Last year when I spoke to this
committee are housing in mexico
had a mortgage six percent which
was more than a hundred base
points lower than a seven
percent rate that barrists could
get from nine mf sources.
Now housing to max was providing
five seventy five percent faj
first home loan rate still low
but it's more like you know a
quarter to fifty basis points
lower than then you're normal
lender
so anyway that's kind of our
goal is how how can we improve
the rate as much as possible for
new mexicans looking for homes
the last point we don't think
we've touched on it much today
but private activity volume cap
which is what the stake it's
every year to issue revenue
bins
of course that's limited and
it's it's you know a highly it's
in high demand for both multi
family bonds at one issue for
four percent tax credits as well
it's the primary source that has
new mexico users to find its
first mortgage program.
It means going to talk a lot
about more about bonds are in
the next presentation.
Are on the next slide.
Like I said issuing tax and
binds as the primary source
historically that that housing
mexico's funded its first
mortgage program talked a lot
about how dpa is funded and in
the state phones and the
severance moneys does that but
in terms of funding the first
mortgage is bonds have been the
primary source of doing that and
fortunately
has in mexico has a great
reputation with investors that
were very high
plus
credit rating and their
indenture
and they've done a great job of
accessing the bine market with
with the public investors.
The second method and and jeff
and his presentation referred to
this
in terms of packaging loans and
the borges back securities and
selling alone since the tba
market is the primary mortgage
market how
mortgagers on the street fund
their loans so basically it's
selling off the loan
and if it does that for their
non first time home by a program
and at times they do it for
their first time on buyer
program as well and then we've
talked a lot about dpa and how
significant that is for for its
bars.
Are this slide is a similar to
what jeff showed in terms of
recent years but it goes back
further this is the production
annually of in total of first
mortgage single family
production and you can see how
far
the authorities come in the last
time eleven years in terms of
how many loans it's financing
hundred million back in twenty
thirteen twenty fourteen at
annual production and they do
that you know in a in a good
quarter now
lights of improvement on the
program side lights have just
you know hard work for native
lenders but you can see the
numbers today pushing close to
five hundred over five hundred
million some recent years it was
down and twenty twenty two and
twenty three just giving house
apply and the mortgage rates
increasing but you know back up
here in two thousand and twenty
four pretty significantly
don't think about this chart as
it does show the mix of how in
the face funded its programs the
green being funding it with bins
which put them on balance sheet
basically in my face borrowing
and then taking that money and
buying the loans and securities
and holding them long term vs
selling them in the tv market in
that kind of purpose color
another point that I think is
really important for you to be
aware of since july twenty
twenty three thirty eight
percent of the states fac alone
originations were from housing
in mexico
across all of our twelve to
thirteen stage if their clients
I don't know that anyone's
anywhere close to that
percentage in terms of their
usage across the state so at its
holy communical and show sound
point
in affairs.
This slide is just a depiction
of.
You know as the financial visa
kind of the end of the day like
we're helping to make sure that
in my face financially healthy
and strong while producing as
best to rate it can to its home
buyers this kind of shows the
financial economics in a
nutshell of both whether they
find in sell loans in the tv
market in that kind of purple
color that's the annual revenue
that they've generated over the
years from selling tba some
years it's very high some years
it's not and when it's not that
means it's probably better for
them to fund with bines and put
on balance.
And so that the chart on the
right in the green colors is the
annual revenue they've been able
to uh create by funding it with
bins and we really see.
A
good to having both of these
executions
using one when the others not as
successful and using the other
one vice versa but at the end of
the day the having the long term
annuity revenue stream uh from
funding with bins really helps
to make a sustainable agency
that can continue to fund
operations even in high loan low
origination years which
obviously the mortgage market is
it is a custom too.
For the next slide this is just
really to show how they had they
make these decisions really
every day and they're looking at
the markets to see where rates
are in in how it's trending we
help on a weekly basis provide
read indicators and meet with
the housing maximum staff to
talk through that in what's
happening in the markets are
means team provides lots of
information on the from the
capital market side to help
them make those decisions and
know how they're going to find
their production I guess the
last more than two years all the
first the touch isn't production
been funded with bins it's just
been very attractive for tax and
issuers spelled a access tax and
bond market.
Um this next slide is a.
Chart that shows over the last
six or seven years
which execution has been the
provide the most value to me and
it's borrowers the dotted red
dark line is the
car
profitability of returns of
funding in the face long program
with tba or selling office
loans.
You can see that's really tailed
off from the peak and tooth late
two thousand twenty down to now
allow the head deal with the
federal reserve stimulating and
buying lots of mortgage
backsecurities and different
thing capital markets.
But the other two lines that are
solid that are the kind of
purpolish blue colors are the
returns by funding with bins at
different prepayment speeds and
this is why the last several
years in my face funded it's
first mortgage production with
bonds the the the return it can
get really the lower mortgage
rates it can provide to its
buyers and this just to pick
that kind of a
long term way.
My next slide is
some information about how
housing mexico's viewed by the
rating agencies it has a a
current indenturating with
moody's it also has had readings
with standard imports for at
various times in inside dentures
and are it's it's main and enter
the two thousand five and
insurers is rate a a with a by
moodies and then a plus smp has
been the last reading for it so
very high um in two thousand
twenty was the last issue of
credit rating from movies which
is and they provide a double a
three rating you can see the
strengths that they noted
including some of the very good
financial metrics
that you can see there as well
as sound over sight management
by its staff the only credit
challenge it noted was lower
profitability compared to its
peers the expected that trained
reverse actually has reversed
the last year to
as it's put more of funding with
bines so really a shape there
and that's important shows kind
of fower well though the sim has
done in that regard.
My last slide is really kind of
summarized challenges an
opportunity to think we've
talked a lot about the challenge
today
are very obviously very
intune with the challenges of
forty housing right now
market you know it's been nice
to see inflation come down from
when I see morgan rates come
down some of the so we have some
more work to do may that'll
happen with fed reserve kites of
those continue.
Um
but I don't know if it is really
done a good job managing some
cap using talk a little more
about how it's managed in issue
some taxable bonds define that
it's first mortgage program just
to now have to use as much
volume cap
so that's been a new tool of the
last twelve months they've used
so i'm in terms of the means and
issue of time and letter
continue
thank you very much mean.
Members of the committee as
alex mentioned my name is mean
that you and with rbc capital
markets and as a firm we work
with thirty eight uh state
housing finance agencies across
the country and I personally
have worked with housing new
mexico over the past twelve
years and really proud of our
long term relationship so just
as a highlight of the single
family mortgage barn program so
obviously
mf issues tax exemptions to
finance first time home buyer
programs and they are all below
market and it is subject to
maximum income and purchase
price limits as set by the irs
the loans are then securitized
into mortgage back securities
and so a mf does not take real
estate risk that timely
repayment of loan principle and
interest is guaranteed by fannie
may or jenny may at regardless
of borrow or delinquency and so
your bonds are rated a and um as
of june thirtieth housing new
mexico had about one point eight
billion of single family bonds
outstanding forty three series
of bands all fixed rate you do
not have any variable rate
exposure on your single family
and since the beginning of the
year mfa started issuing taxable
bands due to increased
production levels and in fact
are the most recent bond issues
a hundred fifty million series e
f was the largest amount that
mfa has ever issued at one time
and it's a very exciting times
and exide please okay this is a
graph that reflects the
historical mortgage rates um
over the past fifty plus years
after the financial crisis of
two thousand eight we've been at
historically low levels at
largely due to fed action until
inflationary pressures drove.
The fed to start increasing
rates in the beginning of twenty
two and a year ago we hit our
historical average of about
seven point seven three and
since then i'm with the
expectation of fed lowering
rates and issues of inflation
being tamed with a a scare of
the economy we have seen um
mortgage rates down
down to a current low sixes um.
The mortgage the current
mortgage rate is a really a far
cry from the highs that we sight
in nineteen eighty one air close
to eighteen percent
and much higher than the lows
of.
Two point six five percent that
we sigh in january of twenty one
next speed please okay so this
is a graphical depiction of a
state housing finally into
agencies as a whole so
nationwide and they are thriving
in this represent the volume of
single family bonds issued as a
hall since two thousand seven
last year the volume was about
twenty billion and it was only
exceeded during the pre
financial prices housing boom of
two thousand seven and we expect
with current udited volume of
eighteen point seven billion we
expect to exceed that number
this year.
In single family bonds are often
counter cyclical to the rest of
the muni market while municipal
issuers generally tend to
be challenged in a high rate
environment this is actually
when housing finance agencies
can become more effective
relative to market mortgage
rates they can
effectively uh borrow funds by
accexing or issuing tax exempt
bonds and still setting a
mortgage rate that is a
significantly lower than market
rates it's really hard for her
face to be productive when
market mortgage rates were
hovering around three percent
in please note the significant
portion of this year's volume
represented by the dark blue and
the bottom of the the bar chart
eh those are taxable bonds and
forty one percent of all single
family bonds issued have been
taxable and this is been driven
by the fact that private
activity capped that we need to
issue tax examples is a limited
resource
and so we've been a padding that
or stretching that with taxable
bonds and as we mentioned
housing new mexico issued its
first taxable bonds to serve to
save volume cap starting january
of this year next page.
And as a quick aside
I mentioned the shortage of
private activity cap is a
nationwide concern and so hfees
have been using that to
issue taxable bonds but also
finance non
mrb eligible loans so if they
are a higher income or higher
purchase limits or if they want
to lend to non first time home
buyers they can do that by
issuing a taxable bonds and this
graph this pie chart shows that
single family bands actually
made up forty three percent of
all taxable municipal bands
are issued so far this year that
is a huge percentage as compared
to the tax exempt bonds single
family bands only represent less
than five percent of the tax
example uni market
moving on this it specific to
housing new mexico this is in
the uh historical bond balances
of the agency starting two
thousand seven after years of a
low pre at low rate environment
where there's a lot of
prepayment and a lot of
refinancings that were out
pacing new production especially
like posted at two thousand
eight um mf has ah rebuilt their
bond and loaned portfolio over
the past seven years and you are
now larger and stronger than
ever at one point eight billion
we talked about you know mf
borrowing more a bunds at a low
level setting a mortgage rate
and that spread is a thirty year
annually that can last up to
thirty year life of the mortgage
and it is
so the longer you have the
mortgages stay outstanding the
better it is for mfa and the
longer you have to gain.
A new item but at one thing to
note
obviously we talked about the
increase in purchase prices
mfa's lock average loan size has
increased from about two hundred
six thousand in twenty fourteen
to two hundred twenty three
thousand this year and so if you
want to help the same number of
people you obviously need to
have a more bond production
and we talked about being at a
healthy place and this is uh
this is a necessary because it
is you know mf is financially
independent with no taxpayer
support whatsoever it's moving
out the next page I know this is
difficult to read but this is
actually a slide from mountain
planes a housing summit made up
of
other her fees in the area in
all each of these are ramping up
their down payment assistance
because down payment assistance
has been a key driver in uh
putting first time home buyers
into their home
it's specially when more market
mortgage rates were at three
percent it's really
state agencies were not making a
material difference in monthly
payment but down payment
assistance and closing costs
assistance has been a key factor
in um help being first time home
buyers and it is now important
more than ever um in particular
because it's a part of the
national real estate association
settlement which went into
effect last month.
Sellers are no longer
required or am automatically
paying sellers
buyer agent real estate fees so
a lot of agencies are putting
closing costs that three percent
fee into their down payment and
closing costs assistance moving
on to the next page just quickly
july sixteenth this is the most
recent mfa band sale a hundred
fifty million comprised of a
hundred five million of tax
exempt bonds yielding four point
three four percent and forty
five million taxable with the
yield of five point six percent
on average in this comparison
very favorably to the then
mortgage rate housing new
mexico's mortgage rate of six
and a quarter it has since come
down within the past several
months to five seventy five and
we are starting to look at the
next deal where that is still as
attainable.
So this tax exempt series had
about twenty institutional
investors in nineteen percent of
the deal went to retail
investors both in state and
national um in an unsold balance
of four point six percent
million which took into
inventory and on the taxable
side we had twenty separate
institutional investors without
much overlap so we have a
different investor base between
taxable and tax exempt moving on
to the next page this is a
summary of orders and allotments
by firm in in addition to your
management team we utilised a
selling group for the tax exempt
side to encourage in engagement
retail participation and
including drexel hamilton which
is a veteran owned firm it was a
very successful sale really
during a volatile market and
moving on to the next last page
so
normally end with this list of
muni bonds issued within the
state of new mexico and where
you stand in terms of volume as
compared to last year or prior
years
I had said that
normally in a higher rate
environment muni issuers are
really are challenged by higher
rates aside from housing
agencies which uh have actually
ramped up their production
levels and and are
countercyclical but I do have to
mention that muny industry as a
whole we are up thirty one
percent year to date twenty
twenty four as compared to
twenty three
in the miss of a very volatile
air it's been interesting and
volatile given the fact that
there's been a lot of
uncertainty with regard to
inflation vs economy and when
and fed action was going to
start
an obviously election in
geopolitical instability as
well.
So with that I will open it up
to questions think you mean
appreciate your work in your
thorough presentation oh I have
served on silence you are on my
list and I don't have anyone
else
thank you all manager and thank
you for the information though
some of the questions that I
have my involved policy or
statute that would be but on
page so five.
On the pie chart up you have a
higher education so would k
twelve.
Qualify or early childhood
education.
I actually believe that higher
education is a more on that
college level not line or that
but but what i'm saying is can
they come into the picture k
twelve in though yes yes a
student we do have a a student
student district program where
um k through twelve do can and
do issue bars not necessarily on
the taxable side but yes they
were there not the next
questions that I have is somehow
on page ten.
Oh what would be the benefit to
the santa fe schools to have to
different sales one day apart.
Um I am not familiar with this
specific it it could be a
possibility of
fixed rate mind issue in pricing
the day before about variable
rate or a taxable binder issuing
series
pricing a day before or after
the tax exams so i'm not
familiar specifically with this
deal but sometimes it's a a
matter of different series of
bonds and they could also be
when the actual barn purchase
contract is executed in if for
some reason one was executed one
day before or after another this
chart will reflect the the date
that at the bond purchase
contract was actually executed
motorola several years back I
mean this is when I has to work
with this.
Oh they always will use to tell
said it would be better to have
one because the new taking the
chance of you know with a
different rate but you know just
a other it's just an observation
is so I have always known about
kirky public schools and here
you have a menicipal school
district number twelve.
There are no just set up the
caution on language you know.
But I I don't know how but
that's I never seen it though
it's always been albuquerque
public schools hey I see man I
well this is from our sourcing
is from bloomberg and how it is
recorded so we took then and I
will we will take a look at fact
the less one of my insurers
soon.
We have a several school
districts you have a fourth
summers you have a seller these
schools are the key home hubs
burner little with also in my
question is
with housing
earn would they be able to
qualify for teacher each in
addition to capped lawley and
the reason that i'm bringing
this up is because we do have a
fund that provides teachers
which is to build housing in
areas that it's very hard remote
areas or rural areas to have
teachers so I have a living
quarters in what this would do
is may be enhance.
You know the ability to move a
little faster because capital
are last on a competitive basis
and then also.
You know by having this you know
that might be
a little bit easier but seeing
that you have school districts
with their qualify is to go into
providing now the possibilities
for districts to do teacher each
so
I my area is generally dealing
with single family program bonds
and so the irs
if you want to uh issue tax
exemptions it is made up of a
income limits and first time
home buyer requirements and not
by occupation I know housing new
mexico has had a programs in the
past like euros programs that
specials more specific to
first responders or teachers and
so that is one of the reasons
why
other her fees have special
programs funded by taxable bonds
which are not subject to those
types of requirements
no mention madame chair the
reason that I bring this up his
home.
World.
I guess you could see
where criticized for being
though.
Very much at the very end on our
reading for education.
And you looking at the whole
picture.
Yes so that is one of the
problems being able to get the
right staff the right teachers
had different parts of the
state.
And the.
Obstacle there is housing.
You know and if that's something
that we can work with him if it
hasn't been looked before you
know maybe read something that
we have to look at policy and
statute also.
But oh thank you mail chairman
thank you.
Thank you senator and thank you
meaner okay I don't have anyone
else in my list so we are going
to move on to the final item and
that is adjournment right we
have a german so we can get some
lunch in that lives are members
who are hungry thank you very
much for your presentations is
that your staff invaluable with
appreciate your so much and we
will see you again next month
that we have emotion for a
