decorum, and I think we have a
quorum to be able to move
forward, um, so, um, we will get
started and congratulations on
your beautiful building. It's
fabulous. My goodness, yeah,
very nice, good parking, it's
great. So, um, we're going to,
um, have members introduce
themselves for the webcast.
We're gonna start from my right
here.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, House
member Meredith Dixon from
District 20, Southeast
Albuquerque.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
state senator Roberto Bobby J.
Gonzalez, District 6,
representing, uh.
part of Santa Fe, Los Alamos,
Vioriba, and Taos, and I've been
in this committee since 1936. I
just wanted to see if you were
listening.
Thank you. Good morning
OK.
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair.
uh, Representative, uh, Rod
Montoya from San Juan County,
uh, is he nice building, uh, uh,
Mayor Keller asked me to.
ask you guys to move back
downtown, but I, I told him I
was not likely.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
and, uh, members of the
committee, good morning,
everyone. I'm state Senator
Jerry or TZ Pino, and I will be
so for the next 5 weeks.
And uh this is gonna be my last
MFA oversight committee meeting.
I've, I've really enjoyed the
time.
Spent here and, and learned a
great deal and also wanted
intensely curious about the new
building. It's, it's, it's
beautiful. You, you, you, you've
done a nice job.
Thank you. I wonder if, if some
of the quorum will arrive as
soon as people figure out how to
get here, but, uh, you
shouldn't, shouldn't be too
hard.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you. I'm
Representative Kathleen Cates
from District 44, which is all
of Corrales, uh, parts of Rio
Rancho and north of Alameda from
here, um, from the river to the,
to I-25. And it is a beautiful
building and, um, and, and
finally we have space
appropriate for such an
important topic. Thank you.
Thank you, yes, Representative,
you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
I just saw you in Santa Fe just
like a few hours ago.
Because we have
Um,
I'm representative Cynthia
Brego. I'm really excited about
your building. It's super
beautiful, um, and it's almost
on the west side and it's about
5 miles from my district, so I'm
super excited about this, yeah.
Thank you. Good morning. I was
waiting for our vice chair to
come, but I hear that he is not
feeling well, so he will not be
here today. And my name is
Nancy. I'm chairing the
committee for the last 29 years,
chairing and co-chairing, and
this also is my last committee
here with the MFA, um, committee
meeting, and, um, I can't say
enough, um, words will never be
enough to thank the MFA, uh, the
staff, Izzy, the board for your
heart.
incessant work that you put in
towards uh providing affordable
housing to New Mexicans and uh
and just to see the, the loyalty
and the hard work that you put
in is inspiring, so I've been
very fortunate and blessed to be
able to be an integral part. I'd
like to say it's an integral
part because we have worked
together and it's just been an
enormous, uh, uh, workload and,
uh, an enormous challenge, but a
great result.
And thanks to you and um and to
and to the board and your staff
once again and um we're going to
move forward. I'm going to have
the staff introduce themselves.
Here's to my left someone I
can't do without all the time.
My name is.
All right. Thank you very much
and thanks for your patience. We
started a little bit after 10
because we were waiting for
members and maybe more will
arrive as Senator or TZpio
mentioned. OK, then executive
director update Izzy, you are
next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me OK? Yes, I can. So, uh,
good morning and, uh, welcome to
our new, uh, hous in New Mexico
home here, uh, we've, uh,
definitely really enjoys it. Uh
we're really enjoying it, uh,
you know, and uh, we just
recently saw an article
yesterday, as a matter of fact,
from the uh new entity, uh,
Justice Square that purchased
our building downtown and
they're doing some great stuff
with that building, so it's good
to know it's in good hands and
they're going to be serving a
great mission there as well.
The, uh,
you know, this, this building,
uh, obviously accommodates our,
our needs much better, not only
now but into the future we have
a little bit of room for growth,
uh, a lot of great workspace and
offices, uh, as you noticed, uh,
a lot of parking, uh, meeting
rooms and, uh, uh, training
rooms for our partners. We've
already held a couple of our
trainings in this building here,
um, great access to the freeway
and for those of you that may be
interested in uh looking at uh
more of the building, we can,
uh, we're offering a tour.
After this meeting is over, so
just let us know and we, we can
walk you around the building
some.
Um
No what I uh
I, I really want to thank
Senator Or Tip Pino, uh, no,
this is, uh, your last uh
oversight committee meeting
here. You've been a great
supporter of MFA and I really
believe in our mission, so I
really wanna.
Thank you and also Senator
Rodriguez, who's, uh, been a, a
champion for affordable housing
and for carries a lot of the
legislation that has been
instrumental in helping
thousands and thousands of
families with a housing trust
fund money that we've received
over the years and with the
support of all of you, so I
really wanna thank both of you,
um, we are having a, an open
house on the 10th of December,
uh, that, uh, you should have
already received an invitation
for. If not, we'll make sure
that you have it, but, uh, we'd
like for all of you.
to to attend on the 10th of
December, and it'll be at the 3
o'clock, I believe is when it is
starting 3 to 6 o'clock. So, uh,
uh, we're looking forward to
having you here and a lot of our
partners from across the state
that, uh, are planning on
attending that.
Uh, just what I wanted to do
today for our last uh interim
meeting of this committee is
kind of give you a real quick
synopsis or summary of the, what
we've covered this year and the
previous 4 meetings that we've
had, uh, in May, we gave you an
overview of the entire
organization and focused a
little bit on the homeless
programs we try to cover
throughout the full, uh, uh,
interim session, the continuum
of housing and all the partners
that we have or the various
areas, so that was our focus in
May, uh, in July.
Uh, we had, uh, the, uh, housing
development and rental uh focus
along with, uh, we provided you
a needs assessment that was, uh,
fresh off the press at that
point. Uh, in August, uh, we
went over preserving affordable
housing, talked about rehab. We
had a couple of partners in each
of these sessions, um, and
addressing also the needs of
some special populations. Uh, we
also talked about the Affordable
Housing Act and Regional Housing
Act at that meeting. Then our
last meeting, uh, in September
we went over the homeowners.
programs and our bond issuances.
Um, some of the things that
we've done over the last couple
of months, uh, it is a highlight
for us. We've had 6 listening
sessions across the state. We
started in Roswell, then went to
Gallup, Espanola, Las Cruces.
Yesterday we were in Santa Fe
and today actually at 1:30
today, we have uh our last
listening session here in
Albuquerque in this room.
So if you're available this
afternoon, we'd love to have you
here, uh, and get your input.
I'll tell you that, uh, uh, a
lot of great participation
across the state and the things
that uh we've learned, uh, that
it should not be of any surprise
to any of you is that, uh, there
continues to be, it just kind of
confirmed the, the, the need
that there is across the state
for affordable housing, both,
uh, some of the highlights that
came out was need for more units
while single family and uh
rental development units, uh.
Great need for rehab and
preservation, uh, with an
emphasis on some of the rural
areas and on the tribal areas,
uh, obviously a need to have
more programs to assist those
that are uh unhoused or the
homeless.
And, uh, one of the things that
also came to our mind as, as
we're going around the stadium
and talking to our partners and
listening is that, uh, we, we
need to do more to make folks
aware of the programs that we
have in a lot of cases, folks
weren't aware and we've had
actually some new partners come
up that want to take advantage
of some of the programs that we
have so we'll continue to work
um on doing that.
Today we're going to cover
briefly at a very high level
orario covered the, the budget
for the organization, uh, we'll
go over the rules and regs, uh,
and some changes there we
generally come to you at the
each, uh, the, the last meeting
of the interim to go over the
rules on regulations of the uh
mortgage finance Authority, uh,
we'll go over some production
highlights that I'll cover and
then uh as uh as traditional
also go over the benchmarks and
the goals that the board set for
us, um, for the year and.
what we accomplished and what we
didn't accomplish under those
benchmarks, and then we'll end
with uh going over a legislative
agenda. We have a couple of
bills that we'd like to propose
to you for, for endorsement, uh,
with that, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
um open to for any questions
that uh you or the committee may
have.
Thank you, Izzy. Um, I don't
have any questions. You were
very eloquent and uh precise on
on the things you were going to
report on, and we have Senator
Ortizipino and then we have
Representative Montoya on the
list. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chairman. Thank you,
Izzy, uh, I guess I, I was
hoping that there would be among
the bills for endorsement,
something along the lines of
We had talked about it early in
the summer about Colorado's, uh,
legislation that basically
pull back
The opportunity for local
governments to restrict
Access to affordable housing.
And uh, I, I had hoped that we
would have some action along
those lines, but I, I guess, you
know, maybe that we need to
discuss it more in depth, uh.
Did you have any uh uh thought
of give, give any thought to
that, Izzy, is that something
that you all could get behind?
Madam Chair and Senator TCP, no,
that is uh something that we
can, uh,
We can get behind, I think, you
know, it's uh it's some
difficult challenges, I think on
passing something like that at
the state level, but it's
something that we feel, uh, uh,
is, uh, could be needed and
could help with affordable
housing, so it's something that
we can definitely, if a bill is
introduced, that we can look at
it closely and uh I feel that,
uh, generally speaking, that we
can get behind a bill like that,
uh, is there's a.
There's a, there's a need for
more affordable housing and this
could help propel it in that
direction.
Uh,
specifically, I was thinking of
the situation in, uh, uh, Los
Ranchos where uh
Project almost nearing
completion was held up in the
courts and fought and, and I, I
don't know what the ultimate
outcome is going to be, but at
one point, they were asking for
it to be demolished. And, and
that just seems like, like, you
know, you're balancing interests
whenever you do this kind of
thing, when you give the
neighborhood an opportunity to
say, oh, we don't want it. But
there should be some way that
the greater good of the
community is, is supported in
those kind of debates and, and
uh
The same thing goes on with
homeless shelters and with
encampment legislation and all
the other issues where local
neighborhoods are wielding
incredible influence over and
essentially able to block.
Um, with the city or the county
or the state thinks is a better
use of those, uh, and they don't
even own the property
necessarily. I mean, it's not
like this is my property. I
don't want it to be used for the
homeless encampment. It's, I
don't want that property across
the street that I don't own, but
that I look at every day to be
used for that. And that just
seems to me to be taking it way
out of.
out of line and and Colorado has
dealt with it, with their
legislation. I knew it was
controversial there, but we
might look at that as an example
that we could, you know, maybe
not identical to theirs.
Toned down or whatever, but get
something that puts the balance
back into those scales. Thank
you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Senator, very
well, uh, very well said and,
and absolutely we have to do
everything that we can to ensure
that we can remove barriers and
inhibitions to affordable
housing. So thank you for that
and then I have representative
Montoya, then we've got
Representative Dixon and then
Representative Borrejo.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
And uh Izzy, uh, I appreciate
you and, and, uh, just your
staff being so accommodating uh
a couple of weeks ago.
Just for the members of this
committee, I have uh an investor
that came uh up uh looking to uh
invest in New Mexico and in um.
Affordable housing
And it's the first time I've sat
down in a meeting and hearing
the presentation directly.
Listening to from the standpoint
of investors.
The
roadblocks in place and
And I just something for the,
for the members of this
committee, um, something that I
think we need to look at in the
future is.
Uh, the particular investor I
have is likely not going to be
able to use an MFA program.
Because of the requirements that
we put on builders.
who work uh through MFA.
Um, it, it turns out that.
Uh, so many of the things that
MFA has to comply with.
Um, and even, uh, some of the,
the federal housing options.
Um
There are so many extra costs
built into
Uh, somebody doing a
multi-family housing projects to
be able to take advantage of one
of these programs.
That
The advantage of the the, the,
the, the more positive rate.
That is offered through MFA or
through some of our federal
programs is more than offset by
the additional costs.
That it takes to be able to use
one of these programs, um, it,
it, it turns out that to do a
program.
And take advantage of, of, of
public dollars.
Uh, to build multi-family
housing units is, is $450 per
square foot and up.
Whereas if uh they just go get
a, if they have a good line of
credit and they go through
Goldman Sachs or some other
bank.
Uh, potentially it can build the
same home or same multi-family
unit.
In the $275 to $300 a square
foot.
Range
I was unaware of that. I've sat
on this committee for 8 years.
Uh
I, I was, many of you know, I
served as chief of staff for
Lieutenant Governor John
Sanchez, and so, you know, the
lieutenant governor sits on the
oversight board.
Um
Uh, so I've been very involved
with MFA for
14 years.
And I was unaware.
The some of the roadblocks that
we in government have put in
place.
To
Making building.
Holmes
Uh, uh, making living spaces
available and affordable.
We as a legislature have done
that.
And I was, I was surprised. I,
I, I, I, it was very
enlightening for me to sit there
and listen to an investor asking
questions.
About the programs that exist
and once again I, I appreciate
Izzy came down to Farmington,
um.
Way, way out of your way. We
could have done a Zoom meeting
and I just appreciate you
accommodating.
Uh, but
Um, these are the best kind of
dollars that would have come
into New Mexico out of state
dollars and these would have
been this investor which uh now
I'm, I'm, I'm trying to look
around and well, we'll try and
see if there's something else
that these guys might be able to
use, but the reality is,
The cost to build
is much cheaper.
If they just are able to do it
through a bank.
And, uh, we, I think it's
something that we may, we may
need to address. We're talking
about a housing crisis in New
Mexico and we're talking about.
Uh, the, the, the need for
affordable housing.
But the moment that somebody
Takes one of these
takes one of these, uh, uh,
projects on.
If they do it with any public
dollars, well, they have to pay,
they have to pay prevailing
wage.
Even if, even if the, the, the
company doesn't have union
workers, we have to pay that
rate.
Um, other requirements that
we've put in place that if it's
federal or state or federal
dollars.
That we make that builder build
into it, that if they weren't
doing that through
One of these programs that they
don't have to do.
So I, I think we're going to be
faced with.
A decision I would hope that we
would face it.
I, are we willing
So maybe relax some of our
requirements to actually deal
with the housing crisis that we
have.
Um
Those of you who know a little
bit more about me that my, my
Life in the private sector, um,
I was an explosives distributor.
Um, I sold explosives to the, to
the coal mine and to actually we
sold explosives to
New Mexico Tech and others, but
I had to deal with all of the
federal regulations for trucking
and while I was in that
position,
The federal standards changed to
where we, we put on
We, we
Put on a trucking companies and
individual truck drivers, a new
regulation which said.
At 10 hours you have to stop.
Wherever you are, you have to
stop.
And you have to sleep.
But when we had Hurricane
Katrina was doing that, we had
to go back in there because of
the need to get supplies down
there and we had to relax.
Some of the requirements.
So that
So that
Our own laws that we had put in
place would not keep.
The help, uh, uh, to New Orleans
from, from happening because we
had just had all these truck
drivers hauling things and just
had to stop 10 hours in, it
didn't matter. There was no
working overtime. There was no,
they had to stop.
And we temporarily relax those
so we could deal with the
crisis.
I think if we believe, if we
truly believe there's a crisis,
a housing crisis in New Mexico.
And we want to use these
dollars, and I know that the
governor's office last year in
particular was talking about we
have a crisis, we need to look
at it this differently, uh, to
some degree, I thought that MFA
was treated unfairly by the
governor's office and, you know,
what the dollars need to get out
there quicker. They need to
I didn't realize the roadblock
that we had put in place by all
of the requirements that we have
made on investors to be able to
use public dollars.
Um, so I, I think.
If we really want to address
this crisis.
Uh, I would, we would have,
there would be an application in
right now.
To do a project through MFA.
Today
Uh, these guys were ready to
just, to just do it.
But when it came down to the
that the the fact that it was
almost double the cost.
To build a home, to build a
multi-family structure.
With all the requirements that
we've put in place, so I, I, I
just
I, I'm just suggesting if we
want to seriously address the
crisis that's before us and it's
all across New Mexico.
The first thing we could do is
find a way to lower the cost on
these developers so that the end
product
That the that that what they're
going to actually charge the
individual who's going to be
renting from them could actually
be affordable.
And I think if we do that,
And so, um, I, Izzy, I don't
know if you want to comment on
that at all, but, and I, I think
maybe I, I tried to encompass
this, but it's, it was eye
opening for me to sit there
firsthand.
And here from the developer and,
and once again, the reason I'm
in this is I'm a realtor,
Developer came to me and what do
you know about the programs? and
I said,
Why are you, boy, did you talk
to the right realtor?
And unfortunately he did not
talk to the right realtor, any
realtor that would have been in
there sitting down.
would have run into the same
issue, which is it is
Too expensive.
To access the dollars, it's,
it's the, the, the favorable
interest rate is not favorable
enough to overcome the extra
expense on these contractors, so
I don't know if you want to say
anything, Izzy, but I, I just
wanted to speak to us because,
uh, it's not something easy and
his staff can do about, uh,
they're, they're stuck with
anything that we put on them.
But it's something that we can
do, and so I'd like to suggest
if we truly consider this a
crisis, even if we temporarily
suspend some of the things that
we've passed just to allow
housing to go forward.
But, uh, anyhow, I, I, I did
want to talk to you guys. I
consider you, I, this is a
serious group.
This group tackles serious
issues, and I've appreciated
this group works across party
lines. It has, this has not been
a political group.
And so I, I'm, I'm bringing this
up, uh, just because I, I, I do
realize San Juan County is, is
hurting just as much as any
other community for, for
affordable housing. Uh, what's
happening right now is people
are looking at developing.
Tiny homes
400 square foot homes or less.
So that we can have affordable
housing.
We have been converting hotel,
old hotel rooms.
275 square foot hotel rooms,
putting a kitchenette in there.
There's not a living room,
there's not a living space,
there's a bed, there's a
kitchenette, there's a bathroom.
And those are going for 1100.
1200 a month in San Juan County.
That's, that's not reasonable.
It's just not reasonable.
Um, first house I bought.
I will be celebrating 40 years
of marriage this year and when
we were 3 years in, we bought
our first house.
1100 square foot house, we paid
$45,000 for that house.
That same house sold.
Couple of months ago.
For almost $300,000.
That's just unreasonable.
And I, and I think
If we're gonna, if we're going
to truly deal with this housing
crisis.
We have to tackle the real
problem. It's not just, it's not
just interest rates.
It's the total cost to build.
Right now
A a a custom home builder in
Farmington can build a home for
about
A custom home for 325 a square
foot.
We have homes that are, that are
from the 70s and 80s.
That are going for over $200 a
square foot.
Um, if we truly want to get
people in homes that are better
built.
That have better energy
efficiency.
Then we need to start putting
Extra burden on the, on the
contractors.
And, and, and let's truly do
something to help the, the
poorest among us. So thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative, uh, Izzy, did
you want to briefly respond to
that, um, because we're getting
a little bit behind already and
we want to move forward with the
agenda, but you can proceed if
you want to Representative
Montoya, we agree, I think that
the price of uh to develop
housing has gone up both on
single and and multi-family,
there's various factors, uh,
some of which may be at the
state level and some definitely
at the federal level there are,
uh, especially the federal
programs uh we don't have a
whole lot of control over, but I
would like to sit down with.
You maybe again, uh, I don't
know if we'll have time today,
but in the near future to kind
of understand uh some of the
things that your investors were
looking at so we could
potentially look at uh potential
alternatives.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is he all right?
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, I,
this may be a better question
for later in the agenda when we
review, um, the legislation.
However, I wanted to follow up
on Senator Ortiz Pino's, uh,
question about, um, legislation
that would, um, restrict or
affect uh municipalities and
local government entities, uh,
zoning and um, so Madam Chair,
is that OK if I ask it now, or
would you?
I think you can't go ahead and
proceed, Representative. Yeah,
it's a legislation, it's not
current legislation here that we
have, but it's a legislation in
Colorado you're referring to.
OK, yeah, please go ahead and
proceed.
Um, so my question, um, Izzy is.
You know, legislation that deals
with housing.
Um, and
Legislation that would
potentially make it easier to
build housing, um, if it's not
prepared and drafted by MFA, um,
who would be doing that.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, Dixon, uh, I
think it over the, the years,
there's been different uh
housing legislation introduced
some of it that gets endorsed by
this committee, and then there's
other, uh, groups that introduce
other legislation so it's not
restricted to just, uh, us
introducing that legislation, we
get the endorsement from this
committee on that legislation
that they agree on, but uh there
are other entities out there
that have done it in other
bills, uh, and not with any
specific entity. I don't know if
that address.
your question?
Thank you, Izzy. um, to some
extent it does, however, um, I
think that MFA is engaging in
the policy arena, uh, for
housing, and this is a major
obstacle that has been
discussed. And so,
I think my question is, you
know, whether, um, given the
role that MFA plays in
coordinating with local entities
if it should be MFA or if it
should, for instance, be the
governor's Office of housing,
um, that engages in that. And I
think that, um, it is a large
enough issue and concern that,
um, I would certainly like to
see someone, um, either MFA or
the governor's office take the
lead on that.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Dixon, this is,
uh, obviously an interest of
ours. I will say that, uh,
Uh, a couple of years ago as we
were, uh,
putting together our strategic
or housing strategy in the, and
the needs, uh, this came up as,
uh, obviously as an issue and we
approached some legislators to
kind of get a feel for whether
there was an appetite to
introduce something like this,
uh, we're told that, uh,
You know, probably not the good
time, and it's a very
challenging, but it's something
that if we can get the
legislator that would help us
sponsor legislation like that
we're definitely think there's a
need and would be fully behind
it, uh, so.
Thank you and, and I certainly,
it's been an issue that I have
worked on, um, in the past and
I'm fairly certain that I had
mentioned the um the challenges
associated with such
legislation, but I would
actually say that, you know,
were I to run legislation, I
would want MFA to be actually
taking the lead, um, I, you
know, and I think that's a more
appropriate role. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
well said and just a reminder
that we are a legislative body,
whoops, I dropped my pencil.
We're a legislative body and
anyone at any time can introduce
legislation. It does not have to
come through a committee as as
he said for endorsement of any
committees, not only the MFA,
that's just the way it works.
And but I really appreciate the
fact that you, you want to bring
in the stakeholders. MFA is a
stakeholder in this.
And the housing, state housing
office by statute, as we had
said before, and I'm happy
because it is the collaboration,
the partnership, the
communication, and ultimately
the respect that we need to have
for each other and for those in
authority. MFA has a board that
has been appointed and some
ex-officials served by virtue of
their current positions like the
state treasurer and lieutenant
Governor and so on and so they
have a hard job.
When they make decisions, I'm
sure they do it after
deliberating quite a bit and,
um, we, uh, are to respect the
work that they do, and I truly
appreciate your comments about
that you believe MFA should be
at the helm of this because that
is what they do, so thank you
very much for that. Now, we're
gonna move on to the next and
I've got representative for
Rego.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I had a comment regarding, um,
Senator Tipino, um, you know,
the, the issue of not in my
backyard, the NIMBY syndrome
and, um, you know, I worked in
planning for 28 years. I saw
that for 28 years. Um, and I
think that what's important is
that maybe, uh, and you might
wanna just look at this a little
bit, um, busy as, you know,
there are
People worry about their
property values and typically
when they're
Against development, it's
because people have not engaged
them early on and sometimes they
think that, you know, they
have all sorts of
misinformation, and I'm just
gonna give you an example,
madam, uh, chair. I was trying
to build some affordable housing
on the west side over by Cibola
in the, uh, Cibololoop master
planned area where we're
building a multi-generational
center. We were trying to build
senior affordable housing. And,
um,
Some of the people who were
against it were spreading
misinformation about, um, you
know, that I was gonna build a
homeless shelter and in fact,
that was so far from the truth
of what got out to the
community, um, and so one of the
things that I was gonna suggest
Izzy, is that
You turn to maybe the American
planning Association because
they have strategies and maybe
you can have your staff research
it, um, strategies for engaging
communities early on, um,
whenever there's a development
because and then oftentimes, and
I heard, um, um, you know, the
representative from Farmington,
uh, very loud and clear is, you
know, developers is the last
thing they want to do is put
money into a situation, uh,
development, and then they get
turned down because that's a lot
of money that they're losing,
and, uh, you know, nobody wants
to go down that path, so I just
wanted to mention that is that
maybe you guys can do a little
bit more research on how to, how
to engage communities early on,
um, and, and other strategies
for
You know, to fight the NIMB, um,
um.
Attitude, I guess you could say,
cause that's what it is. It's,
you know, you're gonna reduce
the, the, the value of my
property because you're going to
build 30 affordable housing
units.
But they don't see it that way,
so that's the first thing. And
then the second thing that I
wanted to mention is just with
regard to, um, uh,
Representative Dixon's comment.
You know, many of these
developments that um that are
affordable are usually a
public-private partnership, uh,
you know, the entity might put
up the land and then, um, you
know, a developer jumps in and
then they try to make the
numbers work now, chair, and I'm
gonna cut my comments off here,
but
I think that engaging the
homebuilders, um, early on,
especially, you know, if, if
there is legislation coming down
the pike, um, because these
issues are very, you know,
they're, they're multi-pronged
approaches, um, to solving a
solution, so I, while I think
that
MFA probably should spearhead,
but I think that you need to
also have the support of of
groups like the Homebuilders
and, um, you know, the realtors
and I mean, so.
There has to be a number of
groups at the table to support
it and get it through. So that's
my point. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative. I know you've
been a, a very big supporter of
affordable housing and other
housing you're experiencing uh
in that area in building and
zoning and all that is
invaluable. Thank you very much
for that, uh, and I'm just gonna
make a couple of comments and
I'm gonna move on so that we uh
representative uh Anan no you
can introduce yourself, but
before I do, let me just mention
that, you know, one of the
things that we always have to
keep in mind over the many years
I
Served in the legislature, I
learned the hard way, um, is
that
When we have
a
proposals can't say the word
proposals and um, we are
proponents to different changes
in the law that directly impact
local governments and
municipalities we have a pretty
big challenge ahead of us. The
first thing that needs to be
done is to ensure that we have
collaboration with them so that
we are not encroaching, but
instead.
com m un ic ation and developing
the rapport and an understanding
as to why we need to change
things. For example, local
governments, and I'm a county
commissioner. I was a county
commit I was a county
commissioner for 4 terms, so I
got to see all this directly in
front of me and, um,
I can tell you that many times
counties pass ordinances uh
based on what their needs are,
what their constituents tell
them and, and ask them to do and
and and the needs that they
foresee and, and so on as they
continue in their roles, but
Many times we know that at a
state level we hear also, we
hear from our constituents and
the needs that have been has
been indicated of the crisis we
have for housing and so on,
continues, so in order to get
that all being said, is in order
to get changes done for zoning
laws and so on. We really have
to work with counties or and
cities, uh, to so that we don't
try to sabotage their work in
approving their ordinances that
they have in place, they're
building codes, um, all these
land use, um, regulations that
they put in for the state to
come in and try and dismantle
something just because we can
doesn't work. It is, um,
clearly, um, an indication where
legislation will fail. It's
happened in the past more than
once. So again, I go back to the
communication that needs to be
done and bringing in um the
association of counties, the
municipal League.
And others um um construction
industry division for the state.
I like that. I think there are
many areas that we can have
better, uh, more improvements
and for example, the state needs
to, and the counties and cities
need to work together on
expediting the building permits
and reducing the bureaucracy
that we have when somebody goes
to apply for a permit. The time
frame it takes to get building
permits approved. Those are all
inhibition.
that
very clearly delay the process
for building.
Also inspections, inspections
take a long time. We are short
of inspectors. Yes, we are in
the state of New Mexico, um, but
again, what are the
requirements? Those are things
to look at. Why is it that we're
short of inspectors? Perhaps
there may be some
the requirements may be too
difficult to become an
inspector. I don't know. I'm
just putting out things. What
are the possibilities that could
be happening, but these are
things that we can look at and
again it all is going to happen.
Only if we work together
with local governments and all
the entities, the stakeholders
together. Many times we put
things together, um, in in in a
proposal and then we get to the
legislature and we get all these
organizations come in and
express our concerns or oppose
it only after we've worked for
months and months trying to get
something done and you know
what? Sometimes we don't like
it, but they're right.
We left a big piece out of this
pie, and their constituents for
all of us. They, they're people
who truly care, who, who deal
with this every day and what we
do without them is going to
impact them very drastically so
I can see why, so that's why I
know and kind of repeat myself
Izzy, but um just wanted to
mention it, and you do very
well. Thank you for
communicating as best you can. I
remind everyone that the MFA for
since it's.
establishment has just recently
gotten some funding from the
legislature that is funding that
can be meaningful to develop
affordable housing. In the past
since its inception, it had only
received 27.
If I remember correctly, $27
million over I don't know how
many years, a long time, and so
now with the the bills we've
passed thanks to your support,
uh, we now are leveraging more
money for MFA to be able to
continue their great work that
they're doing and more
collaboration as we're talking.
Izzy, thank you so much, and I'm
gonna move on to, uh,
representative, and I'll let you
pronounce. Let me try it. A new
is that good or close? OK, but.
You do. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you everybody for being
here. I am, uh, Representative
Janelle Aonornu from the 19th
district that's, um, state
fairgrounds in the International
District. So Ea Nonu, Invisible
R, yeah, you say it, but you
don't write it just for fun.
I don't have my microphone. Can
we approve the minutes so we can
move on the agenda, please.
OK. We have a motion on the
floor for approval. Do we have a
second? Um, oh, I'll second
that. OK, minutes are approved.
Anyone opposed before I go on?
OK, thank you. MFA's budget,
let's talk about that and we
have, um, there goes another
name, let's see, Arantari Bo
tell me again.
Aun Dai, thank you. All right.
Thanks, Izzy for a good job.
Let's.
For fiscal year 2024, which
ended on September 30 of this
year, and also an outlook for
fiscal year 2025. In the first
slide that you have on screen,
basically it says what was our
priority in this last year,
fiscal 2024. It was mainly
expanding capacity and finding
impact, aligning it to our
mission to be the provider of
being the leader of provider for
affordable housing for New
Mexico, and thanks for the
legislation for the STB funding
that we received 2 consecutive
years and also the $50 million
allocation that we have that
along helped us to have a lot of
new different programs that
we've done, and we have tried to
be on this expanded mission. On
the next slide, you have, it
just shows the assets under
management, and the trend is
going up, so we have more
assets. The teal bars are
basically all the assets that we
deal with and that
The yellow or the peach ones are
mainly the book assets. So the
teal ones includes the, um,
LIHDC Home Section 8 rental
housing, which, according to the
generally accepted accounting
principles, if not essentially
in our balance sheet, but the
peach ones are, but you can see
that both of them are on
increasing trend, which shows
the strength of MFA's balance
sheet in that.
We also have very important
mission of having bonds because
we constantly issues and thanks
to the government for having the
volume cap allocated to us, we
go to the state board of finance
and ask for the allocation so
that we can have tax exempt
authority to issue those bonds.
What it does in very plain, um,
The idea is that the interest
rates on those bonds that we pay
out are lower, which allows us
to make lower mortgage rates to
our actual borrowers. We are
restricted by the IRS code to
have a certain difference
between the loan rate and the
bond rate, but we do manage our
pipelines really well. We have a
constant issuance of bonds so
that there is no gap in between
and so that we can have the
supply of funds move on. 2024
was a great year for us. This
was the
year when we had 500.
And $70 million of bond issued
and one particular issue for 150
million that was highest in
MFA's history for 50 years. So
that, that's where we are very
proud of it and we also have
very much financial tools that
we apply because we know that
the volume cap is not unlimited,
so we try to mix a little bit of
taxables with the tax exempt so
that we can still get a weighted
average rates that is beneficial
to our end users or the
borrowers. We
don't do the bondages alone. We
have a collaboration with our
underwriters or investment
bankers with our financial
advisors, and it's always a
group effort and our bonds are
very well received nationally as
well as in New Mexico. We always
do research to see how we can
increase the retail buyers in
New Mexico where they invest the
money and if they invest the
money in New Mexico, it has the
general multiplier effect of
having more income for those
people and spend.
So we have been very successful
in doing that.
Next, I go to a high level
operating budget for our general
fund, in essence, our revenues
we project to be at 36.7 million
and our expenses to be 34.3
million, leaving us a projected
net revenue of 2.4%. That number
is important because what we do
is if we have anycess net
revenue, we right away invest
that for attaining our goal for
any of our, uh, affordable
housing missions that
we have. So we always try to
have that positive difference
compared to last year, our
budget is pretty much flat, but
we anticipate the expenses to be
lower because we've ended the
housing assistance fund, the
COVID moratorium has ended, so
we'll decrease some of the
expenses that came to us related
to that, we had to hire a lot of
staff to do that since that has
gone, we think our expenses will
decrease and we'll have a better
net revenue balance in fiscal
year 25.
That said, my last slide kind of
gives you a, a depiction of the
general fund expenses and
revenue over the years, just a
trend from fiscal year 2020 to
2024 is the actuals and 2025 is
projected. Again, as you can
see, we are in a mission to have
this net revenue number and
always use that for the benefit
to optimize our mission.
Saying that I'll end with any
questions you might have.
Thank you very much. Do we have
any questions or comments or
anybody? All right, I don't have
any myself. I appreciate the
good, uh, thorough information.
Thank you and um we're gonna
move on only for the sake of
time. So, there we go. Let's see
what the next one is. If it
changes into existing and
proposed rules promulgated by
the MFA. All right, Robin,
you're next. Thank you, Robin,
for all your work. My goodness,
you, you really have been a a
very just important part of him.
and we appreciate you.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and, um,
good morning members of the
committee. Thank you for being
here today. Um, this morning, we
are, um, proposing changes to
the MFA rules and regulations.
These changes will also, um,
Uh, be proposed to our board of
directors, um, at the next board
meeting, um, so, um, from time
to time we do update our rules
and regulations just to um
Uh, modify repeal or provide
additional clarification. Um,
this session, um, we're only
proposing one change to the
rules and regulations currently,
we define, um, moderate income
persons or families.
Um, that have an AMI between 80%
and 150%, um, adjusted for
family size. Uh, today we're
proposing to increase that, um,
area median income. I'm sorry, I
used an acronym AMI. That's area
median income, um, to include
households earning between 80,
up to and including 200% of area
median income.
Um, this change is based on some
projections and some analysis
that we've done, uh, related to,
um, increases in housing costs,
um, interest rates remaining at
higher levels, um, more
recently.
Um, the limited um inventory of
housing on the market and we
want to provide additional
resources and flexibility, uh,
where possible. So with that,
I'll stand for any questions
that the committee may have. um.
Regarding this recommendation.
Thank you very much, Robin. Any
questions, comments,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Robin, um.
When was, when did, um, MFA go
from or go up to 150%. Was that
recent?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, yes, I
believe that was in the 2023,
um, interim session. We, um,
increased it from 120 to 150.
23.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Robin. So just last
year because this is the interim
of 2024.
Yes, uh, representative, that's
correct.
And um, Madam Chair, what was
the what have the impacts been
that we've seen thus far from
going from 120 to 150.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, so.
The increase, um, is restricted
to state funding, um, that, uh,
MFA receives.
Many of our programs, as you
know, are layered with multiple
funding sources, including
federal funding, which kind of
keeps those income limits lower,
um, so we've been able to
provide increased uh down
payment assistance, um, by
raising the income levels. We've
established high-cost areas, um,
but we would have less
exceptions by, uh, increasing
the AMI levels uh for eligible.
Um, households, um, another area
where we've been able to sort of
leverage um the increased, um,
AMI household level is with the
single family production, um,
typically those um
Units, uh, those homes can be
sold to someone who is, is a
little bit higher on the income,
um, continuum. So those are two
examples that I can think of,
um, and it, again, it just kind
of gives us additional
flexibility to be able to react
to things that are happening
within the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. um, do you have an estimate
of how many more people, um, MFA
has been able to support and
serve because of the past
increase.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, I don't
have an exact number of um
individuals we do, um, track
income.
By program level, so we would
have to do some analysis to
determine which programs, um,
you know, had people that were
up to that, um, higher income
level.
But I don't have an exact number
for you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
so do we have a sense of how
many more people, uh, we would
be able to support by going up
to 200%.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, you know,
I think that in the analysis
that we did, it does show that,
um, and I'm speaking, um, to
mainly the home ownership
programs that we offer because I
think that's where we'll see the
most ability to leverage this
change.
Um, we can, we can see that.
With at 150% AMI, um, the cost
of affording a medium priced
home, um, if you're making 100%
of area median income in most
counties, not, and that's not
across the state, um, but in
most counties, um.
It is affordable for somebody at
the 150% AMI, um, but we have
also seen a big increase in home
prices, right? And so by just um
allowing a little bit of
additional flexibility for um
some of, you know, a term that
has been used a lot is workforce
housing, right? People that are
just earning more, um, but are
still not able to afford a
medium priced home, um, so I
guess, again, I don't have an
exact number for you.
but it is the intent is to be
able to broaden the um.
The eligibility for people who
are, who are earning higher
incomes but still unable to
achieve.
Um, an affordable housing
payment.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, um, and I noticed in
the um in the packet in the
back, um, I think under number,
um, under tab 5, there is a,
there is a chart that shows us
the 150% AMI, which is very
helpful, um, and so for
Bernalillo County, it looks
like.
Um, 150% is uh equivalent to a
four-person household earning
129,000. Is that correct?
Uh
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, I, I think I don't have
that chart in front of me, but
that is correct. Um, and Madam
Chair, so do we know what would
the, uh, for person, um, amount
be at 200% then.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, for a
four-person household in
Bernalillo County, uh, 200% of
area median income would be
$172,800 per house for that
house.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um.
Madam Chair, I, um, I don't know
that I have more questions at
this particular moment, but is
it possible if after, uh,
discussion, I have more that we
could circle back. Thank you
because I think, you know.
I think it's a big rule change,
um, and I'd be interested in
seeing some of the analysis that
you mentioned, uh, that you guys
have. Thank you.
Sure. Thank you very much. Um,
and yes, absolutely, you can ask
more questions, representative.
Um, I did want to just bring out
a little point and I'm going to
move to the next person only so
we can stay on the same page
here, um.
Robin, let's see. oh yes, the,
we just recently, the board
recently approved in the MFA
supported the, the MFA oversight
committee supported the 150%
increase, so it hasn't, you
probably don't have enough data
as you're continuing to, to do
that because you, you said you
have to do some analysis on
different programs because it
impacts different programs
differently. So that may be one
of the reasons, but I also
wanted to mention one more thing
very crucial here that I think
maybe we have to
Keep in mind that the 200% that
MFA is supporting
in the board, obviously has
discussed it and and there's
been some positive discussion on
that, um, is that this 200%
applies only to non-federal
dollars, so it's not like it's
gonna break New Mexico or or
break the MFA. It's, it's only
going to apply to the amount
that the state.
it puts into the into the the
Affordable housing Trust Fund
or, or other areas, so that
lessens that impact and I think
that's a part that may be
misunderstood out there is that,
oh my gosh, so somebody can earn
$172,000 a year and still
qualify and and uh well, you
know, 172,000 when you have a
family of 4, and that's gross
income, you don't get that much
at the end of the day when your
check comes home. Uh, there's
many deductions and so on, but
even
That. I it is up to 200% for a
smaller amount, which is a state
funds. So it's not gonna be such
a a big impact, but one more
thing is that because it's a
rule, it's not in statute.
Again,
we know the MFA board does a lot
of work and the staff in doing
this, so I just appreciate all
that you do and I think that
it's a, it's certainly something
that if, if it was.
Really bad in the future or or
it started impacting MFA somehow
you could, it's a rule you can
change rules like you always do,
but I think based on the
circumstances that you have now
and the fact that it's only
going to apply to a much smaller
amount.
Excuse me, it should be just
fine, but let's, let's move on
and we can ask more questions
and get more information,
representative, righty
Representative Kates, you are
next, yes.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Robin, for your
presentation, um, and, and thank
you, uh, for your clarification,
uh, Senator Rodriguez, and for
your questions, uh,
Representative Dixon, I, uh, to
have.
Um
Some concerns and some questions
as well, so, uh, and it sounds
to me like you don't have the
data, but here's some data that
I would be interested in for me
to be able to support this rule
change.
How many more have been served
in only one year of collecting
data, which is a very short
period of time to collect data.
I, I understand that, but you're
also asking for another rule
change. So I would want to know
how many more have been served
from the 120 to 150, and my
other question is, how many have
been denied because they made
over the 150. I would like to
know that as well. I do have.
For clarification from our
committee and our viewers.
Um, uh, the, the current 150,
which I am thrilled with. Let me
tell you because I do see entry
level and fixed income.
Uh, individuals very much
needing um.
Uh, that income source, but a
single person.
And Berna Leo at 1:50 is it
9,007,020, a single person in
Bernalio at 200% is 152,000.
Current census, that's 83.9% of
the total population in Bernalo.
Are we making it eligible for
83%.
Of the population.
To have subsidized housing, so I
have, I have concern about that,
which is shocking to come for me
because I usually have no
concern at all about
subsidizing. I want to subsidize
housing, but, um, this just
seems to be a big step and only
one year. If you had some data
to be able to back up that hey
we're in a crisis and we have to
move fast and here's the data
that I would be more comfortable
with this, but, but those are my
questions that I would have.
And, and my concerns. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Cates,
and we are gonna go on. Let me
say, OK, representative Aaurnu
and then Senator Ortizipino.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Robin. Um, so.
When you
opened the section explaining
why we're in, um, doing the
increase to $200. You mentioned
like construction costs and the
unit shortage, um, like of
available housing that we have
in the state.
So I don't know if this is a
question or a comment if you can
pull a question out of my stream
of consciousness, feel free to
answer it. I haven't had any
coffee yet. I'm wondering.
How
In like how increasing to 200
from 150. How that's going to
address the unit shortage in the
state because we still have to
build those houses and we had
cost of materials has gone up,
so.
You know, like the last meeting
that we had, I had like
questions about
Making sure that we do have like
down payment assistance for
first-time home buyers at a rate
that is meaningful, um, cause
you know like $3000 isn't, you
know, gonna help. So I, I agree
that we need to make like
subsidy for more New Mexican
families. I think that's great
that we're doing that, but I'm
just wondering how this
increased to 200 is going to
address the shortage of units in
the state.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Anya Norni,
thanks for your comments and
questions. You know, I think one
of the things that you know,
Izzy mentioned the statewide
housing strategy that we
published a couple of years ago
and, you know, one thing that I
think came out of that and and
that we're aware of now even
more is that, um, there's a lot
of people that are renting.
Um, who can't afford to purchase
a home. So that, um, this
referred to as the latter,
right? And so if somebody can't
move up, then someone else can't
move up. Um, so I don't know,
um, that it's gonna have any
impact on construction costs or
increase of new units, but I do
think it would have an impact on
the availability of units if
people who are on the cusp of
being able to purchase a home
but are restrained because
they're over 150%.
AMI, um, to receive that down
payment assistance and cannot
save for that down payment
assistance because of current,
you know, economic factors. So I
think that's the way that I
would sort of interpret um how
it would have an impact on the
housing market, um.
To Representative Kate's point
about um subsidized housing, um,
when we're discussing, um,
The 150%, 200% AMI. It is again,
it's limited because when you're
talking about say section 8 or
light tech or other um forms of
rental housing that are
subsidized, you are going to be
restricted to income limits at
the federal government imposes,
um, and that we do not have
control over, so I hope that
kind of provides some clarity on
where we see the impact would,
would be, um, we don't have to
change all of our programs to
serve these populations if it
doesn't make sense, but it gives
us the flexibility to do that in
cases where it does make sense.
So and I think Izzy may have
some additional comments.
No, proceed, please.
OK, so, and then you just
mentioned that, you know, you
don't have to change your
existing programs to make this
increased work if it doesn't
make sense, and that's good. I
was.
My follow-up question was going
to be,
Does this increase
From 150 to 200, will that
affect then, if you're writing
these additional loans, will
that affect how much money goes
from MFA to building new homes,
those like, do you have to
reallocate funds from one to the
other. How does that balance
out?
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Anda Nornu, um, so when we did
our analysis, the, you know, the
program that we were looking at
that would have the most impact
is what's called our, our next
home program, so this is um a
program for people that are kind
of moving, um, up in the housing
ladder, um, so potentially the
housing costs would be higher,
which means the 4% that we offer
for down payment assistance
would be higher, um, but I don't
anticipate that we would
necessarily need to.
significantly reduce the money
that we are putting towards
development of new construction,
whether that be multi-family or
single family, um, we tried not
to constrain ourselves too much
because we want to be able to,
um, address the needs, right?
And so we don't wanna run out of
money in any program, um, which
we'll get to in a little bit on
the agenda, but we, we
definitely want to, um, to be
able to have the flexibility.
That's. Thank you, thank you,
Robin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Ortizipino before you
start, Senator, I truly,
genuinely want to thank you.
This committee would have never
been the same if you hadn't been
so um just so intricately
involved in in the issues deeply
caring and hardworking. Your
ideas have always been presented
with wisdom and um just, just
from the heart, and I just can't
tell.
tell you how much I appreciate
you, how much I've learned from
you, um, I've always tried to be
like you and I'm going to leave
here after 29 years and still
have a lot to learn. So, um, I
just want to thank you.
I
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman, and I hope my question
does not now destroy all of your
confidence in
whatever you I'll listen because
you've got wisdom. All right,
uh.
This brings back the whole
discussion we had, Madam
Chairman, in the last session
around workforce housing. Is
that the target of this
workforce housing that we're,
we're actually seeing MFA
programs being made available to
A family of a teacher and a
policeman, uh, a couple of, uh,
uh, people who work in the
construction industry, things
like that, that go, that are
earning too much.
To qualify for what we've
usually thought of as affordable
housing, but, but who still
can't afford to get into uh
housing on the market as it
exists today. Is that what
you're after here?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator R
TZP now, um.
You know, most, uh, the majority
of people who use MFA programs
are in the workforce, um, and so
the term workforce housing, we
feel like we're, we already, um,
serve that population, um, but
yes, to answer your question,
there is a, there's always going
to be a cliff, right? And so
this is just based on what we're
seeing in, you know, the housing
market currently, um, would just
again be able to provide more
to people who are, um, earning,
um, a higher income as a
household. And, and Madam
Chairman and, and
is, is, is the
What we call the Affordable
housing Trust Fund that Senator
Rodriguez referred to.
Does that provide money for
these families?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
yes, we use, um, the New Mexico
Housing Trust Fund, the state
funding to provide down payment
assistance, which I think is
kind of where we're focusing in
on this conversation. So I, I
mean, I just want to follow up
on on Representative Argan you
no news question because it does
seem like if we use this now for
families that are making 150,000
or 160,000 a year, there will be
less available for the families
that are making
80,000 or 50,000 a year. Is
that, is that, I mean, it, it's
fungible, I know, but there's
only so much of it to go around,
so are we, are we in some ways,
shooting ourselves in the foot
by expanding the level of uh
eligibility for people who.
Right now aren't eligible, but
by making them eligible, we'll
reduce the number of lower
income families who could get
some help.
Madam Chair and Senator TCPo,
uh, thank you for that question.
I, I will say and I'll give you
some examples here to address
some of the questions that came
up a little bit earlier. We were
uh analyzing some data back
there with Jeff, uh, but with
this specific question, uh,
these monies, uh, that we use
for down payment assistance, uh,
uh, they are loans that get
repaid back and they create and
generate some what we call
program income to come back and
be able to have more money
available to assist those that
are at the lower income levels.
So they are not grants that are
going to the workforce or the
working families, um, you know,
one of the examples that I'll
give you here, uh, here in
Bernalillo County under our
federal program, the mortgage
revenue bond program for
first-time home buyers.
The IRS and FHA set a limit of
510 as a sales price limit here
in Bernoyo County.
In order to afford that house,
the payment is $33,700 roughly a
month. Uh, it takes an income of
close to $150,000 to be able to
uh to afford that house, uh, if
you look at the income charts at
150% AMI that are provided
behind tab 5, you'll see that
the income limit there, uh, in
Burtono County at 150% AMI is
lower than that 146,000 that I
just mentioned.
Um
You know, for a family of 4,
it's 129 for a family of 5. We
get to 150 for a family of 6. We
all know that uh we don't
generally have families of 6
anymore. We're lucky if there's
families of 3 or 4 in some
cases, uh, and that would be
considered a big family
nowadays, uh, so this will allow
us to uh serve those working
families and stretch out and,
and I will say that it's not
going to be a huge number last
year, uh, we were looking at not
that all of these.
These uh income limits, but, uh,
Jeff and I were looking at our
production last year under our
uh non first term higher non non
first time homebuyer program,
which is a families that we
would be reaching with this. We
did about 450 loans uh to non
first time home buyers on our
home forward program or our next
home program. So if you multiply
that times $10,000 which is what
our DPA is for those you're
looking at $4.5 million so it's,
it's not huge, but it is those
400.
50 families are very grateful
that they can afford a house now
that they weren't able to do
before because we wouldn't be
able to assist them and they
would not qualify with other
traditional financing from the
banks and in some cases or this
definitely gives him a leg up,
so I hope that addresses some of
the questions Madam Chairman,
yes, and, and Izzy and Robin, it
does, uh, to remind us that it
is a loan, uh, this, and is that
the only program then that would
be impacted by this change in
the definition, the, the down
payer.
assistance program.
Or their other state only funded
programs that might also be
impacted, Madam Chair and
Senator TCPo, that would be the
major program, uh, all of the, I
shouldn't say all of the other
programs. The only programs
where this income limits would
increase on our on some state
funds like the housing Trust
Fund and some self-generated
funds we are not able to change
any of the federal, uh, programs
and their income limits, so it
is a limited scope, but it does
help out in this case the
example was 450 folks.
We helped out last year.
OK
Thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Senator,
for, uh, clarifying that and is
he for certainly giving us the
answers, OK, um, I don't, oh,
Representative Borego did right,
did you have your hand up? Thank
you. Yes, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, um, you know,
I just wanted to, and, and I
know probably not everybody was
involved, but I think Senator
Tippio might remember that we
used to have a housing trust
fund at the city of Albuquerque,
which
Um, Ken Belazor started if you
remember that, and we
built um a couple of
developments. Remember guys, I'm
not a voting member on this
committee. I'm just advisory,
but I think it's important, um.
What we built several um um
developments that I remember,
one in my district, which was
tresplacita, which actually, um,
Has
Really kind of favored that
population that you guys are
talking about and, and, you
know, it didn't use the mortgage
finance. Well, it partially did,
I guess, use the mortgage
finance authority, but the, the
city's housing trust fund was
kind of the key driver in that.
And there, that particular
development, and there's another
one in the North Valley off of
uh Candelaria by Rio Grande, uh,
but it, you know, those working,
um,
Working class, I guess, families
are thriving in those
developments, so I just wanted
to mention that because, you
know, there's, I mean, I, you
know, I have mixed feelings
about this rule change as well,
but when I start thinking about
some of the, the benefits of uh
being able to get those
individuals in housing because
they don't qualify, you know,
for the low income, but they're
sort of stuck in this weird
limbo.
Um,
area that, you know, the banks
can't can't provide for them,
uh, um, but
You know, hopefully we can
encourage those types of
developments, because they are
important.
And that's kind of the tier of
housing that we've talked about
in the past is, you know,
eventually they'll be able to
move into a maybe a high, a
higher income housing, so I just
wanted to mention some of those
developments.
Thank you, Representative. uh,
good points. All right, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you all, Madam Chair. I
just have one question easy a
follow up.
So
On the down payment assistance.
How soon after do they have to
start paying?
Like
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, it is, it is done
in conjunction with their first
mortgage payment, so generally
depending on when they close on
the loan, uh, if they close a,
uh, today, uh, in November,
their first payment, uh, Jeff,
would that be first of December
or first of January, so it's
within uh 30 to 451st of
January.
within 45 days, generally, uh,
at the most 60 days from when
they get that mortgage that
their first payment would be
due, and it's done in
conjunction with their first
mortgage payment.
Madam,
so it's two separate.
To separate her lungs or set a
onealine.
Madam Chair and Senator
Rodriguez's two separate loans.
One that goes to the uh first
mortgage lender or servicer and
then the second one that comes
to, uh to housing New Mexico.
And Madam Chair, um, so, uh, the
on the.
the assistance part is it also
extended at the length of the,
of the first uh.
term for the
Number of years.
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Gonzalez, that is correct. The
amortization period is up to 30
years. I think there's an option
if they wanted to have a shorter
amortization period that
obviously and these are we're,
we're talking small loan
amounts, so the payments aren't,
uh, a very significant, uh, but,
uh, Jeff on this one, do we have
a 15 years, we have a 15 and a
30 year option, um.
that the borrower can opt for
depending on their financial
capability and how much they
want to pay.
Very well thank you thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Dixon.
And you know what we
say before we go on, let me
thank Representative Dixon
because truly we're talking
about workforce development
housing, and, uh, you were
The proponent in the one of
them. I know you and others
represented small and others
with the proponents of that in
the house and that resulted in
this big bill providing $175
million last year, uh, to help
with affordable housing for
workforce development is that
threshold we're talking about
that throws people out of the,
out of the potential to have
housing, so thank you for that
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I have 2 questions. Um, the
first is, what is the impact,
um, if this.
Of not doing anything today.
Uh
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Dixon, uh, I
think the, the impact would be
that there are some families,
and I couldn't give you a number
because we haven't changed it
yet. We don't know what
applications, uh, would come in
that we can't, uh, serve, but it
would be not being able to serve
those that missing middle middle
if you will or the some of those
working families of the
workforce, workforce housing if
you will, where you maybe have
a, a teacher and a firefighter
or a couple of teachers, uh, or
a nurse that may be over those
income limits, so there would be
some families we wouldn't be
able to assist. I don't.
envision that that's a huge
number because it takes a while
for people to learn about the
programs and start applying once
they know they qualify.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
is this the only opportunity
that MFA has, uh, in the next, I
don't know like.
the process for rule changes,
you know, and, and how those
work, but, um, I guess my
question is, is this the only
bite at the apple that we have
this year, um, on this
particular item.
Madam Chair and Representative
Dixon, that is correct. Our
rules and regs need to be
approved by both the interim
committee, the legislative
Oversight Committee and our
board. So, uh, if the, uh,
oversight committee did not
approve this today, then we'd
have to wait till the next
meeting next year, uh, in the
May June time frame.
Thank you, Madam Char. Thank
you, Izzy. um.
I think I
I am still a little, um,
reticent based on the fact that
I don't feel like I have have
enough information on, you know,
how the increases, um, you know,
the impact of the increase from
last time, and then making an
additional increase without
having the data, um.
You know, I can appreciate the,
the, um, restrictions given
rules, um, could you talk us
through, um, what potential
downsides there might be, um, to
enacting this rule change.
Madam Chair and Representative
Dixon, uh.
I am struggling to come up with
a, a downside, uh, you know, the
question that Senator TCPo asked
a little bit earlier, we're
using some funds that could
otherwise be used for other
lower income families, uh, uh,
we are the, I think the, the
counterpoint to that is that
these are loans that are coming
back and actually help generate
additional funds, uh,
programming coming into the
housing Trust Fund, um, so I, I
wouldn't, uh, see that as a, as
a downside because, uh, to
assist the families.
uh
very lower income and let's say
that the homeless population we
have federal funding sources to
assist with that, uh, and the
housing trust fund itself limits
us on, and they're obviously not
able to make payments on uh
whatever we give to the homeless
shelters, etc. uh, so those
would be grants. We are limited
on how much we can do on that
end because the housing trust
fund requires that we leverage
the program and it has
limitations on operations and uh
it's, uh, it has to be capital.
type uh uh expenditures that we
have, uh, so we don't uh.
Allocate a whole lot of money to
that category because there's
not a whole lot of new homeless
shelters being built, uh, the
area where we do see some uh
potential there is with building
some permanent supportive
housing to house those folks
that are homeless, uh, but we're
we've been able to meet that
demand with or, or all the
applications that come in for
that so not seeing a downside
there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Izzy. Um, would this have
any impact on programs operated
by local or county governments.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, this gives
a flexibility for the local
governments that have affordable
housing plans and ordinances,
uh, to mirror this increase
here. It's at their option and I
would say that you're gonna
have, uh, probably some, uh,
local governments, uh.
That would be very interested in
this and would be those that are
uh what we call high cost areas,
uh such as uh Los Alamo Santa
Fe, Taos, Ridoso, and we see a
few more creep up here and there
with the increase in sales
prices, uh, that would be
interested in potentially
increasing their ordinances to
go up to this limit.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
that's my last question, and,
um, you know, I, I really
appreciate the information, um,
and the clarification that we've
been able to have, um, through
the discussion. It's, it's very
important. Um, I will say that
for me personally, um, I
struggle to make decisions that
I think have a significant
impact, um, without sort of
having
You know, an opportunity to look
at the analysis and the data
and, and really hear from all of
the stakeholders. Um, so thank
you.
Thank you. uh, Representative, I
don't have anyone else on the
list. I just wanted to, to make
a, a final point here that this
is all a vote here would be in
approving the rules would merely
be, uh, supporting the the board
itself is the ultimate authority
here in adopting the rules and
so this committee is merely
saying this is we support
contingent on your final, um,
Final approval and, um, I think
we, we have indicated many, many
of us, I think, have indicated
that there's a huge crisis in
New Mexico and.
It is time to do something
that's um that thinks out of the
box that we can, uh, take a
little bit more of a of a role
in ensuring that if it's 400 and
4 200, 450 people in the state
that get help that's, that's 450
people that don't have homes
today and you know, that's a
lot. I can't imagine what it's
like to not have a home and not
being able to afford one just
because you.
2 or $3 above the threshold,
you're thrown out of the out of
the box there and the
possibility of being able to
qualify, and I think one of the
things that convinced me in this
in supporting this is that.
It's up to.
It's not automatic 200%. It's up
to based on the needs based on
the area median income of that
specific area, and, um, and also
it only impacts the part of
funding that is state funding
and other sources, not any
federal funds and um and so I
think that um because it's a
rule and not in statute, it
would be
Easier if in the future, like
you do anything else, you
analyze things and come before
this committee to change the
rules, right, or to ask us to do
something different, that's what
you're doing now, so on one hand
we're asking you to make a huge
difference to have a huge impact
to show us that it's making a
huge difference because the need
is huge.
And because of that, we need to
support.
You to be able to do your work
and, um, and then look at it as
time goes by like you do other
things as we said, and analyze
and get more data as time goes
by too and uh and come back and
show the the committee and the
legislature, but I want you to
pass on my thanks to your board,
and I want to recognize Rebecca
Wurtzberger here. She is from
the MFA board, and thank you for
serving Rebecca, uh, Rebecca
used to be a city councilor in
Santa Fe for many years and
Do many other great things.
Thank you, uh, but I just want
to thank the board for all their
hard work in this and and other
areas, so, um.
With that in mind, uh, yes, oh,
you have your hand up, Rebecca,
please, yes, please. Thank you.
that
I think every board member
should have to come to this
meeting, OK? So, and I will say
that this has been very
informative for me. This came
before our my committee, which I
chair the contracts committee,
only 2 days ago and I recognized
the, you know, our intense
desire to continue to move,
doing as much as possible as we
can so your conversation has
been very helpful, particularly
with respect to data and the
kind of information that we want
to base our decisions.
And so on and I can just assure
you I think if the board meeting
that this there will be a
discussion about this further
and I feel very confident that
we'll be able to come up with a
solution that will move us
forward and maybe we can work
with staff on really doing a
further operational definition
of the metrics, uh, for the
timeline of a one year as
opposed to a two year as opposed
to a 3 year and how we can
report that back to the next
committee, so I said I wouldn't
speak, but here I am thank you.
and again I thank you for all of
your support.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that, Rebecca. Just confirms
that that um it's, it's not set
in stone. It is something that
can be continuously worked on
and discussed, so.
With that in mind, uh, may we
have a motion to adopt the
rules, um, OK, there's a motion
on the floor by Senator
Gonzalez, do we have a second to
adopt the rules. All right.
Let's see. I'll second that
motion, um, how many?
OK. Representative Montoya, can
we have you stop for just a
second so we can, uh, oops,
you're talking away here let's
see hello.
Representative Montoya, there's
a motion on the floor to adopt
the rules, uh, OK, I'll let him
second it then a motion by
Senator Gonzalez, second by
Representative Montoya, um, all
in favor signified by saying I,
I.
OK, there's 3 opposed.
No. OK, there's one opposed.
Thank you.
Right? So you've gotta do pass
on the rules and uh.
Go from there.
Thank you.
and you
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
I'll, I'll have, uh, our other,
uh, chiefs join me up here I'll
play a role in this as well with
the, the benchmarks and that we
realize we're running a little
bit behind the schedule, so
we'll, uh, kind of quickly go
through some of these, but we
think it's important to, uh,
kind of show you the, uh, the
production, uh, and, uh, we are,
you know, very grateful to our
staff that does a great job
throughout the year, uh, and,
uh, equally grateful to all the
partners that we have across the
state that without them we
wouldn't be able to deliver the.
these programs at the at the
local level so behind that tab 4
you'll see our annual production
updates. I'll give you some
highlights here, uh, if you go
to that, uh, first page. First
of all, I want to highlight that
the last couple of times that
we've made presentations on our
production I've mentioned that,
uh, we have one county that we
had not been able to serve,
which was Harding County and uh
our goal, that was the only
county where we had not uh
provided a service or a program,
uh, and we're very happy to
report that.
one house got weather ice there
at the end of September. So now
we have uh, you know, all the
map colored in in different
colors there depending on how
much we've done in each of those
counties, so, uh, it's very
important for us to be a
statewide agency and serve all
the counties out there so this
last year on that slide you'll
see that we were able to assist
over 22,000 families, actually
22,612 with the various programs
that we have, uh, if you go on
to the next page, uh, gives you
some example.
on the development or the rental
side, uh, and some single family
homes, but that, that is heavily
weighted on the rental side over
2900 homes were built or
rehabbed.
A couple of examples that you'll
have there we did a single
family development loan, uh, in,
uh, Roswell for El Toro
community 29 uh different uh
affordable housing units there.
We also had, uh, something that
we are very proud of and we
really strive to do is work more
on tribal lands we've been very
successful there. Uh, the next
example you'll see there is El
Paraje apartments 2 single or 2
families in Laguna, uh, Pueblo,
this was a rental development
there, so, uh, as an example, if
you go
on to the next page.
This is our preservation program
over 1000 homes were preserved
there and you have some examples
here, uh, in Rio Reba County,
uh, the North Central Economic
Development District where I was
able to replace a manufactured
home there, uh, so we have uh
1000 other examples if you will
there be in that particular
category.
The next page, uh, you'll see
our home ownership
opportunities. We were able to
assist over 21, almost 2200
families that became my
homeowners, um.
You'll see the other number
there, the 4800 that includes uh
loans as well, but that's when
you include the down payment
assistance loans in addition to
the, uh, the first mortgages,
um, and then, uh, we also have a
mortgage assistance program.
Robin mentioned earlier, uh, or
Eon Doty actually that one of
our programs closed earlier this
year, the homeownership
assistance fund, we're able to
assist 1700 families this last
year, and I think total during
the life of that program, it was
4500 families that were assisted
with mort.
assistants,
um.
We launched our 3rd mortgage
program which is the down
payment assistance program we
mentioned a little earlier at
$10,000 and that's really helped
a lot of families become
homeowners.
Next page, uh, on the creating
stable housing environments. We
provided a housing vouchers to
over 6100 families with the
various programs, uh, and those
folks that were homeless and
homeless prevention we assisted
close to 6000 individuals there,
uh, something that is, uh, or
one program that is fairly new
to us and it is HUD funding as a
recovery housing program, uh, so
you'll see a little blurb on
that there on the right hand
side, new.
program and uh the Hoo Center,
um, is, uh, you know, I think
that one is in uh Gallup where
we're able to provide some
funding there to assist homeless
individuals that are suffering
from substance abuse disorders
and or experiencing
homelessness.
Next slide, uh, kind of speaks
to what Senator Rodriguez
mentioned a little bit earlier
on the housing trust fund over a
27 year period or a 17-year
period, we received a, uh.
Over 17 year period we received
$27 million so we weren't even
averaging $2 million a year
until when we started receiving
the recurring funds and some one
time appropriations, which is
really propelled us and helped
us do a lot more in meeting
those needs out there. You'll
also see there on the right hand
side of the chart that uh some
of the projections that we
received from LFC is that the
recurring funds, which is 2.5%
of the severance tax bond
capacity is projected to go up.
This year we received $34
million. It's projected that
next year may be $46 million and
kind of hold steady in that
area, so, uh, definitely some,
some great funding doesn't quite
meet all the need out there
actually far from it, but it
definitely helps us get much
further than.
We had in the past
The next slide just talks to the
leverage of the program. It is
required to be leveraged 3 to 1
by the act that we're currently
at 17.1% leverage.
The next slide, uh, something
that we're very proud of, uh,
slide 8 is the performance
metrics. We'll mention that uh
in a six month period, uh, we've
had $122 million being allocated
to the housing Trust Fund, uh,
and actually 84 million, almost
85 million of that was became
available to us on July 1, which
is what, 4 months ago, uh, to
us, uh, and based on those
numbers there, we have
83% of that $122 million has
been procured. That's $100
million 70% has been awarded.
That's the $85 million that I'll
give you more details on in a
little bit, uh, 10% expended,
uh, I'm sorry, 18% expended and
is uh when you look at that the
vast majority of that fund has
been available to us for only 4
months. It kind of gives you the
need out there and the capacity
that our partners have across
the state to be able to expend
these funds and put it to good
use.
The next slide, uh, kind of
gives you uh on that $85 million
that has been awarded that kind
of gives you a breakdown of
where that money has gone, uh,
so you'll see there that the
majority of that is on the, the
down payment assistance to our
first-time home buyers. You'll
see some rental development
taking a big chunk of that as
well and then some other funding
sources there, uh, in in other
areas.
With that, I'm gonna turn it
over to the team here who is not
gonna go over all 31 benchmarks
or goals that the board sets for
us, they're each going to touch
on just 3 of them. I, I will say
that, uh, this is something that
our, our board has approved a
strategic plan under that
strategic plan, we have goals
and objectives, uh, and then we
have benchmarks that are set
every year. We report to the
board on a quarterly basis on
those benchmarks and then at the
end of the year so uh remember
Werzberger here has seen this,
uh, she will not see.
This presentation or the rest of
the board members will see it on
Wednesday of next week. She'll
be the only one that'll hear
this presentation in uh in
advance because we are due to
present to him next week with uh
the performance on those, uh,
benchmarks and so with that I'll
turn it over I think Jeff is
going first in covering one or
two goals, and we'll kind of go
bat it around a little bit so we
can go and order for you so
we're on page 11, um, the
strategic plan.
Uh, benchmark number one, we had
a goal of a serving 1800 home
buyers, we, uh, didn't, uh,
anticipate, uh, how strong
demand would be this year, we
Served actually the, the number
on your um.
In your uh packet is, uh,
It was as of the end of August
but as the end of September, as
I mentioned earlier, it's 2,186
households.
The 3rd, uh, benchmark was to
finance the development and or
preservation of 1800 rental and
homeownership units, we were
able to exceed that goal with,
uh, 100827 units.
Donna, you want to go next? It's
number 4?
it
He
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. So
I'm going to cover benchmark
number 4, which was to maintain
a 35% exit rate in the homeless
management Information System.
This is of people, uh,
experiencing homelessness that
were moved to permanent support
or permanent housing through
our, uh, emergency solutions
grant programs, which are the
emergency homeless assistance
program and the Rapid rehousing
and Homeless Prevention program.
So this benchmark was met, um, I
just wanted to mention that this
benchmark is always very
difficult because people exit
the homeless programs for
various reasons. Sometimes it's
termination over income. If they
move out of state or they just
kind of disappear, um, or they
find other housing
opportunities. So agencies don't
always know where their final
destination is, so sometimes
it's hard to report, um,
regarding the, um,
The emergency housing assistance
program, a lot of the people
enter shelters, like an
overnight shelter and they stay
for a couple nights and never
return. So staff, um, really
doesn't know where, where they
have gone, so that, that's what
always makes this benchmark very
difficult.
5, and this is related to the
delinquencies. We have a large
portfolio of loans that we
service, and we always set a
threshold that a delinquency is
not going to go over.
9.5% and for this goal we've met
the objective, and we have
varied between 6.82 to 8.42
throughout the quarters, and we
do everything in our capacity to
have loss mitigation training,
talked to this group of
demographics which are on the
delinquent bucket and, uh, and
we are happy to state that we
are lower than the delinquency
target that we set.
Um, the other one that I'm going
to go over with you is benchmark
number 7, which is we had just
to keep ourselves refreshed and
to keep at par with the new
products coming in with the new
business model and adjusting to
it to the financial tools. We
had a benchmark to do at least 6
new products or business model
or tools to impact MFA, and we
are happy to state that we have
achieved that goal. We have a
new grant management software
that we're implementing now
called Amplifant.
We've done a lucid chart which
gives the process maps pointing
out the internal controls, so
it's much stricter process, uh,
controlling our processes. We
have started the new tax exempt
and taxable bond deals for the
first time in MFA's history. In
this year, we had the land title
Trust Fund,
no, uh, promoted and, you know,
improved. We are also looking at
another couple of new softwares
called Prolink for Litech, which
is used on a national basis.
And also Clearwater analytics
for our bond portfolio because
our bond portfolio is getting
really large, close to $2
billion.
And I will cover benchmark
number 8, which was to achieve
8400 social media engagements.
So we exceeded the benchmark and
achieved 18,597 engagements. And
so an engagement, these are
actual responses to our social
media posts. So depending on the
platform, um, these include
likes, comments, shares,
clicking on links, saves, um,
and replies to stories.
Benchmark number 16. This is the
only one benchmark out of the 31
that we didn't achieve, but
there is a very good valid
reason why we didn't this
benchmark was set to show our
balance sheet strength of having
a fraction of net assets over
the total bonds outstanding, so
it was a fraction of
mathematically it was difficult
for us, our objective was set at
24.82, but we've varied between
23.81 to 23.57, so we were close
to that.
Uh, target that we set, but we
quite didn't achieve it because
our bond production was very
high this year. It was 570
million, so in that fraction,
the denominator got much bigger
than the net assets, so it was a
good thing that we've done our
production of bonds increase,
but we didn't quite get to this
fraction. However, I just want
to mention that for Moody's,
who's our rating agencies for
the housing Finance Authorities,
their threshold is 20%, so we
are way over that.
actual national threshold, but
we quite didn't meet the target
that we set for ourselves.
20s,
Um, so, and I'll cover benchmark
number 20 that was to earn 100%
base fees for the project-based
contract administration program.
This was met, this PBCA, um, is
our contract with HUD to perform
various oversight activities of
the HUD Section 8 properties. So
there are 80, I believe 86
section 8 properties in the
state and some of these tasks
include, um, performing
management occupancy.
reviews, um, processing rental
adjustments, and we review and
verify the monthly, um, section
8 vouchers, corrective actions,
health and safety issues, um,
and general reporting
requirements.
And then I'll, I'll, uh,
Go over benchmark number 26.
On page 16 for our information
technology department, we have
vulnerability scans. Our goal
was to be at, uh, or above 780,
uh, in our actual, uh, what we
achieved was 817. You can think
of that as like a credit score
for IT and being scanned for
vulnerability.
So, uh, we're very happy about
that.
Madam Chair, uh, these are all
the ones that we were planning
on highlighting 9 out of the 31,
but definitely uh we can take
questions on any of those 9 or
any of the others that uh we did
not highlight.
So we're prepared to take any
questions that you may have.
Thank you, Izzy and staff, um, I
don't have any questions. Anyone
else, Senator Gonzalez, you do
if no one, did you have any
questions? Yes, Representative
Borego has a question and then
Senator Gonzalez wants to make
a.
OK,
thank you.
Said Representative, thank you
guys. That was very
comprehensive, um, so I just had
a quick question about, um, do
you guys track disabled, um, you
know, individuals and, and also
veterans, cause I didn't see
that in the report, so I just
wondered if you guys have any
breakdown on any of that?
Madam Chair and Representative
Borego, we do not specifically
track uh folks that are disabled
or veterans. I, I can tell you
that, uh, for our homeownership
program, they're eligible for
our programs and I know we do
make homes to people that are
disabled and veterans, but I
don't know that we're collecting
that data, uh, we would be able
to tell if we have any VA loans,
but there may be folks that
take, uh, our mortgages that uh
without a VA mortgage they could
get a conventional or an FHA
mortgage, so not, not sure that
that would be a good measure.
measurement, but I think Jeff
was going to make a comment.
The same thing as we can, we can
track the veterans' loans that
we do, but I don't think we
disabled individuals.
OK, I'm just, uh, I just think
it might be a good idea in the
if, if I don't know if it's not
too much trouble, but I think
it'd be kind of good to know,
um, because, you know, often
veterans are, um, you know, they
don't have enough money from the
income that they that they
obtain as veterans and just FYI
we just, you know, the two
amendments that were on the
ballot, um,
Um, for, um,
Tax relief, um, for home
ownership was specifically
targeted to veterans and
disabled veterans, and it, it
increased the amount that they
could, um, write off on their,
on their homes, so it might be
moving forward, it might be a
good idea if you
Cause it'd be good good gauge
for us to see how many of those
individuals also come to, um,
the mortgage Finance Authority,
so I just thought I'd mention
that. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative to be
a co-sponsor, by the way those
bills. Thank you. Thank you for
your work. OK, I think this is
just an informational item,
right? Anyone else have any
questions or comments on this
item, Senator Gonzale, yes, on
the benchmarks. Thank you.
Proceed, Senator, thank you,
Madam Chair, I was just gonna
ask.
So on the benchmarks on the ones
that are not met, do you come
back to them, or how do you work
with that?
Madam Chair and uh Senator, uh,
Gonzalez, we will report to our
board uh with the benchmarks
that weren't met in this case
one, we do set new benchmarks.
We actually set the benchmarks
already that became effective on
October 1st, our board approved
those benchmarks in September,
uh, so the board looks at these
on a quarterly basis, and we can
make adjustments to them, but,
uh, I can tell you that that
particular benchmark, we still
have it in there to try to
attain it this uh this coming
year, uh, that one is one that,
uh, in this case we
I think it's a a good uh thing
that we did not meet it because
the reason we didn't meet is
because we had a higher
production and we issued more
bonds, um, which brought that uh
that uh.
That percentage down, but our
board does look at these and uh
resets these benchmarks uh on a
regular basis.
Thank you, uh, man. I just have
one more question, and this was
to the very beginning of the
presentation of director.
Is so on the manufactured.
Homes. Uh, how much do we do of
that?
Madam Chair, in Senator
Gonzalez, when a punt to Jeff
here a little bit. I don't know
if we have current information.
I know that last year at one
point looked at some statistics
and I think 15% of our
production was to manufactured
homes, but I don't know what
that currently is. I will tell
you that we've been in
discussions, recent discussions
with the uh manufactured housing
association, uh, with some ideas
to not only do onesies and
twosies, you know, as people
come in to get a mortgage loan
for a manufactured house.
But maybe doing some subdivision
type development with
manufactured house too, so
that's uh something that we're
working on to hopefully uh get
some traction and do that, but
I'll turn it over to Jeff, Madam
Chair and Senator Gonzalez, the,
uh, I, off the top of my head, I
don't know the number of
manufactured homes that we've
done, but we have made some
important changes to increase
that, uh, by allowing single
section.
Manufactured homes and we've
been, uh, we're
Uh, there's not a lot of
lenders, uh, allow that, but we,
we do.
Uh, we've also, as Izzy
mentioned, we held 3, training
sessions with the New Mexico
manufactured Housing
Association, specifically with
uh, developers, um, about doing
single family manufactured
house, um, subdivisions
throughout the state and uh
we're hoping that because of
that training that we provided,
that there are some developers
that seemed like they were in
process that they'll come to us.
Uh, for us to be able to help
them with financing.
Uh, those, uh, subdivisions.
And Senator, one other thing
that I'll mention is that uh
For a manufactured house loan,
we do not offer us different
rate or a higher rate, as most
financing institutions or banks
do for manufactured house. We
offer the same interest rate for
site-built home as we do for our
manufactured house, which is a
great advantage, I think in some
cases we've seen where the
interest rates are generally
higher by 2 or 3%.
I'm sure the, the less parties,
so, so are some of those being
built here in our state or do
they come from out of state?
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, the manufactured
homes themselves, that Madam
Chair and Senator Gonzalez,
there are a couple of factories
in the state, I think we have a
Carston or Homes Direct that is
here in Albuquerque, I believe
there's a couple of other, at
least one other entity, is it in
the southeast part of the state,
gently.
In Roswell, there's a modular
home builder was builttwise,
which is different than a
manufactured house, but I
believe there's one other
manufacturer in the state as
well, aside from uh.
Caco that's uh that's here in
town.
Thank you and uh Madam Char,
this is just a comment, but um,
I've always thought of this and
uh and that uh couple of
community meetings I have
mentioned this, but uh, what a
great opportunity this would be
with economic development.
Together
You know, say for example, like
somewhere like in Questa that
you could start a program with
building homes, uh, they,
they're not too far from rail,
and there's a lot of property
available, plus this is one of
the areas that uh jobs are
really um.
They're needed, you know, uh,
especially after the closure of
um Chevron mine.
And uh, you know, that that's
something that maybe I can
explore a little bit more and
work with it and uh and uh that
would be a very nice thing if
some of this kind of projects
keeping them within our state,
you know, in different parts,
but uh helping especially the
small.
rural communities.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. I always
very um very much involved in in
issues and you make a lot of
sense in the things you said. I
remember many times you have
questioned and, and worked
towards having more housing in
rural communities, but even if
it takes manufactured housing
because that means a home for
someone and in in rural
communities like Taos Questa and
all those areas that are um so
much in need of housing, you
know, I, I'm sure they
appreciate you wholehearted.
That's why you continue to get
reelected, senator.
OK. Thank you, Izzy. I don't
think I have anyone else on the
agenda. We're gonna move on to
the last item, and that is the
um legislative agenda final
review of bills for endorsement.
We have two bills, um, and, uh,
these two bills are brought
before this committee every,
almost every year, uh, one of
them has to do with the
requesting funding. There are 2
appropriations bills. The first
one is request.
in funding for the uh affordable
housing Act to help counties and
cities um with their plans and
and uh development uh and so on,
um, to to make sure that they um
that they comply with the
Affordable Housing Act rules and
regulations and, and all of that
and all that Izzy continued to
explain that the other one is
requesting um.
is requesting $500 million which
I sponsor every year uh to
request funding for the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund,
um, as has been indicated, um,
we don't always get the 500
million, but we do get lately
we've been getting a good amount
and it is leveraged, um, I read
on your booklet now it's being
leveraged to 17 to 1 in return,
it's been leveraged up to 20 and
9 to 1 in the past and so
It brings in an enormous amount
of funding back to the mortgage
Finance Authority for the trust
fund uh for affordable housing,
and so, um, this time I'll let
Izzy explain, uh, because we're
doing something a little
different in the um in the bill
for 500 million to the
Affordable housing Trust Fund
where, um,
We're putting in provisions in
there where 10% of the amount
allocated will be um awarded to
counties and cities,
municipalities, and, and
counties to um to help with the
affordable housing also, uh, in
their plans and their in the
affordable housing developments
that they're working on and I'll
let Izzy talk about the
specifics on that. I think
that's a very good approach,
Izzy, though I will not be.
He, uh, to sponsor the bill this
coming year, um.
I know that Senator Gonzalez has
always been the sponsor of the
first one on the 500,000 for the
um for the affordable housing
Act, um, and, um, and then he
has been, um, he has requested
and I agreed to have him as the
primary sponsor of the um the
one for 500 million for the
Affordable Housing Act, so I
mean affordable housing Trust
Fund, I apologize. Thank you,
Izzy, I'll let you proceed. I
just wanted to give a short
synopsis.
Thank you, Madame Chair, I, I
think, uh, you covered, uh, most
of the points here. I will say
that we've been in, uh, well,
first of all, I want to thank uh
Christina for uh drafting the
bill, uh, late yesterday, so we
didn't get it till late
yesterday. Uh, she's been
working hard at, uh, putting
this together, so uh thank you,
Christina for just uh uh just
being available and flexible and
and working on the bill, uh,
we'll say that the, the idea on
the set of side came after
talking to uh to some partners
that we have, uh, that, uh,
obviously there's a need across
the state and
Being able to provide a a set of
site to the local governments
would be very beneficial. We
still have them meet the uh
obviously the housing trust fund
rules, and some of the
additional details would be put
in a procurement probably a
request for proposals where we
would prioritize,
you know, uh, money or give
additional points to local
governments that have expedited
or streamlined entitlement
process, those that are shovel
ready, um, those that may.
be able to leverage at a higher
percentage than the 3 to 1, so
those are things that we'd be
doing, uh.
The, if you look at the 2nd page
of behind tab uh 5, you'll see
some projections from our staff,
uh, on what we think is
realistic and what we could, uh,
if we had the additional monies
available, how much money we
could use in each of the areas
there. If you add up all of the
categories there for 2025. Uh,
we see the ability to use uh
$246 million in assist close to
5000 families with those funds.
that that would increase by a
percentage up in uh uh 2026 to
assisting 11,000 families with
about $541 million in that we
see as the money becomes
available, the capacity has
increased and that's been proven
over the last couple of years
when we were only receiving a
couple million dollars a year,
jumped up to, you know, the $37
million and those monies are out
the door, uh, so the capacity
increases as the moneys become
available and we see a gradual
increase.
and capacity and being able to
deliver.
Uh, housing units, if you will,
as the money becomes available
to us, so we see that increasing
um and so I, I'll kind of turn
it over to Robin, see if she has
anything else that she may want
to, uh, uh, include, uh, as far
as talking points on this. No, I
think on that particular bill,
uh, Madam Chair, we're, uh, able
to take any questions at this
point or if you want us to go
into the uh affordable housing
Act when we can do that too at
this point. Yes, Izzy, I think
what we'll do is we'll vote on
them individually, so before I
do, Senator Tipino.
had a question or a comment,
right, Senator? Thank you, Madam
Chairman, and thank you, uh,
Robin and Izzy, uh, that, that,
uh, set aside for the
municipalities and the counties
includes the kind of language
that might help with the zoning
issue. I mean, you, you, you
specifically identify zoning who
have expedited, uh, zoning
processes, um.
A little, you know, that might
be the vehicle we could use
instead of coming down with a
hammer, dangled the carrot, uh,
uh, if you want to get access to
some of these monies.
Find ways to make your zoning uh
less restrictive, that, that
might be the, the vehicle to
use. I think that's a good
thing. Thank you for putting
that in there, um, I wanted to
ask a question though about the,
the, the, the chart on, uh,
under, you know, the, that shows
the impact, the potential impact
of the funding.
Uh, so, so this would, so those
figures.
Or for the same 500 million,
it's not if you get 500 million
this year and 500, that's for
500 million, you'd only be able
to spend a portion of it in 20
calendar 25.
Madame Chair and Senator TCP
know that is, uh, correct. So
then, so then you still have a
lot left over for 26 and 27,
potentially 28, even the, you
know, as it carries forward if
you're not able to spend it all.
Madam chair and Senator TCP, no,
the, the hope is, uh.
That, uh, if we are successful
with a $500 million I think it
would take 2 years, 2 to 3 years
for us to be able to use the
full funding there. It will also
generate some of that program
income to start growing the
funds some in addition to the
recurring funds that were
projecting at about $46 million
for next year, uh, so if you
look at the uh projected uh
demand or production in uh 27,
uh, which is at $865 million so
that $500 million.
won't get us there, uh, but, uh,
maybe with some of the
programming coming in some
future, uh, allocations to the
housing Trust Fund, you know,
we, we can get there, get a
little closer to that, so, so,
Madam Chairman, then I, I was
misinterpreting that then, so
this is actually expenditure
from the fund, not just all the
matching that would come in as
well.
Madama chair and Senor Tippio,
that is uh correct.
So another, another
column on your, on your chart
could show the impact in terms
of the full amount that 3 to 1.
Or greater in some of the
programs would generate, so
we're really talking about
potentially several billion
dollars of housing money getting
spurred by this bill if it were
to pass.
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Tippio, that is correct. This
what we show in this table here
is just the actual housing trust
fund monies being used as not
take into account the other
leverage sources that would come
into complete that particular uh
development, if you will.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister.
Thank you very much and I'm
happy to, to see that this is a
perfect example of what we were
talking about. Thank you,
Senator Ortizipino for
mentioning that about the
zoning, the language about
zoning and so on with counties
and cities because this is an
impetus to continue to invite,
uh, the, the partners, the
stakeholders to be at the table
to work together, um, as a team.
Uh, in not in competition, but
as a team to work together to
develop more affordable housing
throughout the state. So thank
you very much for that. Um, and,
um, I think that's all I have. I
don't have have any questions.
We're ready for a motion for an
endorsement and that is so
to endorse the 0.229115.3 SA.
motion on the floor by Senator
Gonzalez, a second by
Representative Meredith Dixon
and do we have any?
signified by saying I
I opposed to anyone opposed?
Thank you. Thank you for that,
Senator, and you have a do pass
on the endorsement for that one,
then we can go on to the next
one, and that is the one for
the, uh, affordable housing Act,
and we haven't received much
money on that. In fact, in a
long time, we request every year
a Senator Gonzalez's bill, um,
has been that, and we have not
received much funding. Hopefully
we'll succeed this coming year.
So tell us Izzy, and then we'll.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
will back up just a little bit
and make a comment and say that
that carrot approach on the
housing trust fund and
incentivizing, uh, local
governments was not an original
Tata, you know, we borrowed some
of that language, I think
Representative Dixon with the
Opportunity Enterprise when they
had some language in there, and
I know that the governor's
office also played a role in
shaping that. So, uh, we thought
it was a very good idea to have
that carrot approach, so we
borrowed some of that language
from there, so, uh, um, just
wanted to make you aware of
that.
With the uh uh affordable
housing Act, uh,
This is one that you're correct,
uh, Madam Chair, that we have
not received any funding for
this, uh, in the recent past,
our intent with this is uh to
use these monies to help local
governments draft housing plans
and ordinances, so they are
eligible to uh donate towards
affordable housing, uh, I think
that'll be hopefully a small
portion of what we're doing, I
think a bigger portion of how we
use those funds, uh, is to help
those local governments that
currently
have housing plans and
ordinances in place to help them
implement those plans, and I
think the at last count we had
about 39 different local
governments that have ordinances
and housing plans, and I would
say that maybe a dozen of those
have actually implemented their
plans, so there's a, a lot of
room for improvement there and
having another 20 or so local
governments actually implement
their plans and we would plan on
using these funds to help them
get there.
Thank you, Izzy, um, any
questions or comments on that.
I, I just wanted to mention
before we go on for a motion
that uh a few years ago, several
years ago, actually, we passed a
law that established the
Affordable Housing Act in the
provision, main provision in
there is to exempt local
governments and municipalities
from the anti-donation clause
because many times what happens
is that they're sitting on some
land or empty buildings or
something like that.
they can't donate it if we
didn't provide for this
particular um provision in the
law then they would have no
exemption. And so, um, this
really helped in that. Now that
also provides us an impetus to
work together for them to be
able to donate land and
buildings and other
infrastructure for affordable
housing and you're working
together with them on these
plans and and the way to uh to
um provide and support the
provisions of the Act as we
have them today, so thank you so
much for that and
yes, just a quick, uh, just
clarification, um,
infrastructure that would
include if they wanted to put in
place some
sewer lines, water lines,
electric lines, whatever that,
that, that they'd be able to use
this.
Madam Chair and Representative
Montoya, that is correct. OK,
thank you. Thank you. All right,
do we have a motion we endorse
as a committee.
229114.1 SA.
Thank you. We have a motion on
the floor and a second by
Representative Dixon, any
opposition?
All right, you got to do pass on
that for endorsement. Thank you
so much and um we will again,
Senator, uh, thank you for being
the primary sponsor every year
of that one and uh other
legislators as we know can
always sign on as um co-signers
but um thank you for being the
primary sponsor on that one and
also for uh taking over the uh
affordable um housing trust fund
bill appropriations bill that I
sponsor every year. Appreciate.
you work and, and all that
you're willing to do. All right,
um, I think we're, we're pretty
much done, Izzy, do I have any,
did I miss something? It seems
like I'm leaving something out
no? Are we finished, Madam
chair, it feels like you're
leaving something out because uh
we finished 13 minutes early and
normally we bleed over a little
bit past 12:30 that's why,
you know, it does uh I would
like to uh extend an invitation
if you want a tour of the
building, we can provide that
and also uh if you are able to,
we'd love to have you for our
listening session at
1:30 as well, so uh thank you
Madam Chair and thank you for
all of you committee members for
your dedication and your support
of MFA or housing New Mexico uh
throughout the year. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you very much,
and before we move on, um, I
wanted to, to thank each member
of this committee. Thank you,
Representative Dixon, and in our
Nuno and of course Senator
Gonzalez who served in this
committee. How long have you
been in this committee for a
long time, and not the 36 years
that you or 46, please. Madam
Chair, one more year than you.
Oh, my goodness. There no wonder
I learned from him. I'm like,
did I say this right?
Thank you for all your
commitments, Senator and hard
work. All righty, um, yes, and
everyone else as I said thank
you, uh, to representative
Montoya for always being here,
um, you're just stalwart. Thank
you so much for that. And again,
Senator Ortizino, we're forever
going to miss you and uh
representative Borego Madam
Chair, I, I, could I take just
one second because I wanted to
clarify something, um, we, and I
will.
everyone to, especially our
chair and uh Senator Tipino
because I've worked with Senator
Ortizipino for like 100 years
when he was at the city, um, and
always taught me so much, but I
just wanted to clarify
something, Madam Chair, before
we adjourn, if I could, because
we keep referring to Colorado's
initiatives and legislation, and
I did a little bit of research
and I wanted to mention that
there were actually 6
initiatives.
There was not one initiative.
There was, there were 6
different bills, um, that passed
and what happened is in 2023,
they proposed a larger
affordable housing package and
it failed. And then in 2024,
they proposed smaller pieces and
there were actually 6 different
bills, and they were uh House
Bill 2413.
housing and transit, House Bill
241152, accessory dwelling
units, House Bill 24 1305,
minimum parking requirements,
House Bill 24, 1175 local
government rights to property
for affordable housing, House
Bill 241007 prohibiting
residential occupancy limit
limits, uh, so changing the
occupancy limits, and then
House Bill 24, 174, which was
dealing with sustainable,
affordable housing assistance,
but I just wanted to clarify
that because we keep talking
about this, you know, this bill
that changed affordable housing.
It was actually 6 bills, and I
just wanted everyone to, to know
that, so, but thank you.
Madam Chair, you're amazing and
uh we're gonna miss you and your
Senator Ortizino. Thank you very
much for bringing that to us. I
didn't know there were 6, but
that's good to know because we
can get them all and look at
them, right? If we don't have to
reinvent wheels, we don't do
that. Thank you. All right,
Representative. Yes, Madam
Chair, before we go, I just
wanted to once again, uh,
recognize the work that Senator
Ortei Pino and the work that
you've done.
And I just appreciate, um, it's
This is one of the few, uh,
places I think that Republican
member and even leader in the
House, loves to be able to come
and see how we can multiply the
effort. I, I, I wish I was, we
were talking earlier and I said,
I wish there was somewhere else
in government that where we
spent money, there was a 17 to 1
match.
To multiply the effort. Um, it
just doesn't exist anywhere.
That's why I think, um, I think,
uh, last year when the, when the
governor's office was looking at
some changes. For me, it was a
little frustrating to see
dollars being taken away for
housing efforts where there was
not going to be a match and it
was gonna be a taken in, and,
and the taxpayer of New Mexico
is going to be solely
responsible. So I, I, the reason
I'm here and the reason I, I
come.
Religiously to this is because
This committee
is an example of how we can do,
how we can multiply a good
effect.
For the citizens of New Mexico,
and I just, I appreciate the
work, Izzy and and Robin, the
work that you guys do here, uh,
it's just.
Um, it's God's work, and I, I
just appreciate that and we have
a lot of needs.
And, uh, in particular in
housing, and I just, um, I
appreciate what you guys have
done, but, uh, before, before he
left, I just wanted to make sure
to let you know how I've
appreciated your work.
on this committee.
Thank you, Representative, and I
want to thank the staff, not
only the MFA staff and the board
again for all your work, but our
staff, Christina and Rick and
Leo and the many others that
work with us throughout the
year, uh, words can't express,
really. I can't imagine sitting
here like this just like this
without you all helping. I
wouldn't be able to do my work.
You are so awesome. Thank you
very much, and I think we
are done, uh, this will be my
last meeting, as we said, but I
may be able to come to the open
house. I'll try my best for that
one and or the next event you
mentioned was it an open house
you're going to have on the an
open house on the 10th of
December at 3 o'clock and uh
we'd love to have you here. We,
we'll even go pick you up if you
want. Oh my goodness, thank you.
Oh my God, no, I need to pick
you up. You're gonna be so tired
of all the working so hard, yes,
thank you very much and I'll do
my best to be here. So you
I'll have a great rest of the
year. I'll see some of you in
other committees. We have LFC
coming up next week, all week
actually, so I'll see
Representative Dixon and Sandra
Gonzalez and others there. Thank
you to all.
