up there. Um, my colleague
Sergio Mata Cisneros is our
government relations manager.
Um, he's here today, as is my
colleague, Katie Anderson.
Thank you so much, Katie
Anderson. I'm the vice president
of Strategy Partnerships and
advocacy at Roadrunner Food
Bank. Uh, we cover 16 county
direct service area with
commodities, as well as
providing support to an
additional 8 counties, uh, in
our beautiful state, and I'm
pleased to be joined by Jason
Riggs, who is our director of
public policy and advocacy at
Road Rider.
I'm also joined today by my
daughter Avalon, who's sitting
behind me in the in the hat, so
this is her first time observing
government inaction, so it's
part of her civics lesson for
the day.
Um, we are here as
representatives from New Mexico
Association of Food Banks to
talk about the issue of hunger,
particularly as it pertains to
our active duty military members
and to veterans. Um, we'd like
to give you an update about what
the statistics look like.
Obviously that's a bit dire. And
we also want to make sure that
we talk about what's next.
And ways that we can partner to
improve lives for veterans and
active duty military members and
their families.
So with that, I get the duty of
bearing all the bad news at the
very outset. First and foremost,
I want you to know that the New
Mexico Association of Food
Banks, which is made up of 5
food banks that cover all 33
counties in New Mexico, which
I'll go into in a second.
We have a line item included in
HCA's budget right now for $100
million for food purchase. Um,
that's sitting there as a
special line, uh, non-recurring
funding that we are hoping that
after hearing the severity of
the hunger issues across our
state, you will be in favor of
supporting that that gets left
in the budget and survives all
the way through to signature. So
that's our ultimate ask for the
day.
With that said, um, in the first
slide of your slide deck, you
can see that we sort of have an
overview about the definition of
food insecurity, which is when
there is a lack of consistent
access to nutritious food, um,
that a person needs to live an
active, healthy lifestyle. Um,
you can see that there's a
number of different definitions
of food insecurity and it exists
on a spectrum like most things,
um, all the way from starvation,
famine level, hunger to general
uncertainty about where your
next meal might be coming from.
In New Mexico 15.2% of people
are food insecure. Moving on to
the next slide there.
And can see some demographics
here about what populations are
most vulnerable.
And contrary to some opinion,
um, it is actually our seniors
our children that are most
dramatically affected. That
makes sense in families with
children, expenses are high. It
also makes sense in senior
populations who retired on a
fixed income and the cost of
living has just exploded. Um, so
that fixed income is no longer
enough. In the working age
bracket from 19 to 59, that only
represents about 1.8% of all
food insecure people. So we
Really see our children and our
elders being most impacted by
that and that of course heavily
among veteran populations as
well.
Going on to the next slide. I
don't sticky fingers today.
There's incredible consequences
to folks going hungry beyond an
immediate experience and how we
feel about something as central
to our lives is food being
missing from someone. There's a
huge intersection between health
and hunger. Um, not just
physical health, although we see
higher rates of obesity,
diabetes, heart disease. We also
see social.
behavioral and emotional health
impacts from in folks who
experience food insecurity on a
regular basis. Higher rates of
anxiety, depression,
interpersonal conflict,
substance use disorder, you name
it, those are the kind of
conditions that we see in where
that is present. That is
especially true among our
military members who might be
struggling with post-traumatic
stress disorder when you at food
insecurity into the mix. All of
these forces just make
situations even worse.
Everything is connected, food
insecurity doesn't exist in a
vacuum. It is related of course,
to pie and a lack of resources,
so you see not just food
insecurity existing all by
itself is one thing we need to
solve in order to solve hunger
and solve food insecurity. We
need to look at a whole system
that
Ultimately, hunger is a policy
choice. It's the policies we
make that either alleviate
hunger or exacerbate hunger, and
those are related to the
economic.
Ability of a household to
provide for itself.
We know for a fact that children
who are food insecure do not
perform as well as their peers
growing up. That's true of the
children in the families of our
service members. Um, especially
as they overcome some
challenges, relocation and
PCSing, they also, if food
insecurity is thrown into the
mix, they feel even more
uncertain. They have higher
rates of poor performance in
school, um, absenteeism, lack of
graduation, and it is a complete
Picture of impact the future.
I promised that I would talk
about our food banks and how
they're structured. So if you go
to the next, you really want to
look at the map because it's so
hard to talk this out loud, um,
state funding comes to the food
banks in one big lump in it's
administered through our
contract, um, with the state of
New Mexico through our
commodities contract. We all
have a set percentage um based
on the number of persons in need
that we serve on that map you
can see the yellow is what the
counties that the food depot
serves in
Northern New Mexico, red
highlights wrote on her food
bank. You'll see echo up there
basically in the corner with
Farmington, the community pantry
serving McKinley and Grant's and
the Food Bank of Eastern New
Mexico, based out of Clovis
handling some of those counties
over in the furthest eastern
part of the state. We all work
together, we serve our own
areas, we try to pool resources,
do shared purchasing as often as
possible.
And we acquire food through a
variety of sources. One is
through USDA commodities, the
TFAT program. Another is through
purchasing food in bulk and
another is through accepting as
many donated resources as
possible, both from grocery
stores, growers, food
manufacturers, and networking
with the Feeding America network
to bring as much food as
possible into the state.
And with that, Katie is going to
dive in a little bit more about
active duty military families
and prevalence of hunger there.
Thank you, Jill, so much.
So food insecurity is a
challenge and an issue among
veteran veterans and military
families across the country, not
just in New Mexico. Um, it is
believed that they face food
insecurity at twice the rate of
the general public, um, in 2019,
it was 1 in 8, and in 2023, it
is now 1 in 5, so we are
absolutely seeing a rise in the
number of veterans and military
families that are experiencing
hunger issues.
Some of the most common reasons
for food insecurity on the next
page, um.
The pay is a challenge,
particularly for enlisted
personnel. We'll talk a little
bit more about that in a moment.
Um, obviously making it hard to
buy groceries, especially um if
there are children in the house,
there's that theme again of, of
working families with children.
Um, it can be very difficult to
find jobs. Obviously the
partners of of military members
may have a very challenging time
finding jobs in the area,
particularly after a PCS.
Um, there are a lot of places
where there aren't a lot of
stores nearby. Many of our bases
are in a situation where they're
not located close to food
access, and that can be a real
challenge.
Um, like a lot of other people
when they're unexpected expenses
that come up for families that
can be really damaging and
difficult to overcome sometimes
for long periods of time.
And then oftentimes uh military
family members don't actually
qualify for food assistance
programs. I'm going to talk
about that a little bit more,
um, because they're considered
to have too much income.
So this is also a challenge
absolutely for uh for military
families.
Moving on to the next, I wanted
to point out that we focused, we
focused pretty heavily on the
Air Force because that is the
greatest number of enlisted, um,
personnel within our state with
the recognition that there are
other bases in our state, um,
but that is really where the
vast majority of enlisted
personnel are located.
Um, as you can see here in 2022,
there were 13,439 individuals
serving in the Air Force in our
state, uh, 7200 of those were
enlisted airmen E1 through E4.
Um, and then additionally, there
are quite a few dependents. Um,
we're thinking approximately
7200 dependents rely on 7200
enlisted airmen, so really a
huge number of people are
impacted, particularly when
we're talking about uh enlisted
personnel in our, in our state
and then below that is kind of
the estimation of how many the
children and ages that we're
seeing, you can see a huge
number of children ages 0
through 5.
In the household of an enlisted
personnel member.
Moving on to SNAP eligibility.
Uh, this is, uh, from the Air
Force, um, website, calling out
exactly what E1 through E4
airmen make, um,
Both monthly and then annually
next to it. Um, before October
1, 165% for SNAP in New Mexico,
a single E1 would barely
qualify, earning $24,849
annually,
um, at 200% that cut off now
that we have moved as a state to
200%, that cutoff will now be at
30,120 and it isn't going to
include
all E1 and E2 per single
personnel. So that is going to
be a huge help and support to
those community members, those
enlisted airmen were very
excited about that. Um, and
obviously for those with
dependents, there's going to be
a lot more flexibility.
Um, also calling out real
quickly here that, um, tens of
thousands across the country of
military families are ineligible
for SNAP because they're BAH is
counted as income, so that can
actually be a pretty major I'm
seeing definitely some nodding
heads can be a pretty major
challenge for community members
for enlisted airmen.
And that's an area where policy
change can have a really heavy
influence, um, just simply
changing that particular rule
would increase eligibility for
SNAP and let people make their
own food purchase decisions.
Thank you, Jill so much.
Um, and the next page, I won't
spend too much time on this one,
but cost of living, um, this is
based on the MIT living wage
calculator, and this is the cost
of living for three of our
largest Air Force bases, um, as
you can see here for single
adult, obviously 2 adults, um,
one working and one child, two
adults both working and 2
children. Um, if you even look
at the single adult number, it
is um E1 through E4 is not.
Um, does not reach those levels.
So those individuals are facing
a pretty challenging situation
within those communities.
I'll move on to the next year.
Uh, the military family advisory
Network, um, which has an
incredible, uh, has done some
incredible studies around hunger
and food insecurity has also
looked at family well-being, um,
and for those recommending
military life. And one of the
things that they found between
between 2021 and 2023, uh, was
that the number of people in the
military and military families
who indicated that they had
excellent.
Well-being dropped pretty
dramatically from 41.3% to
27.9%.
And also the number of people,
uh, respondents recommending a
career in military life also
dropped. And they talked a
little bit more about why that
was the case, why those were the
findings, and I will share those
with you on the next page.
So the components of well-being
for these families, um, included
all of these things listed here,
emotional, mental well-being,
basic needs, security, safety,
so on and so forth and what was
incredibly clear in this report
is that food insecurity showed
up as a symptom of other
challenges in every single one
of these areas.
Uh, it was 1 in 5,
family respondents who
experience food insecurity in
2023.
And now 1 in 4. And there were
very specific groups that were
called out as being most at risk
for food insecurity I listed,
listed there including families
with children under 18 and those
two PCS in the past two years.
I'm not going to read all these
out to you, but these are some
of the things that we're also
discovered on this next page by
the military family advisory
Network's excellent report, uh,
that 66% had a positive
experience with food support,
which is excellent.
Also shared stories of of having
challenges accessing some things
as we'll see further on, uh,
29.6% did have some negative
experiences with food support,
some of those items were um
having bare shelves in stores,
um, too many processed items,
and struggles finding food that
fit medical conditions, um,
which we talked about that
important connection between
hunger and health, um, when you
can't find the food that's going
to meet the needs for your
family. It can be really
challenging.
In
And then 12.6% um identified
barriers to eligibility or
accessibility of food support,
and many called out the fact
that they were not able to
qualify for Snap or WI based on
the rules in place.
OK, pivoting to our veterans,
um.
I'll say that there's a couple
slides in this that hit pretty
close to home, um, you know,
I've me many members of my
family who are veterans,
particularly of Vietnam era, um,
and some of this even to me sort
of shakes me, um, in a
significant way. Um, there are a
few reasons, you know, income
being one of the biggest ones
obviously for everyone, food
insecurity, people don't just
want to be food insecure. It
usually comes from a place of
economics.
Um, but our veterans have a hard
time returning to civilian life,
uh, transition is notably
difficult and is heavily
documented. Um, so maintaining
well paying jobs, um, having
those post retirement.
disparity, um.
There's definitely a correlation
between to make a study.
Not being food insecure, so that
becomes unstable and suffer um
there's also fully documented
impacts.
Um,
Starting
mental and emotional toll
um particularly deployment has
difficulty that creates in them
being able to be part of
civilian life after the fact.
Going on to the next page, this
gives you a nice breakdown of
sort of where our veterans sit
among the aged from um and was
where they served, um, where
their deployments took place. We
have over 140,000 veterans in
the state of New Mexico, and
this is sort of how they break
out with Vietnam era, obviously
being the most substantial.
When you combine the Gulf War
periods, though the three
lowest, those are sort of
nearing those same numbers as
Vietnam era just for reference
in case you need it, um.
Speaking just personally, my
uncle Michael, my daughter's
middle name is after served
Vietnam era, and he was also in
the Pentagon on 9/11 and he had
profound challenges across his
life and died an early death in
his very early 60s from the
complications of
Inability to adapt to civilian
life, substance use disorders,
profound trauma, lack of
support, um, so I've seen this
play out in my own family where
at times we weren't sure where
he was living and if he was
stable. Um, when you look at the
disability status on the next
page of our veterans. We know
the disability status is heavily
correlated with food insecurity
because of the income
limitations. Um, it's very hard
to hold a steady, well-paying
job when you
have a disability in the way 30%
of our veterans have some sort
of disability. Um, and you can
see there, you know, those of
you, I know Representative
Block, um, Otaro County is
sitting right up at the top for
the number of veterans, um, as
our Cathron and Sierra.
As Katie was mentioning Snap for
military families um is hard,
snap for veterans is difficult
also, um, the burden of that is
just the complexity of the
paperwork. when we see high
rates of and transience among
our veteran populations. It's
very hard in your application
status that you're enrolled in
SNAP that you're receiving those
benefits. There's some
complexities around that. Only
8% of New Mexico's veterans,
12,000.
are actually receiving SNAP
benefits, which is a number of
much, much lower than those who
are food insecure. So even when
they do qualify there's some
serious barriers to making sure
they get those benefits.
I mentioned it before, um, we
see an alarming rate of.
Homelessness among our veterans
and I think in some context,
maybe there's no greater shame
than folks who served our
country being unhoused,
particularly in their later
years, and I think we could all
agree, um, that those who
sacrifice so much.
Um, should be impacted and live
that way and their elders, elder
years. Um, 7% of the population
can claim veteran status, um,
but veterans account for 23% of
the unhoused population in our
state, and I think that
statistics speaks for itself.
The last bullet on that page
just to know, is national
figures. Um, that where it talks
about the department of the
numbers grown to 41,000, so.
Now I promised that we would
have some solutions, as one
should when we present you with
some pretty heavy duty stuff
that way,
um, walk us through some of the
things that we are and some of
the things that we can do in the
future to help reduce food
insecurity among veteran and
military families.
Thank you so much, Joe. Uh, some
things that we want for today,
uh, some of these things are
already happening in some
places, um, and some of these
things are things that we could
really lean into as a state for
both our veteran and military
active duty military and their
families as well. Um, so in
speaking specifically about
active duty personnel, um, some
of the things we could look at
doing a little more effectively
are pantry locations and regular
food distribution events near.
Or on base. Um, there is a
little bit of this going on, but
it absolutely could be a greater
amount. There could be more
availability of food for those
community members.
Uh, school pantries at schools
with high concentrations of
military families, um, in
Albuquerque, we work with
Kirtland Elementary, which has a
large number of uh students that
are whose families are living on
Kirtland, um, and they do a food
distribution every month. Van
Buren Middle School also has
that, and they have a food
distribution every month. So
we've been really active about
reaching out to those schools to
ensure there's food
availability. Um, and then the
families can come into a safe
place that
That they trust and they feel
comfortable in and pick up some
food for their families.
Um, deeper partnerships with
other organizations, um, a
really excellent example is the
military family advisory
Network. There's not a lot of
engagement with that group right
now in the state of New Mexico
and they're absolutely could be.
They're doing incredible work in
Texas, Virginia, a host of other
states, uh, so I, in our
opinion, we think reaching out
as a state and really engaging
more deeply with a group like
them could be incredibly
helpful. Um, and advocating for
Policy changes. There are many,
many policy changes we could
advocate for, uh, a really good
example is extending the
temporary lodging allowance.
Right now, the temporary lodging
allowance for those who PCS is
incredibly short. I think it's 6
weeks, uh, to maybe 2 months,
and it's not a lot of time to
provide support to those
families. So what could be done
to extend that, um, to support
them a little bit more as they
make major changes.
So knowing what causal factors
are really linked to that
increased food insecurity rate
and responding really quickly
could also be very helpful. Um,
and this would require a lot of
engagement and action from
military leadership at each
base. Uh, some of those things
could include uh financial
emergency in the past 12 months.
Um, is there a way to connect,
uh, service members who are
experiencing that as quickly as
possible with social service
supports.
Um, obviously those who have PCS
or removed due to military
orders in the past two years,
um, a greater partnership with
the Food Bank Network, um,
there's an incredible
program out there where they
actually create a welcome box
with necessary items for
families, um, things, simple
things like shower curtains and
um.
Uh, dishwashing, detergent and
things like that, that those are
the things when you go to move,
you throw out, right? You're not
going to pack them and take them
with you, but what a great help
to those families as they
relocate. They have a nice
welcome box there, um, direct
connection to social service
supports. Uh, those who have had
a child within the last 12
months, um, which as we can see
from the enlisted, um, enlisted
members, a high number of young
children connecting them with,
connecting them with other
programs that are there to
support families with young
children.
Children, um, and those who
report military spouse
unemployment challenges. Uh, so
what could we do to focus
efforts in Clovis and Portalli
area Alamo Gordo, Las Cruces,
Albuquerque with military
spouses, uh, our partners that
are needing that work and
desperately looking for it and
maybe having a hard time
connecting.
So this is more veteran focused
here, although a lot of the same
themes are going to run
throughout, uh, providing
funding for programs that are
seeking to reach and feed food
insecure veterans. Uh, the 10,
100, 10 million special in HCA,
um, some of that some of that
money is going to go towards
this work, um, we do work with
different groups across the
state that are focusing very
heavily, especially on veteran
populations. So some of that
funding will go
Towards that.
Um, investing in early
intervention, promoting
awareness of SNAP among among
service members who are at risk
of becoming food insecure as
veterans. So something that we
could also do is really focusing
on ensuring there's a connection
to social services for those
that are transitioning out of
service, actively doing that.
Um, expanding screening for food
insecurity, uh, particularly for
veterans who don't receive care
through the VA. Um, it is
becoming more common now with
turquoise care and shifting into
that for um HCA that there are
social determinants of health
screenings that are going on
through medical appointments. So
a piece of that could be also
that very specific question
around, are you, are you a
veteran, um, and making sure
that there is a connection
happening.
For that individual if they are
experiencing food insecurity, we
have a team at Roadrunner, and I
know that Food Depot also has a
team where they can call us
directly and we can assist them
over the phone and get them
signed up for benefits in the
easiest way possible. They don't
even have to come in person,
make life a little easier for
everybody.
And then last but not least, um,
Looking at studies for promising
interventions for food insecure
veterans, as well as studies of
why so many experience food
insecurity. There's a lot we can
still learn about that and as a
state, if we wanted to dig into
that, that would be an
incredibly helpful thing.
Um, actively reaching out to
veterans, um, ensure they're
signed up for programs like
Snap, um, make sure they know
where to get access to TFAP
commodities. Um, if they're
older than 60, where can they
access CSFP or home delivered
meals where congregate meal
sites are near them connecting
them to all of those really
important programs.
And for unhoused veterans, um,
funding for unhoused programs
come from federal block grants
typically. Um, and those are
administered by state and local
governments. So if we as a state
make unhoused veterans a
priority for all of those groups
that manage federal block grants
that could really make a
difference for a lot of these
populations.
Well thank you so much for
letting us share that and Jill,
is there anything else you
wanted to add in there?
We promised we would only take 5
minutes, sir.
I think we might be over.
we wanted to leave plenty of
time to just answer your
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
guess we're fighting to talk to
you, ladies. So
I guess I, I won, right? So
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for for this presentation
and I'm glad that we, we've seen
each other twice in what, 2
weeks or something. So it's
great. They were Indian Affairs
Committee, so it's good that
they have different priorities,
especially when it comes to
different populations, and then
especially like we're talking
about veterans, in my opinion,
like it may be a radical
opinion, but I think we
shouldn't focus on anybody at
all.
Until we ensure that there is
not a single veteran who is
homeless on our streets. We
should give them every single
thing that they need, and I
think as a state we could
prioritize, prioritize them a
lot, a lot more, so I think when
we're talking about housing,
that's huge, right? You're
always gonna be hungry if you
don't have a place to put the
food that you need to eat.
You're always looking for
another meal, so I think maybe
focusing on that, and I know
that there's federal grants and
things, and I think that's
really good that that we're
harnessing that. But I think on
a statewide level.
I mean, I guess it's like a wish
list, right? We want a
comprehensive network of
resources for veterans because,
you know, I have people in my
family who served, who
experienced some homelessness,
and it's just so sad to have
those stories where people who
put their life on the liner are
now scraping at the bottom of
the barrel just to find the next
meal. So.
Particularly when it comes to
accessing resources, I think we
talked about all like the
paperwork that has to be done.
I'm wondering maybe on a state
level, Mr. Chairman, is there a
way maybe we could
We could set up a new office at
like veteran services to do the
paperwork for them so they don't
have to and maybe give them
addresses in local areas so that
they can have their mail sent
there. Would that be something
that could help in some way, or
I mean, I'm just spitballing
here, but.
It's an idea, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Block, absolutely. I think there
are lots of wonderful, um, there
are lots of wonderful, um,
other, other states that have
figured some of these things out
maybe a little more deeply than
we have as a state. Um, we can
look at those, um those
opportunities, you know, what
might fit there. Um, but any way
that we can to remove barriers,
um, you know, for veterans and
for active duty military around
a lot of these issues. I think
we'll go a long way to making,
making their live
It's a lot easier, you know,
bringing up that family
well-being that we were looking
at earlier as well, because
something else to consider. I
know that I'm, you know,
preaching to the choir here. Um,
you know, but even for when
someone experiences deployment,
um, you know, you're worried
about your family, you're
thinking about your family, and
a lot of military families um
report that they are
experiencing incredible
challenges around food
insecurity while they're um
while their spouse or whomever
part of their family is, uh.
is deployed and it might be kind
of difficult to focus in on the
things you need to be focusing
in on um in your service when
you know that's going on at
home. So what are ways that we
as a state can do a better job
for everybody around that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that. And I, I
think that's really the point.
It's not just veterans, it's
active duty as well, because it
was a really probably the
hardest vote I ever took on the
on the House floor, at least in
my two years, was voting yes on
the universal school meals. You
know, I, it was a mistake
probably in my, in my opinion,
but many people in my community,
they told me, we're technically
not residents of New Mexico. We
cannot access this at the
schools. So our kid is going
hungry and we need you to.
To us and so I guess.
Maybe, I mean that
It's, it's always a vote, right?
You, you have goods and bads of
a vote, but I think that's kind
of the the corner that we
painted ourselves in. We need to
focus a little more
comprehensively on the, on the
whole family, especially when it
comes to, to having to relocate
every other year or every few
years, and I think.
There's been good legislation. I
know Representative Stanana, she
did great with HB 302, and that
was a good.
Push forward to welcome military
families, but I guess.
It's just such a comprehensive
huge issue. I feel like we would
need a new department and
government to do it, and I hate
creating new departments in
government, but I think this one
might actually be necessary
because our veterans affairs.
Department
It's a very small and their
budget is very tiny, and I think
if we put them first above every
other budget.
Line at him, then I think we
could really do a good job in
this state and I, and I
appreciate you guys and I know
that there are so many issues
when it comes to like Road
Runner and everything like you
need a car first to go pick up,
pick up the food and sit in line
to go to go get your free food
that we're giving out, and I
think there's all these barriers
that we really need to address,
but I appreciate you for
bringing them up in this
presentation because this is a
huge issue, especially in a
state where we have so many
veterans in my district, so many
veterans, we don't want any of
them to go hungry. We don't want
any of them to not have a place.
To live and I I think it's just.
It's incumbent upon us as a
legislature to do something
about it. So anything I can do
to help, let me know. But thank
you both and uh it's been really
good to to see you all over the
place and I'll keep chasing you
guys and you keep chasing me and
we'll we'll probably see each
other next week, so thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just thank
you for the presentation. Just
real quick, uh, have you
experienced that you guys are
not getting maybe the quota of
food each time I I had heard
that from another bank. Had, had
you not are you not receiving
the amount of food that you
normally are you having some,
some fluctuations of not
receiving enough food because I,
I heard that from another food
bank.
Sure, thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um,
the sources of food for food
banks constantly fluctuate. Um,
and we have to adapt, quite
frankly, uh, donated sources are
dropping nationally. They're
dropping locally, um, that's due
to a number of factors, not
least of which is AI, food
producers are more efficient,
um, because of artificial
intelligence, so they have less
waste, which is great that
there's less waste, but that is
food that used to come into food
banks. Um, that means that we
have to
Counterbalance that by
developing relationships with
local growers like through the
regional Farm to food bank
program or we need to purchase
more food wholesale or even
retail on the national market.
Um, so yes, our food sources
continue to change. The
commodity food program TFAP is
constantly in flux. Um, we like
to say that when it rains it
pours. Um, there's either a lot
or there's not much at all, um,
and sometimes it's all raisins.
Um, that's just the way it goes
some days, so, um, I think that
we're just so used to that that
we're like, what does it change?
Of course it changes. Um, we do
struggle with that and it makes
it very hard to have predictive
models of
What we should budget for, but
we're constantly pivoting and
finding new sources of food. We
did it across supply chain
shortages in the pandemic. We do
it through inflation, um, and
we're going to do it with
whatever challenge comes next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
ma'am. Uh, the other thing is,
is that I noticed here, I was
just looking at I, I guess I'll
consider it page 3, and you put
100,000,420 children, but, but
what threw me off is up to 19,
so.
Why isn't it just 217 and, and
is there a
Is there, so I'm just going by
up to 17, what is it for 18 and
19? I mean, it must be a big
number to include all that.
That's and why did you separate
it?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Terazas, um, that is based, um,
typically those numbers are
based on the way that they do
the census. Um, so the numbers
that we had here were 0 to 18
and then 19 to 49 is kind of the
next grouping. So it's just
based on on the numbers, but we
are able to break it out into
smaller numbers if, if we need
to or if there's desire to know
about that.
Mr. Chair, ma'am, no, it's not
necessary. I just kind of, it
just kind of when I was looking
at it, I just thought that it
was up to 19, it threw me off.
So the other, the last question
that I have, Mr. Chair, um, is
The housing allowance you
mentioned the housing allowance
and how it it
It, uh, sometimes gets people
out of.
Um, this poverty level which,
you know, but uh do you know how
much that housing allowance is
and is a problem. I, I, I know
at least my daughter's in the
military, OK, so, um, we, we
know kind of what's going on
here, but I'll throw all this in
one package, OK? Is there, is
there any food that some of
these
Um,
Um, soldiers can get military
personnel can get while they're
in in base and and living on
base. I thought there was a
place I can eat and but if
they're off the base, then they
get a food allowance and
housing. Am I understanding that
right?
I can speak to that, sorry, Mr.
Chair, and Representative
Ferrazas, I can speak to that,
um, on a very basic level. Um, I
will tell you that the, my
understanding around basic
allowance for housing is
different from location to
location and it's based on cost
of living in the area and that
kind of thing. Uh, one of the
challenges I did want to bring
forward that does exist in
Clovis in particular is that
there isn't a ton of on-base
housing and there is, I think at
this point in time, about 162
person waiting list for that. So
A lot of folks that end up there
in particular at Canon, um, end
up having to find housing off
base, um, and sometimes that
basic allowance for housing does
not cover the total cost. Um, so
that does happen. There is,
there are commissaries, um, in
every commissary is very
different, um, you know, for
example, Kirtland's commissary,
we actually wrote on her desk
and food rescue from the
commissary at Kirtland. We work
with them and we work really
hard to get that food to places
really nearby, so hopefully
serving military family.
and particularly children, um,
but there can be other
commissaries that have more
challenges with getting access
to food, um, we've even been
talking internally about are
there opportunities to partner
with some of the commissaries
that maybe have a little bit
harder time getting a hold
particularly of fresh fruits and
vegetables that's particularly
difficult to get in some places
and helping to supply some
additional product there, um,
because we will, we do get here,
we hear feedback from time to
time that there are active duty
military.
that have a very challenging
time getting access to healthy
food at some of the
commissaries.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, yeah, I went to the
commissary with her in in
Okinawa and it seemed expensive
to to me. I mean, I, I mean
maybe that's what it is there,
but.
In comparison to the local
stores, I, I noticed that I kind
of, but of course there's
products that are targeted for
what we, you know, you want to
find Lucky Charms, you're not
gonna find them in
in a in a Japanese store, you
know, so, uh, that was just, you
know, I, I don't talk, we don't
talk a lot about that my
daughter's doing fine, but I
just, um, I didn't know and I
couldn't remember if there was a
place that they can go eat at
actually prepared food.
If there's like a place there's
not that. I just, I just, I
didn't know that. I know, OK,
OK, and that's all I was asking.
I just trying to clarify that I
think the biggest problem is,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, ma'am, is the
lack of housing, period. I
think, and that's where I was
going with this. It's yes, they
have an allowance, but if you
can't rent anything, it does,
it's irrelevant. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you ladies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
actually had the same question
about as far as housing, so
extending it or extending the
temporary leave allowance
advocating for policy. Maybe
that's something we could do as
a committee advocate for that
policy and say this is we've
heard from our, I, I, I
represent, um.
The family housing on Kerlin Air
Force Base. So, um, I know
they're having trouble and, and
some of them who have gone
overseas, they said, you know,
we're we're paying upfront and
not getting anything back for a
long time, so it's really
hurting us. So, um, if we could
do something to kind of push for
that as a committee, um,
extending the temporary, uh,
lodging allowance. Would you be
up for that?
I think
For these so.
No.
They probably need to understand
it.
Explain that more, yeah, can you
explain it more?
Mr. Chair, committee members,
uh, I would be, we would be
happy, I shouldn't say I, we
would be happy to to dig into
that a little bit more further,
um, so that we can provide you a
really full picture. Um, I think
we certainly don't want to
answer out of turn, um, I want
to make sure that you have all
the information, but, um, yeah,
but what is possible, we would
be happy to, to tackle some
ideas there and, and provide
them.
Thank you.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll just
start off with the same topic
right here that to Sara Nana
had, and I'm basically wondering
is that ruling of uh
The housing alone.
qualifying for a snap.
Is by rule or is it by
legislation set by rule we can
change it to have the
department that handles that
department that that part.
Change the rules. They're not,
we might have to uh offer some
legislation.
That would change the rule, so I
would leave that up to my, uh,
the man that's sitting on your
right hander, uh, Mr. Chairman.
So maybe him and his staff could
look into it and see if it's
rule or legislation and yeah I
was in a you how we can handle
it or do we need to get involved
in it.
And I'll leave that at that. I
just wanted to comment down, Mr.
Chair, long, long, long time ago
and I got like laid off from the
mines.
Uh, my local parish priest, uh,
I just
told me to decide one day as I
was leaving church and he said,
you go down to Saint Vincent in
Nepal and you find uh and you
gave me a list of kids, find
them some shoes.
In Saint Vincent de Paco was the
name profit organization, so I
went down there to find just
some shoes.
It ended up being almost a
full-time job.
Because I ended up having, I
ended up in a volunteering to do
all kinds of stuff for that
place. I mean, I was packing
packages for Thanksgiving for
your name it and put them in my
car and delivering and uh fixing
bikes and you name it, I, I, I
had it all and uh it was pretty
cool, but uh it was not what I
expected from going to go find
some shoes to.
time job without pay, uh, it was
pretty cool.
It should never be, I've never
forgotten it, and I
Saint Vincent the Paul in our
area has closed down, but every
so often it's the new priests
come into town or sometimes call
me to see if I know where they
can find assistance, you know,
OK, fine, but
So, but basically that was my
big problem question right
there. The one thing that I do
have to mention is a fully
retired veteran, a fully
disabled veteran, OK, fully
disabled veteran in the state of
New Mexico.
It's getting around $300 a
month.
How many of you can live on
$36,000 a year?
I mean, and that, that you gotta
provide your housing and
everything else.
So therefore I think we got to
look at also how we can help
that disabled veteran that we
have in the state of New Mexico
with assistance wherever they
need it.
I'm one of the lucky ones. I got
all kinds of other income coming
in, so that one is just a plus
for me, but I'm, I'm one of a
few lucky ones. We have a lot of
veterans interested in New
Mexico and a lot of them are.
From 75% off or I don't remember
exactly the number you could be
fully unemployable. Weren't you
fully unemployable? That means
you could not work, and that's
how you're going to live on and
that's all you're gonna provide
your family. So that we got to
look at very strongly, uh, and
I, and I hope it's something
that we can think about, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Just real quick, I
think it's a, it's at the
federal level where this would
be would be changed, not at the
state level, right?
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
thinking can be in-house. It was
just like the summer of food
program, remember, during the
pandemic, during the summer food
program.
Uh
During the summer,
No, during the time when there
was no school, schools were
closed down.
OK, I personally called the
secretary.
And asked her if she could make
sure that the that the lunches
got delivered into the areas so
that the kids that are staying
at home could run outside and
grab their lunch because they
can't get to the cafeteria.
And my god it started working.
So I think it could be rule. I
think it can be done by that,
but I'll leave it at that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you both for being here. I'm
just gonna touch on a few topics
that were kind of brought up. So
you mentioned advocating for
extending the temporary lodging
allowance, and I think that's
the discussion we're having, but
that would be at the federal
level, correct? that's something
we can't do at the state level,
so just for folks that are here,
so they understand what happens
when you PCS to a base, they
know that you're still gonna
need time to find a place to
live, whether on base or
wherever, so usually they're
gonna give you a
I think when I would PCSA give
like 10 days, they might go a
little longer, you can try to
extend things, but what ends up
happening, right, they're here
with their families, some might
get a month or, you know, I, I
don't know what it is right now,
what the amount of days are, but
it's so when that person gets
there they actually have time to
look for a place. Some have time
while they're at their place to
maybe sign a lease, uh, you
know, online or do what they
have to do, but some have to get
there, figure out where do they
want to live, right? and figure
that out. And so I think that
would be an important policy,
but it's something.
We do have to work on at the
federal level to not only give
them the time to look for the
right place but give time to
where what's going to end up
happening is they're in there,
they don't have a place they're
literally on the street, like
what what are they gonna do or
they're living with someone else
and you brought up the fact that
in some of these bases they
don't even have a place on base
for them or where they gonna go.
So, um, just I want folks to
consider that, um, with repro's
comment on the dining, um.
So
when you first join and you're
like.
Single unaccompanied, you know,
graduate from basic training,
and you live in the dorms, um,
there are dining facilities for
those folks that are single
individual, um, but those that
can go to the dining hall and
eat. Um, they're not gonna get
their allowance for housing and
they're not going to be their
their allowance for food.
They're just gonna have a meal
cart and go eat, and that's just
limited to those folks in the
dorm because they also don't
have a kitchen or facilities in
the dorm to cook the food as
well, so we just, we do that,
but.
you get to the point where
you're off base or you're on
base and base housing, you don't
have access to those facilities
anymore and that's why you see,
we used to have the McDonald's
on base, but now there's the
Blake Blake's Slater burger on
Kirtland, um, so you could go to
those type places or in the in
the um in the BX has food
choices and people have the
option to do that.
Um, we're talking about also,
um, with what we're doing here
on.
Access to Snap and percentages
of poverty, um, I think we need
to look at that as well and what
can we do from a statue
standpoint and not just a rule.
And I say that as someone who,
um, right now I think we've done
a lot when it comes to Medicare
reimbursement, things that we're
doing, but we don't ever know
what's going to happen in the
future and.
Who's on the 4th floor and who's
governor, right? So, um, what
can we do as a legislature to
make sure that we're looking out
for veterans and folks that are
really suffering for food
insecurity and poverty, and so
we need to look at those things,
uh, going back to what you
mentioned about members serving
and qualifying for SNAP.
I think.
A lot of people have known that,
but some people have not known
that that we actually let people
serving in the military that
have kids and are in that level
of poverty where they qualify
for SNAP.
Um, and, um.
Just to not get political here,
but I just want to be clear,
that's been an issue going on
for a long time, so I don't want
it to be like this is the last 3
years. This has been an issue
even when I was in. There were
people living on base in
qualifying for Snap. And so I
think we need to do all we can
do and, but I think at a state
level, um, and I don't know if
this is a federal level where
BAH disqualifies them.
What can we do here at the state
level to make sure that if
they're getting housing, um,
allowance off base, find ways to
where it doesn't disqualify them
because right now we have folks
who are on base that get it, but
those that are off or not, and
in some cases that housing
allowance is not even covering
their rent, so they're losing
the whole allowance plus having
to pay out of pocket for as well
as utilities and everything
else, so they're really in a bad
spot and they don't have that
option.
And so, um, what can we do here
at the state to maybe say, hey,
this is really an allowance.
This isn't something taxable. It
should be counted as income and
we run into these issues all the
time.
Um, but I, I just wonder what we
can do. Um, I really appreciate
you laying this out, um, the
fact that we do have so many
veterans, um, I mean people in
general in New Mexico, right,
but even our veteran population
that in some cases have access
to more resources than say
others, but it just shows how
big a problem this is and that
we still have so much work to
do.
Um, I'll just end and say, I
think part of the problem is
just like um, you know, some of
my fellow veterans up here.
Um, just like disability claims,
right? As veterans, a lot of
times we just don't want to ask
for help.
And that sometimes is the cause
of this, so I think as a
legislature, we have to.
Find better ways to reach out.
And get out to these veterans
and find a way to help because
um
whether it be pride or just that
service and also recognizing
that a lot of veterans feel.
They're in a lot better spot
than everyone else.
They really don't want to get
that help, and we just need to,
we need to help them.
So that's all I have in
literature. Thank you.
Real quick, real quick, real
quickly, Mr. Chair,
when Chairman Garcia and I were
in the military. We did not
worry about housing.
Uh, Mr. Mr. Chair, that's
because you, that's because you
both weren't in the Air Force,
you know, that's what we worry
about.
Worry about air conditioned
tents and things like that as
well.
They
Uh, thanks for the presentation
when I was in the military, all
that we worried about was the
rations. That's what I ate for
13 months. Anyway, uh.
Thanks for the presentation, you
know, there's a lot of problems.
This picture is a lot bigger
than what we're seeing right
here, you know, because you know
you mentioned about uh.
The food banks and so forth, you
know, in my district it is so
rural and some of these people
don't have running water.
And you know, these people are
not getting no outreach to them
they.
If it's there, they can't afford
to come and get it cause you
know I see out there where I'm
at uh people hauling water to
drink, you know, they're hauling
water 30, 40 miles, you know,
the grocery store's 100 miles
away, you know, and then, and
it's really tough out there and
uh you know, my district is a
lot Native American.
And uh
If you go out there, uh, they
know it's there, but they can't
get to it.
Or they don't, they're not even
aware of it. Now, your poverty
levels are changing.
Which makes it better, but
people are not aware of that
because they they told me, you
know what, representative, you
know, I did qualify I made $50
too much.
Yeah
And they don't qualify for
anything, so they don't know the
changes that are happening and
or there's no outreach the
outreach is very, very minimal
on, on, uh.
Not necessarily your part.
The whole system is broken.
And it really is, and we need to
address those issues to get the
help to people that are really
needed, you know, there's a lot
of uh Native American veterans
out there, a bunch of them that
they don't have any help.
They don't have no cars, they
don't have the, they're just
there.
And how do we address that?
You want to touch base on a
little bit?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, it's
complicated. I mean, quite
frankly, uh, when we had our
conversation at the interim
committee on Indian affairs, you
know, we dove into that pretty
substantially, but it's true
that there's a really complex
issue with awareness and
communications and
infrastructure that all compound
this problem of food insecurity.
Um, certainly the expansion of
Snap, um, to 200% and the
Increasing amounts that will be
awarded to families,
particularly seniors and
children through that expansion.
Everyone is trying to do the
best they can to raise awareness
about those changes. So
certainly as a food bank on the
human to human level, the best
that we can do is let people
know that there has been an
eligibility change. Maybe you
got turned down before, but you
might not now, so let's go ahead
and reapply. Rogener has a
robust program for SNAP
enrollment. The Food Depot has a
robust navigation program that
helps to do the same.
It happens human to human. It's
like that discussion of the
starfish, you know, that are up
on the beach. You can't throw
them all back, but you can throw
one back at a time and we just
have to reach people, one person
at a time. And the same is true
of the new distributions that we
have. We add new distributions
all the time. I know that Road
Dunner does and so do our other
few banking partners across the
state. And word of mouth in
small communities is the way
things get done, so we usually
see that we have a brand new
distribution in
In the first hour it's kind of
trickling in well by the 2nd
hour, everyone has gone home and
told their neighbors, and now
everybody knows, and they're
headed out. So, and by the
second time we have that
distribution, we see more
people, so part of what we can,
that we must commit to and do
better about is not just having
one time pop-up distributions
but having a consistent
presence. So that word has a
chance to spread. Constituents
can tell each other, um, that
were there, that we're offering
water, that we have.
Produce that we have protein
items, um, but we can't do it
alone. Food banks don't operate
in a vacuum. We need fully
funded WIC programs and SNAP
programs with expanded benefits.
We need the regional farm to
food bank program to thrive. Uh,
we need all these other
intervention programs to be part
of the picture, and we need a
really healthy and engaged VA
system that we can refer
veterans to. Um, we have a food
as medicine program where we're
screening for veteran status,
and we should be able to have a
conversation with the VA and
say, we just saw 60 people who
identify as veterans, um, and I
don't know if they're in your
network or not, but you should
be talking to them and making
sure they're getting services.
So enhancing partnerships is a
big part of that picture as
well.
Thank you, thank you for that,
uh.
On this not for veterans he's
got data from 2019.
Is that the
Last data because you know after
COVID these numbers probably
jumped up really big. Do you
have any data?
2019 because you know, 12,000
veterans, uh.
There shouldn't be anywhere on
this list.
But there are, is there more
than 12,000 that you know of?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, absolutely, we
believe that there are a lot
more folks that qualify that are
not, um, signed up for SNAP, um,
and there are a lot of different
reasons for that. Um, I think
you guys spoke, you know, the,
the stigma component I think is
a big part of it. Um, and we're
doing a lot of work to get out
there, but we would be happy to
look into that number and see if
we can get, get some updated
numbers for you around that.
Thank you. And you know like uh
by your pope said, you know, a
lot of veterans are proud.
They you don't want to see you
all here your food stamps, and
they just don't want to do it
and you know, be it'd be nice if
we could have some kind of
outreach for that part of it,
you know, and I don't, that's a
hard one cause.
If a person doesn't come up and
say you need help then it makes
makes for a rough day, you know,
but anyway, thanks for your
presentation.
Appreciate you very much, uh,
you went more than 5 minutes, so
next time I'll cut you short, I
owe you. Anyway, any more
questions from the committee?
We're good to go. Thank you very
much for your presentation.
I was just gonna say, well, we
could have a quarrel.
Uh, I need a motion for approval
of the September meeting.
I
15 seconds, we'll move them.
Thank you,
And.
Next presenter, your, your,
you're right off dying.
Go ahead, sir, sit down and you
sit down and introduce yourself,
please.
You want me to sit in front of
here.
It's the,
yeah, I know my blood pressure
just went way up.
Captain Bar just set up the
computer and everything.
unfortunately it's great to be
here.
Hi, it's nice to meet you.
Sorry, Erin, council service
Slate what is the term.
Somewhere. All right, no, that's
OK. How are you? How are you?
Representative Seranna, nice to
meet you nice to meet you too,
that's mine.
You can't have that.
You can have this,
well, I have to pass them.
That's her job, I'll make sure
they have the legislature works.
Thank you.
Oh yeah.
OK.
Is it gonna be here?
Yes, but I won't it won't be
sick. I don't know if I want to
sit over there, my daughter.
I do that I'm supposed to have.
Yeah, you're gonna get sick.
Oh, you got here longer than
Oh, you got here
at the table you cannot you know
I was gonna be under recording
here is that what this is a
recording device, it completely
shifts what I'm gonna say thank
you very much it's a webcast,
but yeah, it's archived. That's
great.
Joking
Hi, how are you?
What's the purpose overall here?
I didn't about 15 minutes or so.
right now.
OK.
Everybody read me loud and, oh,
that's good, loud and clear.
OK, wonderful. I'm, I'm Colonel
Alfred John Rosales go by Slick
as my call sign in the Air
Force.
I am the current deputy
commander of the forty-ninth
wing.
I brought with me Miss Shelley
Bailey, our community uh
engagement officer I've also
brought my public affairs uh
lead here, Captain Barnhorst.
And do we bring anybody else
with us? No, no, was coming.
Our Major Marshall. And if, uh,
and if major uh Marshall shows
up, he's, he will be my deputy
chief of staff and he's
upgrading to be our chief of
staff of the wing.
And uh I appreciate giving me an
opportunity to speak to all of
you. I will try to be as
transparent, as candid as
possible. So if I can't answer
any of your all's questions. My
goal is to have uh my team write
it down and or I'll write it
down and we'll we'll take it for
action and whatever that action
looks like, uh, I, we will do
the best we can.
So with that, uh, I don't know
how much time I was given. I
know I was supposed to show up
here at 14:30. I showed up here
a little bit early.
All the time that I want, OK,
thank you. Uh, Senator Pope, I
apologize for starting a little
bit earlier or just doing.
No, uh, sir, uh, Mr. Chair,
you're great, you're great. OK,
well, just, uh, just got started
with introductions, uh, at this
point. And hopefully you have,
it looks like you have slides in
front of you.
I'm gonna talk just for a few
minutes about uh Holloman Air
Force Base here, uh, next to
Elmo Gordo, uh, for probably
about 15 minutes and uh please
interrupt me as much as you
like, um, if that's how you guys
do it, I wasn't given any
business rules on how you guys
run these, uh, I walked into
this blind, so that's, that's
pretty exciting. So, um, so if
you need questions after, OK,
but, uh, but I am prepared to be
interrupted at any point.
So if you need to uh audible the
current business rules then I I
happily will uh adjust.
OK, so the first slide there it
says uh forty-ninth wing, we
have two aircraft on there, the
F-16 fighting Falcon, and the uh
MQ9A Reaper and it is, in fact,
the forty-ninth wing is the lead
wing. We are responsible for
both installation management as
well as the primary mission.
Um, at the base and so yeah, we
are America's premier training
wing. That is our primary focus,
not our only focus, and I'm
gonna go through a few of the
other missions that are
particular interest to both uh
both federal and state
legislators, uh, when we move
through this. So getting to the
next slide
right now we currently, and this
is just a snapshot, there's a
lot of words on this, uh, and
it's probably at a 4 font maybe
or 5 font on your actual
pictures that you have there
printed in front of you.
I'll go through it really the
forty-ninth wing strategy to
address our mission primarily is
to train world class airmen and
aircrew for great power
competition.
And uh as our secretary, Defense
Secretary of the Air Force has
been talking through what great
power competition I'm going to
forego all that discussion, what
that means. You could find that
both in the Air Force
Association symposium that just
went, uh, just released a few
weeks ago in terms of what we
mean by great power competition.
But what I will say is our
primary mission right now at the
forty-ninth wing, um, at
Holloman is to train the
world-class airmen and air crew
for both F-16s and MQ9 training.
We do that in a couple of ways.
And if you look
At the slides in front of you
and and behind you if you were
to pivot your seats. We have it
says Airman Mission community,
and they're kind of back under
lit the uh lines of effort you
see in the middle. It's kind of
if you kind of blur your eyes a
little bit, you can see it says
Airman Mission and community.
And really what comes down to is
our airmen, our primary focus,
you're telling me, sir, that you
have your daughter is in the Air
Force, and what I will say is,
as here at Team Hole, and we, we
take our airman's support very
seriously. Uh, so we have
3 lines of effort up there and
how we address that both uh
health and airmen families is um
our primary line of effort
number one and and we try our
best to align our programs, our
resources, our requirements, and
advocacy among that is health
and airmen and their families
and, and our second one under
under excuse me, Aman, uh, line
of effort number 2.
Continued training and
education, um, and then the last
one under Aman is innovation. We
do our best uh every day to
listen to our, our most
experienced airmen, but also our
youngest airman. We as a
training base have a a large
population of very young airmen
here and we do our best to
listen to them and not allow the
rank to stifle innovation and
and we do that in various ways,
uh, and I can answer questions
on any of those terms of lines
of effort 4 and 5 under
What our what we term our
mission, we graduate combat
ready air crew for both F-16s
and NQ9s like I talked about F16
training fighter training is
something that most people are
familiar with in the civil
population, watching movies like
Top Gun and Top Gun 2, people,
that's something you could
probably envision that, but that
is not our only uh combat ready
air crew training here. We also
do MQ9A reaper training like I
mentioned. Uh, are you all
familiar? If you're not familiar
with MQ9 Reapers.
You could type that into Google.
We are the largest persistent
attack and reconnaissance
aircraft in the United States
military and we have a
tremendous air to air to ground
uh requirement in supporting
and, uh, our missions down range
in all parts of the globe. And
so that is a we train almost
every single MQ9 aircrew that
goes that is operating around
the globe right now. They step
out the door from the training
here, ready to go into combat
within weeks of showing up to
their first units.
Now, the bottom one there,
community, uh, if you look at an
airman engaged community is why
I'm sitting here with you. I
will tell you candidly that our
relationship with the local
communities around whether it be
Almo Gordo, Tularosa, Cloudcroft
area, Las Cruces, um, is very
strong at our base. We make an
active effort not just with Miss
Shelley Bailey I brought here
with me, but we have a team of
folks that do our best to see
how we can better advocate
better, uh, highlight the
resources that the state of
and the local basin is providing
for our communities and that we
just shifted community on there.
That is a new, uh, a new
missionary focus for this year
and that's kind of where we're
at with that.
I'm glad you guys have your
printed copies. It looks like we
have some audio visual
challenges here, uh, because of
that, I don't know if the people
on the webcast or have the
inability to see slides now, but
what I will do is if we're still
webcasting and I'll just discuss
and talk about what uh what I'm
talking about with a slide would
say.
So for those over webcast, uh,
our next slide would talk about
our 49er uh history, um, just to
give you a snapshot if everybody
asked how long we've been here,
we've been here a really long
time in the basin since the
1940s, uh, our 49er, the wing,
the forty-ninth wing, excuse me,
we call ourselves the Fighting
Forty-Niners. They, in fact, are
the most decorated wing we have
in the United States Air Force.
We have Medal of Honor winners,
we have the most air to air.
we have the most presidential
citations, we are extremely
decorated in terms of our
operations for the last 6
decades to 8 decades, so it's,
it's a tremendous amount of uh
of support right in front of you
have a picture, um, on that
slide of it's uh Major Richard
Bong and Major Thomas Squire,
just a snapshot of the many
airmen across the years that
have been part of our program,
Medal of Honor winners
themselves, in fact, that second
one there that's leaning in with
the with the hat on.
Uh, that is Major McGuire, which
McGuire Air Force Base was named
after. So just to tell you that
our, uh, the Air Force, uh,
takes this base and uh uh
seriously, and we put our most
decorated wing here to continue
to do the mission in the basin.
Shifting gears continued storied
history. I'm, I'm, I apologize,
I did not read all of your bios
to see how you're familiar with,
with uh the evolution of what
our base has done since we've
been here since the 40s, but I
will just take a snapshot. We
have been in every operation
from the from World War II all
the way to Desert Storm, 9/11,
we were heavily involved. F-117s
that you see there on the on
your uh picture of the um the
stealth fighter, uh, was the
main.
Day of the first push in Desert
Storm, and it came from right
here at home in Air Force Base.
Uh, they launched and supported
it from our 8th black sheep
squadron, which in fact the 8th
Fighter squadron which they were
under is currently a training,
uh, squadron for the F-16, so
it's still here.
Shifting again to another slide
of history, um, just to belabor
the fact we are a um we are
excited to continue to be here
in the basin here in the
military. Uh, everything we've
tested from atomic bombs to
rockets to missiles to space
race education is really still
aligned with that great power
competition. In fact, on the top
right of your slide, you have
the um um you have the
chimpanzee, uh, space chimp Ham.
He's in fact
Uh, no kidding, buried out here,
so yeah, um.
Uh, legislative Mr. Fleetwiz
knows that. He's actually buried
out here. We in fact still have
the primate research facility on
our installation. It's still,
um, it still houses
approximately 2 dozen to up to
30 chimpanzees that are living
out their life from that
program. We no longer do that
facility, but we provide we as
in the government, not the
United States Air Force, uh,
provide them their health and
their services through the
National Health Agency.
And so that's still on our base.
Uh, we can go to the next slide
here.
Our namesake, um, Holloman Air
Force Base was named after
Colonel George Holliman. Big
things to just snapshot from
that is, uh, he was, uh, one of
our innovators early on in the
1930s that uh paved the way for
remotely piloted aircraft across
the military at large. In fact,
one such event that he got
recognized that was what our
late 30s McKay Trophy winner.
McKay for the greatest flight of
that year, both for the Army Air
Corps.
And the United States Air Force,
still a trophy we give today,
uh, and we continue that legacy
even today with our MQ9 reaper,
which is remotely piloted
aircraft, so, um, so that's uh
that's really our namesake,
which is we're pretty proud of
that history of having that
lineage of remotely piloted
aircraft.
Space technology, excuse me,
innovation to now working uh
with what we're doing now and
the MQ9 reaper.
You know, shift gears talking
about our mission, uh, as you
and I are speaking, and we have
F-16 training. There's a lot of
numbers up there, but I will
tell you is that we train 1 out
of every 3 fighter pilots in the
United States Air Force 30% of
the fighter pilots that are
generated for uh your country
are generated out of this base.
It's, uh, we have, we are the
largest F-16 wing in the world,
um, and we have more than 80+
aircraft, and I will say that,
um, we are doing
our best to, to train our pilots
using the the great uh resources
were given in this area. Next
slide.
We also have MQ9 reaper
training, which I've said more
than 3 times, so it has to be
important if I say it more than
once, right? Uh, we are the
largest MQ9 wing in the United
States Air Force. We train
almost every single air crew,
both the pilot as well as the
sensor operator that manages the
systems, whether it be the, the
targeting pod systems, the
cameras, if you will, um, and
all the other sensors that we
have on this aircraft. Um, it
is, um, uh, we operated both out
of here.
And we have the ability to use
satellite technology to go over
the horizon operations and we
transit the local FAA airspace
with this aircraft training our
airmen on how to transit not
just inside the restricted
airspace, but beyond. And so
this airplane will travel
multiple states and with in
coordination with the FAA with
their certificates of
authorization. So something
we've been working and doing for
the last decade or so and
expanding our ability to do so,
uh, here at home and.
Next slide.
We also have various mission
partners, uh, both, uh, on our
facility and, uh, or excuse me,
on our facility, we bolted out
two of those and you may not be
able to see that in a really
small print, the 635th
maintenance material Group in
the 704th test group. I'll talk
a little bit more in detail
about them in a second, but you
could just see there's another 2
dozen uh folks beyond the Air
Force that are utilizing Team
Holleman everything from the
solar observatory to the, we
have balloon operations we have
that primate
Research facility up there that
we talked about. Uh, the Army
Corps of Engineers' house over
here, the National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency has a small
representation here. So we do a
lot more than just that
training, uh, mission that we
talked about at the beginning of
this, uh.
This discussion, next slide.
As for the bolted out ones
there, I'll talk to the first
one, the 704th test group, um,
from, from the state legislative
perspective, this one is
probably of a of great interest.
We are continuing to do a
variety of testing in the Air
Force here at this base, uh,
particularly expanding our, our
abilities with hypersonic
testings and other testing both
air to air and air to ground.
Uh, we are exploring uh as um we
are, excuse me, upgrading one of
our tracks at the moment.
And uh there is a proposal to
expand to a second track, uh,
that would be an investment of
more than one, approximately $2
billion of investment bringing
potentially uh uh a lot more
resources, equipment and people
into this, uh, to this area. So
that is being discussed right
now among the Air Force, um, and
we are working through that,
that concept as we as we speak.
I'll tell you that that is um a
primary reason that test group
is the reason why we, uh, as an
Air Force do value um this
entire basin because of that
airspace and the property that
that goes with that next slide.
635th maintenance material
Group, what people sometimes
refer to bearba, B E A R Basic
expeditionary airfield
resources. Fancy word for if you
want to move around and maneuver
as an air force across various
islands or various countries,
logistics and sustainment moving
big war readiness materials that
this uh maintenance group is the
one that does that for our Air
Force. They lead that fight. We
in fact store a tremendous
amount of war readiness
materials to get after great
Power competition, and in fact,
we're continuing to invest and
expand that capability here at
Holloman.
And they also not just do big
wartime efforts. They're also
responsible for and supporting
multiple crisis action and uh
both here and abroad, so they
are uh some of their folks both
consult and actually deploy to
go help out in areas where
there's crisis, whether it be a
tsunami or a hurricane or a
massive disaster somewhere, um,
either, uh, either in the states
or abroad.
Next slide.
Overall, Holloman, uh, is the
3rd largest Air Force base in
the United States.
Uh, let that sink in. We're the
3rd largest, uh, and see people
think we're out in just the
middle of nowhere. No, this is
a, um, this is very important to
the service, uh, the 1st and
2nd, I think are Eglin Air Force
Base in Florida and Edwards Air
Force Base in California. We
have $7 billion in
infrastructure on the base, if
you could see there over 11,
over 1000, well, now it's 17 or
16 buildings, 3 active runways,
um, all in all in multiple
directions, which is very unique
and over 1100 homes on
Base, um, it, it spans not just
that small, um.
Uh, multi-shaped um area that
you see in the middle of your
screen there or in the middle of
your slides, Holloman Air Force
Base, but all the other blue
containers you see both to and
in the north and one in the
south is also Air Force
responsibility on Whitesands
missile range Complex. Two of
those was the North are uh Air
Force ranges. There's a tactical
range for dropping weapons and a
conventional range for dropping
weapons and shooting the gun,
and then one to the bottom of
the screen or the bottom of the
slide.
Centennial range, which is Air
Force managed and Air Force run
by Team Holliman, and that is
like a tactical range as well.
So all in all, it is um a large
amount of property that we were
required to manage on behalf of
the US Air Force. Next slide.
Terms of the airspace.
It is, uh, one of the most
coveted airspaces in the entire
country.
Uh, that restricted his RS 107
on your slide, White Sands
Missile Range Compact overseen
by the, I think you got a got a
brief today by White Sands
Missile Range Test Center. Uh,
that's, they allow us to be part
of, uh, you do our mission
there, but as well as those
other areas, those other
containers, both the beak moa,
the Picos moa, the talons, which
is the gray one that you can't
read the name there on the
bottom.
And the Bronco Moas, those are
military operating areas. We use
all of those including that
missile range complex to do our
our training both in our
testing, um, for those test
group that we've mentioned
previously.
Next slide.
Terms of our challenges, uh,
this is not uncommon in many
states and many, uh, bases in
the United States Air Force. We
are one of 10 what they call
remote and isolated
installations, um, you have two
in this state, you have that are
on that list of 10. Uh, both
Canon Air Force Base and us, our
remote and isolated, allows us
to advocate for additional
resources if required, and
there's other policy that
support us for for remote and
isolated. But there's other 4
items.
You talk about child care,
access to medical care, housing,
schools, those are all big
players that are not uncommon
among many bases, not just in
the state, but many. I will say
that we'll talk a little bit
more about them and I'm gonna
forego discussing that 22, 23
education proficiency rates
portion of this slide, but I can
answer questions.
Terms of childcare, uh, we have
right now a childcare challenge,
uh, like I said, not uncommon
among.
Uh, our military installations,
we have half of our base
providers that are um that are
hired. The other half we are
advocating for. It's not like we
don't have funding at the
moment. We just can't get them
to join our team.
Uh, we ask a lot of support from
our local community. I we do
know that there is a 67 local
child development centers here
um in the local area, both here
at El Magoordo and White Sands
missile range that do our best,
but we are working through the
challenges with that. We in fact
have one of our buildings that
is completely or just finished
up his renovations, but we don't
have any people to put in them.
And uh and I will say that the
New Mexico state subsidy that
was been approved in his.
implemented as a tremendous um
uh support for both our families
and then also the raising of our
um the child youth programs,
raising that hourly, um.
wage actually is a tremendous
benefit to us. So this is me
thanking you for that next
slide.
Medical access to care is a
challenge in this area, being
isolated, we work the best we
can with Christa's Health, which
is the regional right here in
this uh in this area of Al Mo
Gordo and we work, uh, but
however, most of our folks that
need specialty care in a variety
of different areas, they have to
travel down to El Paso and Las
Cruces to meet the needs of the
military connected folks there
and uh we uh we are doing our
best to advocate the challenges
with both our leadership and
then I'll just, just give you
that.
Note, we do our best. However,
there are many challenges with
access to care and uh many of
our folks requiring to travel
down to El Paso an hour and a
half to do a specialty care and
or special needs as their family
uh requires. Uh, in fact, so
much so this, this one up here
among the four I gave you, the
access to care is the one that
limits the amount of people that
can come here from our United
States Air Force to be stationed
here. In fact, our exceptional
family member program limits the
amount of people.
Come here probably more than
most bases, um, I can get you
those numbers if required, but
that is a big challenge for us,
the medical access to care. Next
slide.
In terms of base housing, yeah,
overall housing our base, we're
well above 97, 98% all the time.
It is not ebbs and flows. It's
always a high demand.
Uh, and we are doing our best to
advocate for the local
community, talking about our
housing needs. We are the
largest, uh, team Hollman has
been the largest in terms of
mission and people here in the
last 4 or 5 decades. And so that
brings a lot more families into
the area and the local area is,
is not ignorant to this. Um,
I'll tell you that that the
local people that we talk to and
and Almo Gro especially, the
leadership, they're extremely
aware and they are doing their
best to see how we can.
They can help uh meet us where
our need is at the moment, so
that's kind of what I have to
say for housing.
Next slide. In terms of schools,
uh, we, uh.
We'd like to say that we have a
great relationship with our
schools here both in Alme Gordo,
Tularosa, and Cloudcroft as our
primary schools on base we have
two Holman Elementary School and
Holloman Middle School. The
elementary school got a federal
grant a couple of years ago and
it's completely upgraded and
it's state of the art. If you
had a chance to go see it, I
welcome you to, to go do that.
Uh, we're breaking ground,
excuse me, we just broke ground.
That's the right terminology on
the Holloman Middle School
Project, Federal gran
money provided up to 60 million
up to $59.5 million for that
program. And, uh, I will say
that the Almagura Public School
District has been, um, pushing
vigorously to um get that brow,
excuse me, groundbreaking, which
is already completed a couple
weeks ago. It should open its
doors when it's finally
finished, and that's the top.
I think it's the top one, yeah,
the top one.
Uh, on your slide, it should
open its doors somewhere in
January of 26. That's the
target, spring of 26, we
understand it's the middle of
the school year, but APS is
excited and motivated to see if
they can make that a reality. So
that's the, that's for that.
There's other things that
schools that we're trying to
throw money at in terms of the
US Air Force, says DOD Starbase,
uh, you see that in the middle
there, uh Mr. uh Mr. Powell, I
think he might be behind me.
Yeah, there you are, Mr. Powell
has been instrumental in the
Space Foundation, uh, advocate
In to get Starbase here and we
have, uh, we have tried to walk
lockstep with him to make that
happen. It's $500,000 of federal
funding every year to go through
that, setting up what would
equate to 5th graders
potentially others, but
generally 5th graders in STEM
programs they were bringing in
from, uh, Almo Gordo areas for
5th graders, Cloudcroft, Tula
Rosa, um, and, and anyone else
that would like to make the
trip. Uh, we'll be setting that
up at at Team Holm and, and it
should open its doors sometime,
I think in the spring.
R
The job posted the OK, the
posted today we're, we're
looking to see if we can, we can
open the the doors as soon as we
can on that one. but there's a
lot of goodness coming on in
terms of schools and we
understand the challenges, we
understand, um, and, and it's
probably, uh, if you go to the
next slide.
No, I go back one then. Uh, it's
probably one of the biggest
decision um factors for most
families either wanting to come
here or to be excited to come
here it's the schools. We
understand if you look at the
national rankings, the schools
and which I'm, I would be just
telling the choir here, you all
know the schools are, don't rank
the highest among the states.
However, we do know that there's
a lot of investment. You see it
for both Almar Goa Public
schools and as an example, they
have provided a tremendous
amount of
Uh investment for a future
upgrades, not just to those
middle school and elementary
school on base, but also
downtown.
Uh, as I'm also an ex officio
member of the school board. I
see that firsthand.
So with that I think that is all
I did. I think I.
Went a lot longer than I thought
I would, uh, we're allowed to
the end of this briefing and I'm
happily, um.
I will happily accept any
questions or comments or
anything of that flavor.
Um, thank you for your
presentation, uh.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, as
far as your daycare, we passed a
bill this last year where if
some uh a family member or
someone from the base comes with
a DOD certification they can
they can go off if they can't
find housing on base they can
work off base and set up their
own little daycare as long as it
works just for military
families. I don't know if you
knew about that. Yeah, we do. In
fact, they reciprocity has been
extremely welcomed both with
childcare as well as the school,
so teacher, teacher
certifications, transition to.
States that reciprocity effort
has been recognized and
welcomed. In fact, our school
liaison, um, at our base, which
we pay a school liaison to
advocate for our military
connected families. In fact, not
only talks to our, our folks in
terms of their children coming
here, but also the spouses that
may in fact meet those
requirements, so yes, ma'am,
absolutely. Um, the other.
Chairman, the other thing we're
doing is compacts. We have a lot
of compacts. I think we have 9
or 10 for sure. PTs, OTs,
teacher compact also, um, a lot
of.
Checks to help the military so
we can make sure you guys stay,
bring more people on, um, uh,
those are bills we have this
year, so, and we have a funding
bill for the infrastructure for
all the bases, and I think you
might have heard of that one.
we're working with Kirtland
Partnership, working with the
Lieutenant governor to set up a
funding so that I think, I don't
know if it's you, it must have
been Cannon who asked for a
playground for one of the areas.
That would be something that
this funding would do to to
bring quality of life for a
military family, so that's just
some of the things we have going
for this next
60 session. Well, that sounds
exciting, ma'am. I appreciate
your advocacy and support. Thank
you.
Uh, Senator, I mean Vice Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Colonel, for being
here and thanks for the
presentation, um, had a chance
to work with some of the folks.
Out at Harlem and a retired Air
Force chemist and acquisitions
officer, so did a little bit of
slit track testing when I was
working at Dra had a great
opportunity there.
Um, just a couple of questions,
um, and I know you do a lot of
work with the lieutenant
governor, and I know there's
like that military commissioner
council kind of working on a lot
of these quality of life issues,
um, can you talk a little bit
about, um, the airspace and kind
of how once again how important
this is kind of to the Air Force
and really national security,
the importance, um, but also,
um.
Um
Well, I'll just start off there
just the importance. Yeah,
absolutely. Thank you for the
question. If you look to the,
uh, that slide, I think it's,
um, we could just talk off that
as a visual aid 13.
Here you go, slide 13, terms of
the airspace, um, I will say
that uh that is probably the
most important one of the, I can
say one of the most important
airspaces in the United States,
military, let alone the air
force, uh, we do a variety of uh
great power competition testing,
uh, we're talking contested
environment testing. We're
talking high speed hypersonic
testing we're talking missiles.
Testing for both defense and
offensive capabilities we're
talking a variety of different
uh programs that are tested
there, but not just the Air
Force, the variety of other
services use that, and I'm sure
that uh the previous um uh
colonel talked about the White
White Sands missile range Test
Center in terms of the variety
of both Army, navy, and all the
variety of folks, uh, having the
test mission or excuse me, the
training mission, um, we balance
both the test time as well as
training.
Time in there and that is in uh
welcomed by us,
but we are grateful to the army
for allowing us to be
prioritized within that to do
that, but um,
but test is the priority for the
one that says RS 107, um, which
makes it coveted. Uh, we do also
some advanced air to air defense
testing F-16s, uh, where we do,
uh, we go uh past the speed of
sound and uh and train our
airmen to be able to fight
those.
in fights and you can't do that
in many places in the United
States and this airspace, it's
large enough to do so, um,
which, which also helps for our
tests or excuse me, our training
mission. The other moa there,
uh, the beak moa, um, and the
talons are primary users of
Holloman Air Force Base, and I
would say there are others like
um canon that would probably use
the Peco smoa a lot more than we
do, but the beaks and what we
call the talons, which is south
of Roswell.
We do a variety of uh training
with our F-16 formal training
unit. So they do a lot of
training out there if they are
unable to use the serve the
White Sands Missile Range
complex based on testing
requirements. Um, and it is uh
that is generally medium to high
altitude air to air training and
some very, very basic, um, level
air to ground training where we
teach our airmen how to simulate
precision guided munitions
dropping with GPS and a laser
guided, but that's all
simulated.
Out in those military operating
areas. Those ones are a little
bit challenging and uh to work
with because as a civilian, you
could fly your aircraft right
through a military operating
area and so we have to halt and
and stop all military training
until they transit out. We can't
ask them to leave. We just
avoid um um um any issues by
just halting our training while
they transit through those. Um,
I will say that the FAA, um, and
our partners in Albuquerque and
um.
Uh, do a great job funneling
commercial traffic, but what I'm
talking about civilian traffic,
I'm talking about the young,
they're small aircraft, light
aircraft, Cessnas and things
like that.
So, um, they cannot transit
through the restricted airspace
without losing their license or
having that challenged.
So it is extremely important.
Uh, we also have realistic
targets, it says there on the
bottom right, realistic targets
and emitters, Smoky Sams, those
are surface to air missile, they
simulate as if it's a no kidding
a surface to air missile coming
out of the ground and smoke
coming off of it. So our
aircraft and threat react off of
those, those, um, those visual
cues, we have those all on White
Sands Missile Range Complex,
both the south and north of
Holloman, um, and it, and it, it
allows us to really
Address all the problems for the
future. We look to this airspace
for future warfare,
uh, it's uh both for test and
training. I hope I got that
point across.
Thank you for that question.
Thank you, Colonel. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, I, um, you
know, being a, not being an
aviator, I was stationed with a
lot of folks when I was out in
Saudi and.
You know, a lot of the
maintainers and a lot of guys
that talked about when I
mentioned New Mexico. Oh yeah,
Halloween, so a lot of them had
had went through and kind of
knew the area, so that was kind
of great, but I also told him,
you know, come up to
Albuquerque. They just their
perception because they were,
they were just used to being in
the ice more isolated area of
New Mexico and I said, well,
we're pretty big state, you got
to kind of go everywhere else,
so had to get that word out.
Well, I appreciate that
advocacy, um, you know, we, we
train, like I said, over 30%.
And of the fighter pilots in the
US Air Force just to this base,
um, and so, uh, so yeah, a lot
of, a lot of war fighters come
through here. Yeah.
One more, uh, actually I have a
few more, but one question I
have is on these ranges. I
remember when I was stationed in
Florida, there's like a big
range down there I.
I'm wondering what the Air Force
does and I'm assuming they do,
um, as far as the environment,
habitats and kind of protecting
these spaces, so, um, am I to
assume that there are programs
set up on these ranges, and you
know, I've read about, I've seen
to where you're you're kind of
protecting the habitats
endangered species in these
areas too, and so I just want
folks to understand how
important that part is as well
on on actually, um, this is part
of that airspace is is actually
protecting.
The inhabitants and the wildlife
as well at the same time.
That's right. Thank you for that
question. I will say that uh on
our base, not only do we
advocate for supporting the
environment and mitigating any
risks that we can that we either
have on the environment, whether
it be uh the soil or the or the
the vegetation or the or the
animals or all the like, um, or,
um, or, uh, historical sites
potentially that they may find
throughout when we do military
construction. I will tell you
that we are
We have not only advocate, but
we also have resources. So on
our team Holman we have our
civil engineering squadron, has
an environmental section that
dedicates themselves to not just
doing new project development
but also ongoing mission
assessments and they also were
required to report to not just
um uh not just to our military
folks, but outwardly that can be
accessed to all the reporting of
how we, how we assess what we're
doing both, both with new
military construction but as
well as the mission.
Um, when you're talking about
the airspace I hear airplanes
and fuel and in all of the
things with field management and
I told you we are the largest
F-16 base in the world, so we're
thrown there's a lot of fuel
being filled up in those
aircraft and managed both on the
ground and we do our best with
the environmental assessments
and safety to ensure that we're
meeting all the requirements and
exceeding them for both federal
and the state requirements which
we report on regularly. So we
not only advocate, but we also
have the
Resources on our base. Uh, in
terms of the airspace, uh, the
actual airspace at large by the
White Sands Missile Range
Complex. We are, uh, I will say
partners in uh the people that
oversee it are the ones that you
talked to earlier, the army,
but, but we in fact support all
noise complaint support, we uh
we evaluate um our our mission
sets to ensure we're, we are
mitigating any any type of
impact to people in terms of
noise, whether it be fighter
aircraft, whether it be.
Um, sonic bones, whatever
whatever there be any any of
those things that people
typically uh will talk about. So
in terms of mitigating noise
complaints, we in fact just
released or excuse me, supported
a release of a of an assessment,
which we're required to do on an
annual annual or semi-annual
basis for the Holloman Air Force
Base area as well, so.
The environment is definitely on
our minds and we resource
appropriately for that.
Great. Thank you, Colonel, and
thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and I'll just kind of, uh, end
with this, you know, you went
over childcare where see you
bumped up the pay, still a
little lower downtown, and I
think these are issues that
we're just dealing with in
general across the nation,
right, access to to childcare in
general, but then for, you know,
the affordability.
And so I think there's more we
can do and I think with early
childcare in our state there's
things that are more that we're
going to be able to do uh access
to medical care, right, housing,
I know that Senator Burt's been
doing a lot of work on this and
dealing with this issue as well,
um, and also schools. Um, so I
guess I'll just end and say.
You mentioned right now you're
limited on the amount of folks
that can come here, especially
the missions because of how the
base right now is kind of rated
to kind of being, being isolated
and these types of services, um.
I mean, this is a hypothetical
question, but if we were
improving on providers to where
we had enough access for
everybody now and there was,
there was some space for more if
the housing went down to 80%
occupancy rate on base if you
had more medical care, um, we
started doing a lot better as
far as schools, as far as what
people think and the assumptions
are what's going on here because
I think you laid it out the
schools on your base, I think
are are probably doing well.
Um,
what would that mean? I mean, is
there, would there, would there
be maybe an expansion of more
missions or expansion of current
missions or what kind of
possibilities could happen if we
made those improvements. Thank
you for that question. Uh, I, I
don't speak on behalf of the Air
Force for the in terms of
bringing more mission here or or
removing mission or modifying
unfortunately, I can't answer
that. Um, but in terms of
talking about hypothetically, if
we were able to address
all the problems and the
challenges in terms of uh taking
care of our airmen and their
families. What I will say is
that just generally speaking in
terms of an organization as the
Air Force is a large fighting
force of our airmen and their
families, um, are, are, are
getting the the actual medical
care they need or the child care
services they need, it actually
increases readiness for our
forces. And if our airmen are
increasing their readiness for
our forces, they can focus on
all those leather lines of
effort we talked about in terms
of addressing the
trying to get uh after after
innovation and, and how do we
come, uh, how do we execute the
mission that we're giving, we're
given already in terms of doing
it better. And so I think that's
kind of where uh what I can
speak to with confidence, um,
that airmen are not worried
about taking their kids 2 or 3
times a week down to El Paso for
their specialty medical care,
and they can use that time to to
get after, um, helping their
either unit or or the Air Force.
do the the great things that
we're paying them to do. And so
that that's kind of where we're
talking about. So if I'm going
to say those challenges, it
translates into increased
resiliency to better posture and
improve our readiness. Great,
thank you, Colonel, and thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Yeah, and I
didn't mean to, uh, I wasn't
trying to put you in a situation
to speak for what's going on in
the Pentagon and what those
missions are, um, but I think
you're right and it's what we
kind of talked about earlier if
a lot of these needs are met,
right?
Allows airmen to really focus on
the mission and the job and not
have it hanging over their head
that, uh, you know, I'm having
to leave my wife and kids. Are
they getting health care? Are
they doing all right in school,
you know, um, that's the last
thing they need to be thinking
about, you know, while they're
doing the mission, so I think
that's what's really important
and what we need to do and then
it also comes down to it can
also impact the decision on
whether someone decides to stay
in or not, right? So, um, thank
you again, Colonel. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. That's all I have.
Any more questions on the
committee?
Black
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Colonel, and thank you,
Captain, and thank you, Shelly,
for being here and everything
that you do cause you're doing
the Lord's work in my opinion,
and I think that's a good thing,
so, uh, Mr. Chairman, I just a
couple of questions. I know that
we have a huge problem when it
comes to housing, right? So can
you tell me, I don't know if you
even know the percentages on
base versus off base. What's the
percentage off base, Mr.
Chairman?
Yeah, we have uh approximately
5000 active duty airmen
excluding our civilian employees
and our contract employees that
are on base, which equates to
about I don't know 15,000-ish to
20,000 military connected
families in the area.
Uh, in terms of on base, we have
about 1100 homes that are uh
from our Soaring Heights
community.
Um, so everyone else lives in
other places in the local basin,
whether it be Almo Gordo, Las
Cruces, and even some in El
Paso, uh, for our some of our
airmen traveled that distance.
Um, on a daily basis. I will say
that uh it has been addressed so
much so that we are redoing the
military housing assessment, so
that one is actually um ongoing
and that report should be out
next year, uh, it's, they will
actually be on the ground here
at the end of November to do the
military housing assessment. Um,
so that we can with confidence
say this is our housing need in
the area and, and so then, um,
both state to local.
And or um private companies can
say with confidence this is the
need and this is what we're
gonna help try to address. And
so that's what we're doing in
the military uh supporting that
housing assessment.
Um, that is excluding prices of
of what they are. I will say
that our target audience right
now in terms of housing is our,
our mid-level non-commissioned
officers, uh, we're talking town
home levels we're talking that
that's kind of the target. We're
not looking at um uh airmen that
need 4 bedroom, 3 or 4 bedrooms,
that's not what we're looking
for that we're talking about
the, the mid-level
non-commissioned officers, the
staff sergeants, the tech
sergeants, that, uh, maybe.
Our younger captains.
Uh, the biggest challenge we
have, uh, because we, we, um, we
assess anecdotally, I can't say
with actual data yet because
we're doing the assessment, but
anecdotally we have airmen
leaving the dorms because they
are um 98, 99% occupancy when
they leave the dorms, they group
up with 2 or 3 other young
airmen, and they take the uh the
houses from the uh from those
that uh families that could
potentially do that. So that
that's kind of the target we're
looking for.
Um, in terms of our housing
need, uh, but we need to back it
up with data. And so that's,
that's kind of what we're at,
um, here locally.
I do know that the city probably
has a lot more comments on that
and how they're addressing it
based on just me sitting in
their meetings and listening to
their city council discussions
and and listening to the
commissioners discussed the, the
issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that and you know,
I agree. I listened to those
meetings myself and it's a lot
of abatements right now and I
think we could, we have a lot of
potential to use houses that are
kind of decrepit and and have
people flipping houses. I know
that's a big thing here, so
that's one way that we could
address it. I think it's very
important to look at the data
like you said, so I, I'd be very
interested to see what that
report in November says, so also
in your presentation, I know we
went through so many things,
education, right? We hate being
50, we're 52.
I guess if, if we put you in
Puerto Rico, 50 seconds we're
above Puerto Rico, right, Mr.
Chairman.
I hope we above Puerto Rico. I
pray that we are.
I, I can't comment other than
what I was what I was told. I
will say that it's an
opportunity to get better,
right? Yeah, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I agree with that, and
I think if the if the DOD can
look at our, our individual
school district and its rank in
the state versus the whole state
together, that, that would be
great. And we also have a new
charter school coming here, so
hopefully that will help assist
with that increase in
proficiency, uh, but our, our
community is very
Very well connected and I think
that's something that you really
brought.
To 4 here today. We're we're all
on the same page, we all want
the same things. We want to make
sure that Holloman stays.
Here, for many, many years with
as many missions as we could
possibly get, and I think it's
great, especially with the Altis
trophy that was awarded this
year. Good job, Shelly, and all
the people involved in that.
It's super prestigious award
that we're blessed to have as a
community. So, you know, keep up
the good work. I'm always here
as a resource, and I know this
committee is here to work
alongside you. So thank you so
much, Colonel. Thank you,
Captain. Thank you, Shelly.
Appreciate you all. Thank you
for coming.
I don't have no questions.
Thanks for the presentation. It
was very good. Now you're off
the hot seat, that's OK, well
thank you very much for inviting
us. Thank you very much. That
being said, I guess.
Mr. Chair, the last presentation
is a no show, so.
We have been said we're
adjourned thanks to the
committee for being here today.
Thanks everybody for the
presentation. Next meetings back
in Santa Fe in November. Thank
you.
