Uh, good morning, Mr Chairman,
Mr Vice Chairman and members of
the Committee. Thank you very
much for having me. Uh Senator
Michael Padilla represent the
southern portion of Bernalillo
County. And, uh, I'm happy to be
here. Senate majority Whip and
as my 12th year
In this, uh, on this committee
in one fashion or another. Thank
you. Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Art de la Cruz House district
12. It's a pleasure to be here.
One of my favorite committees.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Senator Harold Pope, Junior
representing District 23
Northwest Albuquerque, Bern. Leo
County also serve as the Senate
Majority Caucus chair, and this
is my fourth year in the Senate.
Thank you.
Um good morning, Mr Chair. I'm
Andrea Reed. I represent
District 64 Curry. Roosevelt
Chavez.
Good morning, Mr Chair, a house
district. 51 representative,
John Block. Great to be here.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Senator Craig Brant, Rio Rancho
Best town in the state of New
Mexico. And, uh, I I've been on
this committee for eight years,
and I'm the Senate Republican.
I didn't think it was I'm
representative Licon represent
District six with the SP, The
Cibola and McKinley County.
And I have been on this
committee since it started.
Along with there would
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um Good
morning. My name is Debbie
Sinan. I represent House
District 21 in Beo County. The
Manzano high school area. I've
also been on this committee for
my entire eight years in the
Legislature and I. I do enjoy
this committee. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
chair. Fwd, I am the staff
person for this committee from
the Legislative Council service
being on this committee for
A little while now.
Hello. My name is Domenica
Nieto. Um and I am staffing This
committee. This is my first year
on this committee. Thank you.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Harry Garcia mix they
represented for Jo 69.
I mean, notice this Marine Corps
Vietnam veteran. I have been in
this committee since I came into
office in 2016. And this will be
my last year I was voted out of
office, so I hope somebody in
this committee, uh, stands up
We come forward to help the
veterans like I have. Everybody
is helping. I'm not ding
anybody, but we need somebody to
be a champion because I'm out of
office. And, uh, January, you
know, I represent House District
69, which covers parts as a one
McKinney, Ebola, Bernard
We come forward to help the
veterans like I have. Everybody
is helping. I'm not ding
anybody, but we need somebody to
be a champion because I'm out of
office and, uh, January, you
know, I represent House District
69, which covers parts as a one
McKinney, Ebola Bernardo
counties. With that being, said,
general, it's all yours.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Miguel
Aguilar. I'm the adjutant
general for New Mexico National
Guard and the Department of
Military Affairs.
And the acting Cabinet secretary
for Homeland Security emergency
Management, Although today we'll
talk mostly about about guard
military affairs. Uh I wanna
start. Uh, I'll introduce my
team, uh, behind me. I have, uh
uh. Teresa Martinez, Who's the
director? My director of state
programs. Uh, Captain, uh,
Zachary Jesse, Who's uh, my aide
and, uh, Robert Gian, Who's my
federal general counsel? Um, I
have a state general counsel.
She's not with us this morning.
Um, So before I get started on
my presentation, which which I
think you should all have print.
Of, um
Mr Chair. I just want to thank
you for your many years of
service to, uh to the state of
New Mexico. You've been a great
friend of the National Guard and
you supported us over the years
And so we're We're sorry to see
you leave. Uh, we we understand
that the the process of
democracy and how it works. Uh,
but, uh, but we wanna thank you
for your many years of service
to us.
Um, let me start by, uh, I I'll
just I'll flip over to slide
number two. If you can, if you
can get there and we'll talk
about
Uh, what, uh, where we're at
where the state active duty
prepared in this program and and
hopefully I'll remember here at
the end to talk about some
initiatives that are not on the
slide presentation, which
includes a pilot program that
we're currently doing to Jimmy
Carter Middle School in
Albuquerque. Um, and, uh as well
as, um uh, well, I'll tell you
right up front. We we had the
opportunity. Uh, this, uh,
Saturday? Uh, to, uh, to present
a purple heart, um to, um serve
first class. Uh, Placido, um
Um,
who earned his Purple Heart in
World War two. And so that in
itself was an amazing event.
What made it even more
incredible is that, um, he not
only did he serve, uh in World
War two, where he earned his
Purple heart.
Uh, he got out of World War two
when the army reserves
Until he was mobilized to Korea.
Um, came back from Korea of
getting back into the reserves.
Um
Was a national guardsman. Uh,
transition of the National Guard
deployed to Vietnam.
Um and then toward the end of
his career before he retired. He
was also deployed.
To the riots at the
penitentiary, Uh, in Santa Fe,
and so a very, uh very unique
experience of someone who served
in all three components of the
army served in all three major
conflicts over his career.
And somewhere along the way he
managed to find a way to have a
30 year career at the Department
of Transportation as a state
employee and then started Rego
Construction in the seventies,
which is, uh, his sons now run.
So, um, incredible honor for us
to be able to present him with
his purple heart. Um, And if you
know Debbie Romero. I think
Debbie Romero is a a grand with
us all together, and so, um,
incredible opportunity, So we
talk about State active duty
preparedness program. Uh, so a
couple of years ago. Uh, we we
you helped me pass.
House Bill 116, which authorized
us to bring uh uh, members of
the National Guard on active
duty. Um, full time, Um, in
order to help her for
preparedness, And so we've got
we got a small budget of about
$600,000. In order to do that,
with this year was really the
first year that we've been able
to to expend the money and start
the program. Um and, um we have
11 full time employees
currently, uh, working for us
under the state Active duty
program.
Um, to our our full time they
started, uh, last, uh um last,
you know, August and I've got
nine that are seasonal, which,
as I speak to this, what you'll
find is that they will more than
likely become full time
employees. But they're they're
They're part time employees, um,
on a seasonal basis because the
funding doesn't support them,
Um, for them. We've already, uh,
received their commercial
driver's licenses through
Central New Mexico. Um, and
we're in the process of working
with
Really specifically M, Countys,
Miguel County and flood
mitigation as we started working
through this program, one of the
really cool things that we
figured out, especially since I
wore the D HSE M hat now is that
there's FEMA money available for
for mitigation. And so we've put
in a notice of loss. Uh and
we're awarded six a little over
$6 million a year for the next
five years to bring people on
state active duty to train them
and put them out in the field
full time.
And flood mitigation projects in
in the two counties where
they're having a hard time
getting contractors to do the
work. Uh, because there's just
not enough contractors.
Um they, their government
employees are already tasked and
and have full time jobs, doing
the work that they do for the
county. And so, um
This program is gonna help those
counties recover and ensure that
that we mitigate what we're
going to find. We're gonna see
in flooding for the next 5 to 10
years. I think the other great
thing is that it gives me an
opportunity to get young
National Guardsmen.
Who are under employed.
Who don't quite have job skills
yet.
On the payroll full time.
Uh, working with dot learning to
work. Uh, heavy machinery.
Uh, and providing skills, uh,
and their and their they're
putting you in Pera, so they're
working through a pension and
when this program is over, we
may have some that have been on
for five or 10 years who can now
go work for DOT.
Forrester, uh, and a bunch of
other places and continue a
career in state service, which
we all know, uh, we need so, uh,
it's been it's that's been an
incredible program that we're
starting off. Um, additionally,
in state active duty, we put
another $4000 on our Air
Guardsmen come in and do mostly
Air Guardsmen to come in and do
election support. Um, through
the primary. They'll be back on
in November, and what they do is
mostly monitor the networks. Uh
for, uh, for activity. That's
that's uh uh
Normal.
And then we report that to the
secretary, uh, of like the
elections office so that they
can, uh, make decisions on
whether it's like a, um The
other thing is our search and
rescue missions. So we've we've
put on about 10 hours of flight
hours this year, uh, and
expended about $75,000 in, uh,
doing search and rescue. Uh, So,
uh, we have our black hawks that
have a hoist capability and a a
little more capability than the
state Police helicopter does,
uh, their helicopter went down
for maintenance.
Uh, for a while, and so when we,
uh when they're down, we
especially, uh, will provide a
lot more of that type of, uh,
search and rescue support.
Um, if you go over to slide
number three, I wanna talk to
you about the youth Challenge
program. So, um, we just, um,
graduated 63 from our program on
Saturday.
Um, that, uh
That program, um, was amazing.
One of the interesting pieces of
this particular class. It's
unique is we started credit
recovery.
Um last fall, and so what credit
recovery is is it allows a 15
year old to come to the program.
Uh, we're working with Hagerman
High School to start to take
classes to catch up so they can
go back into high school. Um
For the first time in the
program's history. We had one
young man
Who went into credit recovery
work really, really hard and got
enough credits to earn his high
school diploma from Hagerman
High School. Um and so, uh, that
program is is going really,
really well, uh, the other is
we've got, um
I believe it was 12 cadets that
graduated from youth challenge
had been accepted in Mexico
Military Institute.
They will go to the New Mexico
Military Institute in the fall
and continue their high school
and college careers. Uh, we've
got another three that are
pending acceptance. Um, and
that'll bring the total of about
30.
That are currently graduates of
the youth Challenge program that
are going to NM I to continue
their education and that, um,
it's been a challenging piece
bringing it together. Um, but
you know, this program may very
well be, um, um, in incredibly
important to these kids to stay
on the right path. After getting
through this program, um
And the only reason we're able
to do it is because we have the
no scholarship.
And in the, um in the in the,
uh, lucky borrello scholarship
that allows those kids to go to
college or high school there at
no cost to their parents if
their residents in New Mexico so
program is is is moving along,
fantastically not quite where we
want it to be when it comes to
enrollment, so I have the
capacity to have about 100 to
100 and 20 cadets, Um, in the
program for the full 22 weeks.
Um we're still fairly low, so we
showed up with about 85.
I at the beginning of the last
class, we graduated 63 because
there is some amount of
attrition. Um, we've got about
100 and 50, 100 and 60
applicants. Um
In, uh, in this next class that
starts in July, Um
And so hopefully those most of
those will show up. We had about
the same number for the last
class, and we only got about 90
that showed day one and so
Um
Hope to hope to grow that, uh,
piece up and so the other, uh,
the other piece of that is is,
um and and you guys give me
feedback. You don't have to do
to give it to me now, but we
sent, um, letters to every
representative and senator who
had, uh, kids graduate from the
program with a number there to
to invite you to graduation. The
banquet. Um, I think it's a
really good opportunity. Uh, if
you can make it to show up in,
we'll sit you with the families
and make sure that you know
which which district they're
from.
To meet with them and talk to
the families and truly get that
sense. Not only of how how good
the program is and what it does
for these kids because it's
amazing.
But really, you will walk away.
Feeling good about what you do,
Um, because we're changing lives
every 22 weeks in that program,
so that's where youth challenge
is right now. Uh, if you go to
slide number four
We'll talk about job challenge.
briefly, um, the pictures that
you see down at the bottom are
renderings of what we are
currently doing at Expo New
Mexico. Um, if if you know that
that facility, uh there's
there's some dormitories there
that really get used for 4H
during the state fair. It's
pretty much all they were used
for. Things were built back in
like the thirties and the
forties. Um
Pretty run down.
Uh, were in the process. I think
when we're done, we'll put about
$8 million into renovating just
two pieces of what is like a
quadrangle there and then some
classroom space. Um, that's
where our job challenge program
will be housed. We'll have the
ability to put 50 cadets when
it's at at full cycle. They will
go graduate from the Youth
Challenge program.
Come to job challenges if you
want go through intense job
training.
Um and then put you into the
workforce into the job that we
that you, uh, have been training
for. So if you wanna be an
electrician, we'll put you on
apprenticeship program. You'll
do the 22 weeks there. Same as
job challenge. You know all
their all their housing, food.
transportation costs are set.
And then we link them up with a
employer who will continue on
with their internship, and then
they got to be, You know,
electricians, H Vac specialist,
the first class.
We hope to start in January.
Um, we're gonna start with 15. I
say hope because
The construction piece is the
part. That's really the tough
part right now, so if we can get
construction done
Uh, get all of our, uh,
equipment in and furnishing
furniture, and we'll start the
program in January with 15.
Those 15 will be working
directly with, um the, uh, the
apprenticeship union there in
Albuquerque. I think I don't
remember what the local number
is, but what we're working with
those specifically this class Uh
And then as as funding comes in,
because we're short funding. Uh,
right now we'll talk about that
in a little bit, then, um, the
following class that will follow
on in
In July. We hope to try to start
to expand it.
As we grow to, hopefully in the
50. So, um, that program is is I
think gonna be a game changer.
Uh, for kids to really put them
in the workforce. I think it's
gonna be a game changer for
employers as well. Um, and um
and then I think it's also gonna
help you challenge because it's
gonna get us some visibility in
the Ben Leo County area where,
frankly, we just don't get
enough kids into youth challenge
from
Um
So
I'll talk you through some money
stuff. Let me preface. All of
what I'm gonna say af after
this, Um when it comes to money
and bills, Um I have not had my
meeting yet with the governor's
office. Um And so, uh, they've
They've been supplied this
information, but we haven't kind
of dwindled down to it. So, uh,
take some of it, Uh, with, uh,
This is just like me and what I
think, uh, we should get. Um,
and the other thing is with the
bills as well. So I've got my
meeting, Uh, later this week,
and then we'll kind of tweak
these numbers a little bit.
But I think the the issues that
I'll talk to you about whether
the numbers change or not, uh,
we'll still be relevant issues.
Um and so the, uh, the
highlights of the budget is it's
$37 million, as in totality, But
as you know, most of that is is
is federal, uh, share? Um, in in
budgeting for federal share that
we get from, uh, from the
national Guard, Uh, in our base,
uh, in our our base budget. Um,
we're we're asking for about a
$3.4 million increase You see on
Slide.
1.5 of that is is for the bill
that we're talking about with
Tricare. And so I think this
will actually come out of it.
Um, and we separate it off
because it it seems like a
really large number. Uh, but
it's for one very specific
purpose. And if we don't get the
bill passed, then that money
doesn't apply. Um, and in the
other increases, I'll kind of
walk you through as we go
through the next slide, So if
you go to slides, the number
six you'll see, uh, the first
funding increase, Uh, and that's
the Tricare reimbursement
expansion.
So that there's a bill that will
that will talk about here in a
little while, Um
And, uh and I think I've talked
to the committee about this in
the past. Uh, our our National
Guardsmen.
Uh, do do not have free health
care, and so they have the
opportunity to purchase Tricare.
Um, on their own.
Um, but we have a significant
number that are not covered with
health insurance. And so when
they're on duty, if they're
hurt, then they're covered. Um,
but normally they are not. And
if you know 20 something
20 something typically do not
pay for health care.
Um, And so we have a significant
number of our soldiers who are
not are able to pay for high.
It's about $50 a month. It's
relatively inexpensive. Um,
yeah, for us about 51.
Um
But
When
You're making minimum wage.
Uh and you're underemployed.
$50 a month becomes a little
more difficult, and for a
family, it's It's about $230 a
month and so I'll talk about
this in in a little more in, uh,
in the bill here in a minute.
Uh, if you go to slide number
seven. Our funding increases the
job challenge expansion, And so,
um
We? You have been great in
supporting this program.
Um, but what we've what we've
had in the last few years is
Uh, the program itself is about
$3 million in total.
Um and and that's the 25% match.
To the federal to the federal,
Uh, Bill.
The, um
2 million of that of that is in
our operating general fund
budget.
Every year up to this, Um
We have had a million of it that
has been appropriated
separately.
And it's not in our recurring
fund.
And so, um
What we're asking for is to take
that million dollars and put it
into the General fund so that
it's there every year because I
can't spend the federal match if
I don't have the million
dollars, um
What that what that led to this
year.
Um, is that, um
I'm not able to to fill all of
the positions that I need, Uh,
to get the program going, And so
that's why we're going with 15
instead of trying to fill the 30
or 50 cadets for that first
class. Um, so that's funding
increase number two.
Uh, number three is, uh, is a
small increase of 280.
It's $281,000, not a million
because that would not be a
small increase. Um
It, Uh
It's mostly to match um,
expenses that we have, um, out
of, uh, our master Cooper
agreement to ensure that
Um, we, uh, fund those
positions? Uh, 100% to match. Um
and so every year when we do
vacancy savings
Um
We take the vacancy savings out
of the match money.
And then
But I still have to find the
budget to match the the
expensive to every one of those
positions. And so it leaves me
short and in hiring 100% state
employees, um so that $182,000
will allow us to do that. The,
uh the the 80, the $89,000 is is
or the 9 $98,000 really is, uh,
to assist with
Uh, museum, Civil Air Patrol and
some state programs.
And it's a fairly small amount,
but it it would be helpful.
Um
Funding. Increased number four
is is really, um
Increases to allowing
expenditures. Um
So, PE, um, gives us funding.
Uh, reimburses us for funding
for food for our challenge
programs.
As we go to job challenge,
there's gonna be some, uh, some
reimbursements there as well.
And so that just allows us to
take in that money. Uh, and
expend it, uh, in the same with
the 400 categories when it comes
to, uh,
To additional funding through
the federal government.
So, uh, it it, uh
It's not. It's not a lot. Um
But, um
But it just helps us.
You know, run our budgets.
Uh, funding increased number
five. So
This is one that we talked about
last year.
Um
I am currently, uh, my for my
end strength for the army is
about 2800 and some change.
My in strength for the Air Guard
is about 1000.
Um, If you look on my books
today, I I show about 2400.
Uh And I show about 50 to 75
short on the ear guard. So just
under 1000.
I will tell you. In reality,
there's probably more like 2300
actual soldiers.
That are drilling and available
to us.
That leaves us about 500 short.
Um
We have, um
We're we're hurting and
recruiting.
The guard is turning around
nationally.
Um, but in New Mexico, it hasn't
turned around yet.
In order for me to make up 500
We're talking about years at the
current rate, even if things
turned around.
Um, Here's what I'm afraid of.
Is
There is a as the DOD looks at,
um
What
Where they're getting the most
for their money. So we have we
have global challenges.
In in in peers, Uh, threats. We
have global challenges in trying
to modernize the military as a
whole.
Um
But no funding increases or very
few.
And so
Everyone's looking, uh to
Get the most that they can from
from their budgets and their
military.
Um, what I'm afraid will happen
is if we continue to be short
personnel.
Is that we're gonna lose four
struggle.
And
Because they're gonna give it to
whoever can fill it.
And so we have to do more in
recruiting. That's my challenge.
Um, what we've seen, I think
across many years is that
We've lost rural New Mexico.
Um, the days of recruiting
And I say the words because it's
home to me. Dexter Hagerman Lake
Arthur. Those small communities
has become extremely
challenging.
I went to my old high school and
I talked to seniors, uh, this
last year as part of the the
pilot program what they're doing
with helping, uh, seniors go on
to college.
And what I found was that in
those rural communities they
know nothing about the military.
The teachers know nothing about
the military.
And so even when kids are
thinking about careers in the
military
They don't have anyone to really
ask.
And so we've got to do more.
To get into those communities to
recruit.
Not just because it helps me get
people in my formation.
Because I think we make
Life altering changes and
opportunities for those kids
that they just don't know about.
And it's You know what I tell
them is it's more than just
infantry and MP and flying
helicopters.
It's cyber.
Um, it's in intel. There are
some amazing opportunities for
some of our brightest kids.
Uh, to get a free education.
Um and not just in going to
college because you've already
offered that but in actual real
world experience
Our Intel squadron in
Albuquerque. Right now, in the
Air Guard side it does targeting
Um
For the For the Central for
Central Command. The Sancom area
like the most the most, uh,
active place in the world right
now.
They are doing missions right
now.
Uh, planning, uh, that are
executed.
Around the world. It's an
amazing amazing thing that they
do. Uh and I think a lot of kids
would be excited about it, but
we've got to figure out how to
get them engaged.
So what is that? 300 th what
does that got to do with
$300,000? It? It's it's gives me
the opportunity to provide
incentives for our current
guardsmen to help us recruit.
Um more people into the
formation so that we can we can
get our recruiters recruiting
instead of finding
opportunities. Uh, and then the
other thing it does is it gives
us an opportunity to do more as
VA.
Tutoring.
We have kids who want to join
the military who can't score the
32 necessary just to meet the
minimum.
In order to get in the military.
It's It's not a capacity
problem. It's not an it's not an
aptitude problem.
Every every human is capable of
learning.
It's getting them caught up from
where they currently are. And so
if we can do intense tutoring
We can get them the opportunity
that they desperately need, Uh,
to change their situation that
they're in.
So that's that funding increase.
Um, if you go to the next slide,
here's the proposed legislation.
Um And we we talked about this
last year. Um, we just didn't
get it into a bill. Uh, so
removing personal income tax
while on state active duty.
So
You did an amazing job years ago
and taking state income tax away
from active from the active
duty.
So if you're if you're an active
member of Kirtland Air Force
Base right now.
You pay no state income tax.
Our full time National
Guardsmen.
You know, when you called the
National Guard in
To go fight a fire or a flood.
Those people.
Those soldiers and airmen pay
income tax.
The only ones so during Covid.
When God bless the Kirtland Air
Force base, and they shut all
their gates and said, You can't
come in because of Covid.
And and we activated the
National guard, especially those
1st 30 days before the federal
money came in.
Um
They they came out and did what?
What? What The state needed them
to do every single one of them
had to pay state income tax on
that income.
And it's not what you intended.
I think it's just the way we
wrote the law.
And so, uh, what this does is it
proposes that we add state
active duty.
So that all of our guardsmen
when they're activated, do not
have to pay state income tax.
There's a there's a back end
share thing that we've got to
fix as well because we pay them
like contractors, so we pay him
a lump sum money.
We take out no taxes and then in
February, when they go to do
their taxes, they're surprised
that they don't get a refund
because they've got to pay the
state of New Mexico and the
federal government for the
amount of money that they made
while they were doing state
active duty.
So, uh, that's uh, that's that
proposed legislation. If you
turn to
The page. Uh, the next one is a,
uh, proposed legislation on, uh,
allowing us to get an OR. So
originating, uh, agency
identifier.
Um so
I think there's been some
changes in how background
investigations in the FBI DPS
looks at who's allowed to do
background investigations but
all of our job challenge and
youth challenge personnel are
required to have a criminal
background check in order to be
around kids.
But I can't do it because I
don't have an OR. I
And so, uh, this legislation
would allow us, uh, to to be an
agency that's allowed to have
one.
And then we can work with DPS
and the FBI to issue it, Uh, so
that we can do the background
checks that are required by
state and federal law. And then
I. I thought I had a different
slide on on the on the on the
healthcare thing. Um
But essentially what the statute
does is it allows us to Reim
Reimburse Guardsmen for State
Act for their health care. The
intent is to do, um
Staff sergeants E sixes and
below.
And captain Z and below really
that population demographic
that, um, is
Typically won't pay health care.
And so, uh, I I'd be glad to see
everybody.
But just that amount E sixes and
below and, uh, oath. Reason
below is about a $1.5 million
bill.
Uh, to do Tricare and so
Um, I don't want
That's that's a challenge in and
of itself. But I I didn't want
it to turn into a $3 million
bill. Um and then we start to
worry about covering people that
already would be covered
anyways. So, uh, that's the, uh,
the presentation. I
The one thing I told you, I
wanted to talk to you about that
you should know. So the governor
came to me.
Yeah, three or four weeks ago,
maybe six weeks ago and said,
Hey, I, I want you to do
something about, um, help us
help. I want the guard to help
us with
Keeping kids on the right track.
And so, um, she she asked me to
do a pilot program. Um
And, uh, we were gonna try to do
it a couple different schools.
We didn't have any money.
And so we kind of had to figure
out how do we do this with no
money.
And so what?
What we ended up doing is we
picked one middle school.
Um, And the the premise of it is
that
The the military uniform.
Commands some amount of respect
with kids.
And so how do we use the
standing that the military has
To help kids.
Really? What? What I call our
armoring them up to be to have
the resilience that they need.
In the environments that they're
growing up in.
Um And so we developed a
program.
Um, that one runs helps with we
use the literacy program this
year because it was funded. And
so it was. It was. You know, it
was easy. Um and but I think
that it's been productive so
far, uh, we went to CYFD. They
had some at risk funds for youth
that that weren't being used. So
we use some of that money. And
so we have a six week program
going on Jimmy Carter Middle
School. We just started week two
today.
Um, about 30 something kids. We
were hoping for 50. But we got
about 30 right now. Um, and for
six hours they do, Uh, four
hours of literacy.
Um, we're introducing the health
and holistic fitness at the Army
does so they work out.
We talk about nutrition. We talk
about sleep. We talk about ways
in which to reduce stress.
Um And then we we asked them to
do hard things. And and that's
Fridays. And so every one of
those kids were taking them out
and were busting him This last
Friday, we went to our complex
here in Santa Fe. They got on
the repel tower.
Uh, they did some of our
confidence course. Uh, they got
exposed to some helicopters and
some other things.
But we're asking them to do
things that are uncomfortable.
Um, they're gonna They're gonna
do water survival training in a
pool. And so if you can't swim,
you can imagine it's that's
challenging. Um, we're gonna put
him on rock climbing walls.
And give him to climb up and
then release themselves and let
them fall.
Um, we're doing those things
that I think
Kids at the at at at the middle
School age and II. I saw it with
my own Children.
They get to a point where they
just they just don't know how to
do hard things. And so they S
they stop.
Because it's uncomfortable.
We're gonna make them
uncomfortable.
Um, we're gonna have them
exercise and the intent is to
build a more lasting
relationship other than just six
weeks.
With some guardsmen that can
help mentor them.
Uh, and put him on the right
path.
I don't care if they join the
military.
I really don't.
What I want them to do is to not
show up to West Mesa High School
with a gun.
What I want them to do is have
the skills that they need.
To get past the environment that
kids have to grow up in right
now.
Um, and to be productive.
And I think this can go a long
way towards doing that.
This is just the pilot piece.
The question becomes, How do we
scale this?
Um
How do we put this in the places
that we need them and I and I
think that's
The longer conversation that we
have post this six week period.
Uh on is there Is there a
funding opportunity? How do we
do it? I'm I'm challenged from
the guard perspective in
If they're federally funded
I've got to be very careful
about how much engagement they
have, because it's a purpose
violation cause they're funded
to build readiness for the
guard.
Um
I can't use state active duty
people the way the statute is
currently written because it's
for emergency management stuff.
And so
We We? We're contracting some
current guardsmen through the
CYFD funding.
Um, in order to have them there
in a uniform every single day.
I've got some full time folks
that are volunteering out. You
know, a few hours here and
there, uh, to get the program
going, Um
But if we're gonna do this at
scale, then we've got to figure
out a different methodology for
doing it.
Glad to run it from our youth
programs, perspective and
military affairs. I think
there's value in that the
parents were very the parents
that are engaged in it are very
happy we're doing it.
It's just how and where, because
it's
The challenging piece becomes,
How do we do it in rural New
Mexico? Um and how do we do it
in multiple places at the same
time?
So
That's the presentation for
that, Mr Chair members of the
committee. I'll stand for any
questions you may have.
Thank you, General. Before we go
to questions I'd like to in
introductions of people who came
in late.
Good morning. Thank you, Mister.
Chairman. Um and my name is
Nancy. Brigadier General Welcome
and thank you for being an
appearing before us at I'm
Senator Nancy Rodriguez. I'm
from Santa Fe District. 24. And,
uh, I'm here as a very
interested guest today. In your
committee. I had an ordinarily
serve on in this particular
committee. But I'm happy to be
here and I have a few things to
say. Whenever you give me the
time.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr
Chair, and Co-chair, Uh Linda
Lopez State Senator District 11
On occasion. I have an
opportunity to come in and join
the committee. Um, during the
interim, but I'm a guest here
today also, and of course, very
interested in how I can offer
support. Thank you.
I am so going to miss you.
Good morning Represent Lord
District, 20 wrote in on my
motorcycle, So I was late. I
took the long way here. No, I
got here. I was listening in my
headset the whole time, every
word.
Anyways, uh, pause for being
late. I'm always happy to see
you. And and I like your pilot
project. Glad to be here. Thank
you.
District 22. Thank you, Senator.
Good morning, Mr Chair, members
of the committee and Senator
Shannon Pinto from District
three Mckinon San Juan. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Uh, for that we'll go to
questions. Uh,
Better, But, yeah,
Uh, thank you. Chair and
General. Good to see you.
I've been always enjoyed working
with your department. Thank you.
Uh so I just wanted just a real
quick one. I told the chair I'd
be very, very quick. The death
benefit that we put together
that took us about two years to
get that through. Is that fully
funded now? Are you feeling like
you're in good shape there? Do
you need anything else from us
on that? Yeah. Mr Senator
Padilla it it we have the money.
We have the policy in place.
And so, um, I think it's good.
The challenging piece
Um, is
I think it was funded. A million
dollars. Um
Or 2 million. The the
challenging would be is if
We were to have a mass casualty
event.
And there isn't enough funding
to take care of five or six
families. Um, the the way we
currently structure it is, um,
is that we would
Essentially give a payout to
everybody.
So that everyone had an initial
amount, and then we'd have to
come back and figure out where
the funding piece came after
that.
Um, whether it's a a special
appropriation.
Uh, or whether the governor's
office could help us fund it
from there. But, um
But it's it's in it it we were
in a good place to know that, um
If something were to happen
today, that those F uh, thank
you chair and so you know, I
thought about it after that
event that you had me at where
you recognize the fact that we
passed it for you and this and
that That was very kind of you.
Um and I. I was thinking a
couple of weeks later.
Is there a fund that we could
attach this to? In the event
that you needed more money
instantly, So maybe don't tell
me today, but maybe you can
think about that with your
counsel or somebody just to
figure out if there's something
we should attach it to to make a
draw immediately available to
that fund. I don't know what it
is. I you know, I'm a citizen
legislator here. I try to do my
best. But I want to find a way
to make sure that it's always,
uh, funded regardless of what
the amount might need to be,
because you're right. I mean,
there could very easily be
something.
Unfortunate. It's a larger
number of souls. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um
Brigadier General. Let me say
thank you once again for all
your work, and, uh, particularly
for your, um, efforts that you
continue to to make and work on
to be resourceful. You have
truly made a huge difference.
And you and your officers, your
staff. Um, but you do it with
very limited resources and I. I
can't believe that your total
budget is what it is on this
presentation. You have a very
small budget, considering your
your work. Uh, sibil.
But I do have a question that
being said Mr Chairman is, um
The amount that you have your
requesting 1.5 almost 1.6
million for the additional cost
for the TriCor the health
insurance. Um the question that
I have is that's only for the
member the guardsmen and not
covering any amount for the
family.
We already know that if the
family does not have insurance
You know, the guardsman is not
gonna be the soldiers are not
going to be happy. Um, and so
not only that, but you know,
cost of health care is so
expensive that not having the UN
pretty quickly. Uh, but let me
just, um, ask this question.
Have you considered um, adding
that request for even you can
put in. This is be my
recommendation. Mr Chairman and
go from there and leave it in
your hands. All right, but
consider just requesting the
full amount of the insurance.
For a family. And then if it has
to be you go before LFC, for
example, to make your request if
it has to be less than the full
amount for the family, even
50% 75% cost allocation. Um,
help from the Legislature would
be better than what they're
getting now. And so I just
wonder if maybe, um, you can put
those numbers together if that's
what you decide, General and and
go before the LFC with that full
amount and I. I think that
The 1.5 million would be
recurring dollars that you are
requesting just for the members,
and that's very meager,
Considering the amount of money
the state has has at this point,
and we're not expecting our
funding to go down much more.
Actually, it's staying within
very, very even, um, amounts in
recurring dollars coming in
every year. So, um, I can see
how an amount like this and even
more would break the, uh, the
state coffers, considering the
benefit that it would
Another thing. Mr. Chairman is
that every time as we know the
state puts in an amount of money
towards health care, Uh, health
insurance, Whether it's
behavioral, health, anything
having to do with health or
families? It always pays off.
The state has less expanse in
emergency care or other forms of
specialty care, and so on,
because people are able to go
get their physicals, their
ongoing um, appointments and so
on. So, um, I, I think you'd
actually re weal.
To the state, uh in higher
numbers than we put out for for
help in this case, but that
being said I, I let me just ask
you a quick question. I'm gonna
move on Mr Chairman is
Is this amount that I see on
your page five. General, you
have your budget in here Are
these the health insurance cost
the joint requesting the 1.5
0.66 something in here? 51.557
and also the amount for the
income tax problem that we have,
where our soldiers are getting
taxed income tax when they're
called. That looks terrible. Not
only does it look terrible, it's
terrible to to
That the state would be doing
that. But I'm just wondering if
those two numbers are in here in
the 3.4.
Million additional funds you're
requesting.
Yeah. Uh, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator
Rodriguez, so the the $1.5
Million is is included in that
three point uh like $3.6 million
3.4 million dollar increase the
the tax piece is not because it
would. It's not money you would
give me it would be money that
just wouldn't be collected. I
will tell you it's fairly
minimal. Um, I think if you look
at the the amount of, uh of tax
that of a traditional guardsman
would pay
Um, for, uh, for state active
duty. It's It's not a lot and
then I and, you know, frankly,
it's probably, um
Um
There. Theres federal salary
already doesn't get taxed so on
a drill week and they don't get
taxed, it's just when we bring
on state active duty, so like
the 11 kids that I have on state
active duty right now.
Uh, that we're paying. They will
have to pay taxes on every bit
of that income.
Uh and if they're on for for a
full year, it's the full year,
but it's really we're talking,
you know, for somebody who's
making 40 or $50,000 a year.
it's we're talking, maybe $1000
less per person. It's a pretty
small, you know, uh, impact to
To the tax base. Um, but it
would be included in money that
isn't collected versus what goes
into my budget. Ok, thank you,
Mr Chairman. And thank you,
general. But I'm thinking that
because it's minimal and even if
it wasn't but because of the
fact that it is you shouldn't be
contingent upon legislation
being passed to allocate an
amount like this that is so
small and necessary. It's likely
gonna be going into a
legislation like House Bill two,
which is the State General
Appropriation Act, and I guess
Point that I'm trying to make is
that it would be a good idea to
include the request in in your
request to the, um LFC and, uh I
can bring it up at the LFC also,
and see if there is a way we can
just put that into in here into
this budget, and then, um, we
can put the language itself with
the amount into House Bill two
is one of the items in there.
Uh, if as part of your budget,
you know, but, um, that's
something that of course, the
She would have to would have to
talk about, but I can't see a
problem with that. It's so
meager. The amount is meager as
we said, and yet it goes a long
way. But Mr Chairman general, if
you may want to respond, and if
not, I'll stop, Mr Chan, because
I know others want to speak.
General. Did you have something
to say? Mr Chair Senator is the
only thing I'd add to it is that
I think the intent that of of
that bill would be that it would
likely be, you know, wrapped
into a larger tax.
Package that usually gets put
together. Um and we we didn't
include it. Last year, we talked
about it and
And so we missed it. And so this
time we want to make sure that
we put a bill in and then I
think it'll get roped into
The the larger tax package.
Uh, that would be passed by the
committee. OK, And that makes
sense, too. Mr. Chairman, I
would have a plan B, though
Cause sometimes tax packages get
watered down sometimes you know,
you end up being a victim just
by virtue of political, um,
disagreements and so on here, so
I would have a plan B, just in
case the tax package does not
get through. If that's what your
plan is to have it in there to
have it a request to be put in
House Bill two as a general
allocation because this way you
only insure either way.
But thank you, Mister Chairman.
Thank you, General.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation. It's
always good to hear from what
you're doing. Um, I wanna thank
Senator Rodriguez for being here
because in this committee,
there's three of us who are
sitting members on LFC, Um and
and the and the senator is the
vice chair. So maybe after you
go to the governor and and get
the final numbers maybe we could
meet with if if Nancy if if
Senator Rodriguez has time with
you the three of us and and sit
down, So we know exactly what
you want and where you want it
so we can present it and be
The people on the committee that
will push for this, OK, just But
she said most 01 more thing.
Two stars of um Major general,
right?
Just just let you know. OK, So,
um, recruiting and retention I.
I, uh
As important as you are to the
states, Uh, your value is just
amazing. During Covid. It was
teachers and during the fire, it
was just support. Um, we need to
make sure we're getting the
people and we and the the
The amount you won is very
minimal. Um, but for what you
give to our state is amazing. I
was coming back from Europe and
a group of your people were
coming back from somewhere. They
couldn't tell me where, but we I
met him in, uh, Atlanta, and
they were just so excited what
they were doing and to talk
about it. And, um, I just think
you got it. I don't think
Everyone knows the extent of
what you guys do, and we have to
make sure we keep your mission
and maybe add more missions, but
we have to make sure we keep the
National Guard and that's where
the retention and recruiting
comes in. I would be happy to
help on the apps Bab for math if
you need it, But we do need, um,
at least a fund which you are
requesting, Um
So ABS Fab.
What else Specifically, would
you need? As far as recruitment
and retention? Um, Mr Chair.
representatives of the the the
probably the majority of it
would be, um, there have been
states that have had significant
success with offering
Um, a A, uh
I think the word bonus doesn't
work so well in in in statue,
but adding, uh, a pay element to
our guardsmen.
That go out and actively recruit
and find people, uh, that join
the service. And so that the the
the program would do is if a if
a soldier airman referred
somebody, uh to the guard, and
we recruited them, and they
shipped the basic training like
they
They went to basic training.
They would get a $500 amount.
Uh, check for
For for the for the referral.
Um, that that has been, you
know, fairly significant. It's
it's been done in the past
poorly, frankly at the federal
level, but but it's been done in
the past. Uh, and what no one
would ever argue is that when
it's been done, it's been very
effective at getting recruits
shipped.
Um And I think that's the That's
the tough part, especially, you
know, in these rural areas where
where we get some of our
soldiers that live but
incentivize them to go out and
try to get. Um That's what uh,
the probably the bulk of it
would go to
OK, Um, I think the senator
covered most of it and I was
going to ask
I think that's that's it, So I
just think we need to do as much
as we can for the National Guard
in New Mexico as far as funding
and everything you need, you're
not asking for much, so surely
we can fund it. So thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, General.
I just have a a few questions
for you. The real quick. The
recruiting challenges that New
Mexico faces that a nationwide
trend or is it
Specific to smaller rural
states.
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Martinez. It's a it's a national
trend.
Across all components.
Um, the the guard is typically
Better at it than most.
Um Some states are coming out of
it, so they're seeing
improvement. We're seeing some
slight improvement.
Uh, but I've got a 500 person,
uh, you know deficit to make up
which, at the pace that we're
at, you know, I I'm I'm right
now. I'm bringing in
Just slightly less than what we
lose.
And so we've got to figure out
how we plus that number up.
Maybe an additional
Plus 50 or 100 a year to get us
back to the strength that we're
at, Um, because the other
challenging piece of it is is I
can't argue for force structure
If I can't feel what I currently
have, and there's I. There's
opportunities coming in space
Cyber, um and and in defense
that that we're trying to grow
to, uh, that I just can't. I
can't I can ask, but I'm not
gonna be competitive.
Um, thank you, Mr Chairman
General.
Um, I remember a program.
Maybe 1516 years ago.
Or a recruiter from the guard
would go to
The Department of Veteran
Services and get access to
Discharge documents and then
build a an outreach list.
And I know that at one point
that was very successful and
I'm not sure if that program is
still there, but that might be
something that, uh
That you look at.
Yeah, Mr. Chair. Uh uh.
Representative Martinez. We have
looked at it. Um
And so I know when Secretary
Foxx was there it was. It was
fairly easy to get. Um, there
there is.
There's there's been various. Uh
uh, successes in getting not
only getting the information,
but frankly, getting my
recruiters to do something with
the information. Um, if you if
my staff, my staff will probably
chuckle when they when they
heard you say it because it's
been one of those things that,
um as I have my monthly meetings
with my recruiters I typically
hit on is how do we? How do we
get? Uh
Folks that are retiring or
leaving full time activity
service coming back to New
Mexico.
Get them to continue to serve
and, frankly, take advantage of
the benefits that they're in the
process of earning because when
you walk away from 10 years of
active duty service, and you
don't get your retirement, you
walk away from a lot.
Uh especially is is is when you
turn 60 when you can start to
collect a a National guard
pension, which is fairly
generous at that point. Um And
so, yes, we We are actively
working that I. I don't know
that we've had a lot of success.
We do get a lot of folks that
are transfer in.
Uh, from from the active
component. We eat a lot of
pilots that come in from the air
force and stay in, but, um, but
it is one of the ones one of
the, um Thank you, Mr Chairman
General.
Or you are you currently able to
go into the high schools?
Because I know at one point
there was a big push to recruit.
Um, kind of working with the
ROTC programs. Um, but then
there was a kind of a pushback
from PE D a few years ago.
That changed or you are you
allowed to go back into the high
schools now? Yeah, mister Chair
Representative Martinez, we we
are, um I asked my recruiters
all the time.
Tell me the places that we have
challenges.
Um, because one of the things
that we're trying to do
Is
Is not just the recruiters.
How do I get leadership?
So, um, so I have a I have a,
uh, a physician's assistant who
grew up in in, uh, in Encino.
Um it How do I get that person
into Vaughn, who can identify so
one of the one of the really,
uh, neat feedback that we had
from the kids at Dexter was
I. I was from there and so I was
able to talk to them. About what
My challenge is growing up in
that small community. I have an
appreciation understanding of
the culture of that community,
and I was able to connect with
them initially better.
Um And then, and then I can have
the recruiters going in like,
you know, get the ones that are
interested, and so, um, we're
we're growing to get those
opportunities. Um, we sponsor um
Uh, the, uh, The superintendents
have a, uh, a conference every
year, Um, in July, so we sponsor
it and we go to talk to them in
in the message we give all of
them is like I I'm not sure I'm
not trying to say that the
military is the answer for every
kid.
But every kid should have an
opportunity to understand all of
the choices that they have.
Uh, and fully understand them
the best we can. And the only
way we can do that is we go in,
uh and and get them to take the
A S VA, Uh, and get them to
listen to what opportunities are
available, because, um, I
remember when I took of the
ASVAB as as as a junior high
school.
It offered me occupational
choices.
I never really even thought of
because I just didn't know what
they were. And so it's primes.
The conversation for Where is
where is my life going to take
me And how do I get there? Even
if it's not in service to the
military, but I think it's a
great service to the kids to to
get that opportunity to see all
those other. Mr Chair General. I
agree, the more opportunities
that you give these kids.
Kind of as a way out.
Um, cause sometimes they start
to feel stuck in the position
that they're in.
Or, you know, growing up in
northern New Mexico,
You had that.
Small town. I'm never gonna get
out of here. I wanna move to the
Big city. But if you gave them
more opportunities,
Lot of people that I graduated
high school with went into the
guard.
Because it gave them the
opportunity for free education.
To learn a trade to to expand
their horizons. So
You know, I'm I'm glad that
you're making that outreach.
Um, because I think it's
important not only for the guard
But for the young people
Giving them as many
opportunities to succeed as
possible is only gonna help
everybody.
So I. I commend you for for
continuing that fight,
especially with schools.
Um, just just one more, um
Quick question. The the A. I
How How are you doing that now?
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez. We had been, uh, doing
them. I believe, uh we had the
opportunity to do them
separately, um, through a
contract.
Um, that's been closed.
Um
You know, we've we've tried
doing them through CYFD because
CYFD has the opportunity to do
them.
But it's not quite what we need.
And so, um
It's now become a mandate that
we do the backgrounds, uh, for
everybody in those programs.
Um versus kind of the cursory
one that we're able to do
through the military. And so,
um, we don't have a good
mechanism for that now.
The OR. I will allow us to fix
that. And I and I think,
frankly, the FBI DPS have just
kind of tightened up.
How they how they did things. Um
We? We just had that similar
challenge as we were trying to
do, Um
Backgrounds for this pilot
program because we're trying to
hire people in
Uh, and figuring out how we get
the backgrounds done, and CYFT
was able to help us with them
because they're gonna pay them
through a contract.
Um, but it's it's it's
challenging for us to do now.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. General.
I think it's just
It's more efficient to to al
allow you.
To be able to do that.
Instead of having to go through
a contract and go through a
third party.
It just seems more efficient.
If we put things in place that
would allow you to appreciate
that. So I, I
I'm all over that. I fully
support that.
Um
Thank you, Mr Chairman for the
time. Thank you, General. I
appreciate it. I appreciate you
being here and I thank you for
Everything you and the guard do
for New Mexico every day. Thank
you. Mr Tara. Yes, the general
the only question I got a couple
of questions, too. Of course, I
think the only the the quick fix
to, uh
To the state, Texas Just
basically, we're gonna take
Take the word Federal National
Guard or federal active duty.
Just take the word Federal off
of that, Uh,
After the bill itself, and that
will cover. Uh, our state. Uh,
Even when they're on state duty.
We would just it would be worth
it. Basically, um
Income tax for members of the
National Guard.
On active duty does get rid of
the word federal and we're
covered and would be able to
cover that tax exemption.
I think it would be a really
simple built to run.
How we gotta do is get it
through tax, which is a pain.
Uh,
isn't that I think it's an easy,
easy fix. You think, uh, that
would be the way to go.
Mr Chair, representative icon. I
agree. We've got some proposed
language, but it it it
essentially does that it takes
right now. It talks about
federal
And so it was a federal or state
act or ordered on the state
active duty. It's it's a very
minor language change we gotta
do is just take federal and
thugs that moves are negative
duties in in New Mexico period,
OK, we know how to fix it. OK,
let's get it passed.
Uh, Mr Chairman.
Mr Vice Chair.
You will. Thank you. Uh, the
only other question I have is
when you're going to the expert
New Mexico, Uh, you're gonna
take over the, uh, you're taking
over those old dormitories and
fixing them up.
Is that correct?
That's correct. So after a
general election, fix those up
what's gonna happen to the
projects that are for and if, if
a if you're occupying those
buildings, Mr Chair
representative, we're only
taking a portion
And so, uh, So we've been
working with, uh
With with the staff at Expo and
and, uh and so
There's the there are still
enough left.
For them to use for 4H. So
generally speaking, there's
About 30 to 50 kids that that
will stay there for some period
of time during the state fair.
Um and so should be of limited.
Limited, uh, issue for him, Uh,
in in Frank Os to what else in
Frank O and Dan Morning is
What he once once we see the the
really pretty side because it's
all like in a little quadrangle,
um
Probably had to do something
about the other side. Uh,
because they
Uh, they're all very outdated.
Um, in, uh, in not modern and
even in like the showering
facilities or
Um, you know, we're a little
more modest in how we equip, uh,
people to shower nowadays and
these are more
You know 19 forties military
style showers and so they
probably need to be updated as
well. And and so we're we're
working through that, and I
think one of the specials are,
uh, one of the capital projects
we're asking for this year is in
the middle of that quadrangle.
Some old concrete that's
starting to Spawl doesn't look
good. But we what we're
proposing is we put in
AstroTurf.
Uh, so that there is a facility
there so they can we can do
exercise for the program. Uh and
it's and it's a far better, um
Look for that entire so
hopefully a general that, uh the
whole thing gets fixed. I mean,
I I was I spent, uh, through
with with F FA. I spend, uh,
To two years. My junior and
senior year we spent a whole
week there with F FA.
That was when, uh the price of a
McDonald's was 15 cents so you
can imagine what year that was.
And that was the big sign right
out. You could just see it right
out the the where you went 15
cents for a burger. Well,
absolutely Nothing has changed
in the facilities since you were
there. OK, so it was it, OK, I
remember those. Thank you. Uh,
thank you, mr Chair.
Chair members of the committee
and thank you for your
presentation. The, um, tax
break. I think it make it sound
real simple, but, um, depending,
especially now with the
financial environment, that a
lot of our home buyers, some of
them don't even qualify for some
of the home loans is if you
wanna do after or before tax
deduction for this, um, active
duty, uh, because that will
affect financially where, where?
What they're gonna try to do as
they move forward, especially if
they're just starting out so
Really caution on where you put
that deduction, um, and how it
will affect the service members.
Um And I think that's more of a
comment then other than that,
the challenge leadership.
But I think that is the mid
school age being a mid school
teacher. Um, even experiencing
some of the, uh
I guess the the field trips, uh,
being in a different kind of
program, but going on to a ropes
course and really challenging
yourself. Uh, once you do that,
once you get over that hump you
feel like you can do anything.
I mean, you feel kind of
invincible, especially when
you're out there on your own
doing that, So I commend, you
know, having that ability to go
out there, but on that note,
too, in members of the committee
of Mr Chair is, um I got an
email and I sent it to a couple
of you. Um, just a couple weeks
ago that the ROTC at Gallup High
was going to the program was
going to be next. Um, I have not
gotten further details than
that. Was that the gentleman
that was in charge of it, Um,
was very concerned. Uh, it was
very
Interesting because at the
graduation they actually
recognized all the graduates
that were signed up to go in,
Um, in which branches they were
going into, and that was
probably the first graduation. I
went to where they acknowledge,
um, the students that were
already signed up.
And in that, too, with the as
Fab and I don't think it's just
also the as fab or also seeing a
lot of students that are, um
doing the pre college credit
stuff. Um, I've heard a couple
of, uh, students that already
were able to get their CNA
stuff. So are we helping them
with testing Because, you know,
getting out of high school and
then putting that burden on your
parents? Um, those tests aren't
cheap, especially if you don't
pass the first time and you do
need
The crash course to pass some of
those, um, to get through it.
Some of them. Um, we know even
with doctors that the first time
they take those tests, it's uh
Statistically, they're highly
likely not to pass it the first
time and have to take it again.
So
Uh, even with our teachers
If we have some students that
are in there and able to go for
their licensing, are we helping
them so I don't necessarily get
well follow upon you and your
budget. But where else can we,
um, spread out those costs
through the other departments,
But thank you. Thank you for
your presentation.
Thank you, Mr Chairman for
allowing me to speak.
Hi. Good morning, General. Uh,
everybody asked the questions I
want to ask, so I'll be very
brief.
Uh, I agree with Senator
Rodriguez you we need to make
sure that the families are
included. I mean, this might as
well go ahead because it's such
a small amount for the amount of
money that we spend here in
government.
You guys are asking for a small
amount.
Um
I would also you need to be very
careful. Things can get in tax
packages, and they can get taken
out in committees and line item
vetoed, so there's no guarantee
that once again the tax package
is going to stay there. So
you're gonna need this much
support from Democrats on the
minority. I can't do much, but
I'll support you, but, um, as
much part from the governor and
and the Democrats as possible on
that.
Um, I don't like you using CYD.
I
Have issues with that. Uh, I
would rather you have that
directly. That's a big problem
for me because it's kind of a
dumpster fire over there
anyways, and high turnover
stuff, So I'd rather have you
guys doing that directly than
going through them. Um, the
other thing I had. I like the
pilot project. I think that's
great. I'd like to hear more
about that.
And you should do with the state
plan. I don't know. What is your
budget for going out in the
community? Because the state
police has a nice budget. They
show up with this really cool
truck. It has all this
information you get to drive the
truck. Uh, and simulator in the
snow. What do you guys have for
budget? How are you getting out
into the community to tell
people about what you have to
offer? Yeah, Mr Chair. You know,
Representative Lord, so all all
of those things that when we do
those, it's all coming out of
federal funding. So there's
I have recruiters that are
federally funded. They have a
budget for for advertising and
and and for. You know, if you go
to you go to BA a basketball or
football game, you might see a
punching bag or some other some
other things that are there. Um,
that's all funded through
through federal funds. And so,
um, the the vast majority of
what we need for recruiting is
there it's It's the additional
things that aren't quite covered
underneath that that become more
difficult to do. And so
recruiters are absolutely
forbidden from helping
Improve their ASVAB score. Um
and so they can give him a
testing guide, Uh, as a study
guide, but that's it, so, having
the ability to bring in a a an
experienced teacher, um, who can
sit down with a kid and run them
through some tutoring? Uh, and
where they're having problems? I
think that's where there's
value and there's just not a
federal way to do that. And so,
uh, that's why we're asking for
the money to assist with that.
And I understand that, uh,
because in in Torrance County
specifically, it's very rural.
They're
Out of a lot of stuff. Torrance
County is they have huge events.
They have big parade. Everybody
comes in, so I would highly
recommend you go. When events
are happening. You don't need to
go and stuff isn't there? Go and
glom onto the stuff right there
Because the state police come
and I watch them recruit kids
all the time. They put him in
there. They play around with all
the stuff in the truck and then
boom. They have them recruited
right out right there on the
spot, so I'd highly recommend
you go to events. Uh, the fairs,
the parades all that stuff,
especially out in rural America,
And please include Torrance
County because we
Left out a lot of stuff, so and
there's a lot of kids that need
a lot of direction, and I think
military would work well for
them talked about specifically
for for with you. Um, that's all
I had to say. Thank you. Thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak. Thank you.
Uh, you're welcome. No seconds,
OK, representative block.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, I'll
I'll try to be quick. Uh,
General Aguilar, I appreciate
you for being here today and so
a couple of questions I see on
the website it talks about
education assistance, as like a
big
Part of why someone would want
to be recruited why someone
would want to work with the
National Guard. But in this
state they passed
I didn't pass it. Someone else
passed it. The opportunity
Scholarship, which essentially
gives free
Taxpayer funded college to
everyone who wants to go.
So does that. Really have you
seen recruitment?
Tamper off because of education.
And
Have you seen that effect at
all?
Your department.
Mr Chairman.
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh, uh.
Representative Block. It's hard
to it's hard to know.
Because
It. It happened right at the
same time as Covid and a bunch
of other things happened and so
What's the drop off in
recruiting? I'm not sure. Um, I
think there's there's challenges
between how, uh, how. We, um
Um, you know, get in touch and
communicate with this generation
is just different. Uh, I think
adjustment we've got to make, um
The S.
Um so free College for everybody
is great.
Um
But it but you're right it. It's
not a differentiator, um, for
joining the guard, one of the
reasons why we think Tricare,
uh, can be a game changer.
There's multiple advantages not
only making sure people have
health care, um, but
Uh, it's it's it's a recruiting
incentive.
Frankly, it's an employment
incentive for employers. If you
hire a guardsman who comes with
their own health care, uh,
because, uh, as you know all
about $1000 a month, at least,
uh, from from the employer side
to provide health care for, uh,
for employees, So that's that's
the reason we're looking at
that, Um
But we know that, um
There. There are still other
benefits that come with it. And
so, uh, if you look at, uh if
you join ROTC, and there's 22
different ways that you can
take, uh uh, assistance one is
through tuition and fees, which
you shouldn't do in New Mexico.
But if you do the lodging and
life one, you get $5000 a
semester. Uh and that goes
towards helping you pay for you
know where you live your room
and board And so I think there's
there's other incentives that
come
That you can that you can put on
top of it, and still, federal
tuition assistance applies as
well. Um, and, uh and you can
pass those to your Children. And
so what? Tuition assistance I
have left.
Um, we'll go to my kids. So my
daughter I've been holding her
off from from UN M because of
opportunity and lottery. But
when she goes to law school, um
that's when she'll start to reap
that benefit. And so I think
what we have to be better at is
how we communicate.
And differentiate that service.
Um And, uh, including I talked
to a kid in Dexter High school
the other day. Who said I'm not
going to college? I'm gonna go
be a construction. I'm gonna go
work contracting. I'm gonna go
build houses. Um, And so I said
Well, like tile, HVAC. Well, I
always want to do HVAC was it?
Did you know that I have a
Uh, engineer company down the
road, and if you go to basic
training in in advanced training
will make you H Vac certified.
Um And not only will we train
you like, like the free
training you can get New Mexico,
But I'm gonna pay you while you
do it.
Um
And so it's It's making sure
that we're we're, uh
Giving the full story or is
probably longer than you wanted.
No, thank you, Mr Chair, and
that was a good answer. I think
that's good that we
unfortunately we have to focus
on other strengths. But they are
there. So I think that's
important to try to
Shift away from the Oh the
college is is the way to go. You
know, Because a lot of people
years ago this was one of the
ways that they could move up in
the world, You know, Join the
military. You get an education.
You can use that your whole
life Now we're giving that to
everybody for nothing.
And we're devaluing.
A good reason why people come
come join you. And that's
probably why you're you're down
by 360 people you need to
recruit. I believe that's
annually correct.
OK, Well, thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you for that one other
question. I know. A few years
ago. The governor, not this
governor. The previous governor,
uh, they put about 250 personnel
on the border to help with the
crisis. And I'm wondering, uh,
Did you get guys still have that
personnel?
Uh, gap then that you do now.
And
Also recently I know that you
guys had to send some National
Guardsmen to
Joe Biden's inauguration.
Was that a similar amount of
people and was that a similar
cost?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative Block so
Um, So if you go back to 20, I
was, say 2017 is when the, uh
Um, we did. We did this kind of
a a hybrid. We've done two or
three different things on the
border. So that was a federal
title 32 mission.
That was under the control of
the governors, Uh, at the time,
so every every border state had
a federal funding to activate
guardsmen to provide assistance
to CBP.
Uh, for for things that they
were short on.
That program ran into 2019.
Um, it it it kind of sunset it a
little bit and what it did is it
turned into a title X
activation. And so, um, there
are currently National Guardsmen
from all over the country that
are activated and rotate to the
Southwest border.
That feel, uh, the request for
assistance from the Department
of Homeland Security. Uh, two
DOD.
For, uh, for those things that
that CBP says they need help
with
That's currently the case. We've
we've
Not had any new Mexico guardsmen
that have been activated for
that mission.
Um
We started to a couple of years
ago and then Allied allies.
welcome started, uh, with, uh,
refugees out of Afghanistan, and
so that MP company was diverted.
Uh, to, uh,
Uh, to Virginia to do that
mission, so they never really
got to the Southwest border.
We're about to activate some of
our helicopter crews, Uh, that
fly lakotas to support that
mission in a few months. Uh, And
so that's the current state of
where those who are now
Um
The the challenging piece of
what you need on the Southwest
border as it applies to the
title. 10 mission. Uh, is the
that CBP, Um
At every at every region will
say. Here's what we think we
need.
That is filtered up to homeland
security. And it is it is
filtered into a request for, uh,
assistance that goes to DOD.
DOD then says here of all the
things that you asked for,
here's what we're willing to do.
Uh, And then those those
assignments are staffed with
personnel now from the guard. At
one point, it was even active
duty. Um
And that's that's how those
positions go. Um, the
challenging piece if you ask.
Somebody in the El Paso sector.
Um, what they ask for what they
got in the R FA and what they
received may differ in numbers
and assignments.
But that's all the negotiation
between homeland security and
what they think is important and
what DOD decides that they're
willing to fill.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for that. And I appreciate that
general because I know in like
California, for example, they
have person they actually
helping apprehend fentanyl from
coming across the border.
In the California region and
then in Texas. They literally
have personnel on the Texas side
of the border, who are just
deterring.
Illegal immigrants from coming
across. So I'm wondering
currently Do you guys even have
that authority Because it it
sounds like other states Do Mr
Chair.
So, Mr Chair representative
Block the so operation Lone Star
out of Texas. Um, um, the the
California has some some state
active duty and then Arizona may
have a few right now they've
gone back and forth. Um, over
over the last couple of years.
uh, that state funding utilizing
state active duty emergency
authority of the governor, Uh,
in order to do that, um
The, um
That's not in the current
situation that we're in today.
Um
You know, and that's really
You know a decision. Um
What? What? I will tell you.
From my homeland Security
emergency management hat as I
really started to look at at.
How do we build expertise in the
Southwest border and ensure that
we're tracking that information?
Better? Um, is that um, that
What? What We what we are seeing
across the nation is is I've
asked. Even Texas is
Uh,
There's been very little impact
to
Then Mo narcotics are coming
into the country.
From those from those, uh,
operations. The folks in
operation Lone Star will tell
you that the community of Eagle
pass that was severely affected
by the number of migrants that
were being released from that
community. Uh, that pressure has
been alleviated.
Um, likely the number of people
coming into the nation probably
hasn't
Um
And and drug trafficking routes.
Uh adjust, um
You know the cartels adjust.
Uh, how they do business. Um
As as they see gaps in places
and so one of the things that we
talk we've talked about locally
and nationally is, uh and I
advocate for counter drug
program because we do have
Uh, funding in New Mexico for
counter drugs specifically to to
assist law enforcement.
Um, is that those funds are not
nearly as agile as they should
be.
Um, in in the same happens with
the federal government. And so
as as things have changed in
traffic patterns across, uh, the
the border states, um
The funding and the manpower
that is applied to all the
federal agencies, uh, that work
these issues have not adjusted
is typically it's some algorithm
that somebody runs over multiple
years. Um, and and so we're too
slow.
Nationally.
To adjust to the trends that the
cartel can change at. And at a
at a moment's notice. Um
And so what? What we need is a
probably a larger um
Conversation about what's our
state strategy?
For how we work.
From from the Southwest border.
All the way into the communities
are being affected.
Across multiple agencies, and
that's the conversation on the D
HSE M side with law enforcement
that we're talking through now.
Uh, but it starts with our
intelligence fusion center
hasn't been a strategic
intelligence center that it
should have been from its
inception. Uh and we're in the
process of adjusting that and
frankly so that in in a in a
committee like this, our intel
people can come in and give you,
uh, a a detailed analysis of all
the things that impact new
Mexicans So that as you, uh,
apply resources and policy
across the state that you're
doing it from a common picture
of what we
Was happening and what's
impacting New Mexico?
Um, that's the overall goal for
our fusion center. It's probably
gonna take us a couple of years
to get there. But that's thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
General. Uh, I. I think those
are very salient points that you
made. You know, I think we do
need to have a larger
conversation about the state
response and I hope that we can
have that especially in the next
upcoming special session. Maybe
Mister Chairman. Uh, but I, I
think that that is something
that the governor should
definitely be looking at.
Because as we've ascertained
today, that's the governor's
prerogative. She has that power,
and she's currently the only go
On the border that has not
activated the National Guard,
and I think that's something
that we need to continue to talk
about. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, General for being here. Um,
I know on the the funding
increase for the Tricare, I
think, believe we talked about
that last year. We've heard the
comments. I'll try to be quick.
We've heard the comments from
folks worry about families and
paying that and upping that and
and I assume, and we've talked
before. A lot of times. You're
worried about those younger
folks. Usually the folks who
have a family are gonna step up
and and pay this usually right
and even the lower ranks, But,
um
I think we We need to get this
done. We have to get this
treatment and retention as well.
And I think we've all been in
this place. I eat if I when I
was on active duty.
If I would have had to pay, I
probably would have said Hey, 50
bucks so
50 bucks. I could use somewhere
else to drill weekend and they
get their small check. And
they're trying to figure out
whether that college student
it's like, Well, I'm healthy
right now. I'm OK. But
With what we're asking, and
Somebody gets hurt. You know,
it's just can be catastrophic to
that person in their health care
costs and what happens to them.
So we need to make that happen.
Uh, on the recruiting and
retention. Um, this is so
important. Folks have commented
on this as well. I just wanna
reiterate to the committee that,
um just like in other areas, you
know, we talk about law
enforcement. We talk about
educators. We talk about
behavioral health folks. There's
just a workforce shortage, and
so many folks are leaving
retiring and we're not filling
these positions.
So I think in some ways
We're in a position here as
well. So we really need to fund
this.
Um, and make sure this happens
as well. Um
Because if we're really talking
about opportunities for people
Um, there could be a decrease in
these opportunities. Just fact
you could be use losing slots
can be losing missions and
you're right. Um, from DOD
standpoint, right? They're gonna
go well, we're gonna go where we
really need to support this.
Uh, finally, uh, thanks for
explaining a little bit about
the intricacies and things that
are going on in the border. I
think sometimes people don't
understand kind of the state
mission. Federal Mission,
Homeland Security side DOD,
Right. It's it's very complex on
what those missions are and what
In our military can do, um
You know, even with American
citizens, So, um
Thank you. And thank you for
Having those dual hats. I think
that's kind of important being
able to I. I know it keeps you
busy, but I think having you
there brings that perspective to
where someone who was just doing
the homeland scene that, uh
So thank you. And I just wanna
try to support you and, uh, as
many of the members here
On getting some of these, uh,
funding increases and get these
getting this legislation passed.
Thank you.
Any more questions for committee
members.
Mr Chairman, just quickly in
This came from Senator Shannon
Pinto a few moments ago when she
came to talk to us, we we may
need a little clarification just
on a question that came up for
the income taxes general that
we're talking about that people
are having the soldiers are
having to pay when they're
dispatched here. Does that apply
also when they're dispatched out
of state? Uh or how does that
work? Mr. Chair? Senator
Rodriguez? No. So if
As as the current tax law is
written.
If it if the money is coming
from the federal government.
Um
Or drill pay.
Your annual annual training pay
like if they're doing things for
the military.
They pay no state taxes on that
income.
Um if they're doing something
and service to the state of New
Mexico
State active duty.
We tax that that portion of
their income because the the
money
Uh, gets paid from the state of
New Mexico.
And so there's not an exception
for it.
Um it like I said, I think it
was just and and and to be
truthful.
Maybe, uh, when that law was
passed, I think it was in the
mid two thousands.
We didn't do a lot of state
active duty.
Every once in a while. A fire a
day here a day there. It wasn't
a big deal. Um, but as we're
starting to see greater use of
the guard
Under the under the authority of
the governor for state active
duty purposes. The state of New
Mexico is paying 100% of the
bill.
That's where we start to see
that they're being taxed and and
it frankly, it's just an equity
thing. Um, where where you say
I'm the one out here doing this
thing?
Uh and I'm paying taxes while
the you know the active duty
folks that are that are not
doing this or not paying taxes
just simply because of their
status and who's paying the
bill.
Thank you very much for that
response. It's all I have, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you, General I.
I have a I have a question you
mentioned earlier that a
guardsman probably makes around
50,000 a year.
And you know, the concern I have
is on. Everybody said that on
recruitment and redemption, you
know if the family members don't
have insurance
In the garden between 50 Tho I
mean $50 for himself. But what
does that do to the family? It
doesn't have no insurance, You
know, Like, At one point, my
wife was paying $700 a month for
her insurance, You know, so we
need to address this issue to
try and also cover
Family members.
Because you know if a garden is
there, and you don't have
insurance for the family, he's
gonna say you know what? I got a
job to pieces more money.
And that's where you, uh, is
that a problem that that you're
facing Mr Chair? Uh, yeah, I
mean, look, I know nobody on
this side is going to tell you
that we don't want to see
everybody's families covered in
their health care insurance in
in its totality, Um
The the The federal government
has been trying to work through
this thing as well.
Um, the bill becomes
significantly larger at, um
Uh, $50. A month versus two. I
think this year is around 2 42
50 a month. Uh, for an entire
family, Um
But those are valid points. Um,
the the
The vast majority of the I. I
and I I'll get you those
statistics. I think the vast
majority of the soldiers who
don't have health insurance
right now are single.
Um And so, um, you know, I look
at it from the readiness
perspective of, um
I when when the nation needs a
soldier when the state needs a
soldier.
One who has health care and
who's taking care of the small
little problems.
Doesn't have large problems
later, especially the ones that
we then have to send them back
for mobilization station because
they just can't get past their
medical issue.
Um, And so that's kind of the
lens that we look at it from
Certainly. Um, if if the
The the intent of the
Legislature to say just work is
gonna cover everybody and their
families. Nobody on this end
would have an issue with that,
Um
It. It's just a matter of
Of where the funding level would
be in, and I think the Senator
Rodriguez's point earlier. The
intent I think of writing the
statute would say would be to
give us the authority to cover.
Um and then, um, and then, um,
with a priority.
So that whatever funding was
available.
Uh, that we would utilize it and
prioritize it to those
Who are less likely to have
insurance because I will tell
you that today my behavior help
people will tell you that. Not
only are people not doing
nothing and not have health
insurance, um
They they will not do follow up
treatments on uh, you know,
folks are identified with
suicidal ideation.
Um, past the the little bit that
we can do for them internally.
Uh, because they can't cover the
Copas.
Um, to to go do the behavioral
health issues. So, um, we wanna
make sure that soldiers are are
fit.
To do what the nation needs them
to do from a from a physical
perspective and a mental health
perspective.
And and covering them with
health care, uh, allows us to be
to be in a better position for
them to do so.
Even though as we know there's
challenges, even getting
appointments when you have
health care.
Uh, thank you, General. I have
another question that you know
this happened back in the
eighties, when the riots
happened in Santa Fe.
A lot of garden men.
Were involved in that and
imagine a lot of them are
suffering by PTSD. How are they
taking care of now?
And Mr Chair. We've We've looked
at this, Uh, as as the statute
even today exists, as is
currently written.
The only remedy for guardsmen on
state active duty, which is what
happened during the riots, so we
called them up and paid them
with state money.
The only remedy they had was
workmen's compensation. And so
if they filed a workman's comp
claim
They would have
Been entitled now what we know
is that many of them did not.
Um and we've gone back in
retroactively done some things
for them for quite a while. I
think you know.
Teresa is gonna retire at the
end of this year, but she's
she's probably the the
institutional knowledge we have
on this issue. Uh, because she's
got a lot of those documents. Um
You know there was there was
some there was some agreements
that were made with the state
later on, Uh, I think probably
through risk because they would
have been the people who had it,
uh, to help them with long term
prescriptions and those kinds of
things the the issue becomes, um
A a guardsman.
Who, um
Who didn't retire.
And has health care benefits
later on in life, Uh, they did
four years and got out.
Um if they suffer long term
issues.
There isn't a remedy.
Uh, for them to go back to like
the the the the VA, Uh, like you
would with a 214 and say this
happened to me 20 years ago. I
have an issue today. Help me.
Um and that's you know, we know
that's challenging in of itself,
But there's a mechanism for
that. There isn't a mechanism
for state active duty.
Um today, one of the reasons why
federal dual status reform at
the federal level is so
important.
Is, uh, in one of those premises
that they're going under is how
do we allow Guardsmen to be used
by the governor on state, Active
duty and reimburse the federal
government back so that they're
on a federal status and all
these other things apply.
Um, for that very reason is
because we we are exposing them
to potential hazards.
Um, even even you know, when you
go to a fire or a flood, um,
where there are there are things
that you may be exposed to that
you may not have effects for
chemicals later on, Um there
isn't a mechanism to come back.
Unless you file the workman's
comp claim when you did when it
happened to you, so it's it's a
hole and a gap in in how we
treat Guardsmen specific to
state active duty. The riots are
is a is a perfect example of
Uh, thank you for that general.
That's the only question I have,
you know, because you know, like
when I came out of Vietnam, it
took me 42 years to get my
benefits from from the military.
And you know, these are like
these. This PTSD stuff is real
stuff, you know?
You might not affect you right
when you're younger, but you get
older. It does affect you. But
anyway, thank you for the
presentation, and you're not the
only one retiring this year.
Anyway. Thanks for the
presentation. You know what? Uh,
General. It's been an honor
working for with you For the
past years, you know, And if I
could do anything else, I
Be more than glad to help you.
I appreciate you, sir. Thank
you. Thank you so much to the
committee for the time. I
appreciate it, uh, you know,
before we go to the next deal
here, I'd like to, would you,
uh, kind of brief the the
Committee on what's happening in
the 28th?
When the angel fire
And that dedication of the wiess
if you would
Yes, sir. Um, Mr Chair members
of the committee, the department
of Veteran Services, uh, will be
doing a ribbon cutting, uh, for
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
wall. Uh,
June 28th at 11 o'clock in Angel
Fire, and we've already uh,
we've sent the invitations to,
um GSD to the governor's office
And everybody in this committee
is on those invitations.
Thank you. And that much, you
know, make people aware of
what's there And, you know,
ladies and gentlemen of this
committee, it would be nice if
you guys uh, took some time now.
Go attend the very important
So
June 28th. Yeah.
This is
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I think last year as a
committee, we, uh
We send, Uh, Mr Fleetwood
upstairs to ask for permission
for the committee to be paid DM
or mileages to attend this, Uh
The ceremony, which is supposed
to have happened last year.
Fact is, I believe we did, uh,
we, uh, we
Uh, for a permission for the
ribbon for the
Groundbreaking as the ribbon cut
in. Of course, we never got to
get to the
Go to the ground breaking or the
beginning.
But, uh
I think, uh, it it's there
would, uh get, uh, would would
I love Mr Flee what to go before
the Legislative Council and ask
for a day for the in Miley's.
I think it would be a good idea,
and, uh
I will.
Oh, I, I I'll move. I'll make a
motion for that.
My second
Not a pop the first proper
second and the objection.
No objection, Jared.
Uh, thank you, Ed. Appreciate
you.
OK now, before, uh, we're gonna
move to number two. Do I work
plan in Jersey?
Um
Mr Chair. I think everyone's got
somebody else wanna get
recognized. I'm sorry.
So, um, Mr Chairman. I think
everyone's got the work plan in
their folders.
Um
It contains elements.
Of the things that this
committee has been working on
for the better part of a decade.
Um, because most of those things
haven't really improved home.
This is still a problem. Suicide
is still a problem. Those things
are all on there. Um, I have
heard from several members about
Veteran admissions at state
parks. I think that's something
that's coming up, so I I've
added that if anyone wants to
add anything to it now or over
the next several months
By all means, Please let me
know.
Mm.
Um, thank you. Mr Chairman. I'd
like to hear from our bases,
especially Holloman and and
cannon on the, um, where they're
at with the PF clean up.
Where they're at with that with
both of those places, um Canon
and Holloman, um, it can And
there's also, um, I heard the
number of contractors supporting
the range has decreased in the
operating hours are decreasing
as well. So those are so we need
to look at Canon and, um, the
Osprey. The CV 22 Osprey, Um
The the We need to know the
status of training and the
number of aircrafts a cannon.
Um, I read about media that the
CV 22 was, um, has so something
we can look at it it
specifically at Canon and
Holloman is PFS. Also, I'll give
you my notes. If not, um not
only the base the PF, but
there's there's a lake called
Holloman Lake about 11 miles
from Gordo that is contaminated
with PFAs affecting the birds,
the wildlife and I think the big
thing I wanna know is
Who was educating the people who
live around there.
Cause I don't know if, um I know
my brother lives in El Gordo,
and he knew nothing about this
and they hunt and fish all the
time all the time. So this is PF
and a whole bunch of chemicals.
There's a laundry list that are
being affected at this space.
And, um
I just want to know where
they're at in cleaning it up
because it's really important to
the people who live there and
who's educating them on what's
happening around their area.
OK, um
And then Kirtland. We also have
a a jet fuel leak. I'd like to
see the status of that also
because it doesn't seem to be
moving at all as far as the
cleanup.
So our bases are toxic places
these days, and we need to make
sure we're staying on the people
who are supposed to be cleaning
them up.
Um
The other big thing in in the
bases. There's this five and
thrive. It's education, child
care, health care, housing and
and spousal support. We need to
make sure we're we're keeping up
with that, because we wanna keep
our bases. We don't want them to
get them on any kind of, um,
any. I forgot what it was called
The brick where they could be
closed. We want to make sure we
are keeping up with what they
need what they expect from New
Mexico so that we are an ILS are
the big things. I'm looking at
The basic Thank you kind, sir.
And, uh, I'm just a lowly
advisory member, but I think we
should look at these issues that
they presented today. But I do
have a question that maybe
somebody can answer for me if
we're going to do this mandated
behavioral, uh, care that's
coming up in the special
session. How is that gonna apply
to our veterans? Does anybody
know how that's gonna work out?
Cause I skimmed it. I didn't
look at detail. Is there
something in there that says
with the mandated behavioral
therapy
I'm coming. I won't You think I
would miss a special session
where I could ask you guys
questions for hours. You kidding
me?
Um, Does anybody know how that's
gonna play out? Serious
question.
They're gonna push that back on
the on the
On the federal part of it, I. I
would think if you're a veteran,
you and you're having mental
problems they grow probably say,
Well, you need to go back to the
VA. You know, I don't know, but
that's a good question. Because
you know, there is a lot of
problems that are seen out
there.
And they do. They do need to be
addressed, But I don't know that
that's a real good question. And
thank you chairman. That was one
of the first thing I thought of.
I thought, OK, we're gonna
mandate this and I I'm concerned
already about where we have it
just for everybody. But ending.
Yeah, I know everything costs
money. We have lots of money. We
can just
Um, yeah, So I'm just I'm just
very concerned about how this is
gonna play out for because I
didn't see an exemption. And if
there's exemption that's
horrible, because then they're
exempted from getting any type
of care. That's kind of
mandated. But can you mandate
the care and is there gonna be
the care And where are we gonna
put them in a nauseam? So
anyways, I think there's just
something we should all think
about and how it's gonna affect
the veterans.
Good Mr Chair on that question,
Uh,
We will be having a meeting at C
CJ on the 27th and 28th of this
month or the 26 and 27.
This month. So, uh, we'll be
discussing, uh, basically the
draft of those bills.
Uh, that are coming up and, uh,
funding and stats will be coming
up so
Anybody can attend and use your
special days. I believe if you
wanted to.
But, uh, it it it is open on the
26 to the 27th.
For JC.
then you're welcome to have your
terms The last time thank you
for not attending.
Thank you, Mr Chair, totally
different topic than whatever
Lord talked about. But Mister
Zhang just kidding, Mr Chair.
Uh, so I have contis who they
have questions about the tax
exemptions for disability, for
example, and I know we just
passed HJR five and six. I
believe in 2023, and hopefully
we all vote for that in
November, but, uh, the question
from my constituent regarding
that, and I think it would be
good to put it on under item 10
on your work plan.
Would be the eligibility date
because currently from what I've
heard, it's the next year that
they're eligible, but not upon,
uh
Their application and approval
in the current year, So I'm just
wondering if we could just have
a conversation about that. Or
maybe in the the language that
we would have to pass after both
HDR six and five pass just for
the clarifying language to
ensure that we can indeed have
it apply when they have been
approved. Just just a thought,
Mr Chair. Thank you.
Well, thank you, Mister
Co-chair, Mr. Vice Chair. I just
wanted to I. I think Senator
Pope also was going to be
raising this issue. Um, we had a
a town hall down in the South
Valley. Um, earlier in the
spring.
And it was with regards to, uh,
Vietnam Veterans.
And the issue is around. Uh,
The help guidance, um
healthcare. I mean, the list is
long.
With regards to, uh, Vietnam
vets who are stuck but also the
health effects for their
Children.
And the veterans who were there
at the meeting, and they came
not just from the South Valley,
but from around the state who
are part of the the group.
Um, looking to see, I mean, they
gave us a full list of senator
Pope was able to join us, but a
full listing of some of the
health issues right, Um cancer
and other issues that their
Children have sustained.
And there is a federal law that
does allow for Children whose
mothers were serving
Um, in Vietnam, but for the
males for the men.
Um, there. There needs to be
some
I think some compensation
support look research and such.
It needs to take place with
regards to, uh the men who
served also who were exposed to
Agent Orange and have a plethora
of healthcare issues, But their
Children also are suffering.
So, uh, Mr Chair. I'd hope that
maybe like a number 10 that you
have listed here as such, but
Um, I. I believe that there
would be a group of veterans
who'd love to come forward and
share some of this information
with the committee.
Thank you.
I'm sorry.
I will, um Tony Montoya.
Is the is the veteran.
But he has a whole group of
folks that that attended that
meeting. Um, earlier this
spring.
OK?
Thank you.
Yeah, I just wanna add. I think
Senator Lopez laid it out. Um
So much like
The down windows in our state.
We really haven't looked at the
impact of what
The ancient orange visuals, but
it has impacted their DNA. Um,
we actually met
Um descendants and Children.
A Vietnam veterans that are
dealing. Um, and while we can't
do anything at the federal level
And and with the VA. In some
cases, I think, making it aware
and and seeing what we
And Pope and both go ahead. If I
may just add to, um Mister C
chair Cocha is that there are
other states that have organized
also around this issue, and one
of the the the daughters of
Mister Montoya is actually doing
some outreach. Ohio and other
states are have organized or are
organizing around this issue.
Um, for the Children. Um, whose
father or maybe mother, which is
covered, as I said, under the
the federal statute, but
especially for the males because
they have been affected and the
belief, of course, is that it
passed on through the DNA.
I think he's both senators. You
know that That is a big issue
because
Like the downwinders that
happened in 1945, you know, in
the fixer coming into play now.
And the same thing with Vietnam
veterans. You know, uh, that the
the VA is looking at, Uh
That other pack act,
You know, that's difficult
chemicals that the region or in
but you know, cause I register
for Agent orange. And when I got
out of the military, and I never
heard nothing on it, you know
this is kind of push you aside,
But the fix to the kids now is
gonna be real and you know, we
really need to look into that.
You know I won't be here
anymore, but it doesn't mean I
can't help out to, uh
To get done. What? Who needs to
be done? It's only right, you
know.
And you know, the government
always has a bad habit of seeing
well.
You didn't do your application,
right? We're not gonna deal
with, but that's a good point.
Thank you. Anything else?
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I think, uh, I think the street
world will probably correct me,
but, uh
The question has been coming up
over and over again about the
two resolutions that we passed
in the last, uh, session.
And I think, uh, a after if they
are voted on by the voters of
the state of New Mexico.
And if voters say Yes, we had to
come here. We have to bring that
to go to will have to come into
succession
and past enabling legislation.
In order for this to be
effective, and I think the we're
talking about dates, and so far
we don't have any dates until we
can actually do this. I think we
can put an emergency clause I
let it becomes effective. We we
left after the governor signs
it.
But we have to do that
legislation first before we can
do anything else.
OK, so I think that answers a
lot of the questions.
Everybody's been asking the same
thing. When can I get it? But we
still have two steps to go
through before.
We are able to
Uh, qualifier qualified people.
I'm wrong.
Mr Fleetwood says I'm right, so
I'm OK.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair. We do need to
figure out where the committee
Plans on going this, and I would
like to come to go to Las Cruces
in October. But that is the July
and September
July or September and
I. I do wanna caution the
committee that September 3rd
meeting is the day after Labor
Day, so just
We can do Almo Gordo in October
in lieu of Las Cruces, It is a
little more to worry about that.
Oh,
July.
And that leaves July.
What
In October. We'll review it when
we get there.
Uh, we've been to Taos Angel
Fire in Raton. That's not
exactly North.
Actually, the community was in
redo.
We don't need no comes from the
We can do Las Vegas because it's
been a couple of years.
I work for everybody.
Charles
I know.
You can. Yeah. So just for the
just to review or July 23rd in
Las Vegas September in Santa
Rosa.
October 7th at the MCG. November
We're back in San
If the special session runs
long we'll talk about canceling
July, but that's we'll get there
when we get there.
We were all drinks.
Yeah, and again, I wanted just
to emphasize if anybody has
presenters or topics they wanted
to discuss, feel free to reach
out. Always happy to have people
to agenda. Mr Chairman.
I. I should have said it
earlier, but I'll just You know,
I don't know if you want to put
it on the agenda or not, but it
just seems to me like all of our
military bases. We should
probably get a report from them
on like water management and
conservation.
Just because
What's going on with water in
the state and all the different
So I'm just maybe even one of
them can coordinate a report
about all of them just to just
to understand more time. I don't
I don't have no inclination that
there's a problem or anything
like that. But I wanna make sure
that we're not doing anything
that would prohibit any of them
from wanting to stay here.
II. I am told that that there is
some of these larger
installations in the state need
to really be
Uh, focusing on their water
management and conservation
plans. Mainly their water
management. Um, but I would hate
for that to be a reason for one
of these folks to land one of
one of our bases to land on a
Brack because
You know, we're not doing a good
job of getting them all the
water that they need.
So can we please get a report on
that?
It's
Not a bad idea to have them all
come in. And just just give us a
Where are things? How can we
help you and all that? Thank
you.
Mr Chairman, I think, uh, for
the Las Vegas meeting.
Um, it might be good to deal
with the the rural
transportation issue.
Uh, because Las Vegas has always
been kind of a hub.
For that.
Northeast part of the
