wanted to be in the new
building, but it is what it is
for today anyway, uh, we're
gonna go to introductions, uh,
first of all, I would love for
the people that hosted the the
event to come up and say a few
words.
And introduce yourself, sir.
All righty. I'm Billy Jones. I'm
the director of the New Mexico
Museum of Space History. And I
want to thank Jesse Greenspan
for working with us to host
this. It is our privilege to be
hosting the Military and
Veterans Affairs Committee today
and, uh, if you know anyone
that's looking for an executive
director position for New Mexico
Museum of Space History, you let
us know, we're looking for one.
our director stepped away a
couple of months ago and so
we're having a lot of fun in the
interim, um, but, uh, we also
want to thank our foundation,
uh, for providing the
refreshments.
Today we have kind of a man
here. If you go home hungry,
it's your own fault, and it's
because of these guys, these
guys are always very generous to
support everything we do and so,
um, I'd like to introduce Johnny
Powell. He's the president of
our foundation, doing a great
job for us and Johnny, maybe you
have a couple of words you could
share. Well, I do, Mr. Chairman,
thank you and, and, and members
of the committee, uh, uh, as you
said, I am Johnny Pollon with
the International Space Hall of
Fame Foundation. I do want to
thank you guys for coming here.
You're you and gals, uh, I'm,
I'm from the South
So I have no idea. I what what
you're called.
But we do want to thank and and
this committee has a special,
uh, attachment for the
foundation and such as that
because, you know, the military
and veterans are such an
important part of Almaguro,
important part of our community
and such an important part of
the legacy that has been the,
the International Space Hall of
Fame Foundation. Uh, you know,
you, you mentioned something
about you wanted to be in the,
the bigger room. Unfortunately,
you know, in, in this museum
here we're so islanded and so
cramped for space that, that we
need every inch that we have
Billy and his staff to, to get
our exhibits out such as that.
And I want to just point out
some, some, some stuff these
drawings that you see around the
room come from 1973, uh, kind of
gives you an idea, you look back
in the back, look at the cube,
the building that you wanted to
be sitting in, it's kind of
sitting on its corner, uh, uh,
interesting segue from 1973. Uh,
I think Purple Haze was in the
top 40 at that time.
You know, but, but, but anyway,
with that, look at the exhibit
building behind it. That, that
building was not just an exhibit
building. That building is a
conference center. That building
is an event center. That
building is a world-class
destination for people to come
to Alor and be a part of it.
And we have got an opportunity
in Almo Gordo with uh the
foundation we're reaching out to
sent you some, uh, press
releases for Starbase Holloman.
We're, we're engaged with, uh,
Holloman Air Force Base. I'm
looking forward to hearing
Colonel Rosales's presentation a
little bit later, uh, but, uh,
Starbase Hallman engages that in
STEM science, education, and
mathematics. That's what this
institution is all about. And so
we're out, um, uh, at some
point, uh, that, that we're,
we're working together, we're
working with our local community
we
We're offered a $2 million grant
last week to, to work through
some other things. Uh, we're in
the very, very beginning stages
of that, but there's a lot of
wonderful things going on in our
world and a wonderful engagement
from our local community that at
some point there may be a big
ask. And, and so when we get to
that big ask, you know, um, and,
and all your colleagues are
going, they want what, where,
uh, you, you know, just smile
and tell them you know what it's
all about and tell them that
it's, it's the right thing to
do. And so anyway, with
That, we hope you guys enjoy the
uh refreshments that we give.
That's enough information from
the cater. We're on the way to
get you some sandwiches for
lunch. So thank you very much
for being here.
Uh, any questions for questions,
but uh.
On behalf of myself and the
committee, uh, thank you for the
hospitality, very much
appreciated, you know, a lot of
people travel a lot of miles to
get here today, and it, it's
nice, you know, it's kind of
shocking to see what you have up
there. I was up there yesterday
and I said, wow, that's pretty
interesting.
And you know, uh, once again, my
behalf and behalf of the
committee, thank you very much.
Glad to have you guys here.
Take a moment, go up and see it.
Thank you. Uh, we're going to go
into introductions of the
committee members now, uh, Mr.
de la Cruz, we'll start with
you. Thank you, Chairman. I
appreciate being here. I
appreciate being here with you
and the audience and the other
members.
Uh, I've got to tell you I've
never had the opportunity, the
privilege to visit this
facility. It appears to be
really awesome. So yeah, I look
forward to seeing it. My name is
Representative de la Cruz. I am
from House District 12, which is
in Albuquerque.
In an area that is commonly
referred to as the South Valley,
and of that geographical area, I
represent roughly the middle of
that valley. And so I always
like to tell everyone, brag
actually that I am from the
heart of the South Valley. So
it's a pleasure. Thank you,
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am
from the heart of the state of
New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, members, uh, folks
out there and uh those on
webcast. I am a representative
Elio Lealcon. I represent uh
parts of Cibola and McKinley
County.
In my district I have 8.5 Navajo
knit chapters. The whole pueblo
Zuni.
And quite a few uh communities
that I have that I serve. It's
an interesting district, uh, I'm
an old Vietnam veteran.
And an old Vietnam veterans have
a habit of getting older, so I
don't know what to tell you
about that, but uh thank you
everybody for hosting us. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name
is Debbie Seriana. I represent
House District 21 in Bernaleo
County in Albuquerque, I'm in
the northeast, southeast
quadrant of Albuquerque. If you
know when Albuquerque, I
represent Monzano High School,
that area, um, I was, I'm, I was
a teacher, a math teacher, and I
was in the Air Force and, um,
this committee is just perfect
for me, um.
I was here a couple, I think
last year with um the Education
Committee and the amazing things
that the teachers can do with
the things you offer is, is
wonderful. Um, online and
different ways. I shared it with
my science teachers and uh they
said they were going to get on.
So hopefully they learned a lot
from what you, you offer, so
thank you and thank you for
hosting us today,
next, we're gonna go to
represent a block and Mr. Block
if you would, uh, introduce
yourself and uh you know this is
your district if you want to say
a few words.
We'll be more than glad to hear
you. Thank you. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chairman, and you're
right in the heart of the 51st
district, which is probably the
best district in the state, in
my opinion.
But so thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's great to, to be home for a
committee for a change, which is
nice, you know, I travel around
the state and you see so many
beautiful places, but it's good
to be home. So I appreciate
everyone for making the drive to
Al Mogordo to see what we have
to offer, which is plenty. We've
got a lot of cool stuff,
including this great Space Hall
of Fame.
Museum, I mean, I've been
through every single story of
that thing and looked at every
little artifact and it is just
so cool. It's a testament of
what New Mexicans can do, and
we're so blessed to have the Air
Force base right outside of
town, which is unfortunately in
Willie Madrid's district right
now, so I'm like, maybe, maybe
next time they'll put it back in
mine, but it's the beating heart
of our, of our community and our
county, and we are really
blessed to have that as an
investment by our government to
show that they trust and they
value New Mexico and and we're
gonna
Hear a lot more about Holloman,
about White Sands Mitchell
range, and we'll also see all
the good things that we have to
offer in our district. Uh, we
have the oldest zoo in the
Southwest, the Alameda Park Zoo,
which is very cool. If you like
animals, go there. We don't have
mud, but I really want him to
come over or her to come over
because I just love that if
you've been following Mudang
online. So, uh, yeah, I mean,
we've got everything that that
you could potentially ever want
in a community. It's a great
30,000 people community. We've
got a hospital, we've got many
grocery stores.
We've got so much culture and
vision for the future, and I'm
just so blessed to have everyone
here and uh I just can't wait to
hear a little more about all the
good things that we have to
offer because there are so many,
so thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah.
If you'd like to introduce
yourself, Mr. Vice chair.
Sure, Mr. Chairman, State
Senator Harold Pope Jr. District
23, Northwest Albuquerque,
Berlio County, uh, happy to be
here. Happy to be in this
museum. It's just awesome to,
uh, really highlight the
You know,
When it comes to space and what
we do around the world, really
just the highlight of what
happened here in New Mexico.
And so it's great to see this
worked a lot of satellite
programs in the Air Force, you
know, stationed in other places,
Florida, Texas, uh, California,
but as we all know, a lot of it
is centered here, in uh, New
Mexico. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you, Senator Jarrett.
Good morning everybody. I'm
Jared Pleawood with the
Legislative Council Service, um,
joined by Erin Bond and Roberto
the webcaster, um, just really
quickly, huge thank you to
Department of Cultural Affairs,
the museum and the foundation
for stepping up we'd had a
different facility in mind for
this meeting and that kind of
fell apart, so they stepped up
to the last minute. Huge thank
you and happy to be here.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, committee
members. My name, uh, first of
all, start with seeing Happy
Veterans Day to the veterans in
here. Uh, thank you, sir, for
your service.
Veterans, thanks for your
service. Uh, my name is Harry
Garcia. I represent House
District 69, which covered parts
of San Juan McKindibula Bernie
Valencia Socorro Counties, a
third of the state, that's what
I cover, and I'm an old uh older
Vietnam uh Marine Corps veteran
housed in Vietnam, uh, 6 months
after I graduated from high
school in 1968 and it's been a
wild ride. It's a good ride, and
you know, we look forward to uh.
for veterans that my goal is
veterans, veterans, veterans,
you know, I get criticized in
the House of Representatives for
so much veterans, but that's
where my heart's at, and that's
where it'll stay at and you know
this is the best committee of
the whole city in Mexico, you
know, I sit on transportation.
I'm the vice chair of
transportation.
Which is the backbone of our
state, but veterans is the
backbone of our country, so with
that being said, uh, thank you
everybody for being here today.
I really appreciate you guys.
You know, this is my last round.
I will not be coming back next
year.
But I will be back.
Maybe in 2 years, we'll see what
happens.
But anyway, uh, like back to the
committee, thank you very much
for being a good committee.
You're the best committee you've
ever served for and uh with that
we'll start with a presentation,
Mr. Crane, if you would come up,
please, and introduce yourself.
Yeah, OK, got you. Thank you.
Well, first of all.
Each and every one of you, thank
you so much for being here in
Otero County, uh, you know, I,
uh, I'm, I'm, my name is Eddie
Crane and I'm with Healing
America's Heroes, uh, we created
Healing America's Heroes in
2014. OK, we, we established
healing America's heroes in
northern New Mexico and the
Tierra Maria, uh, Chama area.
Uh, was up there from, from 2014
to 2020 and serving veterans
throughout the United States in
northern New Mexico and along
the bed along with the veterans
of New Mexico and 2021, uh, we
were able to make a deal with
the state of New Mexico, General
Services Division for the state
of New Mexico and we leased a
prison facility in southeast
southwestern New Mexico in
Lincoln County.
Which was used to be called,
God, it started in 1969. It
started as Sierra Blanca Boys
Camp, the last uh group that had
this was CYFD and it was called
Lincoln Pines Correctional
Facility and uh they were closed
down in 2015. We, we made a deal
with the state of New Mexico to
lease a facility in 2021. We've
got a 20 year lease on the
facility there. We've got, we
sit on 70 acres.
We got 30,000 square feet of
space. We have the capacity of a
of a 48 bed capacity. We have a
commercial kitchen. We, like I
said, sit sit on 70 acres, we
have um.
1 mile and a half of the Bonita
River running through our
facility, um, you know, and so
we are here establishing this
facility as an outreach for
veterans. It's a veteran
outreach veteran wellness
center, and we are a, a, um,
recreational therapy program.
You know, to where we work with
our veterans through with their
disability with their PTSD
disability, MST, TBI, traumatic
brain injury, military sexual
trauma and post-traumatic stress
through fly fishing and horse
therapy, OK, we say piscatorial
when we say piscatorio
piscatorial is a whole gammon of
fly fishing that is actually
Making the rods, making the
lines, creating the flies, doing
all of that stuff with that's a
whole, that's a whole gamut of,
of biscuatorium and then in
equine it starts as recreational
where there's it, we don't, we
don't do any trail rides. All we
do when we work, when we work
with, with our veterans, it's
all recreational, it's all
recreational therapy and we have
a very uh unique.
Program that that is established
and set especially for veterans
and our PTSD issues, uh, 01 of
the things I forgot to say is,
is uh representing Alcuan and
and representing Garcia, welcome
home, you know, you guys were,
uh, I think you guys blaze the
trails that I walked, uh, you
said you served where
Representative Gray what year,
sir?
68.
And you, Mr. representing Alcon.
69 Yeah, see, see you guys blaze
the trails that I walked. I
served with the 4th Infantry
division and play through
Vietnam. So I know that I, I
walked some of the trails that
you blaze, so thank you, you
know, very much and welcome home
and representing S, did you say
you're a veteran?
You're an Air Force veteran. Oh,
well, welcome home, my God.
That's, that's excellent. I like
to
I, I, I'd like to talk to you
about our program for female
veterans. OK, we just had a very
good 9, we had 9 women from the
New Mexico, uh New Mexico
veterans of no women, women
veterans in New Mexico, that was
the organization. We just had 9
women come down last week for
our program. So yeah, we're
we're doing very well, um, the
move, the move that
We made from northern New Mexico
to the chara just excuse me,
Senator Pope is also a veteran.
All right, Vice Chair, I'm
sorry. Welcome home, sir. Thank
you, no problem. Thank you, sir.
Air Force, Army, uh, uh, retired
Air Force 2018,
so I welcome home, sir. Thank
you. Thank you, thank you for
your, sir. So you know all about
Haldeman then being Air Force
wasn't stationed there but know
a little bit about the work. All
right, well, good. Well, thank
you, sir. Thank you. I,
I, wow. So there's so many, God,
what are you guys doing when you
guys retire? I got something we
need to
I got healing America's Heroes
We can run. Um, but anyway, um,
back, back to, uh, healing
America's heroes, you know, with
our, with our, with our facility
that we'd leased from the state
of New Mexico now our, our cost
has dropped tremendously in
northern New Mexico, our, our
cost per veteran was around 3 to
$3500 a veteran. OK, now that
we've got this facility here,
um.
We have actually dropped the
cost to about $1500 per veteran.
So that's something that, that,
uh, we've really improved in and
we're looking forward to moving
forward with that, you know,
getting started is tough, uh, we
are getting some funding and uh
as we move forward, it's going
to get better, you know, it's
all, all we can say is I
definitely know it's going to
get better for us, you know, we
got a lot of work to do, you
know, Representative Garcia,
and, and the whole board here,
you know, we're all.
Here for our veterans, OK, and
that's, you know, sir, you say
that you're all for your
veterans. I've, I've known you
since I started this in 2014,
sir, and I've seen what all of
you guys do for our veterans,
you know, and I, I really think
so, yes, uh.
We're uh we're open for
questions. If anyone has any
questions for us before we go to
questions, uh.
Before we go to questions,
Senator, would you please
introduce yourself? Oh, yes
ma'am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Senator
Shannon Pinto. I represent
District 3, which is on way on
the other side of the state, um,
didn't welcome to our webcast
people, and thank you for your
presentation. Thank you for
hosting us. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Any questions from the
committee?
Representative block
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and thank you so much for your
presentation. A quick question
about the capital outlay, I
believe, did you guys go out for
Capital Olay this year and I
believe I may have given you
some. I'm wondering what's the
status of your capital outlay
dollars currently, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Lock, uh,
As of today, we have not
received anything. I did talk
with uh with our um with the
people that are doing our
capital outlay, the are and uh
they said that they did get some
of the money in, and I think
we'll be having a meeting this
week, sir, with that, and I'll,
I'll be more than glad to let
you know where we're sitting,
you know, later on this week.
But, but as to date, we, we have
not received any funding.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I know that takes a
little bit of time,
unfortunately, I wish Capital
outlay was super quick, but you
never know, you have to go
through all these bureaucratic
channels, but I hope it gets to
you and I, I will certainly
continue to support you guys. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so much.
Uh, next we would thank you, uh,
Representative Mitchell Good
Vice Chair Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um,
thanks, uh, for coming again, uh
Mr. Crane and being here, um, I
think the last time you were
here was a few years ago when I
was first kind of on the
committee and talking about this
program and um just really the
resources you provide to
veterans, especially those who
are suffering.
Um, just a few questions. You,
you talked about that cost
dropping down to 1500. Um, how
many veterans right now, are you
serving a year right now?
Vice Chairman, uh, and Senator
Pope, we, we to date, we have
had because of our fires that we
had in Lincoln County, uh, in
from May 14th to July 14th, we
had to cancel our, our programs
that we had and we're just now
starting back up so we have had
a mail program and a female
program, uh, since, uh, July
19th and we've had, but we, we,
our goal is to have
Veterans every other week. OK,
and then we're working into our
also couples retreats as well,
you know, and so with the
couple's retreat, we are going
to be having a therapists and
counselors and marriage
counselors and and stuff like
that, but we will still offer
the recreational part of it as
far as like the the horse
therapy program and the fly
fishing program flight time
basically really the veterans
are really enjoying the flight
time for some reason, uh, you
know, we've got a great
classroom.
We've got a great facility
that's that we set up for that
and so we've got, we've gotten a
lot of good response on our, on
our fly fishing and flight
therapy, flight flight time
therapy, but the thing of it is
because of our fires, OK, we
lost all three of our lakes and,
and both of our rivers to the
contamination of the fires. So
consequently, uh, we teach how
to
Cast out there in the in the
parking lot now, you know what I
mean? Uh, but we still are time
flies. We're tying a lot of
flies. One thing good about the
flight time session when a when
a veteran comes through this
program and they applied for
the, the fly fishing program,
the
They, they, they get issued a
fly rod and they get issued a
fly time kit, OK, and that,
that, that is theirs for the
whole week that they're in the
program. OK, so when they start
their flight tying, OK, by the
end of the week they go home
with 5 flies. I that you
actually tied themselves and if
you look at a program, the, the,
the, the first picture that you
see there, OK, this, this is a
lady from Hobbs that came
through our program. She that's
her first.
Fly that she ever tied in her
life and she put her fingers
there just to let you know that
a woman can tie flies and
that's, that's the truth that
she said, she said, would you
please put that in our picture
so I did. So anyway, that's what
that's all about. Yeah, that was
her first fly she ever tied. She
ended up flying, tying 5 more of
those flies, but uh um.
Our, our, our programs that, you
know, we've, we, we've stuck to
being recreational. One of the
things for sure is that we.
We, we primarily our first and
foremost interest is our
veterans, period. I mean, we,
we, we, we are not a uh
We are not for the public. We
are for our veterans. I don't
know how to explain that. I
mean, it's, we're not, we're not
out there for the public to come
through our program. OK, we, we
are specifically for veterans
and I, I, I, I don't know how
many other organizations in the
state of New Mexico are
recreational therapy programs
specifically for veterans, but I
guarantee you healing America's
Heroes is.
Thank you for that and thank you
Mr. Chair and just to clarify
and once again I, I don't have a
problem with this, but it says
on the pamphlet that there are,
there's also a first responder
programs, is that correct? OK,
just wanted to confirm, OK,
that's, yes, because of the,
because of the fires and floods
in in in the area there. We had,
we had first responders, high
water rescue teams as far as
Mississippi, Arkansas,
Tennessee, you know, plus.
So many people from the state of
New Mexico, we had firefighters
from Massa, uh, Las Cruces,
Sandoval County, uh, we had the
hotshot crew from Bernal Leo
from Hewlett, from Clovis, we
had a very good uh firefighting
team there.
Right, and I, and I think that's
important to highlight, um, you
know, I know this committee is
about veterans and our military
and military families, but uh
when we look at our first
responders and what they deal
with every day, right? They're
dealing with a lot of trauma as
well, so it kind of ties into
what this therapy can do to help
them and their family, so, uh,
thank you for doing that. Um, my
last question is, and it's kind
of.
Kind of the reverse of what we
deal with with a lot of programs
in the state in a way, you know,
I'm happy uh where this program
is located, it kind of gets
veterans away, um, you, you're
having uh couples retreats as
well, and they can kind of just
get away, right, and get that
recreational treatment that they
need, um, and it's something
that's not this Albuquerque
Santa Fe centric
location. On the other hand, I
just wonder.
Um, has that been a hindrance as
far as trying to trying to get
people in the program from
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, and is
there any thought of maybe
having another location on
Albuquerque Santa Fe, but maybe
somewhere up north or another
location just to uh provide more
opportunities for veterans and
maybe that's not the case and
maybe it's just to have it in
one location, but just, just
wanna know your thoughts,
thoughts on that.
Um, well, Vice Chairman Senator
Pope, the, um,
Like last week, we just had 9
female veterans from Albuquerque
area, you know, come down for
the program, uh, you know, we,
we have done, uh.
Like
We did a program in in Hobbs to
in rural communities, OK, we, we
worked with the Department of
Veteran Services, and we did a
very nice program, actually a 5
day program in Hobbs, New
Mexico, and we're looking
forward to doing that again next
year. As far as uh being having
a facility in northern New
Mexico, that would, you know,
unfortunately, we moved from
northern New Mexico, you know,
in in in in the Chama area, you
know.
The people were so were really
good to us up there, but they,
their, their hands are our hands
were tied up there because of
the the the the, you know, they
only got a short time of
Time to make their money, you
know, which is like from May to
September, October, November
after that Chama's dead, you
know, so they have, and so
that's when we were having our
program, so they were trying to
help us out as good as we can,
but the expense was was a lot
more up there, sir, you know,
so, uh, consequently, but we'll,
we will go anywhere in the state
and put on a program. Actually
I'm, I'm in talks with uh
General Herrera uh from
Department of Veteran Services.
As far as doing remote programs
through the state, you know,
and, and, and, and he also
emphasized the the same thing as
both you and Chairman Garcia
representing Garcia is saying
about as far as northern
northern New Mexico, yeah, and I
agree and uh I do gotta say that
the fishing is better in
northern New Mexico, you know,
but uh it's not bad down here,
you know, you see our fish that
we caught, you know,
great, thanks. I, I do remember
that.
Uh, being up north and, and some
of those issues and so maybe uh.
The um alternative is really
just finding the resources and
transportation and advertisement
just to get folks in the
program, but just wanted to ask
that question. Um, and that's
all I have, Mr. Chair. Senator
Pope on that, uh, we, that's our
Like we had at one of our like
our at our, at our female
veteran program in May, for
instance. OK, we had a, we had a
woman flying from Leavenworth,
Kansas, a lady come in from
Spokane, Washington, and a lady
come in from California, you
know, and so we had, they flew
in to Rosville and then we had
to pick him up from there. So
that that is one of the issues
that we're that we're trying to
address, sir, is, is how to.
How with the transportation to
getting them there, but one
thing about
Where we're located, so the
elevation is 6500 ft elevation,
so the winners are not quite as
severe and not near as severe as
they were in northern New Mexico
and because of our facility,
we're able to extend into our
winter programs. OK, so at the
uh November 6th through the 10th
is our last male program for the
year, then we're shutting down
for Thanksgiving and Christmas,
and we're starting up our winter
programs in January, which will
be
Uh, guitar less guitars, piano,
and uh and uh.
Arts and crafts there. Thank
you. Arts and crafts, yes. Arts
and crafts. So that'll be our,
our winter program and then
we'll break off in the spring
and go back into the horse and
fly fishing therapy programs so
we're able to, so one thing
about being down here is we're
able to go year round, which is
great.
Thank you, sir. Thanks for the
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
curious uh what happened to your
partner, Mr. uh, Mr. Craig.
Former Representative Craig.
Bob, I mean, Willie, I'm sorry,
Willie. Where am I going?
Uh, Cindy Ancon actually Bob W
is on a hunting uh Eh trip right
now. OK, he did tell me to tell
you guys how well, by the way,
yes, but yes, he's, uh, he's
retired, he's on our state, he's
on our board of represented.
He's on board, uh, he's on our
board of directors and, uh, but
yeah, Bob is is on the nail hunt
right now. Thank you, sir. Yes,
sir. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, this program seems like a
really wholesome program, Mr.
Chairman, but I do have a
question. I know you're a 51C3,
but what are the primary sources
of your funding?
Represent the La Cruz, um, are,
are.
Our funding right now is, is
grants.
Uh, fundraisers, donations, uh,
we did get we did get some
funding from the state as far as
uh uh.
Individual like the
representative had their uh.
What's it called? I'm sorry,
excuse me, yesterday they had
their capital outlay and so we
were able to get some capital
outlay funding, and it's coming
in. I just, I just got word uh
Friday that we're this week will
be coming in. Yes, thank you.
Thank you, and Mr. Chairman, uh,
who is your, your fiscal agent,
is there a local government who
who does that for you? Thank
you.
Uh representing de la Cruz, uh,
our, our physical agent is the
village of Ridoso.
OK, and, uh, they, they're the
ones that that's been, it's been
funded through or funded or
fundled through them, sir, yes.
Thank you, and I just a couple
more questions, Mr. Chairman, so
I, I'm curious how you determine
the type of programming because
it, it seems really wholesome I
know I'd like to participate,
but how do you say, well, we're
gonna do this, we're gonna do
that, how do you go there?
Uh uh represent the La Cruz. Are
you talking about our, our, our
programs that we're doing the
horse and therapy program, horse
and fly.
The the reason, OK, the reason
that I, I personally chose.
Fly fishing and horse therapy is
because what they've done for me
on a on a personal note, uh, you
know, there are 2 reasons that
we started healing America's
heroes and the first reason, of
course, is, is our 22 a day that
we lose to suicide because we,
we served our country, you know,
that's 3,088 a year that we,
that we lose to suicide just
because we served our country.
The other was, was the
medication that we're getting
from the VA and so that's why we
We, we've stuck to being a
recreational therapy program,
sir.
Yeah.
Thank you. And lastly, Mr.
Chairman, uh, how do the vets
pick like
they just say, oh, I'd like to
do this, or I'd like to do that,
how does that happen?
Representative de la Cruz,
that's a, that's a good
question, sir. Thank you for
asking that. Uh, we get, we, we
are, have our own website, OK,
everybody, please go on our
website Healing
America'sheroes.org. We're very
proud of our website, but we
get, uh, we get people signing
up through our website. We are
also reaching out to to
different uh uh.
Organization, veteran
organizations through the state
of New Mexico as and and the
United States as far as uh, as
far as having people come in,
but we are working real closely
with a lot of other veteran
organizations, yeah.
Mr. Chairman, it sounds like a
great program. Keep up the great
work. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Any more
questions?
Uh,
Eddie, you know, I've been
talking to you since uh you
started.
You know, in 2014 facing
everything that's happening and
what hurts what you're doing.
there's a lot of other people
that they come into our
committee and ask for money and
stuff, and they do not follow up
on what they're doing because
there's no way of tracking it
from one, but you can see him
come and go all the time and
you've been there for a long
time and you know my hat's off
to you.
You know, because I've uh asked
you some tough questions down
the line. Matter of fact,
Senator Pope asked the question
a little long ago that I was
gonna ask why did you move from
northern New Mexico and you
explained that pretty well and
that that's, that's good and
well anyway, like I said, my
hats off to you, uh, I fully
support what you're doing.
Cause you're for real.
Um
I got a question, uh.
What did you do for the fires,
uh, during Rio Dosa fires, did
he.
Re
Representative Garcia, uh,
thanks for asking that question
actually because I'm, I'm, I'm
pretty proud of what we did, uh,
May 14th, the fire started. That
was the last day of the female
veteran event. We had two ladies
that I needed to take to the
airport in in Roswell the next
day on the 15th, the the fire
started at 11:30 in the morning.
We saw our first cloud of smoke,
OK, and.
B 7 o'clock that night, OK, we
had 46 firefighters,
firefighting crew at our, at our
facility, we had 5 displaced
family, which was a total of 11
family members displaced from
the fire, OK, uh, we, we fed
those 46 firefighters from May
14th to
June 19th, OK, and that's when
the fires was finally.
Under control and then like June
20th to July 14th, we had a high
water rescue teams from El Paso,
uh, Bernie Little County, uh,
Like I was saying a while ago,
Missouri, Tennessee and
Arkansas. And we had a total of
26 there. We, we actually were
feeding 3 meals a day, 90 meals
a day to these people and uh we
ended up feeding a total of 5400
meals from May 14th of July,
July 14th. Yes, and we also
housed the firefighters and the
high water rescue teams.
Uh, thank you very much Flat
Eddie. Uh, you know, I hope you
I hope you got compensated for
it. I really do. We don't have
to answer that part of it, but I
hope you got compensated for
what you did.
Uh,
You know, uh, like I said,
you're for real. I support you.
But
And I'm pretty sure everybody in
this committee supports you
because you know I've been
around for a while and we hear
everything come and go, how good
it's gonna be and at the end of
the day it doesn't really pan
out so and at the end of the day
it kind of hurts your.
Uh, gold.
Because everything somebody else
does wrong, makes everybody else
look bad, so you understand
that, right, Eddie? Yes, sir, I
sure do. Thank you,
Representative Garcia, but you
know, uh, one thing I got to say
about healing America's heroes,
we are just for the veterans.
We're not there for the, it's,
it's hard for me to say that
we're,
we're, we're not there for the
public, we're there for the
veterans, if that makes sense to
us, you know, and you know, no
disrespect to the public, but
we're there for the veterans.
I'm a veteran, you, you know,
that, that's, I, you know.
I don't know how many of these
veteran or these organizations
that offer this services, their
services to veterans. How many
of them are actually veterans?
You know, and, you know, a whole
lot of times unfortunately, our
veterans are looked at as as a
dollar sign. We looked at as a
dollar sign, and you know, how,
how can they make money off of
us, you know, and that's not
where we're at.
Thank you.
E on that note, uh.
What the Senator Pope said
earlier, you know, first
responders have the same problem
veterans do.
You know,
You know, I was in the war zone
and and some veterans are, some
veterans aren't. It's just like
your firefighters, police
officers, and so forth. They're
all, they all go through the
same.
Uh,
trauma, mental trauma, that a
veteran does to go through and
you know, and then the Marine
Corps there was a saying never
leave nobody behind and that's a
perfect example of what you're
doing there.
You know, Representative Garcia
and Senator Pope, uh, 40%.
Of the first responders are
actually veterans, you know, so
they've already served and
they're serving again, you know,
it's, you know, and, and, and
they, you know, like, like
Senator Pope was saying, you
know, this is, they, they, these
are issues that they address
every day, you know, it's
something they see every day.
Tomorrow's different, but it's
the same thing, you know, it's,
it's, uh, you know, I, I, I got
a lot of respect for the first
responders, and I gained it more
so during these fires and floods
is what I saw.
You know, so, yeah, thank you.
OK, well, no more questions
being asked from the committee
members, if you would do me an
honor or uh uh.
You know, I just got news that
Tinder turn to John Arthur Smith
passed away
if if you would all rise in in
just a moment of silence if you
would, if you don't want, you
can stay sitting down, but
that's just too respectful John
Arthur Smith.
Thank you, Eddie. We'll go to
the next presenter is uh.
Why test missile ranges update?
Colonel Matthew Johnson.
Just wanna make sure I hit the,
hit the right button.
Hey, good morning, uh, members
of the committee, uh, Colonel
Matt Johnson, I am the, uh,
commander of White Sands Test
Center, uh, just down the road
on US 70.
Um, I've been there for, uh, 2
months now. Um, but, uh, I'll
just, I've got a, I got a
presentation or I'll just kind
of talk through what what White
Sands Missile Range does, um,
and, and, uh,
Really, I guess the kind of the
impact that it has on New Mexico
and the impact that New Mexico
has on it as well, but I'll just
kind of highlight, uh, some of
the things that we do, uh,
going, going forward, uh, and
then obviously I'll take any
questions that you guys may
have.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, so,
uh, obviously, uh, White Sands
Missile Range, um, you guys all
are in New Mexico, so you guys
all know kind of where it's at.
Uh, it is, uh, 2.2 million
acres, right, of right, right in
the middle of southern Mexico.
100 miles north to south, 40
miles east to west, and we have
some extension areas where we
have agreements with, with local
ranchers, uh, to be able to, um,
utilize those areas as well, or,
um, just kind of evacuate them
if we need to, uh, for their own
safety purposes, so we can
execute our, our mission.
Um,
You want one of the unique
unique things about, about White
Sands, um, as, as a missile
ranges, we are the, the only,
uh, ground-based, um, open air
range that the Department of
Defense has. And what that means
is, uh, what I, what I generally
tell people is I own from dirt
to space.
Right. And so, uh, that's kind
of our, you know, it's not just
the ground that we have, but
it's, it's the ground and the
air all the way, all the way up
to space, uh, that we're able to
operate in. The FAA does not
have.
Um, control over white sands,
airspace, we maintain that
ourselves, uh, which, which
gives us the flexibility that we
need to be able to conduct the
mission that, uh, that we're
tasked to do.
Um,
And so, you know, obviously the
mission, you know, it's a
missile range, so our primary
mission is, is missile testing.
Um, and so we've got, what I,
what I'd like to highlight now
is kind of the the workforce
that we've got, right? So
there's over probably 6000
people that work at at White
Sands Missile Range, uh, not
necess, not just in the test
center, um, I have about 1000
total, uh, between government,
civilians and contractors, uh,
and then, uh, two other people
wear an outfit like this, um,
and so, so there's other
organizations on White Sands,
right? There's the Garrison
command, we've got, um,
Our developmental command the
army.
Capabilities Development
command, uh, we've got, uh, a,
uh, some analysis center there.
There's a center for, uh,
countermeasures, uh, that is ran
by the DOD.
Uh, and so there's, there's just
a lot of organizations on that
post that are able to utilize
that are there because of what
White Sands is capable of.
Of doing uh in terms of our, um,
in terms of the testing that
we're that we're able to do.
Um, so we've got, there's over
like 1400 STEM professionals,
right? Uh, what I like to tell
people is, is I do, I do rocket
science.
And to do nuclear physics.
Right? So, so those are, those
are kind of two of the.
Two of the key things that we
do, uh, we also, um,
electromagnetic spectrum, right,
any we do, we do a lot of
different things, but but when
you talk about kind of the, you
talk about the stem and the, the
science and the technical aspect
of what we do,
we do rocket science and, and we
do, and we do nuclear physics.
Um, and so when you, when you
look through those, those, those
efforts, uh, a lot of them
getting lost here, but that's
OK.
Uh, so let's see. And so now of
course we've also got, uh,
Beyond Beyond the rocket
scientists and nuclear or
nuclear physicists where there's
computer scientists, we
obviously we have aerospace
engineers, uh, we do, um, since
everything's going in the air,
we need that as well,
mechanical, electrical
engineers, there's
mathematicians, um, we've got
statisticians and we've just got
a, there's a broad um breath of
capabilities that we have within
our workforce to get after the
technical aspect of.
of what our responsibilities
are, um, for the Department of
Defense, uh, and more
specifically the, the United
States Army.
Uh, there's a, there's an Air
Force detachment, uh, on, on
White Sands as well, uh, that,
that kind of coordinates their
test mission on White Sands.
There's a navy detachment as
well that that does it also for
the Navy. Uh, we've got NASA,
um, out there, uh, and then of
course, we have other, other
army agencies in support of the
test mission and then of course
we also support uh
private industry,
uh, that are, that are doing
things, uh, for example, uh,
well, this is probably a joint
NASA Boeing effort.
Um, you know, I'm sure all of
you know, a month ago, uh, the
Starliner landed, um, right in
the middle of, uh, Space Harbor
on, on White Sands and uh it
missed the X they they put on
the uh on the white sand by
about 15 ft. So when you, when
you're, when you're hurtling
through space and then you're
coming in right and letting
gravity.
Bring in this capsule that's
completely empty, right?
Nobody's no, nobody's inside
doing anything and it landed 15
ft from where they kind of
targeted it. Uh, that's, that
was pretty impressive to see,
um.
And so that's just kind of one
of the capabilities that we've
got, um, obviously, uh, all the
people that we have, we also
have a lot of technicians,
right, because we have equipment
that is very, very
sophisticated, uh, to allow us
to do our mission. Uh, if I'm
putting a missile up in the air,
I need to know exactly where it
is, right? So we track it with
radar, we track it with
telemetry, uh, which is pulling
signals off of, off of the
missile. Uh, we track it with
optics, uh, and we have
redundancy so that we know that
whatever we're tracking with one
thing I've got it matched
tracking with with something
else so we.
And ensure that it follows the
profile that's supposed to, uh,
for uh for safety purposes,
obviously, um, let's see, uh,
we've got, uh, we also do, um,
besides, besides the missile
rocket testing, uh, we've got
the uh the high energy laser
facility, so we've got a lot of,
uh, we do a lot of laser
testing, um, and the DOD is
moving, uh, has been moving over
the last several years trying to
to advance laser capability to
use it to, to target various
things.
From missiles to drones, um,
drones are becoming a, a, a big
threat, uh, across, um,
Across the globe, honestly, and
we are capable of helping to.
Determined defeat mechanisms for
those. Uh we also have a uh a
UAS capability as well at White
Sands that allows us to help
figure that, figure that piece
out and how to do the, do the
countering of, of the UAS um
that are, um, coming in various
places.
Um,
Beyond that, we, we've got
electromagnetic environment
effects, uh, so we, we, we will
basically do electromagnetic
radiation, uh, which
Simple terms is, uh, we put on a
frequency and then we just raise
the frequency, uh, as, as we go
through.
Um, and so it does, we do, we
can do whole vehicle
illumination, uh, which, you
know, so we've got, I was out, I
was out seeing it the other, the
other day, uh, we had a Bradley,
uh, which is one of our big
large fighting vehicles, uh, out
there, and it was, we were, they
were just.
It was sitting there and they
were going under test and you,
you don't really know what's
going on, but they're really,
you know, stay away, right? So,
um, because it was, they were
just they were putting, putting
that on there, um.
You know, we, we do high
altitude, uh, electromagnetic
pulse.
Um, stuff where we're, we're
testing, we'll test ordinance,
we'll test vehicles, right? So
we'll do basically EMP type
stuff, um, to test, um.
System's ability to withstand
those types of things.
Um, and then, of course, the
nuclear effects testing, right?
Um, as you guys all know, this
is the kind of the home of the,
the nuclear bomb, uh, up at the
Trinity site in the northern
northern part of the range, uh,
but what we were able to do at
White Sands is take systems
under test.
And
Put them in there's, there's 4
or so different.
Events that happen in a nuclear
blast, and we are able to take
each one of those separately.
And do that individually
against, against a vehicle, uh,
which allows us to one conduct
nuclear testing.
But 2 without.
Doing a nuclear event, right,
cause I don't think that would
be good. So we've got, we have a
fast burst reactor, uh, that we,
that we use, um.
And then there's a, there's a,
we, we've got a gamma radiation
facility, we've got a large
blast thermal simulator which
you, you fill these giant tubes
up with compressed air, um, and
you heat it up and you just.
Kind of let it go and it is, it
is impressive to see the, that's
just the, the wind and heat, uh,
from, from a blast, right?
That's one of the things you're
gonna see, um.
Out there and then we've got a a
linear electron accelerator, uh,
that we do as well, and so
there's just all sorts of
different aspects that we do to
test our systems to ensure that
they are nuclear nuclearly
hardened, um, in the event that
that becomes something that,
that, uh, in a conflict happens.
Um, we also have, um.
Dynamic testing, uh, we'll take
missiles and and whatnot, and we
will do um drop tests, so we'll
take a live munition, bring it
up in the air, drop it, make
sure it doesn't explode, right?
Because that's kind of, that's
kind of one of the things right
because we handle these things
all the time soldiers soldiers
will handle these, uh, all the
time maneuvering them and, and
things happen and so we have to
make sure that these are safe
and they don't do anything until
we actually hit the button and
pull the trigger.
Uh, so we do all sorts of
different testing, uh, with
munitions, um.
Going forward, we'll put it on a
shock table and we'll basically
just vibrate it for for days.
Right, and make sure that
everything sticks and stays
where it's supposed to be, uh,
because that that simulates
aircraft movement that simulates
trains that simulates just
movement on the vehicle all over
the place, uh, going forward.
Uh, we also were able to do a
climatic testing, right? So.
Uh, as you guys know, the desert
is dry and it's generally warm
and hot, um, and sometimes it's
windy, right? And so there's
blowing dust, but unfortunately
I can't just put something out
there to, to do that, so we
have, we have chambers, uh, that
do that. Um, I was actually last
week I saw uh one of our systems
under test, um, we had it in a
huge giant building, with a
quarter inch of ice on it.
-10 degrees. We were just
leaving it there for days. And
then the team was gonna go in
and turn it on.
In 10 degrees with a quarter
inch of ice on it. Uh, we also
put it to, into, um, rooms where
we bring it up to 160 degrees,
uh, and just let it cook. Uh, we
do uh solar radiation.
As well, and then we can, uh,
wind and rain, uh, salt fog, uh,
just all sorts of different
types of things that can, can
corrode the the system or or
whatnot because obviously when,
when the army or, you know, the
Air Force or the Navy would go
anywhere, it's not perfect
conditions, right? And so we
have to ensure that our, our
equipment, um,
will survive in those types of
conditions and they don't have
to go out and, um, scrape rust
and put oil all over everything
to make sure it still works,
right? It's got, it's gotta be
able to work, um, as well, uh,
doing that. Then we've also have
the aerial cable range.
Right where we're able to, to,
to test uh countermeasures
against aircraft, uh, where we
can, it's a huge, what is it?
2.5.
Let's see, yeah, 2, yeah, 2500
ft, but it's, oh, it's, yeah,
15,000, uh, kilometers, 1500
kilometers long, right? So it
is, it's huge, um, it goes from
one peak to another, uh, big
valley in the middle.
And uh and we will do stuff like
that. The other thing, um,
that's really key to, to White
Sands is not only our ability to
test, but our ability to
communicate while testing,
right? So, um, you know, when
you're, when you're out in the
middle of nowhere here in New
Mexico, um, which, which I, I
personally love, um.
Phone signal is sometimes
lacking.
And so we have a, we have a
massive infrastructure on White
sands that allows us to
communicate from the cononement
area, which is where I generally
spend my days, um, all the way
up, uh, 100 miles to, to the
north, um.
And, and everywhere in between,
um.
And so we were able to, we're
able to move all of our data and
all of those types of things and
so we've got a huge uh network
set up, uh, that we operate, uh,
on, on white sands.
Um,
Let's see, and I believe that is
kind of what I've got for you
pending any penny, pending any
questions. I, I know that, um,
you know, White Sands, we have,
we have people that that work on
white sands of the 6000 folks
who live on White Sands, they,
they live in Las Cruces. They
live in El Moguordo and then
some people like the really long
drive to to El Paso. Um, you
know, it's 30 minutes to
cruises, 45 minutes here, and an
hour, hour to El Paso, but
uh we.
have a great relationship, um,
not only with Las Cruces and
Almo Gordo and the surrounding
area, but, um, NASA, NASA's
facility, and then there's the.
Uh, I'm drawing a blank on it on
the, it's on the other side of
my.
Of my range, um.
Starport.
Right. And so, um, just a great
relationship here in the state
of New Mexico, um.
Than just the ability that we
have to be able to do this, this
type of of testing,
um to support the Department of
Defense and the Army and our
ability to execute our, our
mission in defense of this
country.
So pending your questions for
the presentation de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was curious. I know that you
test vehicles and you mentioned
the Bradley specifically, but
Her remember back in the day in
the 90s when uh we were in
Desert Storm that there was a
lot of issue with the filters
with the machinery, right? So is
that what you tested because I
was kind of surprised that they
hadn't anticipated that back
then.
So, so Representative Dela Cruz,
thank you for the question. Um,
yes, and so one of, one of the
things that we do do, uh, is we
do have sand and dust testing,
so we will.
Uh, we, we'll put, put the
system that that we're testing
in a in a in a chamber and uh
of, of, of course, it's we have
specific criteria of the the
grain of sand, the type of sand,
uh, and then we will, we'll fill
it and then we will blow wind in
there like crazy and, and just
cover it, uh, and see where it
goes. Uh, and so that is, that
is one of the capabilities we
got because of things that we've
seen just like that where we
want to make sure that our
systems
Work in environments where.
You know,
They're stuck in the desert.
There's a dust storm that blows
through. I've got to be able to
protect it correctly and I got
to be able to turn it on when
it's when I need to so that I
can either move or conduct
operations as required. So that
is one of the types of testing
that we do, uh, here at White
Sands. There are other places
that do that as well, uh, but we
do it specifically really for,
um, our air defense, uh, and
our, our, uh,
missile rocket artillery type
equipment. We've got the Bradley
here, for example, for, uh,
electromagnetic testing because
we're kind of the only.
Within the, within the army's
test, uh, architecture were the
only facility that has
The capability to do it at that
large of a scale.
Um, there are other places that
can that can do it. They just
can't get a, um,
They can't for for lack of a
better term, paint the entire
vehicle at once. They can do
small pieces and components,
right, which, which works, but
then when you put it all
together there's a whole
another.
It's, it's a different animal.
Um, each individual part can can
survive. But when you put it
together for whatever reason,
sometimes.
Doesn't survive the same and so
that's one of the, that's one of
the capabilities that we have
here as, as well, um, to, to
address those, those types of
things.
And I mentioned the Bradley
specifically because
I love it.
You know, Mr. Chairman, it makes
me really proud that we're
conducting these types of
efforts for on behalf of the
country here. It's really
something to be proud of. Uh,
lastly, Mr. Chairman, is there
something, Colonel, that you see
that the state of New Mexico can
do on its side to help support
these important missions.
Uh, Representative De la Cruz,
thank you for that question. Um,
we have a
Fairly good relationship, I
believe, with with the state.
Um, we've got the, the
lieutenant governor, um, and,
and his team come and visit
regularly to ensure that
the quality of life on the
installation is, is where it
needs to be. Uh, and that's not
necessarily my role, but uh
that's kind of on the, on the
garrison, uh, Colonel Mosier and
then our, our senior commander,
General Turner, uh, that's kind
of, kind of in their
responsibility, but um, but it
affects, it affects.
My, my organization as well. And
so we've got a great
relationship there. Uh, we've
got a good relationship with,
um,
The, the US representative of
the area. I'm sorry, I'm I'm
blanking on his name right now,
uh, but he's very actively
involved in in support.
Yes, yes, Representative Bosas,
thank you, thank you,
Representative Aleon,
um.
And so, so he's, he comes out
regularly, uh, which, which we,
which we appreciate, um,
especially at the at the federal
level, right, because, uh, most
of our money obviously comes
from the US government and, and,
and so ensuring that we have the
funds needed to uh to maintain
the range we've got uh lots of
roads that are out there in the
middle of nowhere that, uh, we
need to make sure our are safe
and operable, um.
You know, and then there's wild
animals. I can't, I can't tell
you how many
um.
How many uh liability
investigations are done because
of orcs and deer, not.
Realizing that.
The truck, the vehicle is not
there to attack them.
Uh, they just, they just kind of
come out and do that, but um,
no, that there's, I think we
have a great relationship with,
with the state and obviously
the, you know, the represent,
you know, the US representatives
and senators around here as
well, um, to ensure that we're
getting what we need, um, in
addition to that, right, we
have, we have partnerships, uh,
with uh New Mexico State
University.
Uh, that we're we're actually
working right now where there's
a leadership course that that we
coordinated with them to put
together that we're going to put
some of our some of our leaders
through later on this, later on
this year, um.
And then we're also working with
them to build a.
For lack of a better term,
because I don't know the exact
name of it like an artificial
intelligence 101.
Um, kind of class, uh, because
artificial, you know, AI is, is
coming fast and furious, uh, I
can't tell you if it's all hype
or or actual like it works, um,
but we wanna make sure that
we're positioned as a test
facility, uh, to be able to um
use it.
And tested, right, as, as needed
and as it comes into our
systems, but there are, there
are things that, that we've
That have been demonstrated that
that would help us immensely,
and so that's one of the things
that we're we're working for and
we're extremely appreciative of
the, the, you know, the
geographic closeness that we
have to New Mexico State
University to be able to partner
with them, um, for that as well.
We have partnerships with uh New
Mexico Tech, um, and, and other.
Other universities around the
state.
Yeah, obviously we partner with
UTEP as well, um, both, both
NMSU and UTEP great, great
technical engineering type
schools, uh, in the local area
and the other great thing about
about them is, is they feed our
workforce.
And that's, that's a fantastic
relationship that we have, uh,
with the educational
opportunities here in the state,
uh, to feed our workforce and,
and keep those people at home,
right, uh, where, where they
were raised, uh, where they, and
they, where they want to stay,
uh, and, and give them the
ability to do.
Rocket science
Thank you, Colonel. Thank you,
Chairman
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Commander, for your
presentation. I used to work at
White Sands at Sofia and uh the
orx was a problem. I was a
computer programmer and some
more engineers, they were just
getting creamed their trucks it
was a little scary, but, um,
thank you. Um, so, um,
appreciate what you do. I want
to tell you a little bit about
what we're doing for you with
legislation this year. One of
them is the funding you were
talking about. We, we have,
we're looking at a fund for
infrastructure for the.
all the bases to make sure you
have what you need so that when
if a BRC or any when when higher
level looks at this space, they
know that New Mexico is
supporting you and hopefully
that funding comes through this
year. Um, we've talked to Cannon
and, and Kirtland and I don't
know if we've talked to you that
much, but White Sands, but, um,
we know we're looking to help
you in any way with the
infrastructure. So hopefully
this funding comes through
lieutenant governors. I'm
working with him also, so we're
looking at that, um, compacts,
we're looking at a whole bunch
of compacts, um.
counseling, dentists, Idists,
um, teachers, therapists, um,
Physical therapist, just a whole
bunch of things to help out so
that hopefully spouses can or
maybe part of this, and they can
join the compact if we can get
them through, um, some of the
big things. The, the big thing,
the question I have, so water is
water an issue on white sands at
all?
Representatives Sara Sara.
That's what I was gonna say I
get a little tongue tied
sometimes, right?
Um, thank you for the question.
Uh, but most importantly, thank
you for the support, um, that
you guys are looking to, to
provide, um, not only to the
workforce but to the spouses.
That's, that's fantastic, um.
You know, we do have several 100
people that live on the
installation, not all wear wear
a uniform, and so there are
civilians, there's families, we
have a elementary and middle
middle school on post which, um,
by all accounts is one of the
better schools uh in the states,
which I think we we take massive
pride in.
um, but in terms of water, um.
I cannot say. I don't have a
problem with water. I don't feel
like we have a problem with
water because.
We water grass a lot, right? You
know, because, you know, when
White Sands came up, it's like,
oh, I've got to have grass. I
gotta have green grass, right,
so there's, there's there seems
to be plenty of water on white
sands, but, but I understand the
question and I'll, I will, um,
I'll take that back and see if,
if, if that is an issue that we
are facing, but um by all
accounts from what I've seen and
what my engagements, I haven't
heard anything specific that,
uh, we need to
Focus
On massive conservation of
water, just, you know, so I
don't, I don't believe there's a
shortage per se. OK, I'm on the
water committee and we all over
the state we're looking at water
and trying to figure out where
it is and where it needs to be
and um it, it seems to be a big
problem, but if you're, you're
good, that's, that's great.
Hopefully, yeah, OK, well, you
can get back to me on um the
other thing is encroachment. Do
you have any problems with DOD
DOE came out with a um an
initiative to look at uh
renewable energy and
infrastructure in New Mex
And a lot of it comes into New
Mexico. It looks close to Canon.
It looks close to White Sands
too, just the the what we saw of
it, so any we do have a bill for
encroachment to try to make sure
um
the if there's new
infrastructure that the military
isn't has a seat at the table,
so you know exactly what's
happening and they know and if
there's problems we could catch
them right away, but do you have
any problems at this point?
Um, Representative Serina, um,
thank you for the question.
Right now,
The answer is no.
Uh, we did work with the state,
um, on a uh on the power line
that was supposed to go through
our northern extension area.
Uh, we provided, you know, our,
our position, I think, and I
believe that was, that was
successful. Uh, we are hearing,
um, one of the challenges that
we have.
Opportunities. I don't like the
word challenges. One of the
opportunities we have is, is, is
coordination with our ranchers,
um, up in, up in the northern
extension area and then and then
even into the into the western
extension area,
uh.
Because obviously they are, they
want to make money, and they
deserve every right to make
money and one of the things that
has been rumbling up recently
are wind farms, right? So the
giant, you know, the, you know,
the Giant fans, um, that, that
blow wind and that would have a
That would have an impact on our
ability to utilize those
facilities, um, to be able to do
that because depending on where
they put them or how many, you
know.
We might hit one.
As an example, um, but, but
other than that, um,
That's kind of the only thing
that I'm that's barely on my
radar that I'm that I'm
understanding. Uh, there's,
there's been no active attempt
to do that, um, but, um, but
we've got a, I think we have a
really great relationship with
the ranchers, um, and, and it's
a, uh, I, I think it's a win-win
situation, um.
And they are, they're, they're
very thankful for, um.
For us, um.
Money, right, which is, which is
fine, right, but, but, but with
that comes, comes that that
mutual respect and and
appreciation for, for what we do
and what they, how they can
support us and, and um.
And so it's, it's, it's a great
opportunity that we've got with
them, but, um, in terms of any
other external pressures coming
into our range, uh, that would
prevent us from executing our
mission. I don't believe we
have. I'm not tracking anything
active right now.
Thank you, thank you.
Uh, representing Valcon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, sir,
Are you the one firing missiles
from this area up to Fort
Wingate.
Representative Al Cohn, that is
a very direct question and the
answer is.
Well, the answer is no because
we fire them from Wingate to
here.
It's the other way around. The
Wingate's too small, uh, for me
to use as an impact point.
Uh, and so, and, and, and the,
the whole one of the, one of the
things about White Sands missile
range, uh, and the the ability
that we have to to do missile
flight testing, uh, rocket
testing, all of that type of
stuff is the impact area is here
on white sand.
My understanding is you're going
that way with a smaller target
and you were going to be sure
that you hit small things. I'm
just gonna tell you, don't hit
my house there in Milan, OK,
because it's on the way.
But anyway, let's stay away from
that one. You know, a few years
back, I think it was a, like in
2020 we did uh 88 compact rigs
that we changed so that uh
spouses there and children of a
military
People that came to the state of
New Mexico could just license
over and bring their licenses
from whatever state they came
from, so they could come and
work here in New Mexico, so and
it's a never ending thing. It
seems like we found 88 that year
and we're still working in
another.
I don't know how many.
everything needs a duck on.
Way of getting done. So it's
kind of hard to do. I just, but
I'd want you to know when you
when somebody comes up and tells
you, I can't get a license for
this, this and this. If you can
get a hold of Debbie,
she was telling us which ones we
need to get so we can get it
straightened out because uh
we're gonna run and build again
pretty soon and we're going to
just ramp back everything else
just like we did those 888 that
year. So we should be in good
shape.
Shape
Uh, I just wanted to comment
that
That one time I had any
experience working with a
colonel.
I got assigned to 11th Brigade.
Yeah, you know, America signed
to 11th brigade as I come in I
back to Vietnam.
And they assigned you there to
wherever you're assignment was
going to be in Vietnam.
OK, I'll go and you're going to
land brigade
or work headquarters
headquarters 11 brigade. Holy
shit, how you couldn't do that.
So I got there with my all my
junk and everything that I had
with me.
I got to the door,
the dag on lieutenant hollered
at the colonel that was inside.
We got a medic.
We just sign this America.
Colonel said, what the hell you
need a medic. Get him on the
next ship, the next helicopter
to 4 of the 3rd infantry for the
3rd inventory needs medics.
So I'm getting to you and with
you just because of the other
guy. OK. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Representative Alco.
I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
thank you, Colonel, for being
here. Uh, spent a lot of time at
White Sands. I used to, um, or
at Ditra at Kirtland, so did a
lot of time up and stalling up
on the north end and uh.
Work in the moplipping years
back, uh, doing workout at
Capitol Peak and some of those
other sites and.
Dodging the orcs at 3 in the
morning when you're driving back
or setting up and always kind of
looking on the side to see
what's kind of chasing your car,
you know, on the, on the road.
Um.
I just want to highlight to
folks just how big that
installation is. I mean, it's,
you know.
Roughly almost the size of like
Rhode Island, Delaware. I mean,
it's, you know, it's, it's huge,
so it allows us to do things
that you wouldn't be able to
normally do anywhere else.
Um.
I kind of chuckle about, uh, you
said the water and the grass. I
just say that as an Air Force
guy how we get teased about
we've got grass and I thought
all the army guys had rocks. I
thought that's where, you know,
that's what we get teased about
is when we go to army
installations there's no grass,
it's always rock, so that's nice
that you guys have some grass
down there. Uh, my, I think for
the most part, my question has
been asked, but um.
I guess I'll just give you
another opportunity. I know
there is uh the work that's
being done by the lieutenant
governor, um, and, uh, the, the,
the leaders from the
installations like yourself to
talk about a lot of the quality
of life issues in our state.
Um, whether it be housing, um,
you know, jobs for spouses that
are coming in, whether it be uh
access to health care, whether
it be improvements in education,
um, because it's really
important that folks know that
when folks choose to come out
here and be stationed and when
the DOD decides.
You know, where to increase
emissions or keep missions
they're looking at those types
of factors, right, cause a lot
of times, you know, um, I think
from the civilian side, folks
don't know. Sometimes you get
your assignment and folks can
choose to say, you know what?
I, I'm not gonna go, I'm gonna
retire or I'm just gonna get out
because I don't want this
assignment to impact my family
or a job.
And I'm not saying it's always
because of the issue at
insulation in Mexico, but those
are actual real factors and
decisions that people make, uh,
just like last year we were
talking about even the hold up
on promotions, right? These are
things that impact folks' lives,
um, with what's going on in the
decisions that we make. And so,
um,
Just want to give you an
opportunity and, and you might
have already working a lot of
these within that group, but is
there anything else that you
just wanna really make us aware
of that things that we could do
at the state level and, and
that's what the understanding
and I know a lot of your funding
is, is coming, uh, federal
level, DOD, uh, with
Representative Vasquez what what
we can do, but there's policy
that we can do in our state to
make it more conducive, uh, to
our military families when they
come here.
Um, and so, you know, we need
help with housing and healthcare
from the federal level, but
there's things that we, we have
to do as well. So is there any
areas that you, you can just
think of that maybe we haven't
touched on today that we can be
working on.
Uh, thank you, Senator Pope, uh,
for the question. Um, so 11
thing that I that I will
highlight is, um,
The the workforce, um,
specifically mine, but really
the greater White Sands
workforce, uh, they are, they're
dedicated to the mission.
They, they love what they do.
Um
And it's just it's, it, it's fun
for them to come to work every
day and.
To be honest, blow stuff up,
right,
um, and so, so, so they, they
love what they do and, and, and
a lot of our, a lot of the
people that work on White Sands
are, uh, are from the, the area,
they grew up here, they've got
family here, um, it's a lot of
one of the reasons why a lot of
people come,
they don't necessarily, you
know, most, most government
civilians.
Uh, depending on where they're
at, there are.
Um, more opportunities.
Uh, for advancement and growth,
uh, but one of the things here
about this community is they
want to stay here because they
have the roots, um, and, and
whatnot. Uh, it's really
probably more so, uh, the
military that come in, right,
and their ability to uh for
their family to.
Feel, feel welcomed and uh.
And feel opportunity, uh,
specifically spouses. Uh, my
wife was lucky enough to find a
job at a, at a school in in Las
Cruces, uh, to teach for kind of
I guess really the first time,
um, uh, for us.
Uh, and be able to be able to do
that with with our kids at the
school as well, um, and, you
know, but, um, but ultimately
one of the.
One of those challenges is it's
always spousal employment. It's,
it's a problem, not just here at
White Sands or in New Mexico,
but really across, just across
the, the military. Uh, I know
that we've got, we've got good,
um, good.
Uh, programs in place for uh to
hire spouses on at like the
government level where they can,
they can find jobs on on White
Sands, for an example.
Um, but being able to find jobs
outside of White Sands, those,
those kind of sometimes seem to
be uh arguably challenging, um.
You know, because right, wrong
or different whether it's the,
the spouse who feels this way or
the or the company or
organization that's that feels
this way, there's that.
Oh, your, your military.
I know for a fact that you're
leaving.
Right. And so there's that
investment in those people, um,
and, and, you know, there's,
there's tons of opportunity,
there's tons of.
You know, reports and articles
and and media where, um, you
know, spouses have that.
Uh, disadvantage, right, because
we
You know, I get told to move and
my family comes with me, which I
appreciate immensely, right? My
family is always going to come
with me. They're committed, uh,
to, to what, to what I do, uh,
and, and what I do for, for the
army in our nation,
but there's that challenge that
they, that they always have
every time they move, um, and so
I, I don't know of anything
specific here in New Mexico, um,
where, where someone just can't
find a job, um, but, but it is,
it is.
and a lot of times it's just
stressful, right? Every time you
move.
Right, I've got one.
You know, this is kind of the
first time for me that my wife
has a job, but a lot of, there's
a lot of military couples who
have a non um military spouse.
Who wants to have a career, um,
but also.
You know, once.
The spouse to be able to to do
what they want to do and so it's
just a matter of, of them
finding something that allows
them to to build their own
career if that's something that
they so choose your your
question. Yes, thank you,
Colonel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, and I like the point you
made about the local folks that
worked there that are dedicated
um that's a wherever you live,
it's a commute to get to the
job, but, um, might sound kind
of crazy saying this, but you've
kind of already said it. It's
one of those unique jobs where.
We spend all this time building
things to blow it up. It's just
it's one of those jobs I had to
do most everything else I worked
on satellites, you're trying to
build things that's going to
last and but I mean, we would
work with, you know, uh.
Some of the civil engineers,
even some of the Navy CVs and.
Build structures so we can blow
them up just to see what these
weapons could do. And so what
other job can you do that at and
so folks just love this unique
job, um, but how do we make sure
we take care of those folks but
also.
Um, when they start retiring,
you know, where, where it's
going to be the new crop of
folks that are going to take
over those positions.
Um, as far as, um, the spouses,
I think you're correct, it's
already.
Tough
They're they're already in a
tough position being a spouse
and having to relocate and move,
um, and I'm sure it's something
you've had to deal with with
with your rise in promotions and
you're having to go where you
need to go and so a lot of times
uh somebody's career, some in
some cases can suffer, um, and
so I think as a state we need to
find ways to really help folks
when they come in, especially
those that are licensed and are
certified to where.
We're like delaying them the
ability to work and by the time
they can work, well, you're
you're you're off somewhere
else, right? So, um, maybe we
need to also look at the state
on what we do. I know, you know,
look at things like veterans
preference, but we need to start
looking at what we can do with
our spouses, you know, even at
the state level, county level,
city level, things like that.
So, um, with that, uh, thank
you, Colonel, for the
presentation and answer the
questions and um I don't know if
you had anything after I get.
Done if you want to comment, and
that's all I have, Mr. Chair.
No, thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I'm
Luis Terrazas, uh, state
representative down in District
39 and live in Silver City, so
just so you get an idea of where
I'm at, right, Grant County, uh,
Kaine Hidalgo, uh, beautiful
part of the state and I running
all over to get here. I'm glad I
finally made it here. Sorry,
Colonel. I didn't hear your
whole thing, but my real
question was.
Uh.
Mr. Chair, Colonel, was, have
you seen any?
Problems with recruitment.
Because of the lottery
opportunity scholarship, I know
that's the way that you guys
generally, uh, you know, get
people to come and and uh
recruit for you, right? Because
they can get their schooling
paid,
but that being said, well, first
of all, let me, let's see if
that's a, that's a question.
Let's see where where you go
with that.
Well, Representative Tarasas,
uh, thank you for the question.
Um, but what you missed was, uh,
I basically said White Sands
missile range is awesome. And,
uh, New Mexico is a great
partner.
But, but in terms, in terms of
that, um, you know, I did, I, I,
I did highlight earlier we've
got great relationships with,
with all of the universities,
uh, here in New Mexico, um, and
we, we partner with them,
uh, not only for future
workforce, uh, but even our
current workforce. Uh, but in
terms of future workforce and
and growing our um, our
workforce because I was senator,
that was, that was, there was
one thing that I did want to
comment, and that was, uh, when
you look at our workforce.
The government has this tendency
to have these hiring waves.
Right, um, and so, uh, one of
the, one of the challenges we
have is I have a, I have an
older workforce right now, uh,
that, that will could
potentially affect our ability
to execute our mission if they
all decided to retire tomorrow.
Um, they're, they're not doing
that because they, they love
what they do, um, but we do have
the partnerships with the
universities around here, uh,
within the state, uh, with UTEP,
uh, and then of course we branch
out as well, uh, across the
Southeast, um.
To to bring in interns, um,
whether they are, uh, you know,
freshman sophomores, juniors
were graduating seniors. Uh,
we'll bring, we'll bring them
in, um, sometimes we'll have
summer interns where they they
come in and they work for us for
for the summer. Uh, we give them
an opportunity, um, to build
things and blow it up, right?
Uh, and, and to kind of do those
those types of things, um, you
know, and there's, we've got a
huge program for, for interns,
um, because it's not just the
summer.
Turns that we have, we also, uh,
we also will hire people as
interns. They'll be considered
an intern for 2 years before we
just convert them into
government service.
Uh, and so that's kind of our,
our main pipeline uh into the
workforce.
Uh, is getting those, getting
those interns. Um, there's, and
there's.
Several different types of
intern programs. There's, um,
army DOD level interns uh that
are, um.
Kind of assigned down to us, uh,
per se, they they cho they chose
to come to White Sands. And then
we have local interns that we,
that we actually pull from the,
you know, the local
universities, um.
To, to bring them on as well
that, that we manage. So we've
got multiple different programs
that we use as, as kind of a
pipeline into, into the
workforce at White Sands.
If that answers your question.
That's fine. Yes, sir. I think I
was just looking for for a
dancer to see if you're it's
stifling your recruitment sounds
like you guys have a different
avenue of how you're making that
happen, and nothing against the
scholarship situation that we
have with the lottery and the
opportunity, I think they're
great. I just wanted to hear
from you guys how that was
affecting you or not affecting
you and um because I've always
been one of these guys that
wishes that we would as a
legislature as for the taxpayers
of New Mexico were, were
Educating a lot of these people
and, and then they're leaving
our state after they graduate
and so what I'm hoping to do is
see if we can
gather, garner support,
uh, where we all work together
and keep the kids here say, you
know what, we educated you for a
couple of years, you know, we
educated you. Can you stay a
couple of years to get back to
New Mexico and, and, you know,
it's not really holding them
hostage, but I think we could
grow our, our workforce, uh,
here if we did something like
that, we fill in nurses, uh,
doctors and so forth, you know,
throughout the.
all the things that we're
lacking in New Mexico and then I
didn't know if that would, so
that was really where I was
going with that. I just wanted
to see if, if it was affecting
you. So thank you very much,
Colonel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh.
Commander, I have one question.
Do you still have a navy vessel
in White Sands?
You mean like, like, like, like
a shift.
It's called the desert ship.
Yes, we do.
OK, I just want to, you know,
cause you mentioned in your
presentation how you test.
All kinds of stuff. How do you
do any testing for the Navy or
do you?
Representative Garcia, thank you
for the question. Um, so.
Yes, so we have, uh, well, the
Navy right has, has some
facilities on White Sands and
it's, it's called the Desert
ship. Uh, it's
Kind of a building that looks
like a ship, but it also has uh.
It also has the ability to
integrate, um, the capabilities
to uh kind of give the
impression that you're doing it
from a, from a seaborne
platform, uh, depending on,
depending on what the mission
is, so they, so the desert ship
provides that capability of the
Navy so that we don't
necessarily, we don't always
have to go out into the, they
don't always have to go out in
the ocean to do their testing,
and then what are the advantages
that we have at White Sands, uh,
as, as I mentioned earlier, um,
to.
Representative Alconn's
question, um, you know, we don't
shoot into Wingate, we shoot
into White Sands, right? So, uh,
one of the things that the Navy.
Can't necessarily do.
Most places when they're on a
boat is shoot back onto land.
And so we provide the capability
for them to shoot, test some of
their missiles, uh, and their,
their equipment uh and they can
get.
Impact data here because we're
able to do it.
And uh
Have an impact on land as
opposed to out in the middle of
the ocean somewhere if they're
firing off of China Lake or or
using Reagan uh test site out in
South Pacific.
Thank you, commander. You know,
when I asked the question, I
know there's gonna be some, oh
yeah,
what are you asking about on
Navy ship on on land, but at the
end of the day, in reality, what
you're doing.
is exactly what they need to do.
Out in the ocean, but they're
doing it here for this site for
this purposes. Thank you very
much for that. Uh, you know, and
you know a couple of years ago I
did legislation to uh help
retired people under taxes.
You went from 10,000 to 20,000
to 30,000 and it had a sunset on
it and the governor uh
They introduced it, but they,
the sunset was going away and
the Senate redid it I think last
year, so that sounds is there
forever.
Microwave in 30,000. Yeah, it's
up to 30,000 and and the reason
for that is we're trying to
recruit people.
That are that are retiring here
to stay here.
Because you get nurses, doctors,
mechanics, and can you touch
that based on that just a little
bit, sir.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Garcia for the question. I can,
I can touch that uh
specifically.
Uh, my sergeant Major, uh, who
arrived about the same time I
did 2 months ago, um.
is retiring uh in the next 2
years, give or take, uh, and he
has already bought property out
in truth or consequences, and
with the expectation
specifically because of the
benefits that you guys that that
the the state of the state of
New Mexico has provided for
veterans, uh, and retirees, that
that is, that was one of the
specific reasons why he
specifically chose to look in
New Mexico for his retirement,
um.
Place where he was going to
finish raising his family, uh,
he's still got two girls at
home, um.
His mom lives in El Paso, um, he
like I, well, he was.
He was a little kid in El Paso.
I graduated high school in El
Paso, so we're, we kind of are
familiar with the area and know
it, but he, he made a decision
to come back to this area and to
retire in New Mexico
specifically because of um.
The actions that that the New
Mexico state government has
taken in support of retirees and
veterans.
Thank you, commander, and one
last question, what's the,
what's the average age of a of
of a person retiring in 50, 55
years old. They can retire at
that rate.
Representative Garcia, yes,
thank you for the question. So
yes, they are retirement
eligible, uh, generally around
55, it's usually 20 years or so
of, uh, federal government
service, uh, I have.
Um,
I have over 100 who are uh
exceed.
Exceed 30 years.
Um, and then we've got, we've
got more as you go down in terms
of time and service, so, uh,
what I've been told is 60% of my
workforce is retirement
eligible, right? So that would
be a huge.
Huge problem if they all decided
to.
Be like Andrew Johnson, Colonel
Johnson, you're, you're
terrible. We are all leaving and
then I have a huge problem. So I
try to not be terrible, um, but,
but we do have that, but we
have, we have people as, as I've
stated, you know, the, the
workforce is committed, they
love what they do. Um, we have
people working into their late
60s, early 70s.
Um, because, because they enjoy
they enjoy what they do, uh, and
so I am very appreciative of of.
Of those that generation and
their willingness to work, but
also the fact that they have all
of the institutional knowledge.
Of how
Um, White Sands has evolved over
time, um.
And they just, they know how
everything works.
They know how everything works,
it's, it's really crazy when I
go out and I talk to, talk to
the team and the things that
they know,
uh, and how they're able to go
back in time and be like, yeah,
we used to do it this way and
now we're, now we're here,
right? And they, and they've
moved and and they've advanced
with that as well and so um I
appreciate them and now it's
their turn to make sure that my
new people or my middle people,
right, they, they're all moving
along that path as well so we
don't lose that knowledge.
and that capability, uh, that
those people provide.
I thank you for that this just a
comment at the end, you know,
all the what the state has done
for the military, you know, for
licensers, uh, you know, so they
can come in and practice nursing
or doctoring or whatever the
retirement deal, what we're
trying to do is keep people that
you're going to lose to stay in
New Mexico and work because at
at 55 or 60 he can still work
again and that's the, that's the
goal I think of this committee
is to keep him here.
And uh thank you for the
presentation. I learned a whole
bunch and don't shoot rockets
to.
For Wingy.
I, I'll do my best to represent
and to the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to, to, uh,
present and, and have a
discussion with you this
morning. Thank you.
Thank you, Colonel. I think
we're gonna break for lunch.
Yeah, so we'll be in recess till
about 1:30ish or so, so, if you
need something to eat, be sure
and steroids ground. Thank you.
