mexico and m f a over sight
interim committee meeting for
the interim session I am your
new chair and vice chair i'm
representative general and you
know new I represent house
district nineteen and alva kirky
that is the third grounds in the
international district and i've
met most of you before um and so
I just want to welcome you thank
you so much for being here for a
first meeting my first meeting
is chair of anything ever this
is very exciting for me and for
the rest of you you get the
benefit of not having to learn
to say and you know you can just
say madam chair for the rest of
the session I think they'll make
everybody much happier and so I
want to start with it committee
introductions i'm so just go
around the room and will do
staff introductions but as
sender to bias and if you'd like
to kick us off
good morning i'm senator to buy
a I am in district twenty one
which is north the established
cricket.
Good morning a dow I have the
city limits of saquiro to the
northern highway that goes
alberto and in donate so
sierra donanna.
Morning I said a great brand to
really show senate district
forty.
Representative matthews if you
like to introduce yourself.
Thank you.
The.
Yeah.
Okay.
Good morning everyone
state senator for one sunday
district six in companies as
part of some of the fair seller
most real reburn towes being in
this committee for a quite a few
years now i've always feel that
this is one of the committees
that I really respect a while
because so.
You know you'll see so much so
many things that happen
we talk about it in the next
thing you know do you have a
ground break in ceremony and
then a ribbon cutting and it's
nice to see for the population
that it serves but it is so you
very very successful committee.
Thank you again to.
The.
Good morning madame chair i'm
representative kathleen keys
district house just to forty
four has to forty four is all of
caralas parts of rear rancho
north of the sale don't know
what they from the river eastern
river down to I twenty five.
Just like to let the committees
know that today are uh I have an
intern from the ask academy and
rear rancho o and peterson and
the back I have to dock out of
this meeting a little early so
if there's any handouts or
anything please make sure that o
and is able to get any of that
paperwork for it and thank you
very much.
Senator herald poe junior
district twenty three that the
furthest northwest burner leo
county district just gone for
sale had west and uh you hit it
happy to be here
good morning madam chair and
madame vice chairs are nice to
see both of you there excellent
and so nice to be in this
building I I missed the november
meeting madame chair and this is
just like phenomenal I had not
realized that all of this and
come together this quickly so
this is very exciting what I say
thank you to the mfa staff and
and our executive director here
or co uh you don't wonderful job
along and this is going to help
you to grow even more and do
more wonderful things for new
mexico i'm senator michael for
the year i'm the senate majority
whip uh been in the senate for
thirteen years and i've been on
this committee the entire time I
was a voting member but i'm no
longer a voting number i'm just
here to kind of advise all that
kind of stuff
we do appreciate all the work
that you do and I look forward
to working through another great
agenda this year thank you
madame chairman of ice cream.
Good morning committee good
morning to all of our
attentions and mfa members thank
you for having this year and
congratulations on the new space
is really nice
senator vice and I
lindatory and I had a town
holiest we're just talking you
up and all the good things that
mfa does for our state so really
happy to be part of this thank
you and represent a terrible
hand from house just to forty
eight thank you.
Good morning madam chair vice
chair members of the committee
those in the audience and those
watching i'm but there is here
royal market by yet alive
represent house district
thirteen which is safe southwest
quadrant of albert cricket happy
to be here I also missed the
following last meeting
with and and all of the other
events that occurred
reference to this new building
sell glad to be here in serve in
this committee again thank you.
Good morning madam chair it's
going to be a lot easier to call
you that then try and pronounce
your name
morning committee members of and
everybody here representative
mentor from house district one
i'm just a little behind center
per dear I think this is my
eleventh year on on this
committee and and is he
beautiful building uhm hope to
see you continue the work that
uh you great staff have done and
once again just to throw it out
there I know that the dollars
that flow through through
this.
Building are are generally
matched
sixteen one match leveraged with
dollars that do not come from
the state coffers so
I just want to make sure that
set front of our minds as we go
forward and put our work
schedule together.
Google ahead representative
territory
then came out of chair good
morning everybody my name is
elena chavis I represent house
district twenty six which sits
on the west side of albert kurki
and also includes the party to
message in the south valley and
i'm excited to be on this
committee
looking forward to learning a
lot about housing in new mexico.
The.
Good morning everyone and it's
great to be here this morning
i'm representative cynthia
boring i'm glad I have my name
right in front of me so I can
read it um representing burnly o
county district seventeen which
is uh the area
cotton would
serving as an advisory board
member on this committee this
year but i've worked with mfa.
Prior to this on many many
projects throughout the city
including albuquerque high
silver gardens projects in the
international district projects
and martinez town south bright
way
uh and alvirato gardens on the
west side.
So i'm happy to serve in this
role I also want to introduce my
dla who is in the audience
gabrieller grego just graduated
from u and m with a degree in
business so i'm really happy to
have her here this morning
thank you ripperigo and thank
you all of you for being here I
really enjoy working with all of
you in the session and i'm very
much looking forward to this
interim session as well and that
we could not do this meeting
without our staff so it is is he
feel indulgent for just a minute
and have our staff people
introduce themselves as well.
Just as best you can did you
like to district my goodness to
please
think you thank you madame share
i'm linda heo senator for
district twenty four in
basically city proper
cereosis down the middle of my
district and I have all of the
housing and workers in on either
side of surreals i'm really
excited to be on this committee
because housing is really an
issue in our community and I
know it continues to be an issue
in other communities I mostly
excited to be able to serve with
the chair and you know no
because I really have great
respect for the work that she
does and we're both left handed
so we're in good company
together right
thank you.
Alright thank you very much
everybody and this is an
incredible staff they've been so
supportive and they can answer
all your questions in mind about
how to organize these meetings
and so I will call your
attention to the agenda we're
gonna do a click switch a room
of items to and one we're going
to do staff and reductions of
the mfa staff before the update
as it just makes more sense
though um take it away is in
thinking
thank you madame checking you
hear me okay.
So first of all welcome to
housing new mexico in our new
building here it's a definitely
been good for us in the staff it
gives us a pleney of room to an
be able to host our these
meetings or board meetings all
of our staff and then our
partners throughout the year as
well
thank you madam chairfare
adjusting the agenda little bit
of money introduced staff here
tonight one call your attention
you have to hand out or binders
in front of you uh we won't go
through all of the details and
all of them here but we will go
to a little bit later on the
ticket binder to when the cess
reference materials if you don't
mind turning to page or tab ten
uh it'll have a some of the
organizational turning there
that'll help as we go through
some of these introductions here
there are a couple of our key
leadership that are not here
today so all kinda introduced
their directors and then all
turn it over to some of the
folks that are here and I have
them introduced their their step
as well so right behind tapped
in you'll see
the executive team that second
person down is done a minute or
chief housing officer she cannot
be here today she has three
departments under her if you
turn over to the next page there
are all introduced her staff but
i'll start by saying that the
donors because been with us
since just right before copied
uh in march of a twenty so she's
been here with us for five years
she overseas three departments
and the people that she overseas
a directly would be the
community development department
and kelly teleson was to hinders
here is a director of a
community development uh the
programs that they oversee are
the homeless programs energy
efficiency programs and we have
programs one of the most diverse
departments that we have here in
the organization that we have
time plus programs in that
department.
Next you'll see marketing the
communications we have a
christian garcia that's also
behind us here she's dirt in
with us for a almost two years
does the tremendous job for us
came to us from last crucials
and
you'll see a lot of social media
post and a lot of things that
they do force here not also in
charge of helping us with the
coordinating a lot of events
across the state we also have or
as a management department
patrick or teases behind us here
somewhere uh he's a director of
assist management they have a
big role for the organization
and that all of the loans that
we make throughout the
organization they have the role
of going out there and
monitoring to make it sure that
the long term compliance
requirements are being met so
they go out throughout the state
they have three hundred plus
properties rental properties
that they oversee probably over
twenty thousand maybe
approaching twenty five thousand
units across the state
next if you turn back one page
you'll see jeff at the bottom of
the page are on the executive
team jeffers our chief lending
officer he's been with us for
about seven years overseas four
different departments so if you
turn back to the organizational
chart I will introduce some of
the staff we have olivia
martinez is that director of
secondary market
all of the loans that are made
within our home wondership
program and get secure ties in
the secondary market and they
are in charge of making sure
that those loans are pulled
correctly in all the
requirements are being met they
have a big job for the
organization.
Uh.
Next is a joseph navidation user
senior director of information
systems or information
technology they make sure that
we have all of this uh it and
there were running efficient and
smoothly here and implementing a
lot of software programs and
some directly home grown if you
will in program here within our
organization.
We also have renewal counia
behind us here he is our
director of home ownership so
all of the first time home buyer
mortgages and next mortgages
that we make to non first time
home buyers and the dump payment
assistance programs are overseen
by his department.
You'll also see the housing
development department their
director could not be here today
but representing him is how
cover martinez
in that department they do a lot
of the long programs in tax
credit programs for both rental
and single family development a
lot of money goes through that
department there and awards or
made across the state i'll give
you more details on that so
thank you
for being here.
We also have on the order to see
human resources department
towards the middle right hand
side of the or sharp dollar.
She may not be in the audience
here but she's our hr director
and then we also have robin pell
which most of you know she is
our senior director of policy
and planning does a lot of a
great work for us not only with
a point person for for most of
you but also doing a lot of the
policy work for us and keeping
in touch with our federal
delegation and also some
research and development type
projects in a running some of
our programs
and then you'll also see an
executive assistant she's the
one that keeps me straight here
and make sure that I get to all
the meetings and that meet all
the deadlines and that dominique
zooning who is because in the
back she just does the
tremendous job for us and thank
you dominique for for all that
you do.
With there i'm gonna turn it
over to our doddy to introduce
her step but I will say that our
doddy has been with us for a
couple of years this is their
second stand whether she was
with us in the early nineties to
uh plate nighties to early two
thousand and left for about
twenty plus years and now came
back to us a year and a half or
so back and just as a tremendous
job as our cfll force or not if
you don't mind introducing your
staff.
Thank you and madam chair I
think that the conclusion that
presentations that we wanted to
make I do want to also most of
you know this person here but
although he's not part of staff
he's the definitely a key member
of our team on the legislative
site and that is john anderson
who was
somewhere is been here and a
partner of a housing new mexico
for longer than i've been in the
organization and i've been here
for for a long time so madam
chair with that we can go to the
next agenda item if you're
pleasure absolutely.
Madam chairman members of the
committee i'm going to uh can
give you an update
in one of the say that probably
be a little more in depth with
this committee than i've done in
that last few years as we have a
lot of new members here on this
oversight committee so we want
to welcome all of you new
members here I think there's a
total of twenty three that
includes the aid advisory and
are eight voting in fifteen
advisory that's a more than I
think that's a record for us
actually so i'll provide some
background to kind of give
everybody a foundational
understanding of a housing new
mexico and then i'll give you
some highlights
over there since we last met in
november of of last year so
we are created in a nineteen
seventy five uh so this is this
year commemorate sorry fiftieth
anniversary
we.
Whom were created were given the
authority to issue tax exempt
bonds so that's where I think
part of our name comes from is a
mortgage finance authority is
having that authority to issue
those months.
The investors in those bonds are
willing to accept the lower
yield on those bond size they
don't have to pay taxes we
intern pass sole savings on two
our borrowers out there with
below market interest rates so
that's how we are created with
one program in mind and there
was a first time home by your
program which is a program
designed to help working
families in the work forces we
would call it now and we
continue to do so and that is
the key program that we have and
while we're most widely known uh
across the state for.
It is almost significantly
program we are a statewide her
agency although we're not a
state agency we don't really we
do not receive funds for
operations we're not state
employees and do not receive any
p r a benefits we have one
office which were sitting in
today but we do provide services
across the state
we are very proud to say we have
a very strong network or
infrastructure of close to four
hundred partners across the
state that are key to the
success of the organization.
Some of those examples of
partners would be local
governments tribal governments
for profit nonprofit into public
housing authorities a realtors
lenders and in the list goes on
many partners across the state
that delivered services at the
local member
or staff here is composed of a
twenty individuals and the way
that we're able to do this run
all of our programs and i'll
give you some statistics and
you'll hear some more a little
bit later on on the various
programs that we have is really
by leaning and leveraging our
resources with the partners we
have across the state
fifty years worth of
infrastructure if you will in a
developing those partners that
we have
as we are I mentioned earlier
that we started out with one
program we've now grown to over
forty programs that we
administer here
we have close to forty different
funding sources and we address a
full spectrum of housing from
homelessness to homeownership in
everything in between
in july of last year we
rebranded to housing new mexico
legally our name is still the
mortgage finance authority we
did not believe or do not
believe that mortgage finance
authority fully discrised what
we do is an organization so we
rebranded his house in your
mexico as we believe it is a
better descriptor of what we do
is an organization
I mentioned earlier that this is
our fifty at that anniversary
on april tenth of a nineteen
seventy five representative
centuries uh the former speaker
representative adled since
nearly hungry and representative
lopus sponsored house bill
eighty eight that was passed by
the both chambers and governor
up a lot of signed the bill into
law on april tenth of a nineteen
seventy five we had a great
celebration here on that date
and we're able to have a speaker
centuries and representative
hunting here along with some
other folks that were attended
that uh particular celebration I
proud to say that in the fifty
years that we've been in
existence we've been able to
assist.
Over five hundred and five
thousand families with the
various programs that we have
on our website we have we
started launching fifty stories
in fifty weeks that would
conclude in september that kind
of a gives you a path if you
will or the roadmap that we've
taken and the key mile stones
that we were cheaped with the
help of our partners in the
legislators in the in the
governor
and so I would
provide that that website to you
so you can track some of our
what's going on there and one of
our future medias will kind of
give you a run down and show you
some of the highlights there.
For a twenty twenty four I
mentioned earlier than our fifty
year as we've assisted over five
hundred and five thousand
families this last year that
just passed into it in september
of a twenty twenty four we are
able to assist just under
nineteen thousand families with
the programs that we have we
served every single county
with seven hundred and thirty
six million dollars in funding
there was a it was invested
across the state that included a
thirty seven hundred families
that were assisted with first
mortgages don't payment
assistance or mortgage
assistance over thirteen
thousand individuals where help
with housing stability the
economic impact that housing has
across the status tremendous
there is four hundred and thirty
four million dollars of direct
and interest in direct economic
impact with that production that
I just mentioned in close to six
thousand jobs that were created
or supported
this year or a year to date
production six months worth of
production has a says just under
thirteen thousand families that
we've assisted with three
hundred and forty one thousand
two hundred and forty one
million dollars
so it's great success with the
new mexico housing trust front
program that is thanks to your
support is being funded with
some recurring funds I won't go
into the details on that day's
robbing will give you some
details here now following
presentation
one of the things that are won a
highlight here is that we
currently have fifty one
different multi family a
developments across the state
that are one phase of
construction or another
some of the development set the
housing development department
has awarded funds to that's
close to forty nine hundred
units that are currently in
construction located across
nineteen different union
supperities in fourteen counties
across the state that's over
three hundred and seventy
million and combined funding the
economic the eventual economic
impact once those are all
completed is over one point
three billion dollars in local
income in over fifteen hundred
jobs that are created or some.
Under our single family programs
we this is something that that
we've started doing here in the
last couple of years we
currently have a nine different
single family developments
across the state that were
funding with over thirteen
million dollars in nine separate
locations so and we recently
launched a new program that i'll
mentioned a little bit later on
call the zip program which is
used to incentive vice
construction of entry level
homes which is not something
that's happening across the
state
on the homeownership programs
the activity that we have there
that's of programs that are
renewal union historic overseas
we have over this year fiscal
year to date uh over seventeen
hundred longs that have been
reserved an average of about
thirteen million dollars in
reservations on an annual basis
or no weekly basis i'm sorry.
We're ahead of last year's
production which is about twelve
point seven million weekly
reservations our rates are
currently about fifty basis
points below the market to
markets about six point seven
five and we're at six two five
we offer and not on the things
that keeps are tracked in fox to
come to us is the down payment
assistance that we offer which
is four percent to the sales
price in an additional ten
thousand dollars on top of that
the average sales pricer were
currently seen is about two
hundred and fifty three thousand
last year that was two hundred
and forty six thousand so I and
the increase are from from last
year.
They know there's a lot of
questions potentially on federal
funds in the administration
sir
view of the budget in the skinny
budget if you would call it we
are keeping an eye as those
bills in the budget progress to
the the various chambers are I
will say that we recently
received our funding for the
year from the federal government
and it was level funding for the
programs that we have nothing to
be concerned about this year but
will continue to keep an eye on
that.
Or intent for this year with
this committee with that with
your approval in the chairs
approval is to have some partner
presentations in the next four
meetings that we today and in
the next four meetings that we
have so you're not just hearing
from step at your hearing about
some more partners that are
doing that the heavy lifting
across the state will
communicate to you the needs the
successes and then how you could
potentially help us in
addressing some of those needs
well plan on covering the full
continue of housing from
homelessness to homeownership in
the needs there and we will
update you on a monthly basis on
how we're doing non
incumbencies and expenditures of
the housing trust fund and then
overall production that we have
the lasting manager that i'll
mention here is that
when of our big events for this
year will be the housing summit
that will have in september
seventeenth through nineteenth
and wall or make sure we get to
more information on that but
want you to save the data so you
are invited to that uh we'd
normally get a close to five
hundred attentions at that and
would look forward to to have a
new participate in that dinner
madam chair with that dollar to
stand for any questions that the
committee may have.
Okay thank you very much mister
hernandez are there any
questions for the
moment share and thank you is he
what a wonderful work and job
you're putting together here for
the the next year and stuff when
you were mentioning earlier
about the assistance to new
buyers of the ten thousand
dollars what does that translate
in to in terms of is that
utilised for like a point buy
down things of that nature
because it's it's it's no longer
worth just ten thousand to them
if you do if you offer it for
that it becomes very valuable to
them or it say thirty year
period.
Madam chair and senior by the
other the gumping the assistance
that we currently have is a four
percent to the sales price list
your staff for round numbers it
says three hundred thousand
dollars so they would get four
percent of that is twelve
thousand dollars in dump payment
assistance in an additional ten
thousand on that so that would
be what twenty two thousand
dollars that they get is
currently down payment
assistance is not used to buy
down the interest rate okay but
it's mostly just to reduce the
principle amount we fire had
some studies a little bit on how
that may work on a interest rate
buy down and we found that the
down payment assistance is
probably a more effective way of
doing that I would is okay
alright think you manager that's
all I had and thank you very
much for your introduction thank
you senator pretty a senator
gonzalez.
Thank you madam surround just a
couple of things so I know that
a director.
Mention about the conference of
happening in september fifth
some of the day to the
nineteenth right.
Those were the dates
madam church in their
consolidation is correct okay
for members
i'll pick up so a correct be if
there's anything that I may
mention that it's not.
Correct of the rector of.
Oh this doesn't happen every
year it's every other year and
it's a beautiful conference it's
probably some very very strong
presentations and really gives
you a lot of information about
you know what's happening in.
So I would really encourage a
lot of members to the plan on
that to to work with that the
second part of that insurer he
is so another community so I
have mentioned to wear or we
have AAA setting for cosi
government and a possibilities
with a work plan that tell in
one of the meetings that are if
we could have maybe young a few
of the board members that tend
and they could give us their
perspective you know on their
part in a home.
You know the functioning of that
hand no.
Then also I guess I sold.
As our part as legislators gives
us a much better understanding
of a good connection you know
with them with a work that's
been done and then again.
An organization that has been
since nineteen seventy five.
And as they mention of a success
if I enormous.
Thank you very much center
consellers I have represented a
low home.
Thank you.
Thank you
so just thank you for the
overview but do I need to wait
to we get to I mean do we go for
the
the funding the state funding
update or routers that next on
the agenda.
And we have not covered that and
downward my question thank you
think you representative of
representative travers thank you
madame charley just have a.
A question about you mentioned
transitional housing and can you
just really briefly talk about
um you know what that looks like
and how you.
Work with some of the maybe
shelters folks who are working
on homeless issues around the
state.
Manager no representative which
I was a definitely I can do that
I do want to take this
opportunity monitor a totally
forgot to introduce one of our
board members that is present
here today I member
apologized member trainer but he
is present today and obviously a
key member of the organization
with regard to transitional
housing we have various programs
and will cover more these more
in detail but i'll just give you
a very quick overview so we have
about twenty five or twenty
seven shelters that we fund
across the state with a shelter
operations uh some of those
shelters and other partners also
distribute our rental assistance
to the homeless fox uh we have a
link it just program that's
funded by the state that's for
uh individuals that are homeless
with severe mental illnesses
that provides rental vouchers
there's other programs that we
also provide across the state to
help with that walk give you
more details on that as that is
this progress is a little bit in
future presentations and I hope
that's helpful thank you thank
you manager and just one more
question in terms of the federal
cards have you all had an
opportunity to talk with
usda office to see what that
looks like and how it's going to
impact.
Madame chairman representative
at a cherisa I have not
specifically talked to the US d
a reps and I don't know far
robin has at this point we have
not but we will definitely make
that a point to to talk to them
and we are at the national level
kind of keeping the eyes on the
potential cut and I know US d a
one of those that may have some
potential cuts similar to to
had.
Thank you.
Thank you representative have as
represented borregal.
Thank you manager I just wanted
to
give kudos to the mortgage
finance authority
or housing new mexico I guess as
it is referred to now
about a month and a half ago I
think it was they had a little
reception for the original
legislators and there were the
three legislators
well two of them that were that
were here
happened to a town and it was a
representative former speaker
ray sound remain centers and a
dallonly dell centerly hungry
against it and then any lobbers
who was deceased but they're the
original founders of this
organization and the original
legislation and could you remind
us is the the legislation number
and that was I think in nineteen
seventy five.
Manager representative or
regular there was house bill
eighty eight
can I just want to let people
know that
um they recognize those
legislators and a little kind of
mini reception that they had
which I thought was really
really great and a lot of staff
was here and I I just I learned
a lot from listening to those
legislators about how this bill
came to be and how this
organization came to be and
there is actually a little
booklet and I have a copy of it
that a deal only gave me
that shows and i'll try to bring
it to the next meeting if
possible because I live learn
for everyone to see it but it
talks about you know the program
back in nineteen seventy five so
I just wanted to mention that
thank you
thank you representative rigo I
love tangible connections
history so they would be great
if you could bring that next
time vice church are here
thank you madame chair and think
it is it's good to ceo i'm
wondering is that is there any
talk amongst the agency to
increase that four percent to
upwards i'm trying to do the
math for the four percent on a
three hundred hundred thousand
dollars.
Loan in addition to the ten
thousand and it still doesn't
come out to a nerve.
That an individual could avoid
that mortgage insurance I
understand that you're going to
get closer to twenty percent and
maybe that's not correct about
that mortgage durates can have a
huge expense to a monthly
payment so i'm just wondering is
there any like move towards
increasing the down payment
assistance for individuals.
Medicare in a vice chair heel
you are correct for most
programs that are twenty percent
threshold eliminates a mortgage
insurance premium which is can
be costly unfortunately
the
we don't have enough resources
so this would be something that
if we could get some additional
resources to allow us to go up
that high that may be something
that we could consider we're
right now we have a lot of
various programs that were
funding with the money that we
do get the if we went up to that
twenty percent for higher than
the four percent it would
probably may be a single program
that we have with a funding
sources
thank you um is he thinking adam
chair I wonder if there's any.
Since then trying to kind of
think about maybe how do we help
cover that expense for the
mortgage insurance maybe that's
a another side of it it just it
would be interesting to know
what the cost of that is on a
yearly bases and how long it
takes before an individual
doesn't have to pay that
mortgage insurance that it could
drop afcause I think once they
get to the twenty percent they
can drop it as that correct.
Yeah.
Manchero I believe so although
they may be no better
differences where there's a
conventional or a government
finance loan and when you can
drop it and will do a little bit
more research on that and get
with you on the both the cost
and at what stage you can drop
it with the types of
longs that you may have great
think you can think you manage
okay and representative of rebal
cable yet.
Think you made a chair and dumb
thinking mister even understand
for your report i'm not sure
whether you address or will we
be addressing the
housing shortage that we're
feast is that part of the plan I
know that we have over thirty I
think it's been estimated forty
thousand units short in the
around the state so I want it
that's question number one and I
have a just a couple of
questions thank you madame.
Madam chair in our
representative I wrote ball
cover yet we will have a
presentation later on in one of
the future meetings on the needs
but about just off the top of my
head
couple of needs that i'll
mention to you on the rental
side a low income or affordable
rental your correct there's
about thirty two thousand units
statewide that uh were short on
on rental for families that are
under eighty percent to the area
median income and the single
family side to testimate it that
we need about twenty five
thousand units over between now
and twenty eight thirty to meet
the demand and then on the
homeless side there's estimate
that we need over a thousand
units for permanent supportive
housing but will give you a lot
more details in a future
presentation with the ill
encompass more of the needs as
well think a matter of chairman
when you do that do have a
presentation on that will you
also address i'm i'm assuming
you're going to address the plan
for how we're gonna address that
shortage in terms of leveraging
with partners leveraging funding
um accessibility to the arm
renters all of that will be part
of the presentation am I
correct.
Manager
representative rebulk of a yet
or yes we will definitely make
sure that this part of the
presentation we do have a
housing
strategy that we developed that
kind of goes into some of those
but will definitely highlight
those areas that you just
mentioned thank you and I would
add to arm it just occurred to
me that part of that should we
should also talk about the
rising costs and how we offset
that what is the plan to offset
the rising class that the state
of new mexico continues to be of
one of the poor states in the
nation and that doesn't seem to
be changing in spite of all that
we do and I know change takes a
while so we are going to have a
considerable amount of of the
population that will be relying
on
low income rental housing as
well as accessibility to first
time home buyer costs and
someone so how do we address the
raising costs and in the best
way possible I would appreciate
if you would include that as
well in the in the presentation.
Manager representative robot
could get a will definitely
include that that's a lot of
different factors that
contribute to that and we'll be
prepared to talk about a more
detail thank you madam chair and
then my second and final
question it has to do with how
the arm.
Your new name housing to mexico
through eurothroughout two years
ever considered partnering with
mobile homes with the mobile
home association and home owners
mobile home
in general
they're and in the reason I
bring the set madam chair is
again it's tight to
affordability and there are
family you said a relying more
and more we thought they would
be less and less many years ago
when we were addressing a
portable housing around the
nation but distate again because
of work constant state a poverty
our families are leaning warn
more on
the affordability part of owning
a mobile home so it seems to me
that at some point we might need
to arm or enter into some sort
of partners partnership with
mobile home developers as well
as mobile home owner as what are
they called mobile phone
site owners
and
the families and owners thank
you.
Madame chairman representative
robot company
under or a home ownership
program manufactured homes or
mobile homes are allowed and I
would say I I don't have the
exact number with me but uh
between ten to fifteen percent
of the loans that we make our
own manufacturer.
Uh I know that we recently one
of the developments had a
mention on the single family
development side that we
recently awarded in hearts
uh eventually two hundred and
two hundred and twenty
mother homes will be placed on
this development that's going
out there we have along there so
we're definitely doing stuff on
the manufactured housing site
and I know we've been in a some
discussions with both
representative matthews and
representative down on
manufacturer
in the existing parts and some
of the challenges there and
potential legislation are things
that we can do to assist in that
area so europe you're corrected
there is a I think we're one of
those states with the highest
percentage percentages of
manufacturer homes
about fifteen percent compared
to under ten percent to the many
other areas of the nation
definitely something for us to
continue to look at thinking
madam chair and I would ask that
we come closely we look closely
at
the.
Um issues that currently.
For
manufactured home home owners
face so that we can
try to prevent or
arm
prevent I guess is the best way
of these are problems continuing
with the continued development
of the manufacturer at home
around the state so I know
representative matthews and
representative down our on top
of those issues as well as I as
I am as well and so i'd like to
just encourage us to try to
mitigate them before they become
major issues as we could
continue down this road thank
you madame.
Thank you very much
representative and similar to
the for a second time
thank you madame chairman i'll
be very quick
so I want to just account binder
what you heard from senator
gonzalez earlier again thirteen
years and i've been to several
of these housing summits along
the way and I will let the
committee know madame chair that
I want to think mf by the way
for the speaker you had about
six years ago I took one of my
proudest pieces of legislation
from the closing ceremony
speaker at this event it's a
really powerful summit if you
can get to a guys I highly
recommend that you get to it it
really teaches you a lot about
the work of the mfa and then
also the housing issues in new
mexico but at that particular
event I found a speaker to be
very powerful on fastering
beyond each aged out foster you
from eighteen to twenty one we
got that done within one year
and it was as a result of that
conference and so your speed was
very powerful to me and spoke to
me and they're able to get that
drafted and done in that very
same year so just want to make
mention to the committee on that
it's a very great summit thank
you.
Thank you very much senator is
that
representative thinking out of
chair and I hope it's a quick
question is he can you tell us
or maybe someone on your team
count for the folks who do
receive the assistance for the
first time home ownership how
are they doing on keeping up
with their insurance and taxes
do you work that into an are you
helping them.
Keep that home and cover those
expenses.
Madame chair and right
representative dow.
Or
having that below market
interest rate in the down
payment assistance has helped
many fox getting to home sir
with regard to keeping up with a
repayments don't have the exact
number of friends on me barrer
or delinquency rates are very
low below the
uh facing nation and most of our
loans are on the face a site
they have to have a generally
are a little bit have a better
underwriting guidelines for
folks that are in the working
class of lower incomes but
compared to the fat the national
averages are delinquency rates
are lower
debt and suffices.
All right I think that's
everything and we'll move on to
item number three.
If we are going over to the next
agenda item which is a reference
binder i'll have a both robin
and earn doddy join me up here
at the table is we're going to
help me get to this.
So that you don't have to hear
just for me so we're gonna go
over the the reference materials
and III wonder sure you were not
going to go through every single
page of this but I am going to
hit some some highlights here
and this is for you to take with
you as a reference manual so if
you have to refer to it in the
in the future it'll be there in
front of you
so we'll start by going through
some of the items here
if you go to tab one course not
going to cover this and detail
others insane I mentioned
earlier that this is the largest
number of oversight committee
members that we've had and I
think close to half of them are
new
members that we have on the
committee so so welcome to those
of you that are that are new to
the committee uh if you go on to
tab two this is the mortgage
finance authority act so i'll go
to some highlights i'm gonna
point you to some page numbers
or you can find some of the
details for highlights and i'm
gonna mention so on page one
you'll see there that we were
created in nineteen seventy five
as I mentioned a little earlier
if you got a five page five and
six so you'll see that we are
created separate and apart from
the state as a quasi government
all entity it goes into our
board make up and all highlights
more board members a little bit
later on that we have seven
board members three exosio and
for their appointed by the
governor uh also on page six
you'll see that we're not not
for profit agency as a quality
governmental entity your notice
in page nine that we are the
trustees for the land title
trust fund the new mexico
housing trust fund in the
affordable housing act it's also
highlighted on page twelve where
there's
going to fast please uh slow me
down and paid twelve we have the
additional powers of the
authority this is something that
that we were uh impowered with
in nine nineteen ninety eight
uh
indicates in there that with a
single state housing authority.
As it states housing authority
and that we are the agency that
would apply for federal housing
funds we administer federal
housing funds of state housing
programs a specifically outlines
as some of the programs that
were transferred over to us at
that time between ninety seven
and ninety eight that includes
the the home program that is
heard funded we administer the
law and compounding tax credit
program the emergency shelter
group program which is out but
program for a homeless
individuals the state homeless
program and in the energy
efficiency program which is a
weatherisation assistance
program if you turn to page
eighteen
it indicates there that we will
uh
draft a rules and regulations
for the authority and that the
oversight committee being this
committee here approved so those
are rules and regulations
it also talks about determining
that we have the ability to
determine the income limits and
factors to consider as we
consider or determine those
income limits were charged and
only classified between lower
than moderate income
on page twenty two this is
something that's very key and I
think one of the reasons that
we're created separate not part
from the states or one of the
key reasons is that the barns
that we issue with the debt that
we issue is an organization is
not an obligation of the state
just recently we ran some
numbers on the total amount of
debt that we should over the
years or the last fifty years
seven point eight billion
dollars in bonds
in sixty three different bond
issues that we made
and then subject to the that's
on page twenty two on page
twenty eight.
It also mentions that we're
subject to the state auditor
audits so we fall into the state
or act uh that's all the
highlights I have on the act I
will mention a couple of
highlights on the positive
governmental
agency and some of the reasons
behind that uh mentioned earlier
that the state is not liable for
the debt or the bonds that we
would issue another one is that
it gives us flexibility and the
ability to be a giant and react
to market conditions the type of
work that we're doing here with
the various programs that we
have requires to be
a gial in react to those market
conditions in the economic
conditions of the state
and then thirdly we're not we
don't receiving the operational
funds so we're not a burden to
the state if you will in having
to fund our operations here as
an organization.
So madam chair i'll take any
questions on the actor if you'd
like our I can go on over to tap
number three and go for the
rules and regs at this point.
If you go behind tap three that
this is a rules and regulations
that the authority we do come to
the oversight committee to this
committee on an annual basis
generally the last meeting of
the interim to go over any
proposed changes to the rules
and we plan on doing that again
this year uh I will say that his
rules definitely do not
contradict in a lot of cases
just mirror the act itself and
give a little more details on
that
on page four of the rules and
regs you'll see our income
limits as defined which is a lot
of moderate very low low and
moderate income you'll see in
there that are our current
definition of moderate income is
up to a hundred and fifty
percent of the area median
income which is the income that
we see that is needed to be able
to assist working families or
their work force across the
state we also have the
flexibility to increase that
hundred and fifty percent of the
area median income for some high
cost areas to ensure that family
circumstances afford a medium
priced home in that area
I will say that the vast
majority of the funds here in
the organization are used for
the the working families some
exceptions would be some of the
funds that we use or have access
to for a homeless individuals.
A lot of mention that on page
fifteen it outlines are one of
the programs or set asides that
we have within our budget which
is a housing opportunity for
that was created in the ad late
nineteen nineties this housing
opportunity found funds several
programs within the organization
uh so this has taken the excess
revenues that we have here at a
house in new mexico and
investing them back into housing
we have made a total of two
hundred and forty eight million
dollars in lounge from mfa
generated excess revenues that's
not something that you'll see
other agencies generally doing
some of the programs that that
funds kind of going back to the
question that we hit from a
senator trohio was down payment
assistance that happens to be
the the largest amount of a
investment that we felt from
that fund we also fund partners
loans which are loans to have a
temp for humanities across the
state to give him liquidity and
they don't have to wait twenty
years to receive those payments
from those up front and then we
also do some other smaller
rental developments are funded
through that.
With that matter of chair all go
to tab number four
this one here is the affordable
housing act that i'll go over
some highlights we have
oversight of the affordable
housing act.
The affordable housing act is a
nack that allows local
governments uh state and some
school districts to contribute
or donate towards affordable
housing without by leaving the
anti donation class some of the
donations can be land buildings
money waver fees.
Uh the requirements to be able
to do that uh is that the
donations need to go toward
slowed and water income there's
some complaints periods long
term compliance periods that we
monitor
two key things in order for an
interest to your local
government to be eligible as
they need to have an affordable
housing plan that is approved by
housing new mexico and they need
to have an ordinance that is
enacted.
We currently have thirty nine
local governments across the
state that have approved planned
in order.
And they've dominated since the
inception about a hundred and
nineteen million dollars towards
affordable housing we do monitor
those on an annual basis that a
minimum
and we provide a training and
technical assistance and we have
simple ordinances and simple
affordable housing plans that
are available to them.
With that madam chair i'll go
over to uh tab five will
actually skip over that that's
just the rules and regs for the
affordable house enacted of
course mirror and do not
contradict the affordable
housing act itself.
I'll take you over to the tab
six this is the regional housing
authority act which we also have
oversight of and that was
created in two thousand and six
two thousand seven we currently
we went from seven regional
housing authorities at that time
down to three regional housing
authorities uh they're the north
certain regional housing
authorities located out of a
tous with a new executive
director there in a nato show
martinez eastern regional
housing authority at a rosal
with mr chris herbert who's been
an executive director there for
many many years.
And then western uh regional
housing authority at a silver
city sonya florida there is a
fairly new executive director
but has been with the
organization for twenty plus
years
these regional housing
authorities are
administered altogether about
that twelve hundred public
housing units and over thirty
five hundred vouchers this is a
housing choice vouchers
that they have consolidated our
systems of over forty seven
hundred units uh they not to be
confused with public housing
authorities that exist
throughout the state we do not
have oversight of those are
there is a total seventeen
actually if you include the
larger cities like albert could
be sent a few in los crucials as
a total of twenty other public
housing authorities across the
state and they oversee about
eleven hundred public housing
units and over two thousand
vouchers.
Some of the oversight that we
have over the housing
authorities
is limited in scope if you will
and that can be found on page
twenty sixth of that act
we
any contracts that they are
going to execute over a hundred
thousand dollars needs to be
reviewed by staff and our board
you need transfers or sells of
over a hundred thousand dollars
also need to be reviewed by us
uhm.
We review the budget has to be
submitted by us and they have to
submit audits to us that we then
pass on to various state
agencies to include the
governor's office and dfa in the
auditors office
on page.
Ten you'll also see that we any
commissioners that are
appointing to their board need
to be reviewed by us before it
gets submitted to the governor's
office.
So that is all I have on the
regional housing authorities and
I think it is stay going to turn
it over to robbin who's gonna go
over the housing christmas.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
yeah so behind a tab seven we
have two legislative initiatives
that this committee endorsed
prior to the twenty twenty five
legislative session the first
one was a request for funding in
the amount of five hundred
million dollars for the new
mexico housing trust fund um and
senator gonzalez introduced this
particular piece of legislation
this one was a little bit
different typically when we have
requested
approval of this committee for
legislation it's more specific
to funding or one of the acts
that that we oversee
and this last year we are
included a local government
satisfied which ended up being
about thirty percent and this
was just too kind of signal to
local governments to provide
some incentives for them to
address housing issues and
ensuring that there was some
funding available
for those purposes
i'm as is he mentioned the the
trust fund
serves households earning of two
hundred and fifty percent of
area median income
so in burning of counting for
example a household at a hundred
and fifty percent of a two
person household will be earning
about a hundred and twenty nine
thousand dollars could be
eligible for some of some of the
programs through the housing
trust fund so we felt that this
investment although five hundred
million dollars sounds like a
lot of money the need for
exceeds this dollar amount and
we'll get into that more through
our housing these assessment and
other materials that will
present to this committee to
kind of help you i'm understand
the cost
we also want in this legislation
to send a message to
stay holders and developers that
there was going to be funding
available for them for a period
of.
Time and that we had the ability
to deploy that amount of funding
if you turn over to the next
page there's a chart on the on
that goes over how we
sort of projected that we could
deploy that funding so was it
kind of a three year plan with
with capacity building year over
year in order to expand that
amount of money and provide
resources throughout the housing
continue on so that were that
bill did not
get past the first hearing
but we will continue to advocate
for funding for the new mexico
has interest on.
The second piece of legislation
that we typically introduced
every year is for some funding
to provide
technical support and training
under the affordable housing
acts that is you mentioned we
actually don't get any I think
it's been several several years
since we've received any funding
to administer the affordable
housing act and so it does take
some planning for these
communities they have to put a a
plan together that can require a
consultant
so it does commit some expense
and the funding that we would be
appropriated would be able to be
used for those communities to
access it to get those grants
developed their plans get their
ordinances through their local
processes and then we don't want
them to just have a plan we want
them to implement the plan and
so funding and a priority of
ours is to actually help
communities implement their
plans once they have it in place
and be able to don't need to do
it and use local resources to
support affordable housing.
The next section behind have eat
and i'll get more into this as
we cover.
I I think it's item five on our
regular agenda this is a summary
of the housing bills that were
introduced in this past session
um kudos to the legislature they
were very enthusiastic about
housing and there were more than
fifty bills introduced related
to housing which is definitely
more than we've tracked in in my
ten year here at housing new
mexico
although very little actually
got to the governor's desk I
think it's just a good signal
that so many people are thinking
about housing and ways to sort
of some of these issues so op
i'll cover this and more detail
in another presentation but I
just wanted you guys to have
this resource to reference back
to
also on h I think beginning on
page nine.
Um the appropriations are listed
so we listed everything that was
appropriate at house built two
some of this is just standard
stuff that goes to different
agencies every year for housing
initiatives and then other is
more of a special appropriation
one time appropriation
including a significant amount
to dfal department of finance
and administration in a hundred
and ten million dollars to
support housing
and then on page ten it starts
with the capital outlay there is
a lot of capital outlet projects
related to housing
so between the capital outlay
and the
house bill two that was about
two hundred and twenty two
million dollars appropriate for
housing initiatives and then in
senate bill three there was
another forty eight million
dollars appropriate for the
expansion of housing services
providers so that's two hundred
and seventy million dollars in
the budget for housing.
In summary.
And they can get turned over
back over there.
The.
Thank you robina manager if you
go behind tap nine you'll see
the profiles of our board
members I mentioned them briefly
a little earlier we have seven
members or board chair is on how
ray is he said no bank of towers
chairman ceo and president he's
been on her board for many years
in our chair for the last five
six years as well does a
tremendous job for us and it
organs all it's not some very
well
or vice chair is direct waldo he
is ceo of american risk tribal
company that provides insurance
under tribal land.
Uh pursue you all know that
lieutenant governor uh his ex
official member of our board and
his proxy is martinez tobacco
chief operations officer
we also have the attorney
general under board in his proxy
is julie and meet uh few turn
the page and of course you all
know that our state treasure as
well
and then we have a rebecca worse
burger she's a board treasure
she's a strategic planning
consultant lived in santa fe and
then with us today as you
noticed in the back is member
randy trainer he's been with us
for a close to a year now does
the tremendous job for us in the
organization as well.
If you go on to the next page or
behind tab ten we've already
gone to this little bit i'll
just give you a couple of
highlights and the organization
of chart we have a three
separate divisions which is
financed division if you well
that are in body overseas the
chief financial officer we have
lent indivision that jeff
overseas and then we have the
housing division which done it
overseas eleven different
departments within the
organization and I mentioned
earlier a hundred and twenty
staff that we can't be happy.
With that madame chairman
turning back over to robin to
go.
And think our mikes here sorry
so the annual report is just
something that we publish at the
end of our fiscal year and and
it's usually available by the
end of the calendar year i'll
destroy your attention to our
production highlights which is
on the third page
um so last year in our fiscal
year twenty twenty four we
administered uh seven hundred
and thirty six million dollars
in funding
we
supported almost six thousand
local
construction jobs and long term
drives
almost nineteen thousand
families were helped through our
programs are impacted through
our programs and five thousand
seven hundred homes were either
created financed or preserved
through through the programs at
mf administers
this is not a record here for us
we did have some um
funding available through
through the end of the pandemic
and were able to assist more but
this were very proud of the work
that we're able to do here and
then also drawing your attention
to the next section on oversight
and accountability is the kind
of covered some of this but we
go through multiple audits a
year and we have had a great
record of on a modified audits
with over three decades things
to our finance and accounting
departments keep in very tight
books for us
we do also have multiple
advisory committees including
for the housing trust fund the
land title trust fund the low
income housing tax credit.
And we have a
new mexico housing strategy
about the recommittee as well
I think that's all I was gonna
highlight on that
going back to page or tap twelve
we provided a copy of our
internal strategic plan so this
plan um
is our five year sort of
strategic vision and plan
forward
so included in our five year
vision or two
provide program continuity to
have increasing and sustainable
resources to provide
single family development
opportunities really interest
capacity across the state to
provide and deliver these
programs arm to make sure that
our programs are as flexible as
possible and continue to secure
both state federal and private
funding um to
to support this work.
We have five goals within the
strategic planner name I will I
won't read them to you
but they you know are tracked
here through objectives and then
benchmarks so going to slide.
I think it's yeah a slightly
eleven the numbers are a little
bit hard to see at the bottom
but we have created for each
call we have created a bench
mark and this allows us to track
our progress so under for school
of creating affordable housing
opportunities
the way that we ensure that
we're meeting the school is by
setting these benchmark so i'll
in one year our goal is to
provide mortgage financing for a
two thousand home buyers for
example
to develop and preserve one
eleven hundred rental units or a
multi family programs and I you
know again I don't need to read
this to you but these benchmarks
are are tracked quarterly and
reported to our board to ensure
that we are in fact following
our strategic plan and meeting
the goals that we've set for
ourselves.
What happened at number thirteen
is actually the executive
summary for the new max core
housing strategy is you
mentioned this a little bit
earlier in I think in response
representative
robot have comments about the
need out there so several years
ago actually when um as he
became the executive director he
commissioned this study and we
created an advisory committee of
about nineteen different members
and they represented people
across the housing continue so
we had service providers are for
homeless
homelessness we had all the way
up to the home builders
association and everybody in
between
to represent
you know all of the needs across
the state we also did a
community service to get
information from people
about their housing condition
and what they saw so the idea
was to create a roadmap to
create a plan to provide the
data so that you as legislators
stake holders anybody that would
interested could have a path
forward and see where the needs
are this is just the executive
summary it's about twenty pages
the full report is a little bit
sicker than this reference
binder on i'm happy to provide
anyone a carpie who would want
it it's also on our website
you can go in there in search by
your county and you can find
information about how many
houses are missing for every am
I level what is the housing
stock in your area all of this
data is available
in summed up in this very nice
report
so I won't go through too much
here we can definitely provide
more information in a future
presentation on the housing
strategy.
But arm if you go to page eight
of the executive summary
and it looks like this.
I know the page numbers are a
little bit hard to read this
kind of gives
some of the I guess problems
that were facing as a state rate
some highlights
about the housing needs that
that our neighbor's feet
including housing instability
how that released to health care
other outcomes for people
you know there's a lot more
people experiencing homelessness
than we mac
not everybody was homeless maybe
necessarily you know living
living in the streets but the
uhm the data shows that perhaps
fifteen to twenty thousand
people and this was done in
twenty twenty one or
experiencing homelessness we've
seen the point in time count
increase and I think actually
double um and so I feel like the
comfortable saying that these
numbers have also increased
twenty five percent of
people who
have a disabled family member
live in a house that doesn't
meet their families needs
another highlight is that we
have a shortage of rental unions
that are affordable for seniors
who may be living on a fixed
income
i'm twenty percent of households
throughout the state or
households with children or
costs burden meaning they're
paying a significant percentage
of their hospital to income for
their housing so
i'll let you read this at your
leisure but it did just want to
point out a few of those
statistics in I know you guys
are going to hear a lot of
numbers and what we won't quiz
you on them but this information
is available
for your
you know for your consideration
and then on page eleven I just
wanted to mention that there.
It's sort of a summary to the
strategy there's a call to
action so what can we do what
are we need to be doing um and
these are kind of are four to
five.
Major calls to action that we've
been working on and how we kind
of um organize information for
you
so number one we need to produce
more housing and this is across
the housing continue we need to
preserve an improve existing
housing stock we know we have
eaching housing stark and um
redevelopment is important we
need to build those home
ownership opportunities for
people we have a high ownership
rate in the state
and it's important to keep that
going and then creating stable
housing for vulnerable
populations.
As well as advocating for
effective federal and all
include state now policy to
address housing needs so I just
really wanted to make sure
that you would have access to
this housing strategy as we move
forward through the interim and
then also into the legislative
session
and if you have any questions
about it please feel free to
reach out.
The.
Are we breaking for questions
now
alright uhm represent have keeps
her question first.
I thank you madame chair and
thank you very much for your
presentation and for this very
important resource this is
excellent I have a lot of
reading to do
and how wonderful to have it all
when place I just are on a note
I just currently for a can
consider it I was trying to look
at the housing bills so isn't
this so wonderful that you've
put them all together for us but
I can't seem to locate did we
night it didn't someone do we
not present a bill this last
session that required.
Landlords of rentals to disclose
all hidden fees and the
consistency of them in the
timelines of I didn't was unable
to
identify that do you know that
off the top your head so that I
can market.
Madam chair and representative
kids you might be referring to
senate bill two sixty seven the
housing application fees.
This bill
required.
Several things they can't
remember off the top of my head
but thank you think it i'm sorry
sorry
I am familiar with that bill
because i've had tree my fellow
real I realities and and
property managers on that bill
i'm talking about the night just
the fees for me we did not have
the.
Predatory fees that paper with
some of our commercial rental
properties that pop up
inconsistently.
Arm I know that I have heard
something that that in the
committee I thought.
But maybe it was in development
and we didn't actually have a
bill
manager and represent kids it's
not coming to my mind either but
we can certainly go back through
and and see if we find anything
like that you I must have been
treating but thank you very much
manager and thank you for this
wonderful I resource.
Thank you represent
representative matthews.
Did I do it right this time ok
thank you
i'm tech and period
a couple questions will first of
all this incredible impressive
presentation all these materials
and I hope we get per dm
forgetting to read
on our time
but unfortunately we don't but
it's incredible resourced and
thank you very much I have a
couple questions one is
for those of us who represent an
albert you district which I do
which is actually right across
the
freeway from where we are
a bin because we're in the
middle of a mayor's rate is some
various other things happening
in the city um been about been
at presentations which is talk
about housing albuquerque
obviously because there's so
many people on the street just
as a huge huge issue.
And my question is to part one
is i'm curious to what extent if
any
the mfa is working with city of
alberturke housing and or bureau
leo county housing folks and
particularly on things like the
mayor of the other day was
talking about converting old
motels into housing units and so
forth and i'm curious about.
The level of cooperation i'm
sure operating but how much mfa
is embarrassed in any of that
and what that looks like.
Thank you madam chair
representative matters were just
debating who should answer this
question so I find mess up is
your jumping but it'll be we
currently work with this both
the city and the county on a
pretty regular basis the
afternoon utilise um through
either a developer or
yeah usually through a developer
non profit on the you know they
have access to the low income
housing tax credit program and
so those affordable developments
that happen here a lot of
federal funding as well as on
local funding goes into those
projects so we have those
relationships that i'm aware of
we're not working on any hotel
conversion specifically
we do administer some housing
vouchers are for the city and
maybe for the county as well
to support that work
and and so yeah there there is a
relationship there and you know
they they have access to all of
the funding and applications
that are that are open
thank you
may insure.
My other question is
in this part state at least our
years now as a very slow trip
you berlio county is known as a
very slow process to get housing
plans approved actual
construction plans and all of
that kind of thing whereas the
word is that real rancho is in
sandwich county just write down
the road
is a wiz and houses are being
built quick quick quick
are you all involved in.
Now necessarily reviewing those
different
approval processes but
are you are embarrassed in
trying to
figure out some solutions to our
cookies and barely or count
incredible slow
and i'll add a little piece to
that and
state wide what's what was the
situation in terms of getting
the government approvals in
order to get construction
started.
Think you manage and member
represent a representative
matters
so we're not we're not we don't
have authority at the local
level to approve or or or
anything you know on the
administrative side we we do not
typically get involved in that
process now if there is a uhm an
opportunity to perhaps go to
city council and talk about a
project or something like that
to support the city we would
certainly or the county would
certainly do that and have done
that across the state.
As far as statewide policy there
were some bills that did come up
this last session that had to
deal with some some of the
statewide zoning changes I would
also direct you again back to
the new mexico housing strategy
there are some best practice
recommendations in the strategy
about land use and zoning that
could be implemented at a state
level
we have not put forward any
legislation or initiated any
legislation through this
committee regarding state
wideline juice and zoning but I
I do know that there were
several bills during this last
session that that did attempt
that
many chair at robert do you rc
or believe that regulatory
process for the approval for
construction is.
Uhm
is a major problem in the state
or for parts of the state
and that madam chair and
representative matthews yes I
mean we do hear that anecdotally
and I know that of some specific
examples where local approval
processes can take a long time
and add significant costs to
projects
you know there are there have
been some recommended changes
for example third party
inspections other other ways to
sort of try to streamline the
approval processes
but I don't think that anything
has been implemented state wide
I nothing has been implemented
state why to to address that
m chair
robert is eat thank you very
much for your answers to the
questions i'm really looking
forward to working with the mfa
again
when years ago when I was on the
attorney general's
representative on the board we
spent huge amounts of times
issuing bands and parm and that
was kind of going to scope with
the program at a time I mean
there is all kinds of different
housing but it was constant bond
deals and I am just odd by where
this agency are under your
leadership and prior leaderships
have come and so i'm really
looking forward to w.
Thank you representative
representative lohan.
Great great man sure thank you
for
the presentation so far this
morning talk about but
I get mentioned earlier we had a
town hall yesterday a senator
to hear and I as an
representative serato the
majority of the questions in the
conversation went towards
housing as you can imagine so
just just what uh representative
of math used to spoke about came
up yesterday as well so mining
processes working with our local
governments we had a
commissioner there and in a city
counselor attend as well and so
one of the the questioning I
mean going on regarding zoning
in all those sort of things
which throughout your
presentation throughout your
reading the materials you
presented from us you've been
working with our local
governments and looking at
looking at those issues and what
we need to be doing
for for the state
and we have funding all over the
place so I serve on the house
appropriations as you you guys
don't know so my my biggest
deliver i'm working in and being
a part of the committee is is
understanding all the different
funding sources you did
thank you for a break in other
legislation and are the
everything we did this this
session including
capitally projects my question
is regards to that or how were
you appropriating the current
funding that you have to go out
with steep funding and then the
federal funding to complete arm
tasks at here and so to
completion.
I have madam chair and a
representative of lan thank you
for the question yeah so
um
we received arm and it will get
a little bit more into detail on
on the state funding in in the
next presentation but so we have
the severance tax bond earmark
that we receive which is two and
a half percent of the severance
tax bond capacity this year
after for state fiscal year
twenty six
it's about forty five million
dollars so women through a
process to appropriate that and
the details of that
are provided
in that other presentation
the additional funding that went
through department of finance
and administration or some of
these other local i'm sorry
state agencies and we don't
administer that so we don't have
any say in you know how that is
directed throughout the
communities we are there several
bills that we are school agent
for in their more programs
specific i'm trying to find him
here.
Oh appropriation bills funded on
on page three behind tab eight
there were several that that mf
was named specifically to be
the fiscal agent for but they
are first more specific projects
more like capital outlate
projects so the extent of our
involvements is just the the
severance tax fine funding that
we are received annually at this
point because the appropriations
do not come through m
thank you but you're the
watchdog of if you will of all
things that are are moving in in
housing and and funding and so
forth so how do you collaborate
with other fiscal agents and
another entities to make sure
that these projects.
Are being streamlined in and
meeting the deadlines that
did they need.
Manager and representative lou
on um so when we have we have
funding as part of any
particular project we we do
monitor for compliance with
federal and state deadlines and
and regulations and
usually the federal regulations
are more restrictive than than
what they state has in place to
we insure that we're complaining
with those and then we don't
have to return any funding due
to the federal government
and we oversee
for the seat funding that we
receive we oversee in a similar
way where we require complaints
periods for the funding that we
administer and make sure that
it's you know being used
judiciously
if we're not part of the capital
stock of a particular project we
don't really have any authority
to to manage that but typically
because we are the states
holding finance agency than many
of these big projects especially
multi family arm you know when
the these projects you have come
to us for for funding
alright thank you and i'm ready
to sub because
i'm trying to just really
emphasize the the
professionalism of of what
you do
and also the efficiency and
so I I will i'll continue some
other questions as we get into
the finding portion of those but
really i'm I I want to just give
you something to think about as
were going through this because
we have two different housing
but we have this mfa and then we
also have the steep are office
of housing and i'm trying to and
it's gonna come up and it's
always going to come up how you
were coordinating because those
are state funds you are not you
don't have access to you have
access to only what we provided
and we asked actually but we
normally get to am a fair and
uhm.
I just want to.
Have a line of question in this
hearing to understand that and
where that puts you as as the
more experienced entity and in.
And I will say that the the
having the expertise and the.
The long the launch of it if you
will to do to do the things you
are doing because as we're being
told we you know we want to know
everything is taking a long time
to get projects
you're in your bringing end all
these other funding sources and
all these other things and we're
in a time key asked you with the
federal finding so we'll get
into that a little bit later too
but I just I just want to start
off with those questions they
came out of her.
Thank you very much
representative lunch pre.
Thank you manager
so i'm hitch seven thank you
guys this is great it's great to
have all this information and
one document
um i'm hit seven you you
referred earlier to source the
we can look up
representative sorry can I
interpret you one quick second
what tab are you on
tap thirteen
page seven
um you refer to
in a source that you could go to
to look up and see statewide
you know where housing has been
built based on emi is it also
broken down by a sense of
tracked that source that you
mentioned and I didn't catch the
source reference.
I'm thinking madam chair
representative brigade so I play
was talking a little bit fastway
apologized so the housing
strategy
is broken out by county level
data and it's american survey
american community survey data
sensors data so so it is it does
include the sensor statement yes
it that was my question um and
what where where can I go online
to find that.
Yes a man chair and
representative so our website is
housing
and
and from there and even if you
just go go in the mexico housing
strategy it'll come up there's a
page under resources that has
bought the executive summary in
the full reports online okay
yeah I just wanted to look at
that map and also and I see that
you have a mouth here is that
the same
information that's online or is
it more extensive probably right
madam chairman representative
there's more extensive data in
the full version of the report
and is that broken down by
single family and multi family
because it's it doesn't show
that here so I just wonder okay
perfect um amount here I just
wanted to have mentioned um
something because
this has come up quite a bit at
our you know in our discussions
in south
is the time that it takes to get
through um
the planning process or the
building you know to get your
your occupancy license or
whatever
I just need to caution us that
every um jurisdiction has a
different zoning code first of
all and they're not all the same
so it's not like we could come
in and save one size fits
because it doesn't and when
you're a reviewing
you know
site plans especially for a
large projects
each one of those site plans has
been reviewed individually and
so it's not really a competition
between jurisdictions of you
know i'll rear round shows
faster to the now kirky and i'm
not defending because I think
there are things that can be
done that can make it faster.
Um but we also have to be
cautious that one size does not
fit all manager and I mean there
is a lot of variables when you
bring in a site plan.
Um sometimes there is sight
plans are not complete and sell
the developer house to go back
change it sometimes there are
issues related to anything from
the size of you know the density
the environmental concerns the
topography the access the
infrastructure I mean there is
just a lot of things that are
being reviewed on an individual
basis and so I just want to
caution us that when we think
one size fits off for the state
it's it just doesn't work that
way when it gets to the detail
of reviewing those site plans
and I just wanted to raise that
issue because you know people
sometimes think that oh if we do
it in real round show that we
can do it and alvocation well
and I want to point out
rerunture has had a lot of
drinkage issues in areas that
they've you know approved single
family homes for example so just
be cautious about that there's a
lot of factors involved a lot of
variables and
as we move forward I just wanted
to raise that issue thank you
thank you very much
representative but I go senator
to bison
thinking madam chair you might
remember a bill as senate bill
one eighty six switch dealt with
multi family unit i'm housing
valuations that died on the
senate floor and i'm looking at
p tap thirteen page eleven item
number two it talks about rental
housing and then landlord
incentives so how
how are you looking at
incentivising landlords so that
like with that one bill failing
within twenty four hours we lost
over a hundred million dollars
of an investment in multi family
units that were being planned so
they pulled out because that
bill failed so what can we do
and what are you looking at to
incentivise landlord.
Um thank you madam chair in the
senator to buy some things for
the question
so.
Under the affordable housing out
there things that local
jurisdictions can help due to
support rental development I
think is he covered a couple of
those such as donating in the
land the cost of infrastructure
things like that and so um and
then with our programs having
lower interest rates and access
to a financing we're hoping to
bring down the overall cost of
the development and building the
affordability period
up front so that there is not a
need to increase rents
going forward or the market
rents that raised on impact the.
The multi family affordable
housing as far as incentivising
landlords is concerned and i'm
i'm not are you talking about
multi family landlords versus
maybe smaller mom in popland
multi family yes right so I
think
I don't know that I have a
really direct answer for that
other than you know our programs
are intended to sort of
incentivise landlords to keep
their rates affordable through
the financing that we provide to
them obviously we don't have
jurisdiction over what taxes and
fees are charged to you know by
the local governments
thank you and madam sure do you
track the data of the value at
time of sale to help me
policy change or systemic change
when you're looking at these
items are using that as part of
your data set
madam chair and senator device
and I would have to do for that
question to our housing
development team i'm not sure
what data they collect at the
time of resupport you know when
the property is complete but
that's something that I can
definitely get an answer if we
don't have it internally that's
data that we could get one of
you know data providers okay
thank you thank you manager
thank you very much senator and
will go to representative robert
cover yellow.
Think of madame chair I just
have a a few.
Maybe three questions hopefully
not too long
I don't want to go on and on
about
what we've already discussed
about
state and local I I think the
only thing i'd like to say is I
agree with all the comments
there has to be in my opinion a
real comprehensive approach.
In order to be able to involve
state and local government's
nonprofits private entities
everyone in terms of trying to
mitigate
the
concerns and issues that were
discussed here about permits and
ordinances and all those kinds
of things that come to play so
you mean not have the authority
but I think you can be the
catalyst and polling together a
comprehensive approach and I
would encourage
as you've been growing and
delivering madame chair in all
these programs and
and
delivering on the financing and
funding that you've been
receiving you've grown a great
deal and i've been seen this
growth a housing development
specialist that was probably my
career and so I follow a lot of
with and he knows this as well a
lot of occurs in this area and
I think it's a perfect timing to
take that leap in two becoming a
real catalyst for change and
this is one of those area so
that's what I would recommend on
that topic
the other.
Thing i'd like to just mention
in terms of what the senate
churches to buy isn't just
raised
and that is creating being rural
innovative you're already on the
innovative taking that approach
now that you are stabilizing and
the program delivery but looking
at ways that we can incentivise
and be real specific about it
and but pulling together these
in these entities
helps definitely what that means
and so that would be part of
being that catalyst pulling that
together.
The.
Pushed the first question I have
has to deal with um
well goes back let me go back a
step that might be a good summit
discussion maybe a task force
could result from that madam
chair from the summit because
you will have a perfect audience
to pull that together as maybe a
topic that can be entertained
and then a test force resulting
from that in that falls in line
with your call day action
approach that you're taking.
Uhm.
In line with that.
Development is occurring
faster than we anticipate it
especially under the current
economic our current economy.
I but we also are facing a
history madam chair of um
for closures
we've had we've seen for
closures occur when we've had
absentize in terms of the
housing market and we don't want
that to happen I know that when
I first came in as a legislator
we were faced with a crisis for
closer collect crisis which is
way the senator madam chair and
others in I am addressed try to
address that early on.
And we set up a lot of
mechanisms to help prevent for
closures.
Along that same mind or facing
per world where we need clean
energy renewable energy
incorporate it into our housing
development planning
planning and development.
So we need to encourage the
developers construction
everything involved in
developing a housing project to
are incorporate i'll renewable
energy.
And the reason I say that is
because the utility costs in the
world of utilities is going in
that direction to begin with so
in order for families to afford
madam chair their mortgages
and stay in their home we need
to level off.
And make their utilities more
affordable and so if we can
start building the.
Things like sili certain other
kinds of things that we've
enacted at the state level
in incentivised the development
in this area it will help
prevent madame chair for
closures in the in the future so
that I would strongly encourage
and there might be another topic
for the summit um
if i'm offering that you may
already have the summit topics
already outlined but this could
be an area that's really
important because we don't want
our families to lose their homes
because they couldn't afford
utilities.
The high utilities have a nice.
Nice new home and they get into
a ten twenty years into their
mortgage and then they find
themselves stuck because they
can't continue to afford so
that's a real important point
that I wanted to bring up
in my question is madame church
finally on my last.
Comment question has to do with
the community survey that you
couldn't find any where you were
referencing it in that tab but
i'd like to know who was
surveyed what was the locations
of these individuals that were
surveyed what where the final
numbers of
their individual set
answered the survey and then.
Perhaps.
Just a read questions maybe some
some kind of addition report
that relates to all of us
because I went I want to see how
applicable the questions were to
the area the people that were
responding and how the numbers
relate over
to those that were servicing our
housing thank you madam chair
thank you madame chair and
representative rebel carrier
yeah we can definitely provide
you with the information about
this survey I don't have it it's
it's not part of the executive
summary.
That would be real important
especially for it
how they relate to the districts
in the constituencies that we
surf thank you madame chief.
Thank you representative erm
senator guns.
Thank you all mountain I just
have one of our director
nunderstar and I think you were
on tab three or you mentioned
that a schools could donate
property or allowed property.
And maybe if you could just
expand a little bit on that.
Manager not as soon as you can
solve it let me get it to their
data tab here it's under the
affordable housing act
potentially under a table.
So what's local governments and
a school districts to include
higher education can donate
towards.
Affordable housing that could be
planned buildings
in fees the when it comes to the
school districts they have to
work with the local government
in their area to make sure that
they're included within the
affordable housing act housing
plan with the housing plan that
they've developed and also have
an ordinary settle allows them
to do that to the doctors
government
so definitely an announceable
activity I don't know that.
In our since the existence of
this act that we've seen an
actual school district do that
but we definitely seem local
governments to that and we can
talk more details if you have a
district in mind or something we
can definitely provide more
information and maybe even do
some training and technical
assistance or have medians to
kind of guide them to the
process.
Motorola.
With that all with that apply to
teacher each.
Madam chair in soon driven's all
is robinson telling me that
that's a different statute that
we could probably do some
research but in the past we
haven't done the need
with the near this funding here
and i'm not sure how that falls
within the the affordable
housing act and if that's
allowed or not we can do some
research on that and robin if
you have anything you wanna
share.
Thank you madam chair and senate
teacher just are addressed under
the
new mexico finance authority act
and I not have all of the
details of that but that that is
the act that I was referring to
which is admini.
Well manager all just a common
door you know we be no and
specially on teach.
The.
Work with that more and more
aggressive and it's finally ha.
Schedule.
You know which again it's
affordable housing because
also the.
But manager I think that our
director number just into
something.
A lot of districts
that have a lot of.
Yeah.
Maybe this is something that.
Bringing them more into working
with her menicipalities and
counties and it's not e.
And i'm sure their areas are the
same.
Which is valuable property but
maybe that's something that we
can look into it and work a l.
Thank you very much server
representative down
thank you madame chair and thank
you for the presentation and I
really like this document you've
given us and I am looking
forward to digging into it but I
think you know for us as long as
sitting at this table in the
executive summary page thirteen
seems to be the area or we can
make the biggest difference and
I I appreciate comments from
other folks like one size
doesn't create doesn't fit all
and your goal is created
flexibility with and state local
programs and policies to respond
to housing needs and market
market fluctuations and and that
it really falls on
it feels like
it's a lot more time the
barriers in my area which role
in mexico seem to be much more
related to statutes than to
rules are you finding that the
barriers that's the case state
wide event in the metro areas or
is it more of the the local
ordinances and zonings
mountain chair in representative
that I think it can be a
combination of both and
sometimes it's the worst case
scenario of both
but
you know and I don't necessarily
have any data to support this
but I think that we you know
we've just heard
santa fe and and i'll be here he
can be slower and sometimes the
smaller municipalities are a
little bit more nimble I don't
think that's the case
necessarily across the board
but I have not I can't think of
an example of a statute that has
created an impediment to
development of affordable
housing
some people don't understand the
affordable housing act and I
think that you know the part of
our our job is to educate
municipalities about how they
can use the affordable housing
out to avoid are the entire
donation issues so that is one
area where I think we could
we could sort of a.
Provide you know provide just
more of resources there
so that that they have access to
that and i'm like for example
what senator dollars for saying
about the school districts are
that have land nor the state has
land minus paladies have lan you
know how do you identify what
land is attached to
infrastructure can be developed
you know has a road or you know
all those things I have to go
along with it and so
I think one of the things that
we see is that when you know
it's a capacity issue and so
when you have somebody that has
dedicated housing staff you know
they are able to navigate these
things then if you have so many
that's working for the
municipality that might be doing
housing and in five other things
so will we hope to do it we know
just try to work through an and
provide assistance to people
where we can be thinking some of
these local and state issues.
You're depending on where you
are you're gonna you're going to
be impacted by them I hope that
is helpful thank you madame
chair and thank you for that and
I do I think a lot of it is
statutory whether it's I guess
building code is rules things
that can be changed the way that
we allow people to do
inspections the way that we
require appraisals all these
things are slowing things down
and I think it does it's going
to take bipartisan support to
remove those barriers and so i'm
looking forward to being part of
that happen being at the table
for that and I noticed that you
mention schools have land cities
have lean counties have learned
states have land we also have an
opportunity to use federal land
and I don't know i'm not talking
about a national monument but
good disgraces I think my
district is over half
federal land and to be able to
use mind I mean it's it's right
at our neighborhood it is right
in our backyard and I think it's
a great opportunity and that
it's not something that we
should so quickly dismiss
when someone uses state land for
a housing development do they
own the land or are there
actually building a property on
something that's remains owned
by that state
medicare representative dowe we
have a little bit of experience
with a state land that has been
provided for affordable housing
the two circumstances that i'm
thinking of a actually the the
state and I don't office a
statutory or if it's our
regulation or a guide that the
state uses but is that the land
that they do provide is in a
long term lease and not actually
sold
but that we can look into that a
little bit more but there is
there has been some progress in
that area with a some multi
family development that is on
state land he actually heard out
and thinking about insurance
thank you and they the developer
took the long term lease that it
wasn't a determined to them
with derisor madam chair in
representative down that is
correct and canceled out in the
work well for them
thank you representative of ice
curture heal.
Big you madam chair i'm gonna
try to stick to what you
presented and then talk the rest
when we talk about coming
agendas on tab two
you talk about you had a number
there
go to it of.
Seven seventy five seventy nine
million
you have the
have said nine hundred and forty
new homes are those multi family
or the single family palms.
And are they rental are they
purchase.
Senator health care too
or talk about our annual report
yeah where you showed how much
is that
now
I wrote down to eleven maybe at
eleven maybe i'm thinking roman
numerals and what I really meant
was numbers it's a tablet
thank you madam chair and think
you senator it is a combination
so
the the largest the largest
number there is going to be our
rental housing development
that's about four hundred new
units a year and the rest of
preservation i've existing
housing units and then our
single family development is
smaller but we are trying to
turn that up and work in hard to
develop single family so I would
see the majority is going to be
rental rental thank you and
could you get the number i'd
love to know what the actual
number is I I thought I looked
at like twenty twenty three and
that was only forty one
somewhere in the forty to fifty
range of actual single home so I
would love to know the number
for twenty twenty four and when
I divide up that amount the.
Seventy four million seven
hundred and thirty dollars it
only comes out to seventy nine
five hundred per unit.
So you're you're matching money
right this is you didn't.
The creation of new homes was a
percentage of the creation not
the actual full creation you're
not going to get anything for
eighty thousand dollars for you
when I divide the nine hundred
and forty into seventy four
million it just comes up to just
just under eighty thousand
dollars per y on it.
Madame chair inside her truck
here one of the things here at
housing new mexico we rarely
find a hundred percent of a
development its leverage and I
think representative movie I
mentioned earlier with a housing
trust from how we leverage
sixteen to one
so
let's say
i'll use a single family
development example here are
there what you may be getting to
we say we awarded some money to
a developer in rose for I think
it was like three million
dollars a line of credit to a
revolving line of credit so they
can develop some homes
as they build a homes they pay
that money back we're not
funding the four more gives are
getting mortgages a first
mortgage on those homes as they
sell em so the percentage of
what we allow in there and use
on your line of credit is going
to be very small compared to the
total cost in some cases maybe
one tenth or even smaller than
that of the what the total cost
would be when you leverage it
with the other sources on the
multi family side as an example
err we may have housing trust
for money to there of three
million dollars but the total
development cost of their
development could be like fifty
million dollars and we have
other gap financing in there are
tax credits or
commercial construction long
this coming from the private
industry okay thank you and i'm
sure I think
there's a balance between how do
we build affordable housing and
how do you help establish
family wealth how do you help
build that wealthy in
preparation for today I was
looking at some of our local
housing and the sound of the
housing trust has one
unit for s.
It's not affordable even
qualify.
So i'm hoping that as we look at
what we're going to do in the
agenda that's why some trying to
keep that separate but I think
there's a real challenge between
building housing that stays
affordable.
At the same time recognizing
that
building for families long term
but six hundred and twenty five
thousand.
Might be a steel sanity for sure
but it's definitely not
affordable housing
the last thing I just want to
point out i'm a little confused
and this one I know is not room
when numerals so it to tab
thirteen.
Um and is on page seven you are
just talking about that may have
an your showing lost almost in
the blue.
And I can tell you that in
sanity we have a serious housing
issue with los alamos living and
displacing our local employees
so I don't know how much almost
can be in the blood they seem
like they should be flaming red
even worse than sound of a an
albuquerque because their
literally
my understanding is they don't
have anywhere to build and but I
do know that they're using up
all of our
housing stock and it's foreseen
our lower income employees to
then come h.
Just wondering how that turned
blue.
Um thank you madam chair and the
senator
here so I think the little blue
scared little blue square not
scared sorry
on the map that is the rental
gap for people who are earning
below thirty percent of so in
versus the home sales
distribution oc so that would
be.
They they have a higher
rental gap than if it's not
related to necessarily home
ownership at first I was
thinking maybe that there was
just not enough data to be
support that but
I think just glancing out it has
more to do with the
affordability out there have a
there
renting a lot of high income yes
just forcing I guess to your
point forcing people out of the
community
i'm it's a mandatory i'll just
say one last thing it's hard for
me to at times not put back on
my superintendent cap.
And recognizing that zoning and
permitting and inspections it's
a big issue it's not an issue
that.
The the mortgage finance
authority the housing it's just
not an issue that you address I
think it's a gap that we've got
to figure out together and i'm
hoping madam share that we can
have some individuals come in
and even just help give the
committee some information about
what that looks like we spend a
lot of time when I was at the
regulation.
We got much better and quicker
but zoning is not a state
it really is a nightmare and
every time we've tried to fix it
because I have been trying to do
this for years those that really
oppose it and the ones who
opposed the economic development
departments.
And bill that they had come and
asked me to help with was local
governments because.
But it would be nice to have.
What those barriers are and what
the challenges I don't have
solutions yet.
Thank you very much best church
for health and then lastly
before we move on to the next
agenda item is represented
matthews for a second time
thank you thank you for letting
me answer a couple more
questions as we have these
discussions more and more
seven
interesting things so my first
question
are we
based on about your knowledge of
the industry are we looking at
work force shortages in the
construction in the harm
construction rental
you know apartment construction
field and we've noticed it do we
have a problem with work force.
Madam chair and representative
matthews yet I think we do have
a work force shortage when it
comes to the construction trades
it's impacting some of the cost
thank you and matter share my
next question is
I know we pay some legislation
during the legislative last
session about the state
paragraphs and the possibility
of transforming that to some
kind about housing project
and wondering if the mfa is part
of those discussions
and wait your if so with what
you're all is.
He was
we are aware of what's going on
with the state fair grounds as
far as what's in the media we
are not at the ground level and
we are not privy to the the
details if you well I can tell
you that once they come up with
the the master plan and if they
need funding for affordable
housing for that we would be
definitely very willing partners
to assist in that area and
provide funding to the extent we
have it available to help in the
development or single and multi
family housing
thank you and matter here
at one time I remember i'm
sorry.
And remember meeting with you
about the possibility and maybe
discount account
discussed before in terms of
teachers but of offering some
kind of mortgage breaks for lawn
voicemail health care workers
and so forward to removing who
would be willing in return for a
break on their mortgage or
something or the conservation
cars to move to rural community
and I wondered
you whatever happened with that
is are there programs like that
and are they reflected under one
of these ta.
Madam chairman representative
met user many years back we did
have what we called a he rose
program which is first
responders and teachers we ended
up
with the program that we have
now we don't have a an exclusive
program for teachers if you will
or first responders however they
are eligible in since we
increase starting come limits
for say the working family to
work for housing they are
eligible under our current
programs with the law market
interest rates and down payment
assistance as well so they're
definitely eligible under those
programs and they generally meet
the income guidelines but we
don't have a program directed
specifically for them
out of chair
iz so
does it include healthcare
workers or just law enforcement
and teachers
madam chairman representative
matthews are programs currently
do not discriminate if you will
based on their
uh their trade or what they work
in so it's just income based so
it can be first responders
teachers
anybody in the service industry
it's just if they meet the
income limits we assist them
with the mortgage and down
payment assistance.
Manager is if I understand we
don't have a
we don't have a special program
for people to attract line
voicemail and healthcare workers
to rural communities
it but if they qualify because
of their income then
refine this understanding we
don't have a special program to
for those trade madame chair
representative matthews that is
correct and mancher.
The.
And.
That is all my questions thank
you very much
thank you very much
representative rep matthews
looking at the agenda we are a
whole agenda item behind where I
thought we were so we're going
to have to start to put pedals
metal because we're getting into
the meat of the agenda so that
we'll move on to the next agenda
item
I will just ask I expanded the
agenda and the meeting times a
bit for this interim session I
doubled them to make sure that
we have time for really
independent presentations and
time to ask questions and I do
definitely want you guys to be
able to ask all the questions
you have so I would just ask
that as you're asking those
questions that you keep them to
the agenda item that we have
just covered and do your best to
not repeat if you didn't hear
something that's fine but just
trying to stay on topic as much
as possible thanks everybody go
ahead manager will continue with
their reference that manual here
in our doddy's next I did want
to mention that dominic put out
some additional food there for
lunch as we know with this was
going to go to the lunch hour so
please make yourself a uh
your way over to the where that
the food is that in instrument
yourself thank you.
Good afternoon madame chair and
all the members the next topic
is on item for team in their
binder and this is a little bit
different about occasion from
what we were talking about this
mainly talks about audits and
the summary so housing new
mexico is a highly regulated
organization such was subject to
various audits and only we have
to have an external financial
order based on governmental
accounting standards as well as
the generally accepted
accounting principles of god and
we also have federal annual
award and our external auditing
form is clifton larson and we're
very proud to say that over
almost three decades we have had
audit opinions which have been
unmodified and if anything that
would give all of you a breath
of being risk of ours and that
we are doing all our stuff
financially that's feasible and
that's compliant other than
external added we also have
internal audit and we have the
contract with moss items as an
accounting form which does all
our internal audits and the
projects barry throughout the
year the desktop processes the
desk the internal controls and
the wrists that the organization
is the acceptable two or not and
those results have been also
very very positive for us we
also have the quality controller
you see audits for section eight
administration as well as our
loan servicing portfolio because
they're really huge we have
almost a two point two billion
dollars of loans that we service
had also annually added on
section aid administration of
the various processes that lie
under had like up home or esg
and so that also shows that we
are complianced with all the
program rules and regulations do
you think that's our rather
resistant program audits and we
are also have the state of new
mexico the department of finance
and human services.
On different administration on
the joint powers agreement on
the grants so from various
aspects we get audited very
frequently and it shows that we
already compliant and we are
very technically savvy to pass
those on its really with blind
colours other than these
mandatory audits we also have
subjected to discretionary
orders which we don't face very
often but we could mainly coming
from iris on negative art tried
to rebeat for our bond issues
are on our tax credits and also
the loan servicing on its good
come from fanime jennings are
hard as required so that is all
about the summary of the audit
process that we go through
annually within our organization
madam chair i'll take this over
to tab fifteen in
november over this in much
detail as I know what coverage
in future meetings I did one
highlight just a highlight to
programs your for you uh and
you'll see there's a list of
close to forty programs and
that's
under the single family
development which is the second
page there we don't have it
specifically called out but we
have the zip program it's a zero
interest home builder program
this is the program that I
mentioned a little bit earlier
or builders to incentivise entry
level homes that is a program
that we are getting a lot of
interest in and we're actually
coming to our board next month
with their first loan under that
so more more to follow on that
particular program the only
other one that all mentioned
here as we're behind schedule is
the housing innovations program
on the following page this is a
program that we are very proud
of this is a program that if as
somebody has a need in their
community and it doesn't meet
one of the criteria of the other
programs that we have they can
apply to us here robinson
department reviews as we've made
close to eight and ten eight
nine different awards under this
that really very.
One of them is our veterans park
in sunmer seal south of some
quarrel tiny homes if you will
another one would be ramps for
us elderly another one is a
mobile home replacement program
another one is a workforce
integration program where people
that are coming out of the
corrections facilities or
provided housing to an agreed
back into the community so glad
great things are happening under
their program and wanted to
highlight that
definitely any questions that
you may have here we're able to
address but won't want to too
much detail there
behind tip sixteen dollars cover
or estimated a funding for this
next year
madam chair and all other
members of dab sixteen basically
gives you a walked through
throughout twenty twenty five
funding and in general the pie
chart in the first page of that
tab shows gets you at visual
depiction of where we are having
the funding sources and as you
can see the most of it out of
our total one point zero four
billion fifty one percent is
generated from the volume cop of
the private activity bonds that
we get for our mortgage new bond
programs and for that we have
about three hundred and twenty
five million for a single family
and two hundred million for
multi family other than that the
second biggest bar section is
the federal funding which is
about twenty six percent or two
hundred and sixty five million
and the key sources are the low
income housing tax credit boat
nine percent and four percent
that makes up one hundred and
eighty two million of the two
sixty five and then there is
project based housing assistance
on section eight and some home
and national housing press front
program everything is detailed
and as we are uninsured on time
I just go high level but all the
different funding sources and
the specifics are detailed in
the pages that follow the by
charge we also receive a state
funding as robert already said
that we have from the severance
tax bond we have have forty five
million dollars.
The state funding totals to
about seventy three million or
seven percent off our total
funding and then we also have
some new mexico housing trust
fun uninformed appropriations of
about ten million dollars we
also have some private funding
which is about sixteen percent
of the total pool and most of it
comes from the taxable bond
portion of the mortgage revenue
bonds by the single family and
what we have done over here is
trying to extend the volume caps
so that we can breach out to
more people by mixing in some of
the taxable bonds into our
attacks example still keep the
interest rate below the market
and other than this biggest
chunk is the taxable bonds in
the private area but there are
some small funding sources that
come from p and m or landlord
engagement program on new mexico
gas company the last sliver that
we have is very small that is
what is the already discussed
that when we have any net
revenue from the general fund we
put it right back into our
objective and we tried to do
something that helps and
optimises our mission so that's
about five million and most of
the disattributed to the down
payment assistance program are
any emergency housing programs.
With that I will go straight
into
dad seventeen which basically is
another level deep down into
funding so in the tab previously
in sixteen we talked about
funding and in tab seventeen we
kind of detail into the federal
funding what may be our housing
new mexico administers and we
can breakfast say that there are
basic for pillars of this
federal funding the first one is
hard which is the housing and
over the development and there
are various programs again all
the details listed for you but
at a high level there are
various programs under hard
which is home national housing
trust fund years g hot board
section eight home arp veterans
home rehab community projects
etc the second is the department
of treasury and they do help us
in funding the low income
housing tax credits for multi
family for both four percent and
nine percent the department of
energy is the third pillar and
they provide assistance on
whether
and met the last one is the
department of health or human
services and they have programs
like loin comes home energy
assistance program so those are
the basic pillars under which we
have different programs that
help in the federal funding
manager the next tab eighteen is
just
gives you a highlight of the
lower compassion tax credit
which happens to be the most
competitive program we have here
a tells a new mexico and it
gives you the breakdown of a
rural versus metro by
congressional districts as well
and where the funding is going
one of the things that's a
little skewed with its charters
with the redistricting there are
some countries that fall in two
different congressional district
opinion up where the county was
split so you'll see that the
population exceeds over a
hundred percent
world try to work with that a
little bit so it is not as much
as it is but the highlight here
is that.
We have a good of mountain money
actually higher percentage of
the low income housing tax rates
are allocated to the rural areas
in the prorated population in
those areas which is good
because that latter cases are
you know we get criticised for a
lot of the money going into the
metro areas and that stephanie
not the case with this program
here so with that out in
conclusion here will go to the
last tab which is a temp
nineteen just gives you a
glassery of all of the commonly
used acronyms we will try our
best to not use these acronyms
as we're presenting here but if
if we do please feel free to
show stop us a week and not give
you an explanation of what we're
talking about it's a whole
different vocabulary and it's on
that that we use here with all
of these things with that matter
will just conclude here and go
to the next agenda item you know
is you directors to.
Alright thank you madame chair
members of the committee so now
we're going to go into the
smaller binder the reference
behind it did want to mention I
know paper super heavy to carry
around we do have cabinets over
here if you want a story your
refinders here i'm important
amount for reference when you're
here you're welcome to do that
i'm although I know you're all
eager to read them this weekend
so i'm behind to I believe tap
for i'm gonna go through some
details in the maxical housing
trust funding we did sort of
touch on its
a little bit already so i'll try
to keep it brief and allow time
for for a questions.
So just a little bit of history
of the new mexico housing trust
fund it was created in two
thousand five it was intended to
provide a more flexible funding
source for housing development
for
lower moderate income new
mexicans
the act does designate the
mortgage finance authority as
the trust and it was initially
funded with ten million dollars
over the next fifteen or so
years there was an investment
further investment into the
housing trust fund which
averaged about a one point five
million dollars a year
in twenty twenty we opened up
the act to allow for a wider
range of activities it will have
typically been used for rental
development gap financing for
the to supplement the federal
low income housing tax credit
program
but we were able to identify a
activities that could be
eligible which include single
family rehabilitation
weatherstation and transitional
housing
during twenty twenty one and
twenty twenty two
federal funding received by the
state was
appropriate to the new mexico
housing trust fund this was
twenty five million dollars i'm
in two different awards this
really allowed us to increase
some of the programs that we had
and help sort of defray the cost
of some of the things that we
dealt with coming out of the
pant and make including i'm
increased construction costs and
you know to be able to provide
more flexible gap financing to a
lot of projects
then in twenty twenty three
senate bill one thirty four was
enacted which allows breakering
funding to the new max call
housing trust fund it was a two
point five percent of the
severance tax bond capacity so
that's a fluctuating number
we've received this year will be
our.
Third appropriation from this
from this act and we've or go
into a little bit more detail on
that
during the twenty twenty four
legislative session in addition
to the two and a half percent we
received our special
appropriation of fifty million
dollars that represented the
largest investment ever into the
new mexico housing trust find
and was very much appreciated
when you think it has been
mentioned were projected to
receive about forty five million
dollars for state fiscal year
twenty twenty six as a result of
the two and a half percent of
severance tax bond capacity
the next slide is the depiction
of the investment that the state
has made in the housing trust
fund so since it was established
we've received two hundred and
twenty eight million dollars
into this fund
we are hoping to see a continued
increase
in twenty twenty six and will
continue to advocate for
additional general fund
appropriations in addition to
the severance tax fund um the
reason for that is that we want
to create capacity we want to
create program can't newty and
we want to be a place where
our sake holders know that these
programs are available and that
they're fully funded
and then we will have the
resources that are needed not
just in one year but on a
continuous basis
moving to the next slide slide
for
we do have an advisory committee
that over that overseas I guess
the new mexico housing trust
fund and the
provide recommendations to the
board so we get their approval
to when we open a program of the
open notice of funding
availability or a rsp the
advisory committee has made
aware of that.
From from staff and then from
there it goes to our board of
directors
three members are appointed by
the governor three members are
appointed by the
senate are protem and three by
the speaker of the house I want
to see that we have a a very
good committee very engaged
committee and and these people
represent
of radio of housing stakeholders
including people like nco
martinez who runs a
camp hope and the community of
hope down in was crisis
all as who's been on the
committee for a very long time
who works at home wise and deals
with homeownership
so just a well rounded group of
people
that are better well to intune
with housing issues
the moving on to page five in
the new was mentioned by
representative
montoya that we do leverage all
of the state funding that we
receive leverage varies by
program and we have seen a
little bit lower leverage rate
due to the increase
in funding that we're providing
to people so where we're getting
seven percent of state funding
it used to be two percent so our
leverage rates were higher now
we're able to provide more of
that state funding but we're
still within the statutory
requirement which is three to
one and aggregate where
we're a leveraging every one
dollar of steep money with ten
dollars of federal or private
funding
we do see costs continuing to
risk we see regular federal
funding state flat and so these
state resources are really
important and help close close a
lot of gaps in these programs.
On page six you know one of the
things because we're not as
state agency we don't have a
budget that gets approved every
year we don't have a standing
appropriation in in house bill
to
we do have the two and a half
percent earmark but well one of
the things that we do to
increase the amount of funding
that we can make available is to
provide loans when a project can
support debt this allows us to
recapture not only the principle
but also
interest on these loans arm and
creates program income for us so
this is an important piece for
us to ensure that we can
you know severance tax bonds is
a link to oil and gas revenues
which is always a a cliff that
were about to fall over
and so we just want to make sure
that we're optimising the
funding that we that does come
to the housing trust fund it's
not a typical trust fund where
we only spend a little bit leave
the you know leave the bulk of
the money in place we spend it
down but we do we do do mostly
loans smaller percentage of
grants so that we have
we have sustainability.
Slide seven talks about the
different uses so we basically
operate with from a steep
funding perspective we have the
program income that I just
mentioned we sometimes get
general phone appropriations and
then we have our severance tax
funds and these all have a
little bit different uses who
just wanted to
depict that here so with the
severance tax fund funding for
example we can only fund capital
projects where you can't provide
operational support
for
service providers for example
but that's recording money that
we know that we will continue to
receive on the flip side of that
were general fun money it's it's
a lot more flexible but it's
difficult to provide ongoing
operational support with a one
time appropriation so these are
some of the things that you know
we have to way as we look at
what activities we are able to
fund
moving on to page eight and we
talked about the hundred and
fifty percent area median income
the housing trust fund with the
housing trust fund we're able to
serve households earthing up to
one hundred and fifty percent of
area median income we provided a
breakdown of the state median
income but we do have it broken
out by county and in can provide
that it's on our website as well
what the by county median
incomes are
most programs are the federal
level are gonna restrict funding
to lower incomes between thirty
to eighty percent of ami so home
ownership programs are typically
where we see these higher income
thresholds and then with the
rental there's more of a mix of
incomes but we would follow the
most
restrictive arm income
requirements of whatever funding
source were using.
On page nine we have
a table here showing our
performance metrics so here at
mf a housing new mexico the
funding that we receive goes
through a reimbursement process
with dfa so our providers are
partners submitting invoice to
us we
we pay them and then we seek
reimbursement from the state
so with the funds that we've
received with the severance tax
bond funding as well as the
fifty million dollar
appropriation from last year we
have awarded eighty three
percent of it to projects and
programs and we have expended
thirty five percent of it
one thing to note here is that
especially for housing
developments it takes probably
twelve to eighteen months before
so when the time that we receive
it and we award it we can award
it at the next board meeting but
it might take a year for the
developer to be ready to draw
down money so the expenditures
do tend to lag and it could be
up to twenty four months before
an award is fully expended
but we want to make sure that we
are providing the resources and
it's all done up front and then
as they said reimbursements come
later.
On page ten
this is just providing you guys
with a a an impact of what the
funding has done and so of the
refunding that we have awarded
it shows you the difference
strategic areas which includes
down payment assistance rental
developments
in preservation and then
rehabilitation single family
development etc so we've been
able to assist about five
thousand six hundred and seventy
five households or
individuals with this funding
over the past and this is just
with the state funding um over
the past two years
slide eleven
outlines the housing trust fund
framework so with the several
taxpan money where required to
identify um and certify the uses
of that money so those certified
uses are listed there for you to
review and then the next column
shows the activity that we
administer the programs through
so
for example down payment
assistance and then how that
tires to the housing strategy
that will be talked about before
and those four different areas
that were focused on of the
housing strategy.
So unsight twelve in conclusion
is just wanted to provide you
with the
the allocation of the forty five
million dollars that we are
going to receive on july one
from the severance tax bond
capacity
so when we're appropriating this
are allocating this
funding to different programs we
we look at several
factors including the priorities
of the state and our board what
other funding is available for
each of these activities
what partners we have to be able
to actually get the money out to
the public and we want to make
sure that we have a statewide
impact and then also and we look
at leverage and in a program
income so
over this forty five million
dollars we appropriate or
allocate I keep in the wrong
word I apologize allocated eat
million dollars to down payment
assistance thirty five million
to rental and single family
developments and then one point
five million to single family
programs
the reason that it was broken
out this way is that most of the
thirty five million dollars in
rental and single family
development is a paypal project
that is already in some fees of
predevelopment this is not
looking at funding out for the
next two or three years these
are projects that need the
funding right now
so
I would just say that
additional resources could be
put to good use
through these programs the eight
million dollars of down payment
assistance is projected to
provide in addition to some
other resources in that program
about a year's worth of
program
funding for that program
so with that i'll stand for any
questions in interest in the.
Presentation thank you burning
questions from the committee.
Senator gonza.
Thank you just going back to on
the article
I really compliment you for
having a in place the internal
and external audit then i've
always found that one specially
with the government that
wherever you have that you
really don't have problems who
does really have a very good
successors and now a few years
back when no we work with this
this is one of the
remedies in a recommendation
that we brought to a new medical
finance authority and so they
also have now the internal and
external but all that is are
very good and you know I really
applied you for them thank you
thank you learn to thank you
very much senator any room
temperature questions from the
committee
okay.
The three c I apologize as
representative coming at all
that's right madam chair just
really quickly
everything you've presented
today and both of these reports
documents there are online
correct all this information is
online okay I was just asked
that
thank you very much and then the
other question I have
is there a mechanism for I know
you have an advisory
group but is there making it
some for consumer involvement
advocate involvement
in put involvement active
involvement in all of this and
other words whatever they advise
recommittee is addressing would
the consumer sells that are
receiving and I don't know
whether the result still
an active housing coalition but
are they is there a mechanism
for them for the for them to
give input and participate in
all of these processes that you
have
madam chair and a representative
of royal ball company yet
what we do with the sim of our
programs were required to have
public hearings and so we
publicise those and have public
hearings on c our action plans
in our consolidated plans which
includes are all of the funding
that we are they were that we
have and are able to administer
so that's one mechanism to do
that and then obviously for the
consumers after we do sin
surveys out from time to time on
our programs to see how they're
working forum and then we also
would use the advisory members
if you will as the voice for the
consumers out there so those are
the mechanisms we currently have
in place
madam chair and and thank you
I want to say years he but it's
appropriate to see mr
nondashhero
I understand that those were the
requirements.
Per the requirements but I
wanting a little bit more in
depth so maybe you can entertain
that amongst them
yourselves and and as we can
come up with some ideas as to
how best to
further expand that
participation in involvement
because their voice the voice at
the grass roots level is much in
the in our in this area we're
talking about consumers
is a gauge for us to understand
whether these are programs are
actually
working on the long run and I
think the advisory committee
they're all involved in the
actual
real estate professional arena
as opposed to more of the those
persons that are actually
received the benefits of the
housing programs so I would just
ask that we might entertain them
and again another subject for
summit maybe discussion as to
how best to incorporate those
voices at the table because I
think it would help a trust the
issue of law income are we
actually dressing no income
affordability I mean the I agree
with vice chair the
affordability of
being able to do if we have an
average home going for hundreds
of thousands of dollars in my
community and my district their
laugh at me if I say that that's
an affordable housing project
and program that they should
access because it's not real
when they have two or three
people in the household working
doing three jobs so those are
the kinds of things that I think
the important that would serve
as well in the long run finally
I
was my f.
The last track
let me just look
at the final point has to deal
with planning and development
again if we have if we have
renewables
our mindset when we're planning
in developing phases for housing
development as a whole then I
think we might get to the point
where we will need lesson mess
whether assation we don't want
to be here thirty years from now
and still talking about whether
resistance
you know we if we are equipping
our homes in our new single and
both I family with arm
advanced technology in the world
of renewals this will eventually
increase the volume which
reduces the cost for renewal and
then in the long run make our
homes remain affordable for the
long run so I just encourage
that discussion thank you.
Thank you matter if if you don't
mind being making one of final
comment here on this
presentation on the housing
trust fund to want to say that
you know we hear rumblings from
time to time on you know the
maybe the the funds not getting
a spinter expended I I will tell
you and you can see it and
slight nine of that uh
presentation that that robin
just made that if you allocate
funds to the year housing new
mexico whether it says in this
case the state funds but we have
a track record of efficiently
expending all of the phone
server none of the monies have
gone back on the state side and
definitely not on the federal
side
the hundred and twenty two
million representative of those
three different allocations to
housing new mexico it's a
hundred and twenty two million
eighty four million of that was
done or became available to us
in the last eight nine months
the first allocation of thirty
seven million dollars if you
look at the expenditures are
they told her forty two million
dollars a week expended in nexus
of the something that we've had
available to us for about a year
and a half and have a really
incumbent all of those funds so
I just would really want to
highlight that thanks to our
partnership in the
infrastructure we have in place
that does there's a great need
here in the state for housing
and if you allocate funds to
housing new mexico we're going
to make sure that we utilize the
partnerships that we have author
to make sure that the funds get
put to good use in a quick
manner thank you.
Reply quick question I do thank
you I guess this is the part of
it when for two talk about the
budget
this year
you allocate the fifty million
dollars from the non recurring
is that correct
sorry madam chair representative
on that was for a fiscal year
twenty five so that funding is
actually mostly awarded
and for this fiscal year manager
what was the word
manager and representatives and
we did not receive any
special appropriations from the
general from the regular session
thank you manager so just
offering on the the two percent
from the seventh tax
allocation thank you mature
yeah I just want to draw
attention to that I think that
is something that is going to
really as i'm looking at putting
all this to trying to so i'm
looking at you know the first
binder
on the twenty twenty five
estimate available funding for
housing new mexico practice
programs at one point zero a
billion and so
with that amount so i'm trying
to get a summary as you can tell
or total with that amount in
play how did it affect.
Representative look
uh you know it's
it's it's difficult I can tell
you where with the two and a
half percent that we got in the
fifty million dollars last year
we had eighty four million
dollars available in so you
build the capacity over time to
be able to execute on those
funds and then when you don't
get any appropriations and you
have a clear and so you have
this built up capacity and use
expectations for more partners
to deliver housing and when you
don't get a special
appropriation it's a different
step in the wrong direction and
since the wrong message and
really set us back a little bit
on that trajectory that we had
of with the capacity and the
developments that are out there
and madam chair i'm bringing
this and drying this point
because as we're having these
conversation and everything is
drawn to you that the amount of
time the timeline it takes to
get all these projects in place
the planning in the development
which
as we know as well many of us
try to work on a planning of
different maybe two represent
boring legislation that didn't
get passed in to have a steep
planning office it really
hinders us and it really is
something that I am you know i'm
concerned with and i'd just like
to drop honda that we did we
have been
here after you're giving a a
certain amount of funding on top
of the two percent to the
affordable housing act which we
set up by then a senator yes you
were triggers and thank goodness
she did that
is what i'm gonna say because
without that I don't I don't
know where you would be in your
planning and development in your
obligations and the ten year
that you have in place to
participate in and these
developments and and plan for
housing first date so
i'm still trying to work the ins
and out of what we're doing with
the the state and housing office
that we set up because
there is a certain award of
money that's going to that
office.
And it is switched it's no
longer a dfa it's now with the
work for solutions and it's been
the secretary of work for
solutions is now in charge of
that which
i'll do respect in into her
credit is not her job
and I just want to commend her
for taking on that that job in
the there's these new
responsibilities so I do have
some concerns because then how
are they with all these would
this mix of all these things
that we have with these issues
and getting the housing and
getting to the to the level of
housing that we need for a state
how are they going to
procure that that funding in the
mount of time that they don't
have.
And that's why we set up mf
was to avoid the the change in
the transition between
between an executive and there
are ten year in the state and
really so we are coming to that
cliff and I just want to point
that out and what are we going
to do this is the committee
where we need to take the
position in the leadership to
really affirm and really
solidify what this
does cross a governmental entity
that we created fifty years ago
is responsible for doing at this
again and I want me very very
clear this is no offense to work
the governor has done out I do
comment her one of the ways of
what she's been moving forward
with because there are gaps with
what we have given them
so that is our responsibility to
so i'm printer on us i'm putting
this all back on it says the
legislator as the legislative
body to really help both.
Entities really survive in this
this time when we need the
amount of housing that we say we
need
and I don't think all the
questions have been there asked
but I really want to put that
out there because that is a huge
concern why did we spend
why we had this body in place
for fifty years who've been
doing an excellent job
and then now we've created
another a revenue stream of
revenue to do the same maybe
maybe different I understand
that there is gaps and that's
why what you have that and I
know that we are all working to
come together to understand that
but I really want to draw that
to the attention.
Because we're the oversight of
what they're going to be doing
but we can give them the the
four tools for the till chest
and that's on us so thank you
it's a little bit of a ramp bits
thank you for hearing me
mention.
Think is a representative of
luhan representative regular
thank you madame chairman trying
to keep my comments brief
because I know you wanna
maturing soon
and thank you for that
representative of low
actually perthinking as sort of
a same place than i'm thinking
one of the one of the things I
saw on your report is that we're
about thirty two thousand units
of
affordable housing shy of where
we would like to be and one of
the things that I think about is
as we go forward ma'am chairs um
you know and setting our goals
and I heard you also mention
that you have two other district
offices in the state
and I just would like to kind of
gauge in the future as we move
forward and I know you can't
meet the the needs of that
thirty two thousand but
what percentage in the future
are we are we actually meeting
the needs up so I would like to
see maybe at our next meeting
madam chair
um some indication as you know
how do we address those needs
and at what percentage are each
of these districts going to
address that
that need
statewide so and I realize that
that's probably going to be more
of a long term like maybe
in the next five or ten years we
address a certain percentage of
that need
and how how we get there
and how do we help you get there
and I think that's what
representative luhon is
mentioning in a what kinds of
real
not just allocations but what
kinds of
a bills.
Do we need to to incentivise I
guess our the development of our
I mean the development industry
the construction industry how do
we maybe make a little dant in
the next five years maybe a
thirty percent or twenty percent
I mean what is realistic for us
and so I just raised that
question amount of chair because
I think that that's we need to
be thinking in terms of long
term goals but in short term
roles but also long term like
how do we get there and and what
you know what are the things I
just want to
the home builders conference
recently on
they had a conference on housing
and
you know one of the things that
they talked about is it
basically what they're and I
think about this a lot as
they're not making any more
lounge
but we are you know and and also
in in that discussion that we
may have in the future how does
our population grows address
that so there's a couple of
things there and i'd be happy to
sit with you guys and talk about
this a little bit more but I
really think that we need to be
thinking realistically is what
impact did we really have in
addressing that thirty two
thousand
you know in the next five years
ten years or whatever
so I just raised that
sort of
sort of a little bit of a
challenge I guess is how do we
do that and also addressing
things that representative
mobile coverage at a brought up
and the environmental impacts on
our water on on all of these
things because we are not going
to be everybody that moves into
new mexico or lives here is not
going to be all mean a single
family home and so you know how
do we build up.
How do we address density issues
I mean all of those things are
really impact for thank you for
that manager
thank you very much
representative but I don't
represent matthews
thank you madame chair
so
we many of us are aware that the
may be cuts in washington in the
program medicaid which is not
understandable but
looking at the figure of twenty
six percent of the money for
housing coming from the federal
government.
I'm wondering if you have
concerns
that some part of that money or
some of those programs
might be on a child
and
none of us know for sure what's
going to happen on some of these
things but i'd appreciate your
assessment of what the risk is
and how big the risk is and what
we what impact that would have
on our programs that's an easy
question I do
matter what representative
matters and i'll back up a
little bit and just address two
quick points on representative
what it was a comments want to
make sure there's no confusion
this is the only office we have
there's no two other district
officers i'm not sure where what
I might said that that
crossed their confusion with
regard to the thirty two
thousand units we currently I
think I mentioned earlier we
currently have close to forty
nine hundred units that are in
one phase of construction or
another
and
we have another about a thousand
units that we add to that
pipeline every year or so that's
definitely going to be a long
time before we get to the thirty
two thousand unit shortage on
rental and I think one way that
would help that is that we did
that need additional funding to
to help with with regard to your
question representative matt
user I think there are some
programs that are thinker on the
chopping block based on which
budget you look at there would
be some of the heart programs
potentially some of the deal we
whether programs in the
potentially some usda although
we don't get those funds
directly here there's also some
positive news with regard to the
tax credits it appears that
there's any increase in tax
credits which happen to be the
vehicle nationwide that helps
develop a good eighty five
hundred ninety percent of all
the affordable rental housing so
there's some pros and negatives
are or had to wait and see
let us settle in see what what
happens in a few months when
they finalize that budget but
there's.
Some risk with some of those
funding sources and then also
some potentially positive sides
over two on some other area.
Yes I get I get my only comment
would be I guess the big
beautiful bill has two sides to
speak to saying.
Mountain thank you I just wanted
to clarify that you said that
you had a there was an office in
towers and another office downs
out
was it is it regional.
Rather than district
manufacturer and I represent
what I was under the
regional housing act we have
oversight of three regional
housing authorities they are not
done entity of ours and they
don't distribute our programs we
just have oversight to make sure
they comply with that the
regional housing act
rather than clarify that because
that's what I was referring to
cause you do coordinate with
them though correct
we definitely have some
oversight and they have to
submit some i'm sorry right
madam chairing representative
what I would so we have
oversight of some of their
functions if you will but we
don't
we we don't
have authority to tell them what
to do or not to do this thank
you.
Think you madam chair um
will have to say III agree with
representative we've got it
figure out
where do we want to put our
money I when I look at the the
capital outlay alone that went
for housing in san fe
individual
members gave over two million
dollars to the local government
to do affordable housing
projects and you know all total
there there's two hundred and
twenty two million dollars
sorry
didn't mean that.
The.
And we were giving a tremendous
amount of money to housing it
just seems an organized and and
what I will say is that we've
had a lot of conversations in
finance committee during session
and there's over six billion
dollars out there in unspent
capital outlay and I wonder of
that money you're not have an
answer for that I think it's
something that those of us on
the lfc probably need to ask how
much of that is these projects
local projects for affordable
housing so there's a lot of
affordable housing that's
happening outside of what the
mortgage finance authority does
but there is a bit of a of a.
I can see fight but there is
definitely a challenge between
does the money go to the housing
or does the money come to the
mortgage finance authority and I
happen to think.
Is there more that can be
accomplished they're always
going to be are there some
market issues that are happening
that we might need to hear about
and try to figure out absolutely
but there's as a legislator we
have given tremendous amount of
money.
I hope that as we continue to
have these meetings and I
appreciate that I am I have to
take this with me.
Sticky notes and yellow
highlighters but I I think as a
body we need to really make it a
citizen do we go beyond that
money that's that's invested and
do we start investing more money
in this agency that could expand
the programming that it does
we're hearing just a smart small
peace of the work that they're
doing and and i'm looking
forward to the next four
meetings
having like real examples of
real life people that have been.
Um so I just wanted to point it
out to like provide more
information to what
representativ.
We are providing money but we
haven't been dedicated.
As much fidelity as I personally
would like to see.
Thank you very much
on we go
legislative session outcome.
The.
Because
madam chair thank you
the same too various chair uh
two years comment maybe also
rethink about state fairland and
the tid they did that about with
that and that's off to a
different are totally different
organization they created a
special
something a rather to I can't I
can't remember what they called
it but what we're seeing in the
last session was by fricating
try for cating if you will
cousin and I agree with the by
share that that's a real concern
because this agencies done a
great job.
Now will go until then
thank you representative atheist
that comment and then you can
talk about more about the state
fair cause immedi.
Board and that's my district so
I am very committed to that area
and we go thank you very mu.
I think thinking madam chair
so speaking of real life
examples I would like to bring
and some guess that have
joined us today to talk about
some of the the policy work
that's happening in the state
they're still here
so first
joining me is rachel bags she's
the chief strategy officer for
almost healthcare for the
homeless and then we also have a
couple of folks here from home
wise johanna gilligan who is the
deputy chief executive officer
and a lena gagos is also here
and she oh I don't have retital
but she
chief operation officer at home
was I apologize if she's not on
the agenda this might be an old
draft
so i've sort of covered and
we've talked about a lot of the
housing bills that I was gonna
cover initially in this
presentation because we're
running a little bit behind the
main definitely want to give
rachel and also johanna and
allen and enough time to target
these discussions with you I
think we should just skip
directly to to the first gas
prisonation which is with rachel
so were behind table five
correct.
Let me live in my agenda.
Perhaps behind have six and then
this page here the twenty twenty
five.
The little book.
Tab five.
There is three presentations
within tab five so this one is
about plate ten pages in.
And cherry ready.
Great madam jared members of the
committee think is so much for
having me this after a new and
my name is rachel begs and their
cheap strategy officer at alba
kirky health care for the
homeless and i'm here today to
share a little bit about our
outlook on the past legislative
session both policy and
investments around housing and
also to think ahead to the next
legislative session and
opportunities that we have in
the state
so today i'm hoping to just
share a little bit about
albuquerque health care for the
homeless let you know who we are
talked to you about what housing
and homelessness from our
perspective looks like in new
mexico and then share our
housing policy priorities our
legislative agenda this past
legislator session and then some
opportunities we see moving
forward
excess.
So albricker get healthcare for
the homeless we're seller rating
our fortieth year this year we
were one of the original
nineteen cities that piloted the
health care for the homeless
program in nineteen eighty five
and so albecricky has that
claimed a theme they are now
over three hundred health care
for the homelessness across the
country we are also now
integrated into the federal
health center program so we are
a federally qualified health
center
we are what's called is stand
alone three thirty each which
just means that we only serve
the homeless population so
unlike our partner federally
qualified health centers and
albecricky area first choice or
first nations and we work really
closely with them but our
population is only going to be
people experiencing homelessness
and that is broadly defined and
we can talk about definitions we
have grown to about a hundred
twenty staff when we started in
nineteen eighty five we are
operating out of an air stream
trailer with a couple providers
and now we have a beautiful
campus at first and mountain
just north of downtown albequer
keith but we try not to create a
payer at our little corner of
first and mountain we do a lot
of street outrage so all of the
services that we provide all of
our integrated health services
are provided across our service
area which is all of burning of
counties that we take everything
out to the street to meet people
where they are so are sweet of
services includes primary
medical services of similar to
what you would experience at a
primary care clinic we also have
on site dental behavioral health
sake and social services and we
have a car reduction program
that's fun to do that in mexico
department of health we've been
funded since nineteen ninety
seven introduced or in services
over those prevention and we
have an art program called art
street and our our programmers
for anyone in the community that
would like to come together and
make art it's also great place
for people experiencing
homelessness to learn skills
make artwork together with
housed and unhoused individuals
and then be provided the
materials and places and venues
to sell their artwork in the
community.
Next slide
so all of our services like I
said are integrated to you focus
on creating a person centered
network of care for people
experiencing homelessness and
these primary care services
integrated with social services
where housing comes in and why
we focus so much on housing and
our work and we do have a
resource center as a place for
people to come in and get
connected to all of the services
that we provide but then all of
the services throughout the
community and so there are a lot
of things that we don't do it
albequirky healthcare for the
home as we like to specialize in
the things that we we do and
then connect with our our
network of community providers
to make sure that people are
connected to services we do
offer a lot of housing services
at albequery healthcare for the
home I so if people are curious
about where to get started when
their first experiencing
homelessness our resource center
is always a great place to
direct people to to connect and
and we we do the assessment for
housing that's through the
coordinated entry system and
then we also participate in many
other housing voucher programs
like the state linkages
permanent support of housing
voucher program are her city and
county re entry program for
people exiting incarceration and
then we do have our own head
funding as well through the
federal government
and like I said all of our
services are provided throughout
the community and outrage next
line it's a little bit of our
impact numbers
at a health care for the
homeless in twenty twenty four
we saw about five thousand
individuals experiencing
homelessness and the service
area
we work
to ensure that are
individuals are connected to as
many services as possible so we
have about twenty thousand and
counters throughout all of our
different primary care services
that we provide across the
campus and then across out reach
we saw seven hundred and eighty
two people and outrage that did
not come into our campus so
these are folks on the street
that we saw that otherwise would
not have gotten access to care
primary medical integrated
behavior of health care.
On the street and then our
dental clinic also and was able
to provide seventy one dentures
both individual and fall sites
of dentures helping people
regain some stability and their
life and i'm getting a healthy
smile back and allows them a lot
of new opportunities with those
dentures so just a little look
at looking at the full service
of our programs I will say in
our housing programs about four
out of five people in a housing
program in any giving year
remain housed after twelve
months so we maintain at least
an eighty percent success rate
and sometimes it's higher almost
ninety percent success rate of
keeping people house that's our
mark over twelve months or
longer so that really shows the
value of permits a part of
housing and the housing first
model and any given year we have
about a hundred and seventy
households that we are
supporting and housing vouchers
throughout the community moving
ahead I will go through the
stats pretty quickly because
you've been immersed in data
today and have really great data
from the housing new mexico
housing strategy and needs
assessment document we do a line
really closely with a lot of the
priorities and find means of
that the housing new mexico
needs assessment and use that in
a lot of our work unfortunately
when we talk about the senses
and people experiencing
homelessness it's really hard to
have a complete count of the
number of people experiencing
homelessness are one official
estimate as the point in time
count which you've heard about
today it is a under count it
really is not a senses it's just
a snapshot such a picture of on
any given eight how many people
are experiencing homelessness on
that night and it's very
specific to the the definition
that hide user so it's literal
homelessness people in a shelter
around the street it does not
capture people living in motels
are used that our couch are feen
families that are doubled up
multiple families and you know
one bedroom unit so it is an
under account of the true
picture but in albert key our
last point in time count showed
about twenty seven hundred
people experiencing homelessness
on a given night.
There some peer review data and
evidence that shows if you
multiply that number by two
point five to ten you'll get the
true estimate of the number of
people experiencing homelessness
so albuquerque health care for
the homeless estimates that
anywhere from seven thousand to
twenty seven thousand people
will experience homelessness in
alba kirki throughout the course
of the year as homelessness is
an experience of people move in
and out of
this is a hundred and nine
percent increase from two years
ago and the state has seen it
similar increases and
homelessness as well and now
note that we are far up he's
seen the national average of
increases and homelessness which
is about forty percent so we're
seeing pretty start increases.
And when we get into the housing
policy space and why are
legislative priorities and
landscape is really focused on
on renters this is where we we
focus a lot of our time and
attention so one and for our new
mexico renters are extremely low
income so the folks that are
living at thirty percent area
meeting income that's typically
for her family of four or some
you know living about twenty six
thousand dollars household a
year and this number is from the
national long housing coalition
the link here if you would like
to go into their gap report you
can get some really good local
data for your communities it's
by county i'm shortages for this
is specific to rental housing
that's available and affordable
and it's specific to people
living at different income
levels so this number is for
people living at fifty percent
area meeting or below so short
as of fifty two thousand rental
units that are available and
affordable and then as I said we
are seeing some of the larger
increases across the country and
homelessness we had the second
word just increase in twenty
twenty three according to the
point tap cap next slight.
And again this is from the
national long and housing
coalition this uh image is
linked and the slide if you'd
like to go into it on mine this
is the gap report showing just
why we focus so much on
extremely low income the take
away from the scrap is to show
that the greatest need is for
folks living at extremely low
income level so are community
members that are living at that
income level have the highest
cost board and so that means
there are pain more than fifty
percent of their income towards
right that's severely cosportant
and that's why we focus a lot of
our policy work and making sure
that that big trunk of people do
not fall into homelessness and
that we can prevent homelessness
and the right hand side you can
see how we're doing in the state
when it when we're looking at
providing rental housing at
different income levels and you
can see that for folks living at
a hundred percent area meeting
and come or actually do not okay
we're providing a hundred and
one units for every one hundred
rental households but as you go
down income levels to people
living at extremely low incomes
we're doing very poorly we're
only providing forty units for
every one hundred households at
that income level so we have a
severe gap at that income level.
Next slide
why we spend so much time
talking about housing is that
homelessness really is a housing
problem you're going to hear
from home why as soon and and
talking about the the importance
of housing they also want to
plug their liberability series
they just brought great colbon
and to talk about his book i'm
homelessness as the housing
problem is a great serious to
come to there's one more coming
up and but really focused a lot
and why we start spend a lot of
time talking about housing and
homelessness
report from the us gao found
that for every hundred dollars
increase in median rent we see a
nine percent increase in
homelessness and they think this
really shows what's happening
across new mexico
we see this across the country
we're not dissimilar what's
different here is that we're not
building enough housing to keep
r a rents low and so are our
rents are going extremely high
we've seen a sixty percent
increase in rents over the past
five years and we're seeing huge
increases and homelessnesses
that result so housing really is
a homelessness really as a
housing problem these charts on
the right hand side are from
peel this study was again
looking at the same problem and
you can see and the communities
that are building housing at a
rapid rate they're seeing
really
less impact on increases and
homelessness and so will talk a
little bit later about what mini
applics and houston are doing
excited.
So getting in two r legislative
agenda for a fiscal year i'm
twenty twenty six coming up what
we
were hoping to have seen come
into forest for this legislative
sessions that just concluded i'm
you can see that the bills that
we are tracking these were our
housing priority bills these are
very similar you've seen some
information from from robert
already and the bills that they
were attracting this this was
our priority for albuquerque
health care for the homeless we
really focused on under cruising
barriers to accessing housing as
a priority for the session and
where excited to see a lot of
progress and some of these
tenant protections and policies
that decrease barriers to
accessing housing so you can see
that we dead see a lot of great
success and getting some of
these housing policy priority is
pretty far this legislative
session and then historic number
I would say of housing policy
priority bills almost fifty
bills that were introduced to
address housing policy and some
shape or form this legislative
session so really excited to see
the progress one of our priority
bills tend to build two sixty
seven did get signed in to lie
and this was the housing
application for your spells I
think you too but legislature
for a support unless it was
exciting to see a lot of really
bypartisan support and
acknowledgment of consumer
protections and issues in
housing
so we'll go down.
The next lied these are the
housing priority is that we
are supported in this last
legislative session and a little
bit more detail so the source of
income discrimination
legislation really excited to
see this get very far in the
legislative session did not get
scheduled in its last committee
and senator gesture but had a
lot of really great discussions
enjoyed the the debates and and
the house floor on hb three
thirty nine this is a protection
that we have in the city of alba
kirky bernalio county last
cruises and santa fe it's time
for the state to follow suit and
there were two other bills that
addressed barriers to accessing
rental housing and some of the
things that we hear directly
from our clients as real issues
for them to get into housing
quicker one that was eviction
ceiling and when i'm automatic
expensive eviction records we
aren't more excited to support
both of those pieces of
legislation thank you madame
chair for the automatic
expansion of a victions
leadership records these are
issues that really address some
of the biggest barriers we hear
from our clients when it comes
to accessing rental housing
quickly
we dead support two bills around
mobile home park and thank you
to
leaders on this committee for a
supporting these bells and
champagne in this bells as well
are mobile home parks are some
of our large extock of
affordable housing in the state
and so a really big issue for us
at alberto healthcare for the
homeless and we think about
prevention.
The other thing that's happening
here in new mexico as we're
seeing a a rapper to increase in
the number of seniors
experiencing homelessness
there's the population that it's
expected to trip off by twenty
thirty and mobile home parks are
a big part of the solution and a
big part of the stock for our
seniors that are living at
housing precarious levels and so
we're really concerned about
some of the protections that we
need to be putting in place to
make sure that our seniors
especially our low income
seniors do not experience
homelessness and healthcare for
the homeless we've seen this
population increase on the
seventy percent in the past five
years so it's it's rapidly
growing and we know it'll
continue to grow and then like I
said the housing application
fees bell I to sixty seven was
signed into la best bill will
require transparency so that
when you enter into a rental
lease you know exactly i'm the
costs associated with that lease
and and all cap rental
application fees at fifty
dollars and at lowers late fee
payments from ten percent of the
monthly rent to five percent of
the monthly red
head sorry I am going very based
I want to make sure we have
enough time.
The.
Two investment pieces that we
were hoping to see in this past
legislative session and one was
an increase investment in the
state linkages program this is
permanent support of housing
through the behavioral house
services department also the
vouchers are run through housing
new mexico and administered
their housing mexico we really
love this program we are
provider of the support of
services for this program what's
great about it is that it's
supplements what we have at the
local level and at the federal
level and these dollars are
specific to people with a
serious mental illness or
substance use disorder and they
can be used for people that are
precariously house so we don't
have to wait for someone to be
experiencing homelessness for
three years literally almost on
the street we can use these
funds right away to prevent
homelessness and to how someone
rapidly which is very exciting
and we did see an additional
five million dollar investments
I think you to the legislature
for supporting that we were
disappointed that there were no
increases to that new mexico
housing trust fund we have
supported increase as a over the
years and we're really excited
about the severance tax bond
capacity to see recurring
sources of unding but really I
think a big missed opportunity
this last legislative session to
**** new investments and the
house interest fund from the
general fund and hope to see
that those efforts continue and
moving forward.
This is just a a summary of of
what we're seeing here and new
mexico and and why again the
kind of increases and our costs
of living the increases and
housing is really driving in our
homelessness crisis in the state
and while of our policy
priorities are focused on
preventing homelessness ensuring
that people have the resources
to stay in their housing and
then and ensuring that we
include increase investments for
housing vouchers in the housing
subsidies that we need to
increase development to see that
our median right has increased
in new mexico by sixty percent
well out passing the national
average is really a result of
our lack of investment and
housing and our lack of
investment at the policy side to
ensure that we don't see these
costs continue to rise I will
note that our wages is only
increased by fifteen percent and
that seemed period and so it
really is an issue of just not
have enough money to afford her
housing here
alright so some opportunities
were wear hop into support
keys are very important in our
work every time a client gets
house at our client leaders of
committee we we shake our keys
we sell a rate keys to housing
will say that we are seen
success across the state and
housing people were doing it
every single day and we do have
success and keep you people
housed but looking for a road
app knowing that homelessness is
solvable knowing that we have
the solutions and we would like
to see prioritization of the
funding that was just passed i'm
thinking about the two hundred
and seventy million I think was
the number that the robin
shared from the legislative
session thinking about how this
is prioritized and I think i've
i've heard this a lot from the
committee members today is just
the importance of staying on top
of how those funds roll out how
quickly they are distributed and
then again how are they
prioritized at healthcare for
the homeless we would ask that
they would be prioritized to
address the highest need which
is our folks living at extremely
low income household levels.
And to invest in the proven
solutions that we never work
that we have the data and the
evidence to support so a lot of
the strategies and housing new
mexico needs associate a line
exactly with our legislative
agenda and our priorities at the
local state of federal level for
housing so subsidizing
affordable housing address even
restrictive zoning uhm there was
a great report that came out
from pu in january twenty twenty
five i've heard a lot of you
speaking about zoning and that
report really digs into what's
happening in new mexico and some
of those starts that I shared or
from that report that increases
and housing costs
what that report locked out to
is just other states in other
places so many athless is the
great example they were able to
add a lot of units of housing
and this is across all income
levels but really adding housing
adding supply
they added and that report
fourteen five percent increase
in housing stock in minneapolis
and in that same period they saw
two percent decrease and rent
which is unheard of right now or
to think about it a city that
has a decrease in ran it really
shows the importance of
investing and and supply for for
housing houstons are similar
results although not as start
but increasing their housing
supply some of their
similarities between many apples
and huge stand and they got rid
of restrictive zoning and and
some areas of getting rid of
parking requirements and then
i'm creating a smaller minimum
wide size for developments of
increasing density added to that
a speed at which to be able to
develop affordable housing
and with that I will end with
some of our successes that we've
seen and the housing landscape
and albert health care for the
homeless partnered with high
desert housing and we're opening
a a new brook sixty six flats
unat at central and unsir and
that'll have forty seven one
bedroom units for people with
disabilities and who earn less
than eighteen thousand dollars a
year alberty health care for the
homeless is not in the business
of affordable housing developme.
We want to leverage our services
to help these projects and the
pipeline and so having albequery
healthcare for the homeless as a
service provider will have on
side services provided at that
new housing development project
starting this summer and that's
what we can do it to leverage
our support to increase housing
development and the pipeline and
make sure that and we have a
good approach to housing for our
lowest income and most
vulnerable in new mexico and
with that I while sandra
questions
thank you very much for that
presentation
we will start with the
representative robot cabinet
thank you madame chair and thank
you so much for your advocacy
and
thrown us in in this report
I will say that this is probably
one of the most important
reports for us and the data and
I appreciate the fact that you
are closely aligned with pule
means they do an excellent job I
use pure data research all of
that
in most of an if not all of my
legislative work so
um
I think the economic impact the
lack of affordable housing um
you highlight it really hinders
are economic growth and it makes
it really difficult for all of
our community for our businesses
to attract retain workers for
workers for a population to seek
employment and then limiting the
ability to rent or on a home
it's critical so this is that
cycle madam chair that leads to
what we're faced with which is
terrible data for our state
page six of ear report
rent new mexico a second in the
nation with the largest increase
in homelessness and your.
A report articulated that very
well and so we are in a housing
communist crisis how bout it's
been escalating I am can you
imagine madam chair what we're
going to face in the next few
years
that is is a cycle that's going
to be very difficult to break
unless we all come together
in a bite participant now to be
able to address the s.
One question I have is
does any of the data account for
and i've been bringing this up
for many years
for the multiple families that
live together in order to be
able to just afford that one
home I know in my district
it looks like we're growing by
leaps and bounds and really
beautiful homes and the far west
southwest area by the way
adjacent to my district I drive
by the new housing of single
family housing I mean not single
family multiple multi family
housing that's going up and it's
exciting to see and i'm glad
that you're going to offer
services there
however in our district there is
a false sense of security
because we have these beautiful
homes going up little do we know
that the new homes are across
the street from the older forms
madam chair who are now now
still up not for clothes but now
we have two and three families
living together in those homes
because they would be on the
street if they weren't coming
together so does any of our data
add to us this particular sector
madam chairman representative
that's an excellent question and
something actually great coburn
addressed and has presentation
recently and albert
some of the data is interesting
it was surprising to us when
they looked at the alba cookie
data was that household size was
changing and that there was
actually a need for more smaller
single fit single unit
households not single family
necessarily but single unit
because our household site had
decreased in terms of people in
the market looking for housing I
don't think we have a good
picture in terms of the
overcrowded have actually has
new mexico does and there needs
assessment there is some data
around has has been crowding and
over crowding
but what was interesting and an
albertioki was that the
household size and demographics
had shifted a little bit from
people looking at the multi
family.
You know having more need for
bigger you know it's let's say
two three bedroom units to more
need for those one bedroom units
because they were single
individuals looking for housing
and that had really shifted
because our are population
hasn't actually grown in alba
key and so thought that was
really start but I do think your
point is really well pointed and
that we have an issue in terms
of not being able to assess the
true impact of doubling up
effects so people are living
multiple family is an one family
house or even a one bedroom unit
we see that health care for the
homeless
those individuals qualify for
our surfaces because they are
precariously house if you have
multiple individuals and so the
picture that you're painting is
really this picture of housing
precariousness and the fact that
we are not spending enough time
thinking about how do we prevent
those individuals from falling
into homelessness there's a huge
you know you were only seen that
typically spring on the street
the people that you are talking
about people that are in our
communities that are living
multiple families and a one bad
room or a single family home are
really the the big numbers that
we expect a fall into
homelessness in the future if we
don't do something right now to
provide the supports that they
need
thank you madame chair and i'm I
know that that is the staff are
listening to this because this
is another one of those areas
that in your long term planning
we need to really doubt deep
into prevent I know culturally
on the hispanic population for
example will not allow a family
would be gone homeless any
member they'll bring a men
because there's the same
I target to translate will just
say more water to the soup and
make it work in our house right
we'll be able to feed everybody
will be able to just
you know roll out the blankets
in the floor whatever needs to
be done but we will not allow
you to go to the street so
that's really important but we
need to seek innovative ways on
which we can reduce that um and
and i'm glad you have some some.
Aware to go for those single
unit precarious needs
and so on
that I lost my train again
I thought when I deviate from my
initial comment
so I I think that we just need
to focus on that a little bit
more in order to be able to
address that issue and also
the it just unacceptable that we
continue to have the kind of
data that you refer to
on the other point there was on
page seven which had to deal
with
the extremely low income and the
chart that referred that refers
to that that's that's set
substantiates what I was just
seeing what we were just
discussing and I think that's
really important for us to focus
on that because then we we just
want we won't be able to break
that cycle and we won't be able
to prevent and homelessness and
then the remembered my point the
aging population the census data
was very telling for our state
and particularly art pockets
large urban pockets and both
rule that we have a large aging
population and we have the aging
and returned population losing
household members that could
help them pay for their existing
homes and so what are that it
that those parents are
grandparents going to do when
they become empty nesters for a
lack of a better word they're
going to not be able to afford
their existing living so what do
we do to prevent homelessness in
that area which is now a growing
population are a population as a
whole madam chair didn't grow
but the particular populations
within
the data are growing in the
largest growth is our aging
population.
That's our largest grills so to
prevent homelessness of the
elderly how are we going to deal
deal with that and so that's
what we need to also be paying
attention to i'm a primary
example we had to downsize
completely
when are you understand left
home we had the downsize is we
weren't able to afford a huge
home the big house that we had
and so consequently that lead to
a lot of other issues so i'm
just one example of that larger
population that we are seeing
an inprevention for that is
going to be really important
because we know that having a
home the security of the income
of the security of a home are
key to the security of a good
the health and well being never
families every member thank you
manager.
Thank you very much
representative I don't.
Thank you mature and the healthy
brief I just have a few things
i'll rachel thank you very much
this is a very sunset
and the fifth question so that I
have this one
on your presentation that you
gave us
does this also involve children.
Madam chair and senator some of
the das includes children I will
say that i'll be created health
care for the homeless it's not a
large percentage of the
population that we serve
but going into sensors numbers
and trying to get a handle I
title one homeless program
probably as our closest thing
that we have to assensors and
counting youth and children and
the school systems and
homelessness so we do have at
some picture of increases and
and child homelessness it is
another area along with our eg
population that we're seen an
increase and are young
population of people
experiencing homelessness.
Okay madame.
I'm on this speech which is says
page four the one someone
visiting europe like attempt.
I think that would be just like
really hard for to be.
To witness to see children
there.
You know I guess that's
something that also we have to
grab with them how do we work
with that.
Oh the other part that I was
could I ask you
at what point.
In trying to work with all this.
And how do we work with it when
you see something that's not
safe and by this I mean it's
like for example I saw one time
assetting like this tent just
almost on the freeway.
You know with a very potential
of something that happening and
you know in those kind of
situations say I just think it's
very
hard you know and I did call
apd and so I don't know if
something happened or not the
right I just saw this very
very sad thing.
Yeah no the next part that was
gonna ask yourself would we
assume that though a very high
percentage.
Of the individuals that are out
in the street asking for hell
right on the medium.
That they're homeless.
Madam chair and senator greek
questions the first question on
encountence certainly
encampments are unsafe
especially for the people living
in them and so i'm thinking
about a harm reduction approach
is what we do and health care
for the home lesson and meeting
people where they are providing
our services and in encountence
talking to people about where I
receive places to be when there
are not options and there's a
lot of good reasons that people
choose not to go to you or
cannot go to shelters and so
recognizing that and trying to
work with the the resources that
individuals have we do provide
our outreach services we work
really closely with the city
you know we have the kind of
public health wing I would say
about reached in the city and
has both their community safety
department and apd on solid ways
that are addressing encounters
are approached provide services
and get people into care and get
people connected to housing
and to really focus on the fact
that when we have housing
resources and vouchers we can
get people house very quickly
and we can house people street
from the street enter housing
there's no need to have
intermediary steps and so that's
where we see the biggest impacts
in terms of addressing safety
and in terms of immediate safety
impacts really the outrage
services and making sure that
we're talking to people about
what makes them safe and
providing our integrated health
care to do that and then you're
a second question was i'm sorry
I forgot what was the second
question
to the medium yes great so and
we get this question a lot so
pan handling and as that's an
issue solely of homelessness and
we don't think it is an issue
solely uphomelessness it's an
issue of poverty and so
addressing issues around poverty
I know we get a lot of questions
about should I give to someone
in a median and we always say do
what you're comfortable with and
make sure people have the
resources that they need that
our support adam we certainly
are outraged services we talk to
people that are that our
panhandling and provider
services.
To people on the medians
and i'm sure the last part that
help yourself going back to that
same picture on page for the one
with them someone that reaching
out on the tent
of so with your program have a
have you or can you
on senate bill three and the
behavior help reform act that we
put in funding have you accept
any funding from that.
Madam chair and senator were
very interested in that funding
and curious to see how this one
folds are watching in the the
regional planning efforts were
part of the behavior health
providers association we are
behavior hocked providers as
well and so will be tapped in to
that regional planning approach
through the behavior of health
providers association at the
state.
So manager right now you have
not not yet now okay very well
thank you thank you manager
thank you very much sender comes
on next sender to buy thank you
mountain
okay so last year I was at a
town hall of the governor gave
i'm here in albuquerque and she
made a statement that stuck with
me and seems a little timely
with what we're talking about
which was that new mexico is
known for our empathy and
generosity towards those that
are homeless for people
struggling with drug addiction
in other challenges so when when
you say that we have this
homeless population that's
growing and groove substantially
I think over a two year period
of time or those individuals
were they all here are ready a
new mexico or do you have the
data saying is there a
percentage that came from out of
state
madam chair and senator that's a
excellent question and we
started collecting this data
about one it was close to ten
years ago and I started
albuckering health care for the
homeless because we get this
question in the light and so we
asked now at our sensors how
long have you been in new mexico
and our data has not changed
substantially over the years
it's about seventy percent of
our clients have been in new
mexico for longer than ten years
and it's very similar to data
that we see across the country
actually and i'll go back to
great colbern and has bucket the
data just does not bear out the
evidence that people travel to
other places to experience
homelessness certainly people
are traveling and people move on
people move for economic
opportunity but largely what we
see in our sense of state at
healthcare for the homeless and
what we see across the country
is that homelessness is a home
grown issue and most people the
majority of people that
experience homelessness
experience that in the
communities that they grew up
and they simply just cannot
afford to keep living there and
so are increases and albert you
that we point into you there's
big increases that we saw and we
also saw those really big
increases in rent and so
addressing affordable housing
supply and making sure where it
were keeping up with supplier to
keep.
Rents from escalating that
quickly would allow us to
address those increases in
homeless asset at a better rate
thank you in madam chair the
seniors that that's a shocking
number tripling in the next five
years is what you said so are
those people are they basically
aging and plays have they been
here for the ten plus years and
what is that age that you're
using as an airmark is it like
the back end of the baby boomer
era
madam turn senator exactly and
so some of this is demographics
that we know demographically
it's a larger percentage of the
population because of the baby
bear in generation when we talk
about homelessness and aging the
national standard as to look at
a number of fifty which seems
very young but what we know
about homelessness is I know the
experience of home assessors
that are small mountains
it does feel very strange to say
fifty but when you think about
the health impacts of
homelessness at ages and
individual about ten to fifteen
years and so we really want to
start addressing the su at age
fifty and start talking about
the aging population as each
fifty and above specifically to
the homeless population because
of the health impacts and
homelessness and like I said
we've seen this population grow
in our senses it is largely what
we believe that people that are
unable to keep up with the
rising costs of living so maybe
your own your home but you can
afford your property taxes can
afford the utilities there are
fixed incomes are are not
keeping up they have certainly
not increased much and are not
increasing that the rate of
which worst the encourage
increase in our state
thank you for those answers
thank you manager
thank you senator a
representative shoppers
thank you matt thank you madame
chair and thank you for the
report on lots of great
information in here.
One of the pieces that I would
like for you to talk a little
bit about maybe expand on is the
whole issue of those who are
chronically mentally ill and
what do we need to do what are
we doing right now what are we
need to do in terms of creating
support of housing for them so
that they can live in a place
and also have access to the
services they that they need to
maintain themselves in a stable
place
thank you madame chair and
representative group question
the national data says the
homeless population is about
thirty percent of the population
experiences uh mental health
condition i'm similar to a
substance use disorder it's
about thirty percent we
certainly see that health care
for the homeless and in our
sense of stata what I will say
is that we've had great success
and housing people with
permanent support of housing and
so folks that do you have a
serious mental illness providing
support of services and the
housing subsidy we can keep
people housed independently of
course that's dependent on the
type of near they have but by
enlarge most people can do
really well in individual
housing with the support of
services provided so that could
be supportive services aren't
sight like some of the permit
support of housing developments
that we've seen and albequer
game then us providing services
or other providers providing
services on side and then with
permit support of housing
voucher that comes with support
of services and so folks like
albuquerque healthcare for the
homeless or other provider
partners we provide case
management services and someone
tom so will go into their home
once a week or once a month or
every day depending on what
their needs are and so it's
based on that individual service
plan what that individual needs
definitely not one size fits off
for our clients and so it's
tailored to their needs and what
they're their individual goals
are and that we can meet them
I think sometimes when we talk
about providing permanent
support of housing or housing
first it starts to sound like
housing only and that's not it
it's really.
Making sure that people have
access to all the wrap around
services that are available and
providing those services and a
lot of different method
modalities did best meet the
needs one example of some
innovative work that we've been
doing is providing are group
visit mart also for folks with a
substance use disorder typically
there's a lot of co occurrent
mental health and physical
health conditions as well but we
are really trying to meet the
increasing need for people with
opio use disorder and providing
medication assisted treatment or
some box on and we've had a
higher success rates on that
providing a group there's it
method so that people can come
in and get access to your
medication same day we can see
you know thirty people at a time
instead of just one visit at a
time throughout our clinics day
so really trying to be
innovative and meet the need the
increasing needs and our
community but we've seen great
success in our permanent support
of housing programs despite
making sure that we're providing
all of the wrap around services
and getting people connected to
the services that they need.
And just the follow up question
how how much of a gap is there
how big is the gap in terms of
what the need is on what we're
able to provide if you if you if
you know that
manager and representative
that's a great question I I
think when we talk about the
numbers of people experiencing
home sness and that we asked to
make at least seven thousand
people are experiencing
homelessness i'm on the very low
end of me we alone see five
thousand people I think a better
estimate is closer to the twenty
thousand people on albuquerque
experiencing homelessness we
have no where near the vouchers
and the housing as supports that
are available when it comes to
just section eight housing only
one and five people that are
eligible get a voucher so it's
not like medicaid where it's an
entitlement and if you are
income eligible you get medicaid
with our housing system f u are
income eligible you probably
aren't going to get it you're
going to be waiting a really
long time that's for section
eight and definitely true of a
support of housing and housing
vouchers today the need is far
out pissing our resources that
are available so I don't have an
actual number for you to meet
that but it it is quite a big
gap
thank you manager
thank you very much senator hope
thank you madame chair and thank
you for the presentation and
thanks for all you do I had the
opportunity with rep travers a
couple of few years back we
spent the night downtown on a
call january evening about
fifteen degrees and tense
talk to folks who were
struggling who were in house
dealing with addiction be able
to issues and so.
You really see the trauma that
folks are dealing with you
mentioned
how you can find housing for
folks and and i'm just wondering
how that happens in for whom
that maybe you cannot find the
housing because we're just
hearing a bit shortage so how
difficult is that matter
man insurance on and everything
you and and thank you for your
work in this area appreciate the
the context and the the
challenges
so when we talk about success
and founding housing with this
specific bar our housing voucher
population
where we see success and some
movement as where we have good
relationships with landlords and
landlords in the community that
really like working with us and
knowing that they're going to
get the funding every year every
month with a housing voucher and
that most of though the money is
is covered and a voucher so with
the permanent support of housing
voucher for example if you have
no income the voucher covers all
of your income if you have some
you'll end up paying thirty
percent of that income towards
the voucher but if you lose your
job the voucher comes in and
covers it so you're not
necessarily going to be
out the money as a landlord in
that case and so we have good
relationships but certainly it
used to be that we could have
someone within a week with a
voucher and now it takes sixty
days you know sometimes we have
around forty five to sixty
depending on on the month and so
that timeline has really
increased and people don't have
choice and I think that's a big
problem that we have when it
comes to supply what we're
seeing an albuquerque is
not dissimilar from what we see
across the country and other
places is that if you have a
housing voucher there's only
gonna be very few places that
you can use that voucher because
you can only use it somewhere
where the the rent is out of you
know median fair market rent
level below um and so while the
idea for a voucher is that we
would desagregate poverty
poverty indeed concentrate
poverty and that people would be
able to stay in like we said
people experience homelessness
where they grew up they want to
stay in that neighborhood and
they want to have their kids
stay in that neighborhood.
That's the ideal of a housing
badger but the reality right now
because of our lack of stock and
lack of units that are
affordable is that people do not
have choice and whether he
wanted to find housing in the
community and they can't stay in
the community group and
appreciate that and also um
talking about that because
there's this narrative everyone
just comes to new mexico you
know since i've been in the
legislature going around
different events red states blue
states it's it's a national
issue and so it's not like
everyone's just going to come to
new mexico we don't have all the
resources either so appreciate
you saying that also like to add
that you know at my district for
this northwest a lot of the
building a lot of the growth but
even have folks that are
struggling there because you
have folks that raised a family
now it's just as a couple when
they want to downsize but what
do they do where do they go and
sometimes there aren't those
opportunity needs to find a
house to downsides as well so
you know trying to help those
folks they're going to be aging
and had a week people in our
homes the question I have is is
something a little different
this might go to the mfa folks I
was going to ask you earlier we
got a little of schedule
what is your sense and mf folks
can answer maybe as well what is
your sense on the impact of
private equity and head funds
purchasing single family homes
rentals
you know
last few years i've heard folks
with making offers and not even
getting a chance to buy the home
I introduced a build about it
and moved more folks are coming
out with that you see any impact
to that
man then turn senator that's a
great question we were really
excited about your bill this
last session I don't have good
numbers or sense I can say ane
totally and why we were so
interested in the housing
application for you is
legislation that's past session
as that what we're seeing in the
market
the challenges that we have of
getting people into rental
housing are really centered
around a lot of the out of
state.
Landlords that are coming in and
some of the challenges that we
are trying to draw some of the
consumer protection issues that
we were
hoping to see and and we're
excited to see come through in
this past legislative session to
address those rental application
fees was really not about our
mom and pop landlords here new
mexico is really about the outer
state landlord starting these
fees but i'm i'm sure i'm afe
has or has a new mexico hasn't
gotten information
thank you madam charity and
think you send a republic you
know I I also don't have any
data on that but it would be
interesting to see you know one
thing that we you know we do see
honor on a home ownership side
where people are trying to
purchase their first home kind
of pivoting from rental to home
ownership is is that they are
you know we are seeing good
production in that area
and you know a lot of times at
the lower income levels of the
lower cost levels they should
say you could have somebody come
in with a cash offer something
i'm sure some of that does
happen but we have seen rubbins
in the decrease we've seen an
increase in people being able to
purchase their their first home
and we don't we don't deal with
the housing choice vouchers we
deal with the project based
vouchers which stay at the at
the development that they're
with so it's a little bit
different perspective I think
but we'll see what data we can
find and try to report back to
you
thank you madame chair thank you
experience no I just think we
really need to look at that and
i'm trying to get the numbers
in others discussions at the
federal level as well and even
if it is a small impact here I
just think we need to kind of
look at that and in I think the
for me the intention is not a
personal owners at home and over
time
you know it makes investments
and owns five ten homes I mean
that's not what this is about
this is about really denying
access to folks and and being
able to get a home and if it's
not an impact for right now I
don't want it to end up like
it's what's going on in phoenix
in a lot of other.
Communities right now
thank you manager.
Thank you very much so we do
have one more presentation
before we get to.
Okay blue hung very quickly but
really quick before you go and
we do have one more presentation
before we can do our procedural
things and get out of here so
well I just wanted to to kind of
touch on some of the the
questions or we're were the fund
rating for housing
is coming from regards to what
we did this session and you you
brought that up have you been in
conversation
with any of the agencies that
will be or dfa or those that are
going to be administering the
the funding for those this
specifics.
Madam chairman and
representative a dead have the
opportunity to meet with the
secretary of work for a
solutions as she's coming
undertake a rare the office of
housing and shared are you know
in sight into where we think the
priorities should be so
encouraged to have that
connection and and see where
that goes but other than that we
have had no i'm real
conversations outside of that
so managers you are planning on
getting
yes what is your plan because
we're coming upon the end of the
fiscal year starting to get
these funding
spent so plenty manager madam
chairman representative as
albuquerque i'll give her the
homeless we are not planning to
get any of those those funds I
think from the policy
perspective where we're
interested in seeing i'm where
those are priorities because
we're not in the affordable
housing developments world that
we provide the support of
service says certainly i'm
funding for a support of
services and it's important
seeing those increases in the
linkages permanent sport housing
voucher find something that we
addicated for and we will
certainly see some benefit from
that across the state and hope I
will be able to support my
people and housing vouchers with
that increased funding and I
think there's a lot of
opportunity with the the new
funding to target towards
vouchers things like um
increasing in the the capacity
for folks to access the the
rental market but then also
things that we are just not even
going to benefit from but we
will in the long term of more
housing across the spectrum so
to see investments made and
housing development while bring
down those rents and will help
our population and will help
that increase in rates that
we're seeing and the increases
and homelessness
alright thank you manager again
i'm there just these gaps thank
you.
Madam chair and if I could add a
comment
representative look on you we
also did provide
some potential
projects developments ideas for
for distributing some of that
funding
sort of across the housing
continue on because we're not
sure exactly what the priorities
are going to to be
but yeah we I think a lot of
people have come to the table to
express express their opinions
and interest in in prioritising
some of that funding thank you
very much i'd be as we are
interested in that that
prioritizations couldn't look
like thank you.
Alright thank you very much
representative so in the
interest of time we will move on
to the homewise presentation
will get through that I don't
want to rush them but as quickly
as possible thank you so much
rachel and
sorry miss big and also thank
you very much to
miss gill again and gonzalez for
sticking around and being
patient with us get through our
first meeting of the interim
it's always a little bit of a
lengthy process thank you for
sticking with us.
Thank you so much madame chair
and members of the committee my
name is selected and tell us
some the chief operating officer
of homewise have been here for
about eleven years but born in
race now the cricket been doing
similar work for thirty seven
years here so I wanted to just
tier kind of an overview before
I turned it over to my colleague
to honey kill again just to let
you know what homewise is all
about we basically help people
get ahead through home ownership
in our mission on the first
slide
describes how we create home
owners and strength the
neighborhoods so that
individuals and families can
improve their long term
financial well being and quality
of life
that would be on the in the next
slide and i'll go pretty quickly
through this arm so we are a
nonprofit community lender a
cdfi community development
financial institution which
really a next light gave us the
ability to create a very unique
business model so think of it as
a as a one stop shop if you will
where we we do a lot of
marketing and outreach
we put a line of time labor in
love in two or our buyer
assessment and home buyer
preparation because we really
want to create sustainable home
owners so we do a lot of
counseling in education which I
have of more details on next
slide but we also have real
estate sales to help those
families find the right home
once they are preapproved we not
allowed people know this but we
are real estate developers so we
also build housing in south a
and albert current
and we've been doing that for a
couple of decades in santa fe
we are we also offer more gets
lending which i'll talk about
more in the minute and we also
service all of our mortgage
loans which is really fantastic
that we're able to do that
because it's.
It's creating this client for
life and make insurance stick
with that client if they have
issues in the future they can
come back to home wise and we
can help them kind of figure
that out instead of getting to
link when or losing their home a
few years ago we started taking
deeper divine to community
development and neighborhood
revinalisation because that part
about string the new
neighborhoods is more than just
individual home ownership we
believe in really contributing
and listening to the residents
and and providing the services
that they need
and then we are for home
improvement in and refinance
lending so all of this kind of
ties together on how we're we're
able to fulfill our mission so a
little more details on the next
slide we've had decades of
trying to figure this out in we
we really believe when we
offered the really in depth
three coaching and education
that helps to pre prepare or new
home buyers and home owners and
are non commissioned realtors
are part of the team for the
family so they go out help on
phone at home in their price
range again and the last two is
really are are claimed to fame
my guess when we talk about down
payment assistance it's really
providing deeper subsidies
because is we look at every home
in the mexico and we look at
what what is the family qualify
for versus the sales price how
do we feel that gap and so not
only does how wise work
tirelessly unraising resources
we partner with cities and the
state and federal partners to
bring in more resources to fill
those gaps and then our
mortgages we typically do a
madame chair and committee
members mostly conventional
financing and we structure it
alone where there's no mortgage
insurance so it does save the
family a lot of money up front
and monthly would rather see him
by groceries or
close for their kids.
And the next slide we have a few
key results are fiscal year
ended march thirty first and
just to give you
a flavor of our impact in in
twelve months we were able to
provide the financial number
coaching term of three thousand
families three hundred and sixty
those families successfully but
their own home and we on our new
homewise homes we built in sold
fifty seven energy efficiency
homes we renovated eight homes
because we truly believe to
and also addressing neighborhood
kind of vacant and abandoned
homes so we have an acquisition
we have program and we ready
those homes for the families for
their long term home ownership
goal there we provided sixty
seven households with energy
efficiency energy efficient home
repairs and upgrades because we
truly believe that that is also
a key to long term success for
our home owners and we refinance
nineteen families so
on the next slide it's just
talks about the importance of
home ownership and we will go
over a few numbers I won't bore
you too much with a light of
data but as we know how
monitorship is really the main
way you know to build individual
in generation wealth across the
country especially here in new
mexico and in it's typically i'm
going to show you a couple of
slides
contrary to popular belief
homership is is long term and
sometime short term cheaper than
renting and as you heard the
previous presenter rents have
out past and gone up and
incredible rate and so moving
people along that spectrum in
the home ownership is really
really important so in the next
slide just very quickly when we
look.
At
wealth by income it's it's very
very apparent and this were
probably not different than most
parts of the country but the the
huge gap in wealth of being a
renter versus being a home owner
and so by it and it's all across
income spectrums you see this
this huge this huge orange bars
for home owners on on how they
build wealth through home
ownership and then you see a
long every income category not
so much for renters so we were
trying to move families in to
home ownership to start building
that wealth that we know is so
important the next slide is
actually just a snapshite of
a similar slide but by race and
so are wealth gap between white
black and hispanic renters
versus home owners very similar
but you see a large gap among
their white population home
owners uh versus renters over
four hundred thousand dollars
and wealth are black families
still up there almost two
hundred and twenty three
thousand dollars gap between
renters and owners and our
hispanic families
over two hundred and seventy
thousand in that gap so it
remains chew by income by race
is really looking at
the the huge disparity between
wealth
among home owners versus
renters.
On the next slide out we have uh
just to a really cool fact here
we were looking at our own data
for the last five years on the
home that home wise helped to
create between twenty eighteen
and twenty twenty four and i'll
be at it there was some years of
covered where you saw some
appreciation in the value of
homes but if you look at this we
we helped contribute and helped
these families build equity of
over sixty five million dollars
and that was an average of a
hundred and seventy one thousand
dollars in the equity per family
and which is which is incredible
and we serve many families of
color seventy one percent of
that equity are almost forty
seven thousand were for built
for families of color so we
think it's very important we
have seen this trend that might
be a little bit more than
another five year average
because during that time frame
we saw the appreciation in
values
so the next slide very quickly
is really the share of income
spent on housing
for families and this you may
have seen many many times but
how much do people pay on their
gross monthly income for rent or
for home ownership and in in
every steady that we have done
and and my clothes in our ceo
has written white papers with
there been instead
it's very consistent that you
see home owners paying less of
the grossmanly income when they
own home versus renting and
across income streams we see
it's like ten percentage points
lower that home of their
groceries landcome that they are
pain for housing which is there
mortgage payment versus a rent
payment and that could be three
or four hundred dollars a month
and again that's really huge
especially for new mexicans and
we're not the highest.
You know of income of states so
it's really important to look at
these numbers
madam chair are next slide is
really showing again how renters
are more costburden than home
owners across low and very low
households and not I just want
to point out one one that's very
it's it stands out when you look
at very low income families
under twenty five thousand a
year sixty four percent of those
families pay more than fifty
percent of their income for rent
and so when you see these
families become home owners and
again contradict popular belief
we serve very low and low income
home owners or or people to
become home and owners and we
will explain how that works with
our with our lending model but
it it it decreases if they are
home owners there's only forty
six percent which is still high
pay more than fifty percent of
their income on housing so with
within these income populations
even the higher income you will
see
they pay less when they're home
owners so you know we drive home
the point that home ownership is
a very viable means of
affordable housing.
The next slide shows our
affordability big bang if if you
will it's a very easy visual to
show over thirty years let's say
how rant just continually goes
up and out paces the monthly
mortgage payment of a home owner
and so as you see that the black
line here even with the mortgage
payment and maintenance and
improvements you're pretty
steady you see the increase
slightly of taxes in insurance
but a lot of people in the exit
keep their homes for a long
period of time and you see that
dramatic drop off after the past
the first mortgage after the
thirty years then they're just
paying taxes and insurance so
it's a huge effect for these
families who maintain maintain
home ownership of it a long run.
So on the next slide we just at
home wise we truly believe
everybody we truly believe in
the importance of the whole
housing spectrum it's really
important to pay attention to
all of it as we've heard today
supportive housing subsidies
rental hugely important for
people moving along the spectrum
hopefully out of a homelessness
and then home wise works can
have been the middle assisted
home ownership
market rental is important and
then market rate home ownership
and will describe in a little
bit how we how we do that as a
developer and how we make home
affordable but just trying to
keep the continue of housing i'm
equally balanced in our state
and we we've heard the huge need
for units units units but we
need to also realize the
importance of home ownership
units as well as rental saying
an it turned it over to my
colleague to talk about some of
the barriers and some of the
opportunities for policy
improvements in our state to
address these issues thank you
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee i'm
johanne kill again our w DC yo
at home wise I do manage our
real estate development team so
a lot of what we've talked about
today is very
close to my experience in terms
of how long it is taking us to
build homes so
quickly want to run through a
few data points on what we see
some of the key issues that are
um creating barriers to home
ownership and housing and
general lot of this is similar
similarly data points that have
come across in previous
discussions today so you can
have answer the next slide so
nationally and new mexico is no
exception we have had huge drop
off in the amount of housing
production that has that has
happened from prior to the
recession to post recession
we there's a slide coming up
that's got what it shows use
that we were we were delivering.
Roughly three times the amount
of permits leading up to the
great recession in relatives to
thereafter so while covered has
really exaserbated the house
increases this has been a crazy
spring for a while because we
really have not been keeping up
with the demands of housing
production for over a decade at
this point
you can ever answer the next
slide in addition to not
building enough housing were
also really started we've been
seeing a trend for many years
now towards larger housing units
so these are three or four
bedroom homes the the market is
not delivering starter homes
which is therefore putting
greater pressure on the rental
market so if you don't have the
ability to buy a smaller and
more affordable home than your
likely going to remain a renter
rate so this is affecting that
housing continual and is making
housing more expensive as you
can see on this slide in in
twenty twenty three there was
virtually no two bedroom home
spelled the vast majority were
three and four bedroom home
switch therefore it just
increases the price of of
housing
by size you can advance the next
slide
this is all a cookie specific
data and what you see here is
that homes under fourteen
hundred square feet as a share
of the overall market has just
continued to dep and you know
their regulatory barriers that
are causing this is it's a lot
easier to build a single family
home than say a duplice try plex
or four plex there are also
financial incentives for this if
you're going to build a single
family home as a as a foreprofit
home developer it's just more
profitable to build a bigger
home cause you can sell it for
more
so you can have answers the next
site please.
So we are really working hard in
our realistic development
department which as as my
colleague alini said we built
installed fifty seven homes last
year are goal is near is more
than that this year to deliver
the kind of housing that we
think is missing in the housing
market which is affordable and
smaller starter homes so this is
a little bit about a project
here in other correctly summer
door osday on the on the west
side and indeed the gibson it's
going to be seventies you town
homes twenty nine of which are
going going to be deeply
affordable and twenty two of
which are going to be under
eighty percent am I the rest of
the homes are going to be well
below market rate this is a mix
of two and three bedroom homes
that are that are modest and
size thousands of two hundred
square for twelve hundred
graffit and
relevant to representative
coverage comments this is a are
first all electric developments
in other cookies so all these
are going to be not zero ready
and we will also offer a lending
product that will help those
homeowners to get solid very
excited about that
and it's and this is possible
this high level of subsidy of of
affordability is possible
because we raised a lot of
subsidy from this project
including a five hundred
thousand dollar grant from
housing new mexico which has
been great you can advance in
the next side just to put a
little specificity on this we
wanted to kind of do some open
book accounting with you all
it it we're our two bedroom
homes which are a thousand
script fee will cost us two
hundred and sixty five thousand
dollars to build we will sell
those the market rate homes will
be sold at two hundred and
eighty five thousand dollars
that is a profit of twenty
thousand dollars which is a
clear indication why you're not
getting more of this housing
type from the market that is a
very very marginal profit for
the risk that you take when
you're developing homes however
when we sell those to an income
qualified by your under eighty
percent am I the effective price
to the barrel is actually two
hundred thousand dollars which
means there's a net loss of
sixty five thousand dollars on
that home between what it cause
us to build and what we sell it
to the client.
So this just gives you some
granular signs of the challenges
that developers are up against
in this housing market similar
trans on the three bedroom you
know it's two hundred and ninety
five thousand dollars to build
three hundred and ten thousand
only the market rate place but
only two hundred and twenty five
thousand is an effective price
so there's just real gaps here
that we need to view addressing
and and we're doing that through
the subsidy that we're raising
for the project next day please
we have a similar project in
santa fe middle flood fifty six
homes twenty two of which are
deeply affordable meeting the
santa fe homes program standard
these are one to four bedroom
homes there's a really beautiful
open space element to this
project you can have answer the
next slide
this is the financial detail on
these projects so similar size
homes are cost to build as
higher in santa fe and part
because land values are more
expensive and so we haven't even
bigger gap to fill between the
costs to build and the
affordable sales price because
eighty percent area meeting
income in santa fe as not much
more than it is an albuquerque
so this is a roughly two hundred
thousand dollars gap for our are
affordable homes in the santa fe
market you can go had an advance
to the next let
so we hope that that gives just
a little bit of a sense of what
it's like on the ground what we
think the market conditions are
and why it is the case that this
these starter homes are not
getting delivered so we have a
few policy ideas that with a we
are working towards we think are
relevant to all the committee
members and are really
complementary to the work that
is happening already alongside
housing new mexico
you can advance the next slide
so as we've discussed in detail
today as many of the committee
members have raised this the
issue of time to get to
entitlements and permitting it
particularly in santa fe also in
all curriculum our experiences
just far too great one example
we have a project that is going
to be going before planning
commission in santa fe.
On june fifth this project will
deliver fifty percent of the
units meeting the affordable
homes program it has taken us
four years to get through
resounding and entitlements and
we haven't even started on the
permanent process yet so that's
just an outrageous kind of time
table for a fifty percent
affordable housing project so we
really think that the ideas are
offer
we as to incentivize local
governments to streamline these
processes and just a creek
flexibility you know the ability
to choose to build a duplex or a
triplex in a single family
zoning for example doesn't mean
that everyone well it doesn't
mandate that it just means that
it gives the option it makes it
simpler right now in many
minutes politics the easiest
thing to do is build an
expensive single family home the
second easiest thing to do is
build an apartment complex what
we really need is a much greater
diversity of housing types and
so we really think that there
are opportunities that the state
level to think about how to
incentivise that happen at the
local level and that's what a
lot of states are doing
there's the also the opportunity
to require local governments to
priorities affordable housing in
landuce decisions which gives
developer standing in a way that
doesn't currently exist which
makes the opportunity to sue
which is not in any deal
scenario but sometimes the tool
that's necessary more viable
next slide please we also think
that in addition to work that
has new mexico is doing like the
housing innovation fund there's
the opportunity to think about
ways to
further capitalise cdfires in on
profits and to help them
innovate by providing funding um
in the form of something like a
homeownership priority fund
which we think could really help
to deliver deep subsidiary to
low and moderate and come buyers
to purchase a home could also
foster it in a betin at the
level of cdfis and nonprofits
the.
Done payment assistance that has
been in mexico offers is a
really helpful tool and it is an
amerities to all so it does out
of payment to clients and it is
anywhere from zero percent to
market rate interest at home
wise we are doing a zero percent
down payment
program and we think that this
is also very necessary without
real subsidy not just loans but
subsidy to these projects you
cannot reach the levels of low
lower income folks that are
needing to become homeowners so
that is something we really want
to strongly advocate for
next low please and third is how
are we incentivised more small
home production
this idea here the new homes for
new mexico program what is is a
concept that would incentivise
home builders to build starter
homes from honest income new
mexicans throughout the state
under this program buyers of new
homes built by participating for
profit and nonprofit home
builders would be able to access
home by our assistance so it
could be a tax credit that then
converts you down payment
assistance for the home buyer
and it would also help home
builders because it would allow
them to benefit from a pull of
home of ready buyers with home
air assistance that could enable
them to purchase homes they
could not otherwise afford so
this a version of this was in
the governor's fy twenty six
proposed budget it called for
fifty million dollars for down
payment assistance for a
thousand new affordable homes
for first time home buyers
but it was not included in the
final budget and we think that
this could be an excellent tool
in the future two to address
both sides of the tool if you're
only subsidizing buyers you're
your accelerating a hot housing
market but if you're only
incentivising home builders
without thinking about how to
connect low and moderate income
home buyers you're leaving those
folks behind so this is a tool
that would blend those to
that conclude their road
presentation I am very impressed
with your ability to focus for
such a long time I haven't
thought any presentations.
We're happy to stand for
questions thank you
thank you very much and thank
you again for sticking around
with us today and we have a
quick question from best your
true health yeah thank you
madame chair and I don't really
have a question I just want to
point out you guys are right I
mean you addressed some of the
things that I was hoping that we
would hear today number one is
that zoning is a problem and
there's not a state solution for
that when you talk about taking
four years to get there the
biggest issue was zoning it
wasn't the permitting it wasn't
the inspections and it's not the
the
you know
those things that happen from
regulation and licensing
department or from the local
government whoever does it it's
the zoning and we've got to find
a solution for the zoning and
the other thing that i've been
hearing is that.
The biggest cast and we gave
about two million dollars to
home wise from the santa fe
delegation this this year for
capital outlay and it was a huge
investment for all of us
but brightly so you know i'm not
complaining we were happy to try
to make sure that there was
affordable housing but the
infrastructure is expensive the
roads the electricity the sewer
you didn't really touch on that
in your your idea of what the
cost were but i'm assuming that
built into those costs you had
that kind of infrastructure in
there and so you know someone
brought up at a meeting that we
were at any last week maybe even
at the or the week before that
we've got this leader program
local economic development
program that provides subset the
provides many like reimburseable
money but money now in the last
for businesses two build
infrastructure whether it's
there building their roads
leader does that rate we grant
that over to local businesses
because we want people to have a
higher any jobs
maybe we should start thinking
about a leader like program in
under under the affordable
housing project where we don't
have to do
our capital outlay rate to help
make sure that organizations
like home wise have access to
the money to build that gap for
the infrastructure maybe just
i'm just thrown it out there
this would be the group to kind
of talk through that and how
what that would look like but it
seems like we should as the
legislature be able to come up
with some sort of leader like
bill that provides builders they
are going to provide affordable
housing to
to help do that infrastructure
that's a l.
Thank you very much my sheer to
heal a representative
of regardless yet I too added I
think that was actually
representative that brought that
up
really how you how we can
streamline things differently
and and and just to add to it
right here saying mom chair is
so that so you brought up the
bill the fifty million dollars
that the governor wanted to go
directly to another program
which again then if that fifty
million dollars would have gone
to it am a fair rate
they already have the
construction they already work
with home rise is that correct.
Yes we have received subsidy
from a hope that is cracked
thank you so again we are
killing
you know pilling these layers
incorporate you know that I
don't think
streamlining and and we're not
there for being a efficient and
we need to be more efficient and
these are great ideas that's a
great idea but then that money
goes directly to a program that
you would oversee the homewise
would oversee rather than you
going through the channels of
what is already in place in and
did our artist streamlined as
much as they can't be able to
all the other things that are in
place I think we really need to
attack what is going here by
what the bicycle said the zone
mean and all these these other
effects of water influence the
the
the expensiveness of of doing
these things and to get a
subsidy then we would as the
legislature then have that
subsidy or put the language
towards mfa for that particular
purpose and then maybe have
language that were there address
your partnership with the leader
program
I think that those are
again i'm gonna just bring us
back to let's streamline and if
you know why we were we doing
that and looking at that and in
that structure thank you
very much representatives may
respond vampshire face surgery
here and representatively home
thank you so much for your
comments and also to the santa
fe delegation thank you so much
for the capital commitment it's
been huge for us we are focused
very closely on how to deploy
those funds as quickly as
possible and it's a critical
subsidy tool for chair contender
which is going to deliver
fifteen hundred units forty
percent of which will be
affordable to your point I
absolutely agree that
the the need for efficiency and
clarity and how these funds from
the state level get deployed is
a great one.
I think the the case on our side
is just that it is critical that
the the funds can be used as
subsidy and those can be
deferred subsidy but that there
is not necessarily a loan
structure a loan structure I
think is limited in terms of a
particular advertised loan
structure is limited in terms of
how much we can achieve to reach
the folks on the lowest income
spectrum
thank you
so thank you I would I would say
that it's a simple function of
language and how we deplore
deploy that language as a
legislature into policy to give
the allowance for those things
to happen and I understand when
we're looking at our are and if
it and i'm afan the and reader
though sort of things we have to
we have to
use it has to be specific and
that's what you're getting at I
agree with you there and that's
the cracks right so how do we
all come together rather than
having everybody in different
entities go to the governor and
then come to us and then go and
then I know that that's my
frustration and i'll give the
example of.
We aren't we managed and that
great credit to the governor's
office she put it she she really
helped
help us create a a balanced
approach
how we could put the budget
together for all of our
different food initiatives and I
think this is the same same
thing that we're all trying to
do again this is no fault of
anybody I just think we need to
be more efficient.
Representative as center than
this
thank you manager just want to
add to the place cheers part
year so one of the things that
are we also have to look at and
what is creating the problem so
and i'll give you an example yes
i've been a landlord for fifty
years
and I have worked with section
for many many years you know and
but now
if I was starting today
you know and i'll just give you
an example like this past few
months i'm one of the section
eight
rentals that I have
my insurance went from fifty two
hundred to ninety two hundred
you know and then on property
tax
even though the your control has
gone to hurry should be less
it's never less you know the the
other part years so i'm the
regular insurance
a lot of insurance companies are
not insuring
you know even though you have
not had any claims or anything
so those are things are going to
be driving the cost now on your
section aid you know if you put
individuals where out of where
they're far from the grocery
store far from the everything
that's going to be a cost for
them to know to how so I think
looking at the picture really
really close like they say if I
was starting today I couldn't do
it you know i'm i'm able to do
it because I have everything
paid and just with the upcome
and just with going back with
increases like that on my car
hits the it's just very very
hard and then again you're
creating that game you know to
everything else to make in it
even though someone wants to
work with it they can afford it.
Slandlords
thank you very much
thank you very much senator did
you want to respond to madam
chairs senator is eight it's an
incredibly important point I
think that home insurance is
going to be brilliant
existential threat to property
ownership if we don't start
thinking about ways to provide
government alternatives so I
just absolutely agree with you
and something we're giving I and
I mean we are lucky in mexico
that are property taxes and
insurance or it's tend to be
lower than a lot of other places
but we are definitely concerned
about this insurer your
perspective thank you.
I think that includes thank you
so much for that presentation
thank you for sticking with us
and
we will hear again from issue
and robin and.
And will go for the agenda and
then I have an announcement
about the work plan before we
are doing.
Think you manage her so on
tab number excuse me behind to
have number sixth of the small
binder would just draft it out a
there's four more meetings after
this one I also want to think
the committee members who have
stayed here appreciate your time
today we got a lot of seed bad
great feedback arm and it's
great to hear the enthusiasm as
well as the concerns and we hope
to provide information along the
way to address these issues from
both policy perspective and a
funding perspective would also
like to highlight some of the
accomplishments of this
community and these stake
holders developers service
providers unlike we've done here
today and give people a chance
to come in in sort of advocate
not just us but our partners to
you guys about how
how we can help during the next
legislative session in future
sessions to support this work so
I will go into the details of
this but we do have in our work
plan we have some saturally
required things that are mostly
listed on here and will build
out these agendas to answer the
questions that we get that we
got here today I think I have
about fifty that i'm gonna have
to go research and sell more to
follow I don't think you'll have
any meetings where we will have
extra time though so thank you
for that.
Thank you and so the quick
announcement I wanted to make
regarding the workplan we won't
have christine to go written
detail because you have it in
front of you I just wanted to
say if there is anything any
topic that's particularly near
and dear that you want added to
the work plan since the voice
vote they were taking today is
not a formal adoption the
workplan is not formally adopted
until elsie has adopted twenty
third of june is that correct
christina okay so if there was
anything that anybody wanted
added to the work plan please
message myself either directly
or christina and she and I will
meet ahead of the lcs meeting
and will see what we can make
room to add on so
with that in mind then
is there
is this
that has allowed.
Okay
so with that is there a motion
to unformally adopt the work
plan from the committee alright
in a second.
Sorry
and a second from senator
gonzalez alright
tended to work plan adopted
and I don't think there's
anybody left who has not seen
the building and wants to go on
a tour with my tack it on later
in the agenda so but thank you
for powering through we were
only
forty one minutes over board so
not bad thank you very much we
are during everybody.
