The.
Thank you mister chairman.
Thank you for having me.
I think that the big project
that we've had is our new campus
at which we completed over the
last two years the transitional
housing component of our
organization which will be able
to house up to forty two
veterans or forty six veterans
and their families coming off
the street and that was
completed are we did just a
sneak peak and were very excited
that we are we are going ahead
and moving in veterans into the
new facility on september twenty
third so we're extremely excited
we think this is going to be a
game changer for a community
especially one though
you know we figure about one in
every ten almost people are
veterans so this will address a
big need we will actually be
moving from our existing
location which is interest mixed
with the general population our
veterans have to share rooms
coming into this new facility
they'll have single rooms will
have a dog part for those with
service animals while we're
working a trail it'll just be
their battle buddies and and
their family members there we
have more children and it's just
going to be a a really big
change and we're really excited
about that of course we can
invite any of you that would
like to come for a tour what
we're always given tours so we'd
be glad to do that uhm but other
other than that I mean I think
we're our biggest struggle right
now is with the it's called
great predium the transitional
housing is paid on a per day
rate through the v a and we were
paid during the pandemic really
wasn't a cap on it it was really
just reimbursing us our costs we
were spent about a hundred and
twenty dollars per day per
veteran on those services when
the pandemic came to an end in
may of last year
and it's been about eighteen
months with this lower rate it
reverted back to the prepaid
democrat at sixty four dollars a
day it's been raised up to sixty
eight dollars a day.
But I know it's been in congress
it's been a bantered about uh at
the federal level to raise that
rate but we're struggling to we
got a lot of money for the
bricks and mortars but we really
want to take this facility and
maximise what we can do for
these veterans we've had to
scale back staff a lot of peer
support which is veterans
helping better ins so we're
hoping that the federal
government will finally address
that and raise the rate coming
up soon i've heard some positive
reports from secretary of rare
who is in DC and it's serious of
good good things that hopefully
that will change so we can
really maximise this result in
the past and what i've testified
the last two years in the past
the new mexico legislature would
give money to the vic um in in
about two hundred thousand a
year and that was cut in twenty
eighteen but really that we
would always ask for some
some operational support the
bricks and mortar thanks to the
legislature and thanks to the
county the city the federal
government we've been able to
raise over fourteen million to
to build this facility but
really we want maximised the
impo- impact of this we've
invited other providers d s uh
the other
non profits other counseling
centers to come to our site we
don't want it to be the veterans
integration center site we want
this to be the community site
where we can meet the batteries
where they're at instead of
making them go jump through a
bunch of hoops elsewhere and so
we really are trying to
capitalise on that so it's a
really exciting time I I
couldn't be more thankful our
biggest frustration I guess over
the last few months as we've had
this building complete but we've
been waiting for the furniture
to arrive so to speak in twenty
twenty three the legislature
appropriate one point four
million dollars for furniture's
pictures and equipment thank you
very much but getting that
through the process with the f
a.
Through the county as bend very
much a struggle as I know you're
all aware of the capital outlay
money that's very difficult to
get to the site but we've just
decided we're gonna move in
because it's time to move in
we're gonna take what furniture
we have and make it work and
tell
the good stuff around that sort
of speak so but that's better
our biggest frustration is more
that the bureaucracy of that but
they're snightening based
volteer not complaining at the
thing but that's really been our
ultimate
place but i'm just so thankful
that we're gonna be moving in on
the twenty third and then our
second phase of construction
will begin in september which
will bring all the agency under
one rough uh support of services
for veterans in their family's
program currently on central
avenue and albuquerque will be
moving into the campus now
without one stop shop that we're
really trying to achieve.
I can go
if you have more reported.
On the offers.
Registering and good because I
might take our questions thank
you take a while
real quick so as far as funding
and getting it out of getting it
spent we we get we get updates
on what's been spent on what
hasn't and it's a big deal it's
like in the billions now so we
need to figure out how to get
what we need is it just
supply or that the furniture is
that mostly what's holding you
up or yeah this chair in the
representative I it's it's
really the first we're talking
further than equipment while
qualifies as that so we're
talking industrial freezers
desks tables all that for
you we're we're gonna wing it
until then we currently have
deaths were bringing that stuff
over but really that board table
in the board chairs and office
furniture where we're pretty
confident that we have because
currently they live with us we
have beds that we can bring over
why we're waiting for the beds
were hoping to get the best by
them but it's almost you know
it's actually that burning of
county owns the furniture under
the plan because of the anti
donation class so for ten years
they'll on it so we actually
went and got a bridge loan in
january to purchase it and found
out after we got a bridge loan
for over a million dollars that
that that wouldn't help us
either because the county has to
buy it and have the purchase
orders so we had to say thanks
but no thanks the longest that
so it's just a lot of hoops but
because the county is actually
owning it they have a
procurement department and has
to go through dfa which is
really and I know their backlog
quite a bit so we sit and wait
for furniture
to chairman the let us know I
i'd like to help you
so that we can push where we
need to push because in left see
where you look at that the
numbers and when things aren't
spent then it gets kind of
sticky so.
Oh yeah that you know okay.
I've been here and hoped thank
you mister chair and thank you.
Uh we had a great conversation
just before the meeting as well
as forest funding for what the
vic is doing um could you
explain a little bit on what
would be really kind of capable
infrastructure needs that you'd
be looking at where there be
federal.
You begin grab you know what
you'd be getting on a federal
lender asking from us and then
what type of operational needs
you know what type of funding
would you need there moving for
mr chairs and report a yeah I I
think right now we are applying
for several grants we have
applied through the v a
for the sergeant parker's
suicide prevention grant which
is a pretty large graph which
would help really boost the
suicide prevention as you know
it's about one point five times
the suicide for veterans over
the general population so it's a
big concern
but really that the capital has
been raised and we are building
that everybody donors and and
legislators then and each
government empty bricks and
mortars been really great but
when you're running a twenty
four seven program the more
supports that we can put in
place the better and so
as I said under this program
we've lost over two hundred
thousand over since that rate
cut has gone down and what
that's forced us to do scale
back things like pierce support
and case management work we're
really kind of on a shoe string
for that so any operational
support from the state while
would be helpful and it would
just again it's not there's no
profit involved with the
nonprofit this is all going to
direct service and that the the
idea is the more weakened
bolster the services and support
the better the outcomes will be
and these veterans will get
better faster than move into
their own independent living
arrangement and they'll stay
there and they won't return to
homelessness by the more
supports that we can put in
place whether that substance
abuse mental health life skills
were
were also younger in younger
veterans are coming into our
program that traditional veteran
that people have in their mind
isn't as as prevalent um we have
your fifteen percent right now
or women that are coming into
our program women with small
children families that are
coming in.
So we really need to adapt our
programming quite a bit address
family needs more than the
individual veteran needs and so
that's caused that's gonna have
to be a little bit more nimble
on our feet so the more support
we can get the better job we can
do at meeting those needs yet
you know mister share broke you
know you just bringing up you
know an important issue we are
seeing a lot of the oil folks
rate the oe folks that are now
becoming that larger number of
veterans that are seeking help
they are coming back.
If you had.
Yeah i'm just just gonna ask it
what would be kind of a wish
list like I mean I know you want
that two hundred k back of which
you've.
Had a kind of cut back because
you don't have that anymore once
again.
Says twenty one I know we've
been talking about that in that
curtain I don't want to put the
secretary on this either and
have him speak for what that was
not what i'm trying to do but I
I think at a minimum that needs
to come back but I think the
only on us is a legislature to
make sure we kind of fight and
push for that on our end as
well.
But I guess what would be the
wish list or what what would you
be if you were given like what
do you really need to do what
you want to do what would be
that amount of money and i'm not
saying that we're able to do it
but i.
You know I just think it's
important.
The job that you do we're
talking about when in ten
ventures we're talking about in
our state.
Folks that are on house and
that's that's still a huge
number and it's our veterans and
we're not just talking about
kirky burner leo county you
serve.
People from all over a state and
so if you get a think about that
and talk to that a little bit on
what you'd be up you know if you
do a number out.
If you had a million dollars
what what would you be able to
do and and then the second
question would be.
Um are there any thoughts of any
other additional sites.
Of how you which are doing right
now the vic it has been any
plans for other locations and
other parts of the state mr
chairs and the pope
you know it I I think when you
have nearly a hundred and fifty
thousand veterans in the state
in new mexico that investing I
think my ultimate wash is that
they're needs would be risen
higher and investment over on
that just in the veterans
integration center but overall
and part of that is that
coordinated care model and I
know the sector rare and you've
been working on that but really
we need the veterans need a
place they can call we can track
how it's it's doing it too often
a veteran in need gets pushed
off to another place to another
place and then gets lost in the
cracks so a coordinated care
model will be really tracked
what was out there and what what
is needed would be the ultimate
the other thing I would really
think would help us is
transportation money as well as
we are in a spread out as we are
is very difficult is be very
difficult to recreate the vic
and and another part of the
state just because the the
demand in the staffing and the
intensity and having a va cost
by but if we could transport
have the ability to transport
them easier I think that would
go a long ways towards meeting
those needs and we also offer
emergency housing and some other
options and getting creative
about that and having more
flexibility to meet those needs
and would be great as far as our
agency goes if we were to get
two hundred thousand we will get
a million all that money could
be invested in more treatment
options a more creative options
we always say well here's the
therapist here's your
psychiatrist at the eight good
luck but there are alternative
forms of therapy that have
evidence behind them that work
we've looked at art therapy
plate there be eight quite there
but not that i'm bringing horses
out to the campus but those type
of innovative type treatments
would be.
To me
you're just the opportunity the
other thing is having supports
peer to peer supports someone
has gone through our program
been successful to be able to
hire somebody like that to come
on site to help guide our
veterans through the process
would be incredibly helpful and
and just really
outrage we we need to get out on
the streets every day and and
the more money that we could
have to help us get out on the
streets to find the veterans
where they're at those point in
time counts are great but you're
not getting everybody there
there many different places that
need to go so overall investment
in outreach would be fantastic.
Great thank you broadband
mister chair I I just want to
thank you again for the work
that you're doing and you
brought up another point of kind
of that period appear or folks
who have went through the
program
could you explain a little bit
about that have you been able to
actually hire folks who went
through the program and how
successful has I been in house
successful has a program and I
just just want to build a you
know sure that with folks.
This fears that are
it's been probably our most
successful we can hire a
counselor we can hire
psychiatrists we can hire all
sorts of are people on staff but
appear to peer somebody's been
through the program that
somebody can be there not a
staff person I think that's a
lot of times there may be a
distrust of staff when you have
somebody in that neutral role
it's very effective to came into
a communicator asked on how we
can do better with our clients
but helping them understand the
program in those expectations so
though it's been very successful
we have one period per support
worker now i'd like to hire two
three four more especially if
our campus is going to get up to
forty six veterans
having a a female veteran to be
able to work with other female
vector and to be able to really
match better it's just
tremendously that battle buddy
is is more effective than
anybody I think
yeah mr chair and brock I agree
and someone who's been through
that one they can also hold them
accountable right been there and
been through it so
I just want to thank you for
what you do and what your team
does and we got some work to do
on our end as well because I
just think this is your ear one
of the areas and one of the
tools I could we can use to help
folks.
Um you know get off the streets
and actually help them deal with
whatever issues they are dealing
with that that got them in there
and also help with that long
term rate so that they don't end
up back in that situation thank
you mister chair
thank you very much for
committee.
Martinez
thank you miss chair I just have
a quick question
mr what what how much staffed
you have.
Right now.
Then are they professionals are
visit mostly peered appear
mister chair representative
martinez
we have about thirty five staff
right now most are professional
staff we have case managers and
a monitors that are there twenty
four seven lead monitor that's
there so we have to to be that's
mostly professional staff we
have a few we have several
volunteers that are food pantry
but we have a just one right now
peer support worker and we
really love to be able to expand
that.
Thank you miss share that's all.
I thank you most
you know I don't have a question
you know I had a honor to be
there for kind of a grand
opening here of month
in nor you folks need to go out
there and look at this facility.
It is really nice you know
they're hard to the right please
and you know there is a lot of
veterans go.
The.
Much more fair want to insure on
the outreach how do you get to
run in mexico.
You know there the latter my
district is really rural and
i'll reach just about non
existent you know in the city of
albuquerque one thing on the
screen sanity but when you get
out to the other parts of the
other state even northern new
mexico like up in more in and
these companies you're the all
reaches very very rare were
very.
It's not there but how do you
propose a not addressing those
issues
mr chair what what we I think
that's where our partnership in
that coordinated care model
really comes in to play I I
think the bso's through the
department of veteran services
are key hub and that's where we
can really be a resource when
they do so show up in those
offices to be the place they
refer to but I really think
that's where that coordinated
care network were whose wear and
where can we get a hold of them
in one network I think that
wherever they enter that point
of entry and it may be in gallop
it may be another place but that
they are connected to the right
place it is really important and
I don't think there's enough
coordination of that care right
now we just really need to to
work harder to to link people
that can help quickly and held
accountable I think there's a
lot of agencies that
they could do more
and with that coordination and
accountability that goes with
that I think I go long ways.
Do you thank you for doing i'm
glad you're reaching out to the
veteran services yes could you
know the vs
there are there strongly too
because we don't have enough of
them but if you guys can work
together on it it'll it'll be a
big plus for all of our veterans
you know one more thing.
It's too bad the gap lovely you
cannot use it for operations.
You know it doesn't matter how
much we give you you cannot use
for operations and
representative of the mentioned
earlier of all
getting funny to
get a lot of which can do no it
it's done not happen and that's
very unfortunate you know.
But anyway you know I appreciate
what you're doing for a veterans
you know night but I have been
there since you first started
toward the buildings up and it's
some melts you know it's very
nice you know then the the issue
will have or you're going to
have is just what they're having
and uh here see on that hospital
staffing.
You know you know because we got
sixty million dollars for that
hospital yes.
And it's open.
The lack of staff
that's the big issues and only
just concerned that we need to
address the body to make it
better
but anyway thank you for your
presentation and the people have
any more questions.
Thank you thank you.
The.
Very good i'm poor casaday i'm
currently vice chair of the
military base planning
commission
the chair of the commission is
lieutenant governor and the let
lieutenant governor is traveling
so I am here in his dead we have
a a number of folks here with us
today um i'll introduce them and
just.
What
I guess you're going to get our
presentations.
Yeah.
So there if I could mister chair
and mister flate would we we do
we are going to get to all the
items on your agenda just maybe
a little bit different what you
like to do it I brief overview
here and then will turn it over
to some of our
military folks to make
presentations with regard to
canada for space and curtail and
air force base as well
first of all the mission of the
military base planning
commission is to keep the
governor and farm regarding
issues impacting military bases
in our state to support the
commission to services layers on
with community organizations uh
the military these planning
commission also works very
closely with the staff of our
congressional delegation
new mexico three leadership the
governor the most military
belief based planning commission
and the military base planning
and support office and that's
mister rich glover you've seen
him before he's not able to be
here today
has had much success and
supporting the state's military
installations as I mentioned uh
lieutenant government are how he
moralises the commission chair
we have
three commissioners representing
curtail and air force based on
albuquerque uh mister chairman
mccarticle who just passed out
information so the founding
member of curtain partnership
committee and a member of this
commission some at the same gulf
of cio artists call for the city
of albuquerque and myself can an
air force base is represented by
mister james burns and raymond
montreal gone who you just saw
he's here with us today hollaman
air force base and eliminator
was represented by as brapson
and national sikes and why stand
missile range and last crucials
is retired general eric
saturdays and every more from
the chamber down south and we
have one at large member.
Uh jennifer weller
the basis are assets here in the
mexico in fiscal year two
thousand twenty two the state
and mexico received over four
point six billion dollars in
defense spending as a result of
our bases which provides direct
funding for the uh for the
department of defense personnel
salaries defense contracts
construction of military
facilities throughout our state
there are many contracts cracked
contractors dot personnel their
families that live and work here
as part of our community we are
really blessed with their
presence
in the all this activity
generates really important state
and local income state and local
tax revenue store communities
military installations in the
mexico contribute more than
fifty two thousand jabs to the
state two point eight billion
and annual labor income and
fourteen billion dollars and
economic activity
can an air four space is going
to speak and just a few moments
but i'm going to just briefly
say that
the what they have there there
for their prime asset is the
twenty seventh special
operations wing uh so w they're
one of five active wings or so
throughout the air force special
operations command and I I want
to talk any more about that i'll
leave that base commander and
the mayor of clovis when we get
that just a few minutes I do
want to do want to mention that
the mill mel rose air force
range is is a terrific asset
here for the air force and for
omilitary branches uh it is a
hundred thousand acres that
south of canada for space and
clovis and it's used for
training missions throughout all
the services a hollow and air
force base and we don't have a
representative.
From holliman with us today the
forty ninth wing is what they
have there is it's so the host
unit uhm which provides combat
ready for sixteen fighting
falcon pilots and the mq nine
reeper pilots and sense or
operators uh the wing provides
air transportation clinics and
basic expeditionary airfield
resources and support of dod
contingencies
and unique operation there
and then we have curtain air for
space and we have the commander
of the curtain air for space and
emission supply group commander
with us criminal my power and
colonel jason
knock and they're going to be
speaking with us in just a
little bit white sands missile
misarrange is next
last if you will white says
missile range is an army base as
opposed air force base and it's
the army's premier overland test
range which provides long range
missile and laboratory testing
for air defense smart weapons
fire support nuclear effects
air to surface air to air and
space we have a lot of space
activity here in the state of
new mexico
wimsor consistent pricingly
forty x one hundred miles of
restricted air space additional
areas
for a temporary call up
facilities
and in uh they also host a
number of mission partners like
the counter center for counter
measures
office of the such sector
offences where they report any
united states army training and
doctor analysis center also for
a forty
is a large installation way down
south really primarily the
headquarters in texas of the all
parcel area but ninety.
Eighty nine percent of the of
the land area of
four blisses actually in the
state in mexico so what are we
working on at military based
planning commission and all of
our community partners
throughout the state
is primarily based upon
rest approximate license
currently
in two thousand and eighteen
uhm and I should say that's what
we focused on a lot with
legislature
I when I seem representative on
mr garcia chair see senator pope
and others a historically
uh taken the time to sponsor
legislation and that has been
really really focused on
the rest approached license for
military spouses
in the rest the reason we did
that is that two thousand
fifteen and again in two
thousand eighteen the three
service secretary's request of
the nation's governors to
advance action to provide for
rest of process licensure to
military spouses and the means
to improve the quality alive of
military families
curling partnership committee
and the
communities of support
organizations across the state
and in the military base
planning commission lead the
legislative development and
advocacy working with our
partners in the legislature and
thank you very much for that
four bills have been passed that
really advanced this cause
so why isn't important the
military department of defense
and specifically the air force
has generated report cards of
our is a basis to compare
house states are are dealing
with
taking care of our military
families
and our military families if
they are happy or
for the folks are all on the
front lines fighting the battles
are are going to be happy and
they're going to be able to do
their job.
And it will help to retrain to
train and I retain and recruit a
military
personnel in the air for air
force sent throughout their
department or defense
you have invested alive in that
we've invested a lot and of that
in the past legislative sessions
to deal with we now score a
green on the current form of the
of the report card green out of
a on a scale of
a green yellow red we were read
until the legislature took
action and the governor approved
that that process
so how do they use the score
they use it as one of their
tools to award new missions to
community so them to move things
around a two to do the best to
deliver what the military needs
to deliver throughout the world
new mexico has been blast we
have a item light of missions we
have a lot of bases
and that's why we take it so
seriously here then stayed in
mexico
so
you think I am going to stab
there for just a moment.
We we do have
a very special person here
from the department of defense
out of the california office and
kelly is going to come forward
come for a now
when we are asking our military
partners what they need
we go to kelly kelly douglas
is the person who helps us
identify what the holes are and
legislation that will help us
address the needs of our our
personal here so
kelly has been looking along not
only in a mexico but all along
with all the other states where
air force bases exist on on what
legislation is needed we've
identified
a number of pieces of
legislation and she's going to
take a few minutes and as much
time as you need to to summarise
what those are proposals are and
then we'll talk about a at least
one more and additional what
she's going to do if that's okay
mister chair
kelly does him mr chair
thank you telling me douglas I
am the pacific southwest
regionally is on for the defense
stateless on office and our
office is based out of the
pentagon in
the office of the secretary of
defense is it nine
for a military community and
family policy so add the defense
state leaves on office was stood
up in two thousand four two work
with state policymakers on
issues affecting the quality of
life for service members and
their families that we
understood and still understand
are are really under the perview
of state governance and so we
work with state policy makers
on.
Some identified solutions that
we have developed that that
really helped our families
mitigate some of the challenges
that we're seeing
many of the areas that we've
covered in the past and
currently are related to
mitigating that high transition
for for a military family so
very similar to other highly
mobile students and and families
things like licenser where
variances of of steep policies
create a real barrier for
military spouses as they move
from state to state and have to
continue to get licensed in
multiple states without some
sort of reciprocity among the
states that the that there
service member stationed in
similarly k twelve education has
been a really big focus for us
in new mexico has helped us
in act several policies that
help ease barriers for a
military connected children as
they move from state to state.
Um so since two thousand twelve
we have helped states in act
over twelve hundred seventy five
pieces of legislation or policy
and many of those were obviously
we're proud have have occurred
in new mexico
we have worse we're still there
still a focus on
unreciprocity as politic had
mentioned being that starting in
two thousand and eighteen there
was the letter from the that the
three service secretaries urging
states to look at ways to create
an easier
pathway for military spouses
when they transfer in for
military connected students
since then there were
the annual requirements within
the national defense
authorization act for a services
to develop the score cards
and
those are requirements were
really based on
any any quality of life measure
that the that particular service
whether it was the set
that navy are there the army are
the air force would which
measures were important to that
particular service but as we're
seeing and and all three
services identified k twelve
education and licenser but as
we're moving forward
one particular federal
legislation was signed into lie
in early twenty twenty three
which
in the way which the president
signed which created basically a
a
fifty state resuprocity
requirement for states to abide
by and so really superseded all
the the state specific
initiatives that we had worked
over the last decade i'm with
that said the score cards are
now very high highly focused on
interstate licensing compacts
and so as paul was mentioning
previously new mexico was you
know went from red to yellow
rate and
but now with the focus on
interstate compacts in new
mexico new mexico having only
joined one of the seventeen that
ds and.
Supporting that's a heavy focus
on the license piece and that's
where the future score cards
you'll see what will you do will
look at his positive until new
mexico really in earnest looks
at considering joining these
interstate licensing compacts so
that's I know we have
legislation this year that were
interesting to be introduced for
a several I think health care
mostly health care related
compacts there's compact there's
a compact in there's a teacher
license or compact there are
multiple health care related
compacts and then some therapy
related compacts to health
related compacts as well but I
have a really just encouraged to
state to really look at look at
those that opportunity this year
as they start to be introduced
several other do you want to
check in
say something here I think what
we're saying with out of the
department of distance out of
the department we're seeing a
migration to
method that is really pure
resuprocity
right as opposed to every state
having their own rules are
written in the laws you can
imagine so they they want
something that they're you know
families can move from alabama
florida new mexico and arizona
without having to worry about
you know doing separate
registrations and that is the
request that's new since uh
since we around this table
worked on their single since two
thousand eighteen it's might
it's a migrating thing because
they're fining they needed to so
thank you for allowing me to
thank you for clarifying part
and then and then one more point
i'll just make about the
licensing competences they're
not focused only on military
spouses so they really are a
holistic kind of opportunity for
states to look at increasing
their workforce
not just by easing barriers for
military spouses but really for
anyone that's highly mobile and
so hope the hope is that you
know.
That that kind of umbrella
approach which we believe
supports military spaces also
will support the state and other
professionals.
Um there's add a few other
pieces of legislation I think
will be seeing introduced this
year
a few of them related to to add
criminal justice just now
adjusters one of them is we're
working also with the governor's
office to look at existing
statute that that is in place
for establishing concurrent
jurisdiction on federal lands
my office a specifically focus
on insuring that states have
framework in place to adjudicate
juvenile fences that happen on
military basis because right now
and i've i've briefed this group
about that before but right now
there's night without without
establishment of concurrent
jurisdiction for juvenile
offences that specifically call
out juvenile's in statute
because I believe currently new
mexico has statute that
establishes a a process for a
state or services to request
concrete jurisdiction but it
doesn't explicitly explicitly
address juveniles.
And so that's definitely a a big
priority for us we want to make
sure that there is a way to
ensure justice for both that the
you know the accused and for
that the victims of crimes that
happen at the end the hands of
other juveniles on basis and
couple of other
pieces of policy that I think
one one is related I it some
called state response to
military interpersonal balance
so there are several things that
do is doing to ensure that we
are
really
looking at the issue and in the
preventative manner as far as
violence that occurs within the
military community against
spouses significant others on
whether that be domestic balance
or sexual
so
but there are several things
that we bound that states can do
to really strengthen what we are
doing on the state side so
making sure that for example a
military protective orders can
be entered as evidence in in a
filing for a civilian protection
order just can it using a using
the experience making
adstreamlining the process for
victims to who are have already
received a level of review or
attention on the base that that
can easily transfer over to the
civilian site
and then finally just am I kind
of a totally different no is
that we've identified that
special education transfer for
military students highly mobile
students including military
students is is difficult and has
created a significant delays in
receiving services upon moving
on military orders and so we're
asking states to look at a
variety of things that again
that that would minimise
barriers reduce reduced delays
for all highly a mobile students
and of course that would that
would support military children
so with that I will start and
open up for more questions or we
can do questions after.
Par.
Thank you mister chairman so i'm
curious how the year the ratings
factor into
the viability the
wording is of the base holidays
holiday doctor.
Thank very much for my
so representative I think that
you know
i'll just say I grew up I grew
up in the incorporate I was a
more incorporated my dad was
with the career in and I
remember him always saying you
know they they tell us you know
we assume we don't we don't
issue your family right and so
that was kind of like bonus and
and you know anything that had
to do with kind of the well
being of the family was kind of
secondary so I think that you're
just we're just seeing this
evolution of it you know of
course there's mission
requirements and I think that
those were always take
precedents in terms of national
security but understanding that
there's choices that families
will make if they don't feel
supported that will tick away
from the the
dad the man power really you
know available to a particular
base so I think it's just a
matter of retaining and
recruiting umm and that's where
you're seeing more of a focus on
on these issues
thank you mister
and I get that I think that's
where we come into play in our
roles to the extent that we can
but thank you for being here
thank you chairman
I think it was interesting thank
you mister I was looking at
assuming these are your reports
as I would that's possible those
are just a clarify they those
are the air force specific score
cards at each service had to
develop a score card those of
the air force scorecards and the
last time therefore put theirs
out with twenty twenty one so we
are waiting for the twenty
twenty four versions but we were
told that
they're making some adjustments
based on the federal lobbying
pass and that's what what I was
alluding to as far as moving
forward the compact having a
little bit more sway than does
that the measures in mister
chairman ma'am thank you for him
so much for your presentation
although you thank you I was
looking at here at the chronic
absenteeism rate for public
education and it's something
that I think we as a state
obviously.
Whether you're in a base or not
it's something that needs to be
addressed are my understanding
was that
then I can't remember I want to
misquote that the percentage but
also big percentage of kids I
thought it was forty percent was
were absent more than three
weeks or so does that on rate
mister chair and and
representative yes it was forty
percent they just reported today
it's down to thirty three
percent and I believe but
they're trying to make your
right we follow that and thank
you for bringing if I could just
say one thing I didn't cover the
score on education which has
read we continue to be read so
thank you yes and in a looking
at you can see this course all
the way up wait on the red side
and I think absenteerism and
graduation reads probably have a
lot to do with one another and
uh
it'd be nice when never some of
us are I did put in a a bill
addressing that i'd like to see
some support from from
yourselves and other people in
and from both sides they all us
coming together addressing that
um so that we can get
since sometimes parents are part
of the problem and uh sometimes
you know we have to kind of
encruise them and find out why
it's your child missing school
are you are you helping them
miss glore are they out for the
reasons but
I just I saw that and I thought
that was important thank you
very much.
I represent one
I think you mister chair
I give number one is going to
follow up on a representative
that us.
On your education
how can we determine
the graduation uh
procedure this would not be
students are moving all over the
nation.
Student will start school here
and new mexico
and they will leave to another
state so therefore we have a
basically we we have that person
that children at
matter was in not graduating and
new mexico they will be
graduated another state
so we need to know that rate
through the chair yes
representative it's a good
question and III can double
check but an from my experience
over the last decade on this
issue as long as a student
this indeed decent roles when
they leave it won't be counted
against absentee years I mean it
won't be counted against the
graduation rate so as far as the
military children that are
leaving as long as they're
they've been disenrolled from
what I understand they were not
counted against the graduation
rate
okay thank you the other
question of course I have is on
my looking at the at
a long enforcement
and are allowed non non military
police on to the basis of how
we're going to go about that
so through the chair
representative and so the way
we're addressing it is first
looking at state legislative
frameworks making sure that's in
place so that when a service
let's say there department of
the navy are here but i'm that
the effort is comes to the
states as hey we you know we we
are requesting concrete
jurisdiction over such and such
property that that framework is
in place the second piece though
that would be recommend after
the framework is in place as the
establishment of them are used
between the local authorities
and the base so that they can
stipulate exactly what the
requirements are in who reports
to whom
and everything that's involved
with that that
allow its to come on to the base
out it was determined i'm just
thinking our our basis are so
large.
They can remark a lot of area
lot of counties
and
I mean you'd have to go around
making a given now every use
from are going to different
insurance dictions in order to
handle we have a new mexico I
mean if you go to
the news other states while I
mean the one basis of when the
new express basis and the whole
state so ha
ha do we go about
day over there thinking about
the same thing that i'm thinking
other we go about getting the
able you could all those
government and that these are
these basis or are bordering
some mr chair representative I
think
every state that handles it
differently we we've already
addressed something very similar
in the states which was an issue
regarding trouble abuse and
neglect reporting and so that
was the same similar
there's a similar situation
where we are first asking for a
state policy requiring the that
that local transactions share
the information with the
military vice versa and the
second part was the development
and state why demo so the the
state and you know health and
human services or what whatever
agency it is would as that would
would reach out to all of the
installations in ideally create
one joint mo that way that
you're not nickeling diming
going in haming to reestablish
and then when when one commander
leaves then you have to do it
again so
we really encourage the same
type of model of a joint service
statewide emily
thank you mister chair that's
all I got I hope you're going to
put your brain to work now that
I ask this question
absolutely
victor
thank you mister chair and get
senior kelley paul.
The happy to work with both of
you with got some of this stuff
down in the past some of these
bills just have a few questions
at I know and the concurrent
juvenile justice and we try that
before I know you probably got
some folks and will continue to
work on those issues just have a
question on the open enrollment
flexibility and just kind of
understanding what we're talking
about here again compared to
what we've done so far in the
state and kind of what that
looks like.
Based her through the chair
so
I believe and I have a status
sheet in one of the papers that
you received but
so hb three o two yep that's
when that was signed um
previously
whereas I from in talking with
this day i'm department of
inscalacins there was just one
piece of that that I think that
they were hoping to look at
which was including charter
schools
yes go most is just really a
modification it's just we've
worked on this a few times it's
just confused me when I keep
seeing open yes what we did say
in a vice chair so if the first
time was advanced and rome and
then and then we did open a
roman and then when I heard from
the
air for school
they did mention that there was
just one little one piece of it
which was the charter school
okay just want to make sure
that and then when we talk about
state support for military
family so special education
needs
you could talk to that a little
bit and does that deal with also
like our dd waiver I guess what
type of supports are we talking
about there
yes mr chair i'm investigator
i'm not sure if the de waiver is
why imagine de waver
just the development of
disabilities waiver that we have
other dd with dd up and they
said he okay yes
so so this particular issue is
looking at we we've done as a a
series of studies through
declaring house for military
families through penn state
university and
and also a literature of europe
of existing
existing research in
in addition to talking with
families with
special education needs and what
we have found is that I think
it's thirty one percent of
military families that that
transfer with their child with
an individualized education plan
wait up to four amounts.
To receive their full services
as it as provided in their
previous state so what we're
doing is asking states to look
at enhancing their existing
policies as well as idea right
so you estate can go above what
ida provides but not under so
one one example would be
when a when the student moves
into the state on an ap
currently the federal largest
requires that state that
discourse system implement the I
p as soon as possible we're
asking for a thirty day like
time on to make sure that we
that those students have
assurance that they will be
receiving services within thirty
days even if that means that the
school system decides to do
another evaluation we're asking
that that evaluation be done in
thirty days so is that just one
example of what what we're
asking is just then enhancement
of what's currently required
great thank you and I apologize
that i'm cuisine you on each one
of these are listed just want to
get a better understanding of
what that counter means to our
statement
are there any states right now
that are doing the remote
vehicle license and registration
for an all right now I just
wanted to set through the chair
and yes vice chair that that is
our only that's our only brand
brand new issue that we added to
the twenty twenty five list
so
so being new we've done a review
of existing
states across the nation and
have found that thirty one
states are providing some some
some either some mechanism for a
remote renewal of their driver's
license and their vehicle right
so if a service members of a
resident of new mexico and
leaves for three years that they
wouldn't have to come back if it
if it expires to go just just to
renew so i'm thirty one states
have either mail or online
options in and that includes new
excess that it's not one of the
issues we're asking
yeah because I I remember having
the renewal and.
Doing the address and we're not
asking for registration right
about remotely which really
renewal so right yes yes
alright well thank you i'm sure
we work in some warning of these
and that's all I have thank you
mister
thank you senator
def stuff is in a report I mean
pinto bob before she goes on
reduce yourself
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee i'm
senator shannon pinto from
district three northwest corner
state
over three hours to get here
thank you mister.
Thank you
have you been before the
education state committee
high senator penta good to see
you again I saw her in portland
this summer
no I so represent sarniana has
has presented our issues before
to the committee but I have not
okay so I think that this year
yes we just recently they look
into it okay I guess that was a
meeting I missed wells
appointment color with me
the lacensing
unless we could do it all the
way crossed board federal
because he been with our
hospitals with the doctors the
providers and stuff that's
another thing is having a
national database where they
don't have to go to every state
to get license and I think
that's something I don't know I
would see how we it would
alleviate a lot of things if we
could do nationally just not
interest that within it state so
maybe we can kind of brought in
that a little further doh as we
go for
under special education with the
ips I I don't think there is a
shot clock because I am getting
parents calling asking me at the
high school level
y
the kids are being ding right
now because for extra correctly
activities even though the kids
aren't special education and yet
they're not allowed to
participate in sports because
there well you got a lot of
teachers say thing in the high
the high school level we really
need to make sure there is
something in place versus the um
the primary
level so bank of that can be
brought at which the education
study committee won't know if
that was something that they
have on the rate are to put a
shot clock on cause I think
there's a lot of things that
don't have a short clark we just
assume that we can ask him to
report it and then that'll be it
at the end of it so I did i'd
like to support that the.
Item seventeen crucial year with
the
the solar race system is that
really about air space are or
the woody how how do we reason
or
see that that that needs to be
addressed mister chair etc i'd
like to address that if we could
we have found here in the mexico
and as went energy were no
energy as developed out there is
very very poor communication
between the installation and are
commanders and we have three
commanders sitting behind and
cut talk about this and the
actual wind developers what we
would like to put in place here
it is a process that would have
one developer files an
application that they would file
at the federal level for any
development that they notify the
office and military based
planning so that we
can make sure that the local
base commanders who where the
energy resources were this
transmission or when turban or
even solar
can communicate that it's coming
and make sure the training space
has not affected as a result of
that development and is
commanders are our bases are
willing to work with the wind
developers
of course and with that
discussion though they can't
solve the problem we don't want
or training
training areas to be diminished
because a lot has been a lot of
time and efforts been spent to
develop those over over decades
and decades and decades so it's
not not once I post of renewable
energy by the way it's just
let's communicate so we we don't
interfere with mission work
so mr chairman is a different
question thank you for your
response to your mike so we
don't hear the echo employee
i'll be turned into
mr chairman members that are
committee
so I think with this particular
one I don't know if we really
would have to have a bill.
Maybe it's just policy
whether it be with an our
application process on the state
level versus the federal level
but if we can start the process
of fighting out where unsteady
just going to draft the bill I
don't know they have the
committee would fill that into
taking emotion on having some
kind of
what where where can we fix this
thank you mister chair senator
rependa we have found
in a volunteer capacity the
things we do every day that
we need the hammer of law to
have have this put in place and
I hear mister chairman the
corkel back here was have to had
had to fight the battle numerous
times to
there was a line they are going
to be built across white sands
miss orange which is our
premiers training sight of
nationally from the military and
they were just going to go
across the data they didn't care
but it took sixteen years of
fighting to to to come up with
an alternative so we would
prefer if you know respectfully
that it be
in law and understand your your
question concerned them that
that would be our collective
response and sherman may or and
others back there can certainly
I can yield my seat
mr chair members to me I find
that interesting because means
like national security what come
the nations
coming forward to support you in
that and having us to do at the
state level but the ok well that
enters that um then give mister
chairman members to commit thank
you for the work you do.
Any more questions about
position.
A criteria of energy on friday
to talk about just this so just
still so it work we're moving on
trying to figure out what to do
exactly.
Thank you mister chair and I had
a question on the report cards
do you take into account the
accessibility to
medical care for our airman
being from clovers and I think
this state won't probably
personally at least the
information I have received as
often people can't even be
stationed at can and because
they have special needs that
cannot even be addressed in our
state and I think it's just
important overall that we all
understand you know the medical
issues that we have in new
mexico and does that come into
play on whether we keep an air
for space and quality of life
for our airman
mr chairman representative it's
a great question in for me as I
go
visiting amongst I was telling
someone one of my seventy five
active data installations in my
region it seems to be top of
mine for every installation that
I that I visited and
particularly in remote and
isolated areas so it it's it's a
it's a great point so when the
within the nda the
services are required to
incorporate whatever they
believe are there metrics for
quality of life within their
score card so they the airforce
could include the health care I
know i've seen drafts of the
armies and there's include
health care but it's up to the
service
and thinking of mr chair and I
don't I just think that it's
important for this body and our
entire body to realize the
issues that we face in these
remote air basis I think even an
albertar key week because I
would assume somebody in
clovisco go to all the cooking
and only think we have the
resources for them at least
we're close to texas and can
maybe get there and and help our
airman but I think we're really
lacking in the medical doctors
and and all the issues were
facing so that was one point I
wanted to bring up an and
following up on representative
i'll come to question the mister
chair i'm a concurrent
jurisdiction I I don't.
And incorrect me if i'm wrong
but just be in a prosecutor I
was a day and am currently
county and we had a very easy
relationship with the base and I
think they still do some areas
working current jurisdiction and
you know some were completely
based but we all just got
together and we had median
senders for five law enforcement
agencies we would sign these
mouse and I myself were talked
to the base all the time and
like they might request a case
it was one of their airmen and
say hey can we get this case
that I might say now you know I
think this is going to have to
be handled downtown or whatever
but I think you could do that
with the juveniles because is
there anything how do you
prosecute your dube on all
chrimes that are corrupt base at
this point mr chair mr chair and
representative that's the
settled question right there and
this a reason why we've been
directly and we've been directed
by congress to do this across
the nation so even though we've
seen local terrorist sections
able to
to you know work together to get
the cases just kind of
just by honor right like I could
but we've been directed by a
congress to establish to ensure
that there is a framework for
for the not just for the
friend the services to request
jurisdiction but I process for
the state of time give to accept
and give back the
jurisdiction and also to
establish those local agreements
but yet so it can happen at the
local level but we were directed
to insurer that it was in place
in every state because there
were some very high profile
cases that happened on bases
first within the department of
defense schools that are on the
east coast arm and then we saw
some cases come out in housing
areas where no one prosecuted
the case because the local
adjuristion said you know that's
your jurisdiction then it's it's
a within a property i've
exclusive federal jurisdiction
so we don't.
We cannot we don't have the
authority to do so but the
federal account because
juveniles and other civilians
don't follow under the uniform
code of military addresses thank
you mister chair thank you I
everything goes as violent as
kids are getting nowadays I mean
we've really we've talked about
how at the the legislature of
the sixty day needs to really
look at our juvenile code and
really start putting her thumbs
down on these juveniles from
another committee I said I am so
I would I highly support that I
think that would be a very great
thing but those are my only two
questions thank you mister chair
thank you here questions you
know
go ahead
you have questions.
Thank you secretary general
you know I you know the the
question probably already
answered on a during isle of
concern to an algeria's diction
you know because are doing else
now days are not committing
crimes
you know is to be broken windows
or breaking an internal june
over killing people and we need
to really invest those issues
could what happens if possible
in goods inside the bees and and
and kill somebody or vice versa
military person goes out of the
bees and killed somebody what
are we addressing the issues.
Thank you chair eight I can't
answer the question about the
latter question about where
happens when the graph base but
but we are definitely this is
the core of what we're trying to
do is is make sure that we have
a framework in place that is
solid for what happens you have
for us the main focus is
juveniles other states are
braddening it to all civilians
one base to make sure that those
you know anything any offense
that is that
is committed by someone that's
not in the military would be
able to be educated by the local
authorities
thank you for that in other
words for non notary would do
something that he needs inside
that base how you do aggressive
as a federal crame or is it
state range
thank you mister chair that's
that's a great question I think
that guess if it's you know I
i'm not an expert in time I can
pretend to be but I think you
know
we are concerned about the you
know being able to
adjudiate cases through the
usual ucmj so as far as being
able to prosecute those cases
you know federally add that
seems to be up to eat up that
the authorities on how that that
case is handled I don't know
thank you because you know
the day where I get to the day
I was chair I think if it
happens on base the base is has
the authority of that case if it
is a base person who comes up
and like I have a case right now
he was military and he killed
somebody my prosecutor through
the state so
and then when they're I believe
in
if i'm correctly from wrong it's
going to encourage your
restriction and then we work it
out is living at the base deal
with it yes and thank you for
that I think that that through
the chair I I agree with that
but i'm some parcels that we
found to be so we've we're we've
done an entire study created a
tool to identify where.
What parcels have of the land
are likely to have juveniles on
it's a and just in terms of the
juvenile piece
nah all parcels currently are
established concurrent without
the service having requested
that from the state
and you don't earn the reason I
brought that up is because you
hear about it all time you know
it happened in the base is not
our deal or happen out there is
not our deal and at the end of
the day some person killed
somebody walks away cause it's a
issue of he said she said that
you know then no like I said
before do announced in do these
things but now they're doing it
more than adults you know you
hear about it every day and i'll
be doing it but it would be my
concerns and new knowledge and
want to put it up there thanks
for the presentation very
interesting buried educational
thank you
mister mister chair if I could
bring a couple people up we have
a couple more folks to talk to
you briefly that I want to leave
with a cornell mike power who's
commander that three seventy
seven for four space and credit
card colonel jason arkamora
whose the mission support group
commander and thank you for that
we thank them for being here
today
next point.
Mr chair mr vice chair to single
representatives it's an honor to
be here today i'm colonel
michael power on the three
seventy seven here based when
commander at curtain air for
space and albuquerque in mexico
I also serve as the installation
commander for the for the air
for space there are very proud
to be here representing the
twenty three thousand people
that work on the curl and
therefore space it really is a
national security complex as we
call it
proud proud history at current
when therefore space all the way
from the manhattan project and
and we still perform that rule
as a supporter of the nuclear
enterprise as well as a air crew
training and and many other
things that happen on our forest
base
in their turn the exciting part
about our bases that it is a
growing base there's more
emissions coming there's more
people coming with that come
some more challenges though a
lot of them have been hit on
today or ready and conversation
as a as a military officer but
also apparent the first thing
that we look at when we get our
military orders as we get on the
computer and we look at
education like where our kids
are going to go to school and
obviously some concerns there
although there are some bright
spots to that I can speak to an
album for sure specialty care
health care is something that
we've discussed today a little
bit as well just a one statistic
for our exceptional family
member programs those there are
those that have a special need
special care that they need
right now we have a twenty five
percent rejection rate of those
families as they come to
albuquerque and we're in the big
city right you would think you
would think maybe we would have
some of those care available and
sometimes it's it's a matter of
we have the care available but
the first appointment is going
to be in eleven months or twelve
months and that just doesn't
work obviously for families
one thing that's maybe unique to
the three air for spaces in new
mexico as our crime situation
right outside the base when I
we've had a lot of discussions
about a jurisdiction and things
like that already so that poses
some unique challenges for us
and alba kirkies at the highest
rate of crime in albuquerque is
right up again star northern
part of our barrier for space.
And then several other issues
and I won't go all into them but
spouse employment child care all
those kind of things that were
constantly looking at and
working with our with our
friends and the current
partnership committee
to make sure that I remember
taking care of
I mention the bases growing it's
also really a hub of technology
which is exciting with the air
force research laboratory sandy
and national labs all those
things on our base and increase
space force presence you are
space forest presents on our
base so it's really an exciting
time for curl and therefore
space lots lots more mission
lots more people coming in and
we're just doing our best to
make sure that we take care of
them as they come in and then
finally if I may we have the
chief of staff of the united
states air force visit our base
a couple of weeks ago general
although and one of his big
things that he's pushing right
now is really looking at
families specifically I think a
lot of times the military we
talk about the military member
we talk about readiness and then
we get to the family priorities
and things like that but he's
really making that come to the
forefront of how can we make our
families more resilient how can
we take care of them better and
that's something that's
certainly a priority for us at
the curl in their forest no
thank you for your time mister
chair
or good afternoon chairman good
afternoon committee great to see
you and and first I guess first
order business is just to say
thanks for the work that's
already been done to this this
far you know being I came here
to currently last year and and
had the opportunity to talk to
representative of coin there
about some of the the joint or
the concurrent jurisdiction
pieces for the enhanced use
lease
house bill three or two was a
tremendous success and and one
one instance I just want to give
you before I get off that
portion is it it it does
translate into military rating
as it does translate into the
assistance that we can remove
barriers as much as possible for
folks to be in new mexico and
and enjoy what we are the
familiar pieces of new mexico
and enjoy what what the area has
to offer one one example is one
of the new missions that's
coming to curl and air force
base in fact there that the jets
are on the ground.
We'll have a ceremony this later
this week is the ac one thirty j
gun ship training mission it
includes new new missions coming
in a whole bunch of people and
so with the whole bunch of
people we have folks coming in
from florida who were already
family care providers inside
their homes and with house bill
three to it allowed them to
directly transport their license
without having to have a new
mexico license child care inside
their home in addition to the
already demanding federal
standard so it was a it was a
win win for that family to to be
able to continue doing what they
were doing in florida but now we
have increased our art front
family child care providers by
zero two one and and I think
this is just an again in
avalancia and what that really
does is allows families who are
coming in may be working shifts
that are outside of the norm
working hours to have a child
care and without worrying about
like here you know this child
care facility is only open from
this hour to this hour and how
do I get a bridge between this
one in the next one so those
family child care providers on
the base or in the homes are our
real important peace and again
house bill through it to kind of
gave us a unlocked that
possibility so I just want to
say thank you for the broad
support there second you know as
as we take a look at criminal
air force base and as a colonel
power mentioned we're very proud
of where we are what we do out
there and the missions that we
we support it is fifty two
thousand acres of land right now
and by geographic land mass that
is bigger than washington dc it
is the size of columbus ohio
geographic space and and with
that comes a lot of a lot of
interesting things to rain so we
have a you know wildland fire
relationship with the forest
service of fantastic we're we're
working on prescribe burns and
making sure that we're
maintaining.
The the land in the in the best
way possible being responsible
and with the high high danger
things that happen on the base
you know munitions ranges those
kinds of test sites that were
being were being good stewarts
of that of that environment
so with that a hundred and eight
different organizations on the
base that share that compete for
not only land but also
priorities
all the way from send the
national ads which you can
recognize that seventeen
thousand contractors on the base
that live and work there every
day all the way to small three
four people units who may do
only what on only one place in
the air force does this work
right and so it's it's a pretty
wide range but no less important
along the way so we we do we try
to do a great job of a
judiciating some of those
resources to meet those
standards
as meant was mentioned we got a
lot of folks not only is at the
fifth largest installation in
the air force but a lot of
people active duty a combination
of guard reserve on current air
for space as six thousand
civilians that doesn't include
the dent do you and sandy
national lab folks and then in a
healthy retiree community which
we estimated about twenty seven
thousand folks all come to curl
and air force base to be to
receive services be sustained in
their in their in their life
across the base you know it's
it's really kind of those
talking to someone back here
really being a city manager of
things about over seven hundred
and sixty five buildings over a
thousand privatise housing units
so as much as the focus is in
new mexico relargent and albert
he about providing adequate
housing we also have a housing
shortage which we're trying to
dial into a a couple of ways
so with our thousand housing
units you just can't compare and
contrast the numbers if twenty
seven thousand people work on
the building you gotta.
Spot for twenty five eight
thousand on the base you have a
strong demand on the local
community and that's something
we were working with kpc the
overall state and city and
county managers on situation
solutions
most people don't know but we
have a we of five fire stations
on the on the installation which
help us manage that why
geographic area we have we are
the single provider for airfield
capabilities for the for albert
turkey in some port and national
airport also for the flight line
on that the military flight line
portion the munician storage
areas the
sending national label all those
other things so it is it is a
large landmast to manage and I
will say you know with the
mission growth that we have
coming in one of the biggest
challenges is how to assess
current air force bases
readiness and receptibility to
those light has been talked
about scorecards here score
cards are a part of the
evaluation process and I will
tell you that there are folks
who
they receive this court card and
they receive a document with
some words in it that don't
translate into what is actual
reality on the on the base so
yes medical housing schools all
of these roll up into the
scorecards and yet we still have
to fill in the blanks with a
narrative of how this is
actually happening we have to
identify those places of where
those twenty five percent of
folks get and kick back because
it is medically and act adequate
support here where I mentioned
about exquisite
missions so there are places on
interior military side that
there are very few places that
these families can go because of
what they do they're their jobs
are so technical and so the you
have the assignment team looking
at this and going okay I get it
that you're that the medical
services are inadequate here but
i'm sorry.
You're gonna have to go there
anyway and
and so why I don't like the
system all the time when it
kicks people out of make
disqualifies them from curl in
their forest base we sometimes
end up having to find care for
them because this is the only
place that they were one of the
few places that they can go so I
just want to round out that
conversation a little bit and
and as I spoke earlier this last
week on on education I think the
education speaker in in new
mexico is getting a lot better
and that we have to help be good
stewarts of that narrative as
well you know we have to get out
there and tell people hey
they're really good pockets of
things that are happening and
you know APS is is doing better
and there's a lot of things that
we could do so I think we have a
shared responsibility in in into
that I think you know the
state's been really helpful in
in reducing some of those
barriers we have the purple star
school program rules drafted and
they were sitting on the
secretary of education's desk
last week and I think they'll
probably stay
but i'm just kidding but it but
it is a integration program and
how do we welcome students into
their new environment I I told
the story last week that both of
our kids are we have six kids
between us and we have a change
schools between six and seven
times in the last eight years or
so
and with that comes with new
rules new assessments and new
things that have to be
considered and parents are left
to relearn all of those things
on the fly as they as they tread
incorporate and that's even you
know that without the difficulty
of special education
requirements or at any gifted
testing requirements that differ
from from base to base and state
the state so I just throw that
out there is sometimes it comes
with as as these basing
decisions happen uh missions get
allocated to a place called
curling air for space sometimes
it comes with this narrative.
That we have to help fill in and
connect the dots if you were to
to tell a bigger story
I will also say that you know
you know compare mentioned our
secretary sorry chief staff the
air force released the message
on refocusing family readiness
refocusing family readiness from
the air forces perspective is
that it takes a village to get
readiness and to to maintain our
combat keep ability and while
that's not a new issue it's
really kind of just footstopping
this this how do we prepare
families for the hard work that
they're going to go do maybe one
or two people in the and their
family new class does it but how
do we prepare them to do that
and then how do we sustain them
into the resiliency peace and
one of his foundational pieces
was nine eleven as as we all
learned what surgery meant
we were young officers at the
time I literally worked for like
seventy days straight without a
break fifteen hours a day trying
to just launch jets right and
that was that was my specific
instance where we've learned
over a time is that not only
does it take a hard thing to get
there but also to sustain it and
is and I think that what the air
forces focusing on now in great
power competition to
revitalizing or reoptimizing the
force is that we have to take
care of that whole group new
grace of the family to make them
make to preserve their combat
capability so I know it's it's
sometimes hard but things like
relocation things like
connection to medical care and
family care and other things
like mental health support and
all those become that really
important part of
the resiliency portion of of
combat capability so
I think i'll stop there and and
offer time for questions sir.
And thank you mister chair thank
you for your presentation
one thing we can do today
particularly mister chairman is
I was working with colonel
commora
and the purple star bill is
purple star and where was out
and he's right it hasn't moved I
asked ldc to look into it they
said it has a move so could we
write a letter from this
committee saying what are you
doing when are we going to know
what's happening when we can get
something done
maybe that will help move it
along you might not like the
same way but that's okay but at
least we're going to do
something as a teacher former
teacher we have to do something
to help these kids because this
is about you know support for
academics for emotion social
emotional support of these kids
as they transition to a no
school and you stayed a new
place and it's really important
for our kids where they're
military kits can we do that.
The.
There will talk about that one.
So there's a little something we
can help with um
if you don't
know we talk we talked earlier
so I I think i'm thank you thank
you though for everything you do
I don't I don't know a question
is requirement and one of just
mentioned of the lago families
he's not just about the airman
or air
lady better in the gentleman
it's good to both families cut
that it's very important that
you are look at that part of it
because you know a family member
has more into it in the better
and those a lot of times you
know you know my own vietnam
better and record veteran and my
wife suppers more to what I go
through
then then we know it's there
it's really there and i'm glad
you brought that up that you
address in those issues about
not just the not just a better
in it off the family members
have very very important
thank you very much for that
few times up
a guy representative anyway
thank you very much for that at
very very important thank you is
the chair anyway when are you
going to allow us to returns to
get into the the.
We're always looking at mr
representative that ways that we
can support our veterans I can
follow up with you on that.
I I don't you know i've always
under the peaks
when my military id
you're going to the gate and
then I have never had a problem
and i'm just addressing that but
I know I didn't know you were
having a problem that
but they have never had a
problem I got my military id
they check it together and then
good morning where we want to
that base yes sir absolutely mr
chair if you have a a valid
military you can come on to the
base and use those services.
No no no that's well my role
when I go i'm a hundred percent
disabled you get of a military.
The.
I like a motion to a per minute
for june
some of mister chairman is it
just once.
All right here.
Anyway do we have a proper first
in the broadband second minute
so we thank you anyway your
gentleman made note for the
questions
you have an issue with.
A general administrative terry
but the only people will get
this idea is veterans at a
hundred percent
not not all veterans
because.
You know you know i'm a hundred
percent and he's a hundred
percent then I don't know why
you won't have to see my but
i've never had a problem going
to the base
we can get up like okay
generally thank you very much
for your presentation and most
of our think food service.
Next we have credit partnerships
comma please introduce yourself.
Mr chair members of the
committee in my name is megan
dollar osa I am the executive
director of the curl and
partnership committee we are
five oh one c three um with our
mission is to support preserve
and grow curtain air for space
where the primary focus on
military value i'll go over a
couple of our successes lately
so in twenty twenty three at the
request of the air force
there was a release of exclusive
federal land jurisdiction shared
state and federal for the
enhanced useless on curtain it
was seventy acres and we asked
for support in the most recent
um session and received that ull
went through and that is now
um a development called maxq and
which it already hosting
north it run up and
slated a host several other
retail and restaurants and
things like that to enhance that
area on gibson
another recent was the US
therefore air tanker based on
curtail and it became
operational in april and it
dispensed two hundred thousand
gallons of water at the ridder
so fire so it was used
immediately and really it was a
gift for new mexico we we have
those issues of our tankers
having to go out of state to
refull and now we can host them
right here
in new mexico.
And the ah severe waste water
infrastructure project on hurtle
and we were seeking fifteen
million
to re have that and if that
would have failed we would have
many many many jobs that um
unstand still so burning a
county july mortgage bucket came
through
very big on that
so another thing that curtain
partnership does we host curtain
sustainability community
committee and we interface
between team curtland and the
current community
so a burning of your county the
city the state siebel and
national forest others are
represented saraniana attends as
well and others this process is
only occurring in albuquerque
and it has been named at best
sited
practice from the cheapest staff
of the air force
so this is an ongoing effort to
insure good communication and
timely resolutions between our
stakeholders so an example of
that would be renewable energy
projects on missions
coordinating with emnerd and
new mexico renewal transmission
authority and developers
requesting these lines of
communications between DO e and
DO d and that's the encroachment
that paul was discussing earlier
is opening that line of
communication so no one has to
make any any moves late in the
game
a few other things that kpc is
working on you've heard
kelly douglas and
colonel power current local
moral are speak to the scorecard
and how those quality a life
issues impact the state and the
basis so the department of
defense is now making basing
decisions based on quality of
life issues that um you know
goes back to the score card so
when we see child care as some
other things that kbc is working
with we work very close with e c
c d and secretary against
childcare efforts we hosted a
child carefare.
Um in um coordination with eccd
city of alberti and cnm
to boost childcare resources for
current and the community we
track legislation that goes
through an early child care and
then we can.
We're working on facilitating a
temporary child care facility
for current land when they go
through a renovation of their
cdc center
education we track education
closely obviously the purple
star schools in which we spoke
about earlier is
big but another
thing that we received at
kirtland and hollman received it
as well is old cc office the
local development community
cooperation they do federal
grants and curtland and hollamen
were recipients of that federal
grants and so
curtain was able to rebuild
sandia based elementary for
fifty two million.
Forty two million of that was
from o l DC c ten million was
for a matching funds from aps
and when you go down to
hallowmen and see their rebuild
they're doing a joint rebuild of
their middle school and
elementary school they received
I think I want to say sixty five
million and old cc funds for an
eighty six million rebuild so
those are matching funds that we
receive federally and when we go
to the housing
side where we're on all the
sixty we are working with oil
dcc to do a state wide housing
study surrounding military so
mortgage finance authority will
be housing that and
they'll just be updating their
initial
housing study and we are doing
we're actually hosting housing
summits right now and working
closely worth arm members of the
state and and sitting in county
and saying what incentives can
we bring in to
umm to boost housing and in the
area and and that state wide as
well we're working across the
can and holland in which sense
must arrange on that health care
we have been working with
lauren madigan the new ceo of
presbyterian health care and she
has come in
very graciously to work handed
hand with curtail and canon on
the others to to address a lot
of these issues such as tell a
health arm a lot of the bigger
issues and and so presbyterian
is has a big seat at the table
and sell that's just a small
overview of what the curl and
partnership committee covers and
we're trying to take what we're
doing at all kirking curtain and
married across the state at each
base
it's as par sad we we have a
fourteen billion dollars impact
or second to oil and gas and so
it's important that we take care
of these basis and
thank you
any question from the committee.
Observe luck thank you so much
mister chairman thank you for
for the presentation so I know
at home and air for a space we
have a in almogto it's called
mean gate united and we work
very closely with the base so
how does ours work alongside
yours and what are the
differences what are the things
that you see we may need to add
to ensure that we can mire what
you guys are doing mister chair
that's a great question I
actually was just in
conversation I believe this name
is jared yep jerpery so we have
a scheduled phone call coming up
and that's what we are looking
over
statistics from each base and
saying what is hollow in having
the most issue with and and
where do we need to address and
and what did we do at curtain
that we can
mirror at home and and and
address it to gathered such as
the state white housing study so
yes conversations are being held
at each level on that
thank you so much mister
chairman and thank you for that
and I i'd love to hear more i'll
talk to during and see what you
guys talk about so thank you
president
thank you very much question
from the committee
none are not really a question
you said you get two million
dollars a water to the beautiful
fire or something
especially share it was two
hundred thousand
galance of water in that
unit opened up in april and so
it and correct me if i'm wrong
current local moral but that was
their first mission was out to
the road as a fire
are you just giving water just
to also chemically put into it
so what they did with it
and the reason I asked that bush
included when you see him
dropping it you know it's orange
it did to retarden.
You know you're not private time
just water
okay
we wanted everything you know
but anyway thank you for helping
them those people fires possible
you know why tour that we had
also a couple weeks and it is it
really bad it's really really
bad you know it could have been
a lot worse if people want to
help but anyway thank you for
that you know the normal further
questions are
thanks for the presentation
thank you
mister chair members to pay
thanks for having us today and I
know canada for space hasn't
been heard from I didn't
summarise them but
the mayor still here.
Was the caterport based update
of the people here
can rubber
they're not here right
the mir.
Good afternoon mister chairman
and committee members I
appreciate the opportunity to
see you all here today and has
many of you meant have mentioned
in the little bit that I know
about you so many of you are
veterans so thank you for your
service and you know for stand
the importance of supporting
quality of life for our military
and their families in our
communities and we certainly
live that out and clover says we
are one community with the
twenty seventh sal station that
can an air force base in
melasmount buying range and we
undertake a mirrored of uh
efforts and strategies in order
to support quality of life of
the airman and their families
and
one one recent effort I was
something called arm forces
support committee and this was
really an old committee from
years ago when canon was on the
bracklist
that had gone dormant but I
resurrected it and the but
thought behind that is to bring.
All of the governing bodies of
the local area together for a
quarterly report and update as
to the progress and activities
it can and as well as the
evolving needs at can and
whether it be housing as has
already been discussed this
afternoon and we've got some
some exciting activity
addressing housing in our
community or whether it be
healthcare access as a
representative brought up
earlier and it's a major factor
in in quality of life and in the
ability to assign an airman and
their families to our base
but
again I in in that thought and
and in that vain we are just so
proud to be one community with
canon we certainly support
everything that's being
discussed here today and one
thing that i'm i'm working on
that we're working on along with
our partners curtain partners as
well as
mr mindragon and the rest of the
military base planning
commission where shopping
support for a would be a piece
of legislation which would
create a a grant program for
defense communities within the
state such as alma gordo such as
clovis albuquerque and so on
and so we're hoping to to find
support for that there's
conversations going on about
what that might look like an
disagreements about how to fund
it but I think we can all agree
that funding quality of life for
our our military families and
supporting our defense
communities within the state is
something that we need to do and
with that I appreciate the
opportunity I know I was just
buying time
for our partners
from cannon and I see colonel
johnston has arrived you may
want to hear from him or maybe
there are questions for me
in this out.
He does it
or good afternoon I apologize
for my target
but i'm sure you were very
entertained by me or more is
here
in speaking of which I think one
of the things I think we were
test to do is provide a good
update on can and I think would
you return sorry
colonel robbie johnson current
twenty seven special operations
we can commander then they see
for about six weeks now to go
for colonel jerry bergen
career outsoccer aviator
previously station I can't air
force face in two thousand
sixteen two thousand twenty
and so happy to be back both my
wife margaret glad to be back we
considered a home coming so it's
it's gonna be back to new mexico
I was just going to say one of
the biggest updates for can I
think is really our community
engagement with her not just
clovers with the entire eastern
mexico role communities
including portalist a and miros
a lot of an issues that were
trying to integrate both from
how we both benefit from the
military aspect and readiness
and quality of life and then
actually give back to the
communities of the same time a
couple initiatives that were
going after is the signal
landscape project which team
together with a local area
doesn't it two point five
million acres of federal
label didn't federal aspects to
help you after water
conservation so that captain I
think fifty three wells
currently on mill rose air force
range which is a huge benefit
for us to help save some that
aspect in in save the depletion
of the ogala aquarium for
another one is getting after dod
starbase in trying to become the
third base within the state to
get after that initiatives
helped him
in issues for the local
population that students in the
fifth grade each group so we're
hoping to break round on that in
january and start that
initiative up with a lot of
support from local communities
while special when it comes to
transportation
probably a mother huge emphasis
item for us is.
Exceptional family program
right now currently for out of
every ten airmen that get orders
to can their force face or
denied because we don't have
specially medical car within the
area a lot of their space to buy
dependents special tea a special
medical care needs
and so we've been working both
with the air force for at
largest in the local communities
far as rose about general
hospitals well as p r and c to
try to get those special care
providers ins that we can bring
down that uh denial rate so far
both internal from we call the
circuit writer program so we
have specialty care providers
coming from alaska from curtail
in from
us they come in for a short
stand and now we can get over
some of those denials we've
driven down the northeast by
fourteen percent so far in the
last two quarters and we're
hoping to sustain that going
forward because what we see is a
lot of those folks who are
denied or that mid range
young ncos are you our first
front licepervisors or middle
tier cgos you have younger
children who have those needs
and then was thirty nine we kind
of lose that so we have a gap
when it comes to that coverage
especially when it comes to
frontline engaged leadership
which has follow one in a
consequences for our force
and I think the last one we
probably have on is the
education side along with the
god star base and providing that
upper level education the
superintendent reneigh rice has
been huge and and then trying to
identify
collaborative efforts not just
from the volunteer aspect we
have a
until resource of volunteers
that can help school programs
out as well as bringing the kids
to the base so they have a
better understanding of what the
air force of the military
service can provide them going
forward it's been huge and we're
trying to go forward with the
purpose to our initiative both
from all the bases to set those
men requirements so we can
reassure our parents and then
help inform the schools of what
requirements they need going
forward and so with that really
parts and for any questions.
Thank you mister chair and
colonel and i'm actually from
close I know it's easy our
daughters
and memories I know that we had
talked a little bit about you
mentioned in the scramp program
can you elaborate a little with
the committee because I really
wanted you to kind of explain to
them what you're looking for so
we can kind of you know
brainstorm a little bit about
you guys have way more
experienced on the finance I
probably that me and kind of
wear to go from there and if
this possibility so if you
wouldn't mind kind of explaining
to the committee kind of what
you're thinking about in
revenues to quality of life and
helping our but our basis thank
you mister chair mr chairman
representative read not at all
thank you for the opportunities
to expand on that a bit sitting
here with my friend colonel
johnson and i'm talking to you
about the and the efforts
underway close in canon and by
doing so highlighting the the
partnership right i've obviously
the clovers community benefits
tremendously from having can in
there and we want to be
supportive of of everything that
they need and so we meet
frequently we we remain a
constant contact to hear about
what their needs are and whether
it be through partnership for
policy or or some other effort
we want to we want to fill the
need went when there is one
representative reeb has teat up
for me the opportunity to talk
about a work that
we.
We we began talking about in
clovers very quickly reached out
to curtain partners military
based planning commission and
just ask what is the possibility
of e a new grant program that
would be designed for defense
communities within the state and
because in the case of almogordo
and holliman or in the case of
clothes in canada for example
we're aware of the the unique
needs that that our base has we
we we have those frequent
communications and after times
it might be something smaller or
or maybe something different
that isn't being caught through
his budget or being addressed
otherwise through local or state
budgets it might be for example
a playground on the base where
it's not I have to have but it's
definitely a nice to have an
enhances the life of of the
airman and their families it
might be the the need for a city
of cloves to assist our partners
that can and by alleviating the
need for them to operate a waste
water management plant and
instead pipe that water to our
treatment facility and in clovis
in order to treat that and
relieve that that burden
impressure that they have so
that those that energy and
resource can be focused on
mission readiness and in doing
what they do so the far is is
that
one where another we end up with
a grant program
that defense communities are
able to apply for and we have
envisioned a two to three
million dollars perhaps a grant
for for each of the communities
potentially so maybe a ten or
twelve million dollars lift
annually that that these
communities would be able to
apply for these grants and and
be and have a little more
agility and and creativity and
support of our millions military
installations within the base
and again we might I I need your
help I i'm looking for input in
and guidance on this on how to
push and who to talk to you next
but I think that we can all
agree that finding new and.
Innovative ways to support
military within our our state is
a good thing and we need to be
having those conversations I
hope that was a decent enough
explanation representative yet
mister chair and mere morris it
isn't and that's why I wanted to
throw it to the community
because I know that you some you
a lot more experience in this
area especially representative
syriano may be able to throw
some thoughts in but I just
wanted to kind of throw that out
there and i'll leave it open for
other people have questions but
I do think it's a great idea it
would be nice to be able to to
help the base they help us you
know just just work with them
because they are really the the
main account there are big there
are partners of it there are
economy too especially probably
and that representative blocks
areas it's not really
necessarily albuquerque I know
they provide a lot of jobs is
just really different for a
rural area so and wallow to play
to all the basis I think it
would be a nasing to really talk
out and maybe try to guide them
how to do this from where to go
next.
Mr chair if I care that one
great example of that is the
sender or housing project that
we just finalize within close
new mexico we have about a four
hundred bed shortfall for our
air and because we are so young
and doing so the next milk con
project we had on the books for
dormatories would not be
complete into at least twenty
thirty one with a tune of about
ninety million dollars
in so trying to find this
creative solutions we teamed
with clovis and some local
partners there to build an
apartment complex that only
houses airmen off and it's
probably much nicer than they
would get within the dormitory
facilities and it's integrated
to the community to provide that
economic base as well as just an
album for air mean to get after
so huge that it was the first
time in the air force that we
partnered with the a private
partner in order to identify
those and we got I think right
now we're at two hundred and six
beds with the opportunity to
hopefully grow to two hundred
ninety five and they continue to
pursue other options in that
same manner.
Thank you mister chairman and
think for your presentation so
i've been working with curling
partnership and hurtling group
to
to to figure out how to do this
fund where it should come from
severance or what areas excuse
should come from I talked to the
chair of house appropriations
and he's the vice chair of
legislative finance committee
and we're we're talking about
where to come from the few
curbans give me a lot of
different things they would like
to see funded using this fund if
you could do that send me more
so we have a great uh strategy
making sure they understand how
important this funded it's just
another funded really really to
do some good things that the
basis needs right you they need
the funds available and we'd
like it to be recurring and
there are winter things we've
been looking at so if you could
do that and then as we talk to
the chair and may be come in
some zooms we're going to have
it and talk to him and yeah I
think that would work just but
brilliant getting his attention
to this is why we need it this
is why it's important that is
why we need now and this is why
we need it recurring um you
could do that that would be that
would help.
Okay great thank you.
Any more questions committee
members.
No more questions of you know
military basis to me in new
mexico is it a lot of economy
you know they curted in
therefore we have twenty seven
thousand people working there I
don't know how much can and have
been a major few tool and you
know we need to support two
people as much as the post
weekend could you know if those
basis go away a lot of stuff is
going to go with them you look
as you bring in in
not already military people but
people retire here you know you
have mechanics you got
carpenters you got.
The ease back people you got
everything that we need and if
we don't take advantage of it
wouldn't wind up losing it and
you know if you can talk based
on that a little bit they'll be
nice
absolutely can therefore speak
currently has about fifty three
hundred airmen in about eight
thousand large when you count
our families and civilians
a couple of things we're looking
for as far as trying to expand
that the vocational aspect is
working with clovis community
college and bring in in some of
their vocational students on
base both from the aircraft
engineering aspect as well as
are you know words short of
civil engineers and so how do we
partner with the local community
including eastern and mexico
university to bring in their
specialty
social workers because we have a
mental health deficit for some
environment and so those
partnerships are huge and then
we can also provide
when there's more opportunities
I give a good example the other
day we're trying to get joint
incentive funds for the veteran
affairs clinic so the va clinic
we have a small one in clovers
were trying to expand that one
to get more specialty care
providers that will help our if
impeded out rates but also one
of the big things that we have a
hard time doing is hiring
contractors local area
specifically because some of
them are concerned because
there's not enough medical and
and veteran or va care in the
area so if we can continue to
expand that a lot more people
when they retire from kenya for
space are going to stay in the
local area so we see a huge
benefit for that but in the
meantime how do we provide
resources that may be like in
the community so they can
capitalize on our resources and
vice versa so it's again it's a
great partnership
you know being one of the two
power words when a three power
projection wings for special
operations but one of only two
bases and maintains of twenty
four seven alert posture we
understand that we are a no fail
base and that is completely
relying upon the community and
you know the waste water
treatments are great example of
that if our waste water
treatment facility fails our
mission feels and so how do we
get creative with local
community in order to find those
alternatives sources of water.
Because that our infrastructure
is aging and there's only so
much air forced out so many air
force dollars to go around to
apply to the infrastructure so
how do we get creative with
local community to take
advantage of this partnerships
and then once you continue to
take advantage of partnerships
people were going to be more and
more in grain was in the
community and I will tell you
from the last time I was here
four years ago it's night and
day the level of integration we
have with the local communities
which is which is goodness
you know with a criminal that
being said you know partnerships
are good you know you're working
with a mere there and he's
working with you at the end of
the day if you guys were
together you'll make it happen
you know if you share bumping
here then I don't know about
this on about that then then we
shall feeling and then if your
basis go away the whole
community fails you're not going
to consider your you know what
you have to offer the community
or the seat and in mexico the
full great you know everything
mechanics like I should
doctors nurse it whatever you
have in their we can benefit
from it because at the end of
the day you know I did a
positive legislation that gives
retired military tax break in
the state new mexico and that
that very important because you
know the complaint why are you
giving these people could their
veterans and to be a veterans
veteran if you retire here and
you wouldn't
would be asked because what's
the average days of a retiree in
the military now.
You I don't know the rate of
coverage age I will tell you is
becoming younger based upon the
blinded retirement initiative at
the federal government has now
so
used to be where you're twenty
years of service was guaranteed
for your pension women's
transition to blend in
retirement that that calculators
has changed a little bit so I
would probably say those
separating earlier and still
getting a a retirement check is
probably younger than it used to
be
however I would say anywhere
between.
Thirty nine to forty three would
probably the average based upon
the twenty year pension policy
and then the reason I brought
but that up her notice because
you know I figured about forty
fifty years old you know
operating and redirect fifty and
still have another career you
know what comes out of that is
the benefit of their knowledge
to stand your mexico and
continue working and and
producing more that's that's
mingle that you know that is my
comments in
appreciate the.
Which gradual procedure service
and you know when I was in
military eternal
you know I was in eighteen years
old in the corner was fifty old
but anyway thanks for your
service again mayor thanks for
what you're doing and I be
appreciated presentation
mister
come on up
you know I don't know whip
castle pick you up if you want
to get microphone but that would
be
commission
put more together economic
impact analysis i'll be happy to
uh report to get that to chair
it
we have a hundred and forty one
five hundred and fifty eight
veterans recited to mexico with
thirty three percent living in
early of county
we the military is a seventeenth
largest.
Employer in the state of new
mexico and the total effect of
the state is presented in the.
Are you act fifty two thousand
two hundred sixty eight jobs two
point eight billion and labor
income more than fourteen
billion and industrial output
and so the fifty two thousand
two hundred sixty eight direct
interact into does jobs are
generated by these
installations.
Equally in roughly double there
are mining oil and cast jobs in
the state it will be happy to
make this record of the home but
it goes into uh
detailed analysis of every
military installation in the
state of mexico.
And i'll be happy to provide
that for you thank you thank you
very much for that
point that this chairman thanks
for the opportunity to be here
today and and to hear what we're
talking about there and and I
assure you i'm doing everything
I can't to never but heads with
the colonel we we we we
frequently uh talk and we talk
about the fact that we are one
community where they were
talking about quality of life or
public safety or would have you
education what's good for the
base and their population is
good for the community so we
don't we don't really do the
distinction where one community
out there on the side of the
state we talk about economic
impact.
Obviously would be devastating
if we were to lose can an air
for space and so we need to
think about the economic impact
but I would submit to you that
the cultural impact and the
positive impact there folks like
criminal johnson and his family
have on new mexicans is worth in
continuing to invest in
encourage our or military to
continue to invest in build out
their missions within our state
and in that small way of just
being a support of state where
this guys the limit on how how
great have that's the report can
be we're participating in in
national defense and and we
cannot be very proud of that so
thank you
thank you for that internal
would consider earlier it really
struggle good you were here when
two thousand sixteen I think
**** and now came back and you
said it's like a day and night
the change that that goes to
shore how much improvement has
been made and that that that
means a lot that means a whole
bunch if you don't see it in I
came back and that's the same
thing
but when you said it today night
to come back to what you got
home now that during point
anyway thanks for the
presentation.
The emotion to adjourn.
So.
Thank you sir thanks for all the
hospitality and imagine I am
sure these are the people
appreciated very much to nice
please to be in and it was a
good day
thank you.
Of first second
