all be given a presentation
today which i'm really looking
forward to and then also white
sands missile range is been at
our doorstep and it's as i've
got an older it's always been
interesting to
what type of impact both those
installations play now just in
our local state but nationally
and internationally and so it's
been a privilege to
come around and fully understand
what they do and can't think all
those servicemen and women
enough for their service to our
country.
Thank you it representative
we're just doing introductions
on the the district you
represent and if you served in
the military or military ties or
if you were represent your area
militar.
Good morning chair my name is
downhill eat them a heat
represent chavis county
I don't have any ties
with them really terry myself
better represent many veterans
and my county thank you for
being here
thank you membership
good morning everyone it's great
to be back in ms spent for for
good years here
I am debi saranian I represent
house district twenty one and
burn all your county as
someone's own a high school area
if you know alva I was air force
reserves for six years and my
son's murging core two tours in
afghanistan my data and my son
allowed me at their force
catamin are now stationed in.
A good page hungry so i'm going
to visit them and but family of
military I work there white
sands as a computer program for
many years ago I told him before
he was born but
but a lot of last cousins have
have a lot of great memories
from ice cream so agreed to be
here thank you.
I'm senator harold hope junior
representing district twenty
three northwest albuquerque
bernalio county area where the
petrol of national monument is I
am retired air force started off
in the listed ranks worked as a
dental technician in that some
time in the reserves within a
med group did air for its round
sign my commission went back in
and served as an acquisitions
officer and a chemist and did
some time over the middle east
as well as talking with the
colonel morgan a little bit
earlier did some time at ditcher
of the test group director spent
a lot of times out here at which
wismer and spending on the north
and stand up in sakora and
avoiding the orace driving up
and down you know especially
late at night and on with myself
thank you for being here and
thank everyone else for being
appreciated that
with that i'll also give
you folks from our staff and
opportunity introduce results as
well
weren't in erin bond with the
legislative council service I am
both my parents were in the air
force on their for spread my
brother currently service the
need.
Apologize to minican yet or does
not have a microphone.
The.
Alright
thank you so we will go ahead
and get started so first up on
the schedule you should all have
the agenda in front of you we
have director of military
veterans programs here and msu
director hector sanchez and you
can come on up.
And on the microphone you're
going to see the little person
you press that when it lights up
red and you got a hot mike in
your you're good to go
you have the floor.
Mister I want to thank you for
inviting me to talk about our
programs to talk about the work
that we're doing here at a new
mexico state university in our
branches as well cause we help
our branch campuses as well in
terms of supporting veterans I
was a veteran that attended any
machine back in the day
I know a lot of the obstacles
that are veterans have to go
through to get their education
and there are a lot my office
primarily is decided to help
take down as many of those
obstacles as possible i've been
director now for a close to
ten years
is servers I I was in the
register's office for some time
before then and i've been with
the university now over twenty
one years
I don't feel that all for some
reason I have twenty one years
unlike it has really been that
long time just passes.
But the best time the best arm
enjoyment that i've had has been
working with our veterans here
at new mexico state university
as I mentioned there might my
position even though it is a a
campus position is also a
a system why position to help
our other campuses across the
state
we've had a lot of work that has
been done in variety of
different campuses as you may or
may not know our grants campus
has gone through changes in
adding a resource center to
for students there were its
applies to them computers to do
their homework a place to study
a place to basically other
veterans to meet other veterans
so there have been a lot of good
work and by the by the way
submit much that supported by
the state legislator
legislation so i'm i'm very
thankful for that alamo gordo
campus is a important campus for
us because it is a direct link
to hollowing her for space I
served it halloween I was there
for four years and that's how I
got initially my associates
degree I was able to go on the
weekends and do some night score
and knock out my associates
degree so by the time I left the
military I read had a degree
with the
tuition assistance program that
the military has so it would
have been it would have been
very difficult especially in
those days this was pre kind of
pre internet
you had to have a brick and
mortar school to go to court
college in those days
and or donate a campus community
college also has a large
population of veterans that
attend for vocational reasons.
We get a lot of veterans to come
into our office that don't know
what they want to do and they
think well I need to go when
could get a university degree
when we find out that their
interest is really more in hands
on and so we encourage them to
think about a vocational degree
and a lot of them do that
whether they electrical plumbing
automotive and or
animal science so they've been
instrumental in making sure that
we have programs are too
you know to help her batteries
and even though
and this is something that's
very important to me
unfortunately um
unam in any mission we have some
resources that we can offer
student veterans but there are a
lot of other
universities in schools across
the state that have basically
very little if any services that
are offered and so many times we
will help those other
institutions in terms of letting
the mill what programs that the
va has letting them no state
programs and helping those
institutions
or help their veterans I don't
care where a veteran is if they
come to any machine union or
western I just want to make sure
that that better and served as
much as possible at their campus
were ever that maybe so I think
that's an important thing that
night just I mean just not me
but my staff does they go out of
the way to help other schools in
the state to make sure that we
we support all veterans going to
school no matter they come in a
monsieur or any well where else
so what is our mission in our
office
as director I think the number
one mission that we have is
advocacy
if we do not advocate for a
veterans then there will be no
one that will and that's
detriment before officers offer
started in two thousand and ten.
In before out before I know I
was a well but after I became
a member of the staff of any
missue when I went to a two two
new mexican state there was
nothing
there were no programs
there were no programming if I
bump into another veteran it was
by sheer luck
the only thing that we had was
one woman very nice women miss
of army home who did educational
benefits but that was it
in two thousand and ten the
university decided that we could
not do that anymore that our
population here was too big to
neglect our veterans and so one
of the big things it happened is
the administration from that
point forward found out all the
issues that veterans had to go
through
not because before then they
didn't care
is because before then they just
did know they did not they
needed to do what better is all
the obstacles that they had to
go through and so more office
today is to make sure that the
administration knows
what our veterans have to go
through what issues they that
the
the day is students have to
um yep put up with been some
ways to be veterans it wasn't a
little recently to be honest
with you that we had a policy
that allowed veterans in
particular military to serve
their obligations in the in the
reserve
before then this was
I am talking recent two thousand
twenty two if a very needed to
to be away from class
they were told sorry that's not
an approved and approved
activity um
in the nora and our ministration
policy again not because the
administration didn't care they
just didn't know this was an
issue.
And the professors and the
instructors did know that it was
an issue so our office changed
that we got with the faculty
senate and said this needed to
change any changed and now any
military or reserve a state has
to obligation to go out and
serve for training or our
mission is entitled to be
excused from class and if for
some reason they cannot complete
class because they just don't
have the the the time because of
the mission is first right then
we will refund them all the
tuition all their books no
questions asked that we do here
because it's the right thing to
do it wasn't being done for a
long time but again I want to
stress because the
administration just did not was
a problem we are now tasked to
make sure the administration
knows about problems like this
and so
I advocacy is probably at the
top of our mission within
department
we also coordinate many efforts
the veterans and frankly
military have one using their
benefits
I can say that the va is not
probably the friendliest place
or the easiest place to request
benefits for a variety of
different reasons in many
veterans are confused on what
they qualify for in what they
don't so one of our task is to
make sure veterans could help
where to go what information to
take what their benefits give
them
because it is one of the most
important things that are
veteran gets when they and more
military get when they they
serve is to help with their
military education
I can tell you this one thing if
it wasn't for the military I
would not be here.
I would have had all the doors
opened education is given me
education was the most important
thing that the military gave me
so that I couldn't when I left
the military I could serve my
community serve the the people
in my community in the way that
I thought it was
to benefit to me so education is
very important and that's one of
the things we we
recorded
the other thing that we do as
well as we help them with many
times access to education
they may have medical
mental issues that they need
help with and we have a
department to can coordinate for
them to get help so when they go
to the classroom if they need
more time to take their exams
the instructors and professors
will give them if they need a
special environment for them to
take their exams or their
quizzes we will do that if they
need accommodations made because
they have to go cba medical and
they're going to have to be away
from class we will help them
with that so those are things
that that we that we
that we help with we also help
with our academic issues
we had a situation
we we had a veteran that didn't
have enough date
and we have a pantry at the
university but this veteran was
too ashamed to go and get food
we told the veteran don't worry
will get the food for you will
bring in to our office and you
can come get it here
they will probably if they
didn't feel comfortable talking
to us about it maybe they would
have gone hungry but our staff
was able to can I help them
because we tried a form of a a
relationship with our veterans
as much as we can so that they
know that they can come to us
when they need help.
And you know in the military
we're told you know green it out
tough it out and we have that
money said and when we leave we
have that same money said that
we have to do it but there's no
shame of asking for help there's
no shame for for for for telling
someone that you that you need
to help so that's one thing that
we also coordinate is those
things in in in
more than port the net
we we want them to come we want
to be there
one stop shop we don't want them
to have to go to the register's
office or two of financially
we want them to come to us first
and if we can help them then we
will send him to the right
department so that's why we say
there were a one stop shop so
when veterans apply to any
missue the first thing they're
going to get if they check the
box that says there are veteran
or their militaries is there
going to get a note saying
here's an office for you this is
our contact information you need
any help come to us we will help
you in any way we can and so we
try to get the word out the
other thing we do to entice our
veterans that a lot of students
don't get but I like that we do
it is when they come to our
office we offer them free
printing free scanning we offer
them free coffee donuts we have
a lounge area where they can
come if they want to put their
food their microwave so they
form that relationships that we
need to form with them the other
thing that we do is we have a
computer lap
it's six computers but when I
first got to be director was
asked do we really need the
computers are we have a lab
across the the hallway with
sixty computers do we really
need to have that so we'll let
me think about that well as I
became more aware.
Yes we do need it in the reason
why we need it is not because
those computers across the hall
can't do the same thing they
can't study but they know that
when they sit in a computer that
there that the person next with
them is a veteran
and they can share their
experiences the things that
they're going through the things
that they've I mean it is war
stories it is stories about
their family where they served
how they serve and so I think
it's vital that we have our
computers there so that they
know that they can come to our
office in sit down and know if
they want to talk to the veteran
they can the they're not the
only veteran on campus the other
thing that we do is we hire
student veterans we have seven
work studies there are that have
served in the military some of
our dependents as well we want
to hire them so that they also
communicate with them so they
know that they they served with
them and are going through the
same issues
there there that that they are
going through one of the things
that i've been cited with is in
the last two years we've
we've
created a mentorship program the
mentorship program is a a
program that helps first year
and even second year veterans to
transition to being a student
see when you're in the military
is for those who you have our
served
you know what you need to do
right you know where you need to
be you know there's a time you
know there's a place and you're
told many times this is what you
need to do
well when you leave that
structure isn't there anymore
and now you're on your own no
one's telling you to go class no
one's telling you what to do and
so the mentorship program is a
structure for them.
But it also helps them
transition and so we have a
coordinator who serves our
mentor and he sits down with
them and basically anything they
need he will provide information
for them and we make sure it's a
voluntary program we don't make
our veterans go through it but
it's voluntary
and so yes so one thing that I
would like to
leave we with as well is that we
do get a stigma
for some reason
that veterans
have post dramatic stress
disorder depression
suffer from a variety of
different health and physical
issues and yes we do we do have
veterans here
but let me tell you something
most of our veterans that are
serving
our excelling
edining issue the average gpa
for a vet for the population for
for our students is three point
one
the average gpa for a veteran is
three point three
higher than the average the
student many professors are
asking the caller office cause
they want
graduates that are military or
veterans because they know when
they get veteran that they know
that their mature
that you'd have discipline and
can lead and so I just want to
make that point that are most of
our veterans or excelling in our
programs and are going out in
achieving very important and
great things
let me talk about the
educational part and give you
some statistics that you may
want to
know about.
So we administer through our
office two basic programs the gi
bill which is the oldest arm
scholarship program in the
united states
and also tuition assistance that
is offered by the department of
defense
currently we have overall four
hundred veterans there are ten
main campus
of the four hundred that attend
about two hundred and fifty
around two hundred and fifty or
actually receiving gi bill
benefits whether it's post nine
eleven
chapter thirty which is now
going away
but I would like to point out a
statistic did his change to
dramatically since i've been
director and that I said there's
a almost drink to ten years
when I started director
about eighty percent of our
beneficiaries were military and
veteran twenty percent
were
were dependents meaning spouses
children wouldn't today
sixty percent of our
beneficiaries are dependence now
there's good and bad news to
that
the good news is that benefits
are going to
their families
for a variety of different
reasons and it's been growing
the bad news is that the reason
many of them are receiving these
benefits is because many of our
veterans that have served are
now going a hundred percent
disabled
there are
because that's part of the deal
for chapter thirty five which is
our biggest program to receive
that program you have to be a
hundred percent disabled so that
you can then give educational
benefits to your dependence and
so we're seeing more in more in
that and that's just.
The time now that has happened
since the iraq and the
afghanistan wars there are
veterans are now more and more
going to disabled rating and and
are giving that
the benefit to their through
their spouses through the
dependent so I just wanted to
point that out i'm over all in
the system we have around over
eight hundred if you include all
of our branch
campus for a veterans
and so that is important for you
to know just the weather it's
changing the democratics of what
who were serving in our office
but we serve them regardless the
same way they're they're a
dependent or a member of the
military or better there are
military family and we give them
the same services that we would
give any veteran or military in
our office
one thing they're also talk
about while I talk is veteran
housing
thanks to the new mexican
legislator many years ago when
i'm many may a few years ago we
had an upgrade to our veteran
housing here on campus up some
of that money came from the
legislature and I want to thank
you for that we will be able to
put new appliances in these
on in these homes and these
homes are important because
they're on campus
and because they're for families
and many times there a whole lot
less expensive than going on to
the community and
yes they're old they were built
in the nineteen fifties center
back but it's it's something
where they can live that we can
bring their family have a yard
of front yard a backyard they
can bring their dogs and stuff
and they're with other veterans
that are in their neighbors and
so this is a program that
actually any misuse was one of
the first to start in the
nation.
And so that program is still
going on
and lastly because I know i'm
running a little shorter and
time I like to talk about or tc
program we do have an artistic
program here
on campus for both the army and
the air force we have new
commanders if they have started
and so
there's been a at least in the
since i've been director a
gradually decreased
unfortunately in applicants and
cadets for a variety of
different reasons I think one of
the reasons is there's just more
opportunities to get your
education on a variety of
different ways obviously the
state
is offering a variety of
different scholarship programs
and so the incentive of going to
the military for your education
is less now than it has been and
so the the the the branches have
made a determination to keep
those um origins he programs
going to combine them with you
tip
and so you tap
rtc and are any mess you will
share commandership so the
commander of of any message will
also be come the commander over
there at you tap
I don't know if they that'll
change but at least for now
that's the weird is so just
wanted to give you kind of an
update on our tc program and
with that
willing to take any questions or
anything else until my time is
up thank you thank you
do we have any questions from
the committee
center block.
You let her come in at the end
so you go thank us to change my
share
just like to talk about the rtc
thing for a minute are you
saying that.
They're shutting down the
detachments here at an issue for
the army in the air force and
they're going to be a crosstown
for you tip.
But a red we'll see a red light
okay I know the detachment is
still the battling **** so the
detachment is not going to
change it's that now they're the
commanders for the artistic
program for both you tip and
any months you will now share
responsibilities for both
detachments so so that's the way
it's been described to me
currently now will that ever
change where they would they
would combine the attachments in
in a physical sense I don't know
but i'm from my understanding
it's just the sharing of the
structured leadership
places chair I want to make sure
I understand so you're saying
the the billets for the army the
air force will still stay at the
mexico state
that's correct so we still have
our cadets we have a actually
department are we still have
military science all the all the
programming for the r to
separate still in place
mischair mister
we had a brief from a unama a
gentleman couple gentlemen
similar to you that are working
up there the area for the
veterans is that open to their
families and children as well
where they're
have access to this
area for computers in and coffee
or food or whatever guess of
course guess don't depend it as
I had mentioned previously if we
consider him no different than
our veterans are active due to
military in terms of what
services we provide obviously
they meet depending on the
the benefit they're receiving
they may not qualify under but
regardless if they are if they
identify as a dependent they can
come to our office
technically then the beat let me
just correct that any student
can come into our office.
It's open to all students that
they the the thing that we
provide the particularly the
stuff that cost money
such as the printing that is
done for veterans independence
of veterans because that we have
money to tallocate its specific
for that group some just wanted
to just two more quick questions
for chair so the vso's for like
order the purple heart the d a b
the the vfw american region are
those vso's you do they
coordinate with your office to
help veterans either apply for
their disability benefits or
reapply for their benefits
yes weak partner with all those
organizations particularly with
certain events that we do on
campus but we invite them over
so that they talk to our
veterans and they usually will
have a table or tables did they
will have information for a
veterans on membership to their
first of all to their
organizations but also on
certain programs certain
scholarships that they
and other activities just give
you an example of one year the
american leach and opened up
their kitchen for our student
veteran organization so that
could you fundraiser for food
for their organization so we we
definitely try to partner as
much as possible with these
organizations because many of
them have us benefits that are
veterans can use here on campus
chair and how how far is that va
i'll pass off from here like
forty five minutes away an hour
away
from your passo you are you
talking the seaback or with
specific um
the seapark there yes it it it
is probably forty five to an
hour away if they're forced to
go to to the past so
and then lastly miss chair
mister sanchez what what do you
need for much I mean where's
your g.
Where was your shortfalls for
support for the veterans that
you need to legislate yourself
on
it she mentioned it kind of and
I know there's been initiatives
in the past
I wanted to say how fortunate we
are here at new mexico state to
have the backing from the
administration that I receive I
can go to any ding and ask for
support and they will almost
likely always say how much do
you need my concern is those
smaller schools in the rural
areas they don't have anyone
they don't have an office for
for veterans they don't have a
place for them the goal i'm
concerned for those veterans
because it had was here that I
had that situation and I felt
isolated I felt only as a
veteran and so my concern is
that I think that we need to do
better to help our smaller
schools in the state with some
finding or services so that they
can provide what we're providing
here on campus so if they're
going to eastern or if they're
going to per towers or if
they're going to a smaller
school that they still have some
services there and currently
unfortunately many don't there's
variety of to little services
that these other institutions
thank you I miss chair thank you
such as greatly appreciate what
you do for veterans they're
dependent on children and just
let us know you have a lot of
advocates up and up in the round
house for you and for a veterans
out there so I appreciate I
think one of the things I I sure
the other committee members
picked up on it but the three
point three gpa higher than what
the normal students have three
point one I mean that's that's
pretty impressive right there
I would imagine it would be
higher if you didn't have the
army in there
but I definitely appreciate
the the focus on academics for
for our veterans.
Thank you mister chair
senator pinto mister chair
members of the community thank
you for your presentation
if you just need some climate do
you get high school students
that continue with day are
martial tc in high school and
then they get to tune to higher
ed they continue the program or
something
a good question so if there are
a
student at a rtc program and
they're coming ten him as you
most likely they're looking at
unless they join the reserves or
the guard most likely looking at
being an rtc cadet
as I mention or may have no
mention we do have separate
missions we deal with the
veteran and act of duty while
rtc is a trip officer training
core program
they have their own mission
their own program so we if they
came to our office we would then
get them in contact with the
liaison over there are to c so
they can see if that's an
interested thing that they would
want to be part take so that's
how we would help that student
thank you mister chair members
of the community because my
understanding some of my mind
school district that had these
programs the they don't have the
min.
At the high school level so.
Thank you mister
chair
thank you senator representative
million
thank you mister chair
mr sanchez thank you for the
presentation my question is how
many houses you have available
for a families
my understanding is we have
around fourteen units of up of
over there are at any one time
available but really we don't if
we needed to make more because
we do have bigger rate it's it's
not like we have these united
states these units were improved
and they were they were given
additional money so we can
improve the
facilities but if we want it to
expand it further out week would
have more but we and it's up to
the veteran whether they want to
be in that community or not but
we try to
publish a segregate is a bad
word but we try to group them in
that area so it's really an area
more than units but when i'm
talking about family housing is
just that those units that we've
we've kind of improved but we
definitely can increase that if
we had more they needed them
great and had big boat there's
you know normally my
understanding is they're too
bedroom to bedroom i'm not sure
the square footage but their
average size are not very big
i'll be honest with you but
they're but two bedroom of front
backyard are spaces so
and
they know housing is made a
effort to make them as cheap as
possible to for them that I mean
I think they're in the six
hundred seven hundred thousand
range which at in campus around
is almost
just half of what you would get
if you were anywhere else and
how can be apply for them
if they they have to come to our
office we will go ahead and show
them where they can do in our
housing case it's a housing.
Service and so they just need to
apply and see that they want to
are there a veteran and they
want to apply for the family
housing unit on campus
wonderful thank you for that
answer mr chair thank you
thank you now to the pressure
thank you mister turment and
think again for the presentation
and besides trying to figure out
where your officers and it's is
the family housing the southwest
corner were by the interior
fields that were the old
mission chair
yes it's very close it's it's
it's probably the older of the
of the housing that we still
have we've we've looked at
renovating them more than
rebuilding them because
rebuilding would be very
expensive and so those units are
there even though they're older
they still work and we can
provide them at a cheaper cost
for a veteran if we can keep
them up and running but yet
you're right it's in the can't
custom in from your areas
it's a great area i'm living on
campuses is a huge benefit so in
all utilities you're paid by the
way they don't pay for any
utilities are a water gas
garbage all that I even even
think about my my going beyond
them I don't know if wi fi is
free I know it's free on campus
I don't know if it makes it out
to there but but all utilities
are paid to
mister chairman sorry is your
where is it located is a pre
central located on the capital
office but yes what i'm glad to
say that we we've gone through
of a journey to be where we are
and let me explain to that we
were once in garcia and x which
is a good facility but we were
the reason my office moved from
there is we had international
programs next door and there
were issues being caused
particularly with our middle
eastern students and the the
administration made it an
attempt to so to work can we
put.
Military
I was an advocate I wasn't
director at the time but a lot
of people said we need to put it
the heart of our institution the
heart of our institution is
corporate because that's where
the student union is that's
where all the food is that where
everything is so we are prime
and center in corporate
it's easily accessible everybody
knows where it's at its eighty
eight very complaint and and i'm
going to be kicked out screaming
shouting if they ever try to
move from that facility.
And thank you and thank you for
what you do and you know i've
worked a lot with
the UNM director and the
equivalent of their went back to
school a few years ago and
worked with them as well and as
a person that has a little more
options and being retired and
not really needing their
resources i'm just happy it's
there i'm also happy to wall
glad you brought up the points
of the barriers
I remember getting out of the
air force joining the reserves
starting I first semester at unm
and the old gibil before the
post nine eleven where you
literally register for school
which you literally had a weight
a month to get that check and so
I remember me and other retreats
like that last two weeks here
literally using your credit card
and like where am I going to eat
or hang out at the events
because you know and and the
served there's a lot of left
over food in your light just
trying to manage that majority
you know trying to cover your
other bills and gas and
everything else and parking at
you and emerate so.
People just need to understand
that
it's tough getting out of a
system to wear a lot of times
your focus is just the mission
in your job and you have those
one start shop facilities on
base to get s.
Well you need a talk to them you
talk to them and so i'm happy
that there's a place that we're
the.
Just a couple of questions you
talked about the rotsi and you
talked about the rotsi commander
running
you tap and nmsu first stuff
what rotting programs are in an
issue of air force army I guess
which which service mister scher
we have both army and air force
programs at any mission and so
when you talked about the
command were you talking about
that they're just are they going
to share the air force command
is going to do command for both
or the army or book combined
with i'm i'm assuming it's just
for one service well actually
from my understanding I think
the the services have made a
coordinated effort I don't know
if it was a coordinated effort
between the air force in the
army but my understanding is
right now both the army and the
air force are sharing
commandership of both you tip
the card rate are still
different there's card read here
that is for any messu and
there's card reform for you tap
that's not changed because there
can't be that can be shared but
in terms of the actual command
and I believe it's just a cost
saving measure for the for the
both the services so that they
don't have to put another
middle command officer to do one
program only they can since it's
relatively close by.
That they can come to both
campus is to
for leadership
well bank thank you for
clarified clarifying that and
i've seen this in other places
where you have some big
university is kind of around a
city and it's like each one
doesn't need their own rotten
attachment rate they can kinda
share and and have seen some of
that so that's great you
mentioned the fact that now we
have a lot more folks receiving
a hundred percent disability and
then those benefits
transitioning to their
dependence
and like you said it's great
that those benefits are being
used but there's that cost of
what's happening.
My question is are we tracking
dependents that are using the
gibil off of the new one because
I remember when I retired in
twenty eighteen there were folks
who had the option that if they
knew they weren't going to go to
school they could go ahead and
pass that on to their children
and so are you seeing some of
that is that are are those
numbers and I guess those some
of the dependents you're seeing
as well to where they're just
i'm i'm you know you could bent
you could be an officer that has
plenty of degrees in it and
getting the post gi bill which
are like I want to take care of
my kids are you seen some of the
students.
Mister chair yes we are seeing
what is called the transfer of
entitlement proposed nine eleven
which is the ability to transfer
post nine eleven benefits to
your I dependents that frankly
is a
uhm recruitment tool for the ud
so another or is to get that
they have to put in ten years
minimum in the military and then
they get that ability to do that
of my understanding and against
just my understandable duty's
drawing back on that but who
knows anything to do can change
where we're getting in and and
that's a small percentage maybe
five percent where we're getting
the biggest percentage is
chapter thirty five dependent
educational assistance which is
geared specifically to those
veterans that have now been one
hundred percent declared
disabled that automatically
gives their other dependence
legal dependents at least at
that point chapter thirty five
benefits which is a stipend it's
it's different than the post
nine eleven which you get
tuition in fees housing
in book allowance with the with
the chap of thirty five it's a a
one time when at one time but
per month stipend for anything
that you need if it's more great
if it's less used out of your
pocket
but then and that's what we're
seeing eighty eighty five
percent increase since I have
been here
thank you thank you for the
presentation and thank you for
answer questions I appreciate
thank you very much thank you
and thank you for inviting me I
saw is a pleasure to talk about
what we're doing here in new
mexico state and welcome to new
mexico state all right thank
you.
With that we'll move on to our
next presentation colonel john
strippling the deputy commander
of the forty ninth wing at
holland air force base
and shelly bailey that chief
community engagement for the
forty ninth wing public affairs
of parliament air for space
you're welcome to common up.
And for the committee members
there are the meeting minutes in
the folder um if you want to
just take a look will be voting
to accept those later on but I
would get folks a chance to take
a l.
The.
So
welcome failing welcome colonel.
The on this little microphone is
a little person in the middle
bottom there you just pressed
that like some read when it's
read the mike's hot and you're
ready to talk.
The.
And you have the floor all right
mister
members of school thank you so
much for the opportunity as I
was introduced cornell john
strippling just took over from
the money's thick results about
a month ago
I am the departy we committed
the four night wing at home and
a four space and today I will be
presenting a brief overview of
the wing addressing some of our
challenges and then opening up
the floor for any questions that
you all may have.
The.
I am a r organized drawing pill
it by trade and a enjoy new
mexico for my first month so
far.
If.
We're gonna electronically keep
the longer I just tell you slide
of okay perfect thank you so
over all the four ninth wing as
you see is our mission vision
and priorities there again we
are currently a training face at
our heart so training world
class airman and aircrew for the
great power competition which
has its additional challenges
our priorities are airman
mission and community so glad to
be here for that meet one of our
priorities a brief moment on our
history or forty nine history so
we were born in war two we
started off is
a group to.
Back up to mcarthur is his
specific campaign began
and we had
for lifting air error
successors and that war and I
allowed douglas mcarthur to turn
us the fight and forty niners
and hence that's our name to
this day so very cool we have a
number of
metal honor winners a number of
presidential citations and then
I caught some solid action at
the tail into vietnam longer
street throughout the various
worst american history.
Or to slide getting fast forward
present day of late last three
operational fighters we flew
with fifteen of the top left
therefore and seventeen on the
right there and then finally it
f twenty two before we
transition to a training base.
Slide a young new mexican
history better than me but
excited to be here and
glad to be partnered with the
state.
Next slide a little hollow in
history and so
like advertised we did indeed
train the first
chump to get space effectively
named home crowd tibbets were
strained here before the noga
gammission I say here sorry hold
an air force base and then of
course the gordo
royalty of doctor stop and for
lifting record of testing a
human capacity and plate in
various other capacities there
at the test track.
Next slide uh so are fundamental
mission is building air crew for
sixteens and ninety nine such
will go into in a little bit
more detail and within that
basic cormission our four lowest
accomplished flight training
sort of generation willness and
mission support all to get our
aircraft the door ready to fight
the great power competit.
Next slide so sixteen one of our
two mean major weapons systems
that we train aircraft for it is
the largest f sixteen unit by
number of aircrafts in a
location in the world to invest
my knowledge certainly in the
united states eighty one
aircraft you can see there's
three fighter squadrons a train
scotter and operational support
squad and it is big it is busy
or flying about fifty sorties a
day uh.
Minus some exceptions including
fridays which we don't fly at
present.
Uh you can see there it's called
the becourse it's the
fundamental course from pilots
that are flown other aircraft
now they're flying an actual
fighter at sixteen for the first
time it is program for eight
months often takes a lot longer
to the various challenges we
have and you can see enter their
the graduate certified and night
vision low altitude air air they
are basically trained at sixteen
pilot on the other end of this.
Are challenges are attrition
that everyone gets through it's
a challenging course on and
timeline variety of things drive
that timeline but in general
it's much longer than eight
months as program that's one of
the things for struggling with
on the at sixteen side overall
you can expect eighty of sixteen
pilots per year and we're
definitely looking to increase
that but for now that's the
thoroughput of hollman air for
space and our money fifty fourth
fighter group
next slide low closer to my
heart empty nine training here
you can see it is also the
largest inch you know and wing
based on how many aircraft we
have for that number does
fluctuate over time.
You'll see twelve gces that
stands for ground control
stations that's how we operate
the reepers and cannot reverse
you see the four night
operations group is a group of
handles the training of those
air crew it's not just the four
squadrons you see there but we
have two geographically
separated training units that we
call for use or formal training
units four ninety first is up in
syracuse new york and then the
four ninety second is at march
reservation and riverside
california so they are under our
wing and we do work with them
and manage them uh
appropriately.
As you can see the aircraft for
the repairs include both pilot
and since you're operator so for
those don't know the pilots on
the left side and then there's
an enlisted center operator on
the right they both go through
this ftu training together it's
about five and a half months
they are shacking their time and
it is producing so you can see
versus eighty they got four
hundred and fifty air crew
that's pilots and since they're
going through every year so uh
impressive numbers overall they
do drop they are certified and
beeves at aircraft qualification
including the him at a ground
missiles which kind of the
favorite point weapon of choice
for the repairs give you twelve
and gb thirty eight which are
the laser guided and gps gps got
it weapons were some dance kill
chain familiarity and the
maritime environment.
Uh so challenges are kind of
similar attrition that I don't
think that timeline is is
actually challenged anymore that
the united states are good jobs
then right on track.
Next slide we don't just have
rebursed and at sixteen vipers
of ah a variety of different
airmen and what not and so
leading and developing airman as
a focus of the very place so and
within that you see the six
lines of effort including things
like fitness and resources to
ensure our airman are equipped
to develop.
On a canceled the other aspects
of the base said you go to the
next slide there uh we have
joint international training so
i've note the italians just got
weapons on their so they they
have a repreferent and and so
they've brought a number of
initial cadre instructors to
holliman we got them trained up
on how to use weapons for their
newly acquired weapons system
early weapons on their weapons
system and then sent them up so
we do have some permanent party
in united structures it's kind
of unique and a core aspect so
we have a permanent party
italians and we are picking up
netherland
instructors here shortly so kind
of a cool partnership we have at
holliman
fms for military sales if you're
not familiar it's a cell in
these repears around the world
and it's actually kind of
growing and and a little bit
international in flavor summer
sixteens
oh sorry skeptic at the marine
corps does have their f
equipment there you can see the
numbers on the sides and that's
where they are for now there is
some discussion of whether
they're going to stay or move to
another location I believe
they're concerning pennsylvania
but for now that's a marine
corps decision but for now we're
happy to have a partners of the
marine corps excited they have
reeperts and actually provide if
an interesting joint
interoperability option as you
play familiar the services kind
of rarely have the same aircraft
so it's been a benefit for the
repair community.
Okay I see perfect thank you for
that
we have a number of other
mission partners at home and
it's quite a list actually if
you were to go through the whole
thing uh the oldest focus on to
for this presentation and then
if you have any other follow up
questions i'll be happy to
answer
so first
seventy four test group primary
statements for that high speed
test track and think it most
people attracting that book from
the history lesson we got as
well as or whatever as well as I
just kind of in the news or
whatnot but they do a lot of
tests as you'll probably know
that air space around holland
and it's premo the test
facilities are all very
excellent so kind of a couple
interesting things does provide
some other aircrafts we have two
thirty eight and see twelve
flying around halloween as part
of the weapons in january
testing anything gps the denied
environment which is something
the military's focused on now as
we care up for a great power
competition this particular task
group seven or fourth is is our
go to for the air force national
radar cross section test
facility that's a really good
one I feel like a chance to look
at the bottom right of your
slide there may be easy to see
on the screen to say the runway
can it comes to an end there
then they have a bunch of
equipment and
year to either move the aircraft
around or tested different radio
frequencies as well as I are
and then finally going to
interesting directed energy as a
big effort in the test group and
that's actually kind of more.
White aperture on that one but
right now this counter I man
aerial systems as a focus of
that group which is great
because that's a challenging a.
Um emerging threats if you will
uh again six hundred eight six
hundred eight total percent
about a hundred million dollars
annual budget so they are a big
component of hollowing.
Over to what we effectively call
bare base or six thirty fifth
material maintenance group they
perform a number of functions
one is the world or reserve
material and for familiar we
stop a lot of war material said
that we go to war it's available
and ready to be used they also
support what the air force is
emphasising these days is as I
will come back which is
essentially.
We've operated off these big
safe bases that are away from
the enemy that is our at risk
now is an hour diversifying our
airfields moving around agially
for that we can still operate in
generate air power even in a
contestant farm including our
airfield so they're a big
component of enabling that both
in the test and train as well as
equipment and initial stand up
the various airfield facilities
they have a huge deployment
commitment that comes with that
they are the largest world or
reserve material
location and the dod and over
four thousand containers that's
a big operation and takes up a
big chunk of.
Are our base and our excellent
partners with us at home.
All right over the next slide so
third largest air for space and
the united states at least fire
square mileage as you can see
their fourteen thousand
buildings a little over under
eleven hundred
on base homes for our airman
overall impact the region
three quarters of the billion
there you can see and then
footprints pretty large
particularly compared to all the
gordon so about ten thousand
folks directly related to the
base plus eight thousand
addition through retirees
reserve
and so i'm alborized thirty one
thousand selves they were a big
portion of the region there is
the base.
The.
Three runways all very long
screen spot in the air space as
this is great we have it's a
great spot for air space as we
do various training and what not
the reverse generally can stay
south of the base the fighters
fly around a little bit more as
they go much faster and much
farther as you can imagine
reversing go far too it just
takes a long time
there are three ranges to drop
weapons which is excellent we
did have a talent mower our mill
military operating area that was
doubled so despite all that
speeds were always fight for
more just because everything's
always
demanding more more air space so
I can never have enough but it
has been effective for the
various training programs we
have and the ranges do provide
um some realistic trading
environment not just scoring at
some of the smokes there imitate
sam launches and what not so
it's been an excellent resource
for our training programs.
Next slide
so if you were challenges that
we we are one of ten continental
united states remote and or
isolated installations and we'll
get in a few days but some of
the challenges we have our child
care access to medical care
housing and school.
Uh it starts with.
That start on the right there
it's not always very rate all
new mexico as far as someone
moving accordo as folks are
concerning their options that
certainly what pops as you do
your little google search about
the new home you might have a
new mexico that the schools
aren't ranked very well.
Alright so right off with cdc
cobad killed us and earners
hiring free is killed us and we
have not recovered we're doing
better than some basis we still
have our cdc open uh weightless
about a hundred and fifty kids
right now for the city on base
and it's just unfortunate hiring
freeze had it's just right if
you're familiar with the way we
do cdc a lot of the spouses of
our active duty rotate out over
summer or so as they start
roading we're taking out that
hiring freeze at and so it's
been a real challenge for us
that their school care and
preschool cares not as bad but
the street cdc is a big
challenge for us and it's also
challenged and base so even if
you want to throw money at the
problem it's just hard to get
child care and that cdc is been
a hard point for us to deal with
at the weightless there says one
of four but I updated that
number and and it's about one
forty eight right now.
Next line uhm so as we mentioned
as you you see you might be
going to mexico the initial
numbers do concern you and it's
a overall retention problem with
the military as you move around
this active duty life you're
doing this to your family and
kids and as you move around not
always at a challenge to move
your kids around but sometimes
you go from school district that
has either different curriculum
are much more advanced crickle
and down and then back again
particularly for officers that
go back and forth to the
washington area as a big
challenge anyway top five
retents an issue for activity at
large
now interestingly holliman and
middle school elementary school
are pretty solid are very
impressed that facilities
educations good but you
essentially have to learn on
base to go to the schools that
puts a lot of pressure on the
base healthy that doesn't always
have the capacity for everybody
so anyway it is a challenge but
a few winds
we we do appreciate uhm
that the local school offer some
advance academics should be some
of college credit stuff that you
can accomplish while you're in
high school
we were awarded the duty star
base that kicks off in september
so we're pretty excited to see
that if i'm not familiar targets
fifth graders essentially can't
expand more we'll see where it
goes uh offers them some hands
on stem like education as walls
and interactions with various
military members to get the
interest parked and both them
and federal service so we look
forward to starting that off
here about a month.
The new real school looks
amazing I was just talking about
how president of the
construction workers is they're
not slowing down and this brutal
heat as they get that thing
constructed and looking forward
opening next year
next year.
Is the help.
Um yeah I think that covers
that.
And
I did want to touch on a couple
the other issues that we had
brought up.
Yeah and there's access to
medical care so.
You know not sure this direct
form for it but it's into a lot
of our specially cares and el
passo and so that becomes a big
challenge because anything over
a hundred miles try careful will
cover that transit so we're just
below about threshold through
answers you know it's just a
pain but for our younger
enlisted that's that's a pretty
significant bill on their live
to drive just the gas and time
alone and certainly where that
that is a challenge additionally
if you're familiar with military
assignment process that we have
exceptional matter medical
family program and this location
does not always support our
families that are in that
program and so it does launch
their assured it causes and some
difficulties for us manning the
base appropriately just as
there's a
family the special medical needs
of challenges not just if
they're here but also they have
stuff that this area can't
support so without I conclude my
brother briefing and i'm looking
forward to your questions.
Thank you do we have any
questions from any of the
committee members.
Center blood.
Yeah.
Thanks to your vice chair couple
quick questions here
so did you guys uhm switch the
the the mission from luke for
the succeeds the vipers come to
halloween is that I understand
and then you lost a raptors.
A copy yeah I believe that's
true I don't know my exact
history but my my caught new to
here says that's true I forget
me mister chair and members of
the committee thank you for the
question
so I know we receive some
aircraft but the f twenty two
mission went away and twenty
eighteen and around sixteen
fifteen we picked up the
fifteenth of over overlap and I
i'm not sure where they're ftu
previous things chair and sir
was at a hit to manpower and
economic development reduction
economic development when you go
from the f twenty two to.
Uh training pilots for the
viper.
Mr chair senator block and so
every chart i've seen are mainly
growth is only increased as I
said at sixteen numbers
authorities and number of
aircraft are massive.
Scheduled thank you chair so
seriously a pilot shortage is in
the air force right now for
fighters or heavies or.
And man.
Or all
mister chair senior block the
senate block yes there is it's a
big focus of the air force now
at you have to separate or pa
pilot
and I call legacy pilots since I
am an
traditional pilots the
traditional pilot shortage is
nathan and in the thousands for
the air force you've guidance
but uh report mannings actually
pretty pretty solid right now
they was charged a few more
quick questions here so the e f
m p we heard that last month
with curtain there are twenty
five percent if mp rejection
rate which is huge and curling
by the ways in a metro area you
are not canon is not I mean I
was stationed at my not in
belgium as a miscell here and we
had some tougher and p issues up
there as well which mp uh
retention rejection rates.
This fear center block and I I
was trying to actually get that
information right before this
meeting and you don't have a
connection would be happy to
follow up great I would say
pocket about a third but i'll
get you to the exact
chair colonel there the cdc had
a hundred and fifty
kid wait there are you guys that
sounds like a a need maybe the
local community can pick up is
are they picking up the the
child care outside the base
defense.
This for chair center block and
so
again better I get I can get you
really good detail but the quick
answer is now the weight list is
pretty universal throughout
their areas even if you can
through all the money in the
world sometimes it's just hard
to get child care and age area.
Things to show so the issue is
there's not enough child care in
alamo gordon chalka facilities
in al mugordo to reduce that
hundred and fifty weight unless
some of the parents this want
their kids on base.
Mr chair center block.
That's fair there's some new
ones for that if you're one days
going off based to get child
care in the back on base there's
that's a a bill our airman would
rather not pay but even if
you're willing to on the boro
date child care has weightless
that you have to navigate no
matter what
thank you thank you mister chair
the you know you're talking it
sounds like your basis i'm
hearing like bees are stuff on
on your base therefore deploying
our forces to different areas
sounds that's a a great mission
that you guys are part of so
thank you for that having the
dutch or some vernato partners
back to parliament is is great
because the germans left and
seeing the dutch there's kind of
near due to my heart as a
previous commander at both hell
over it the netherlands and are
you getting
these guys because their
transitioning f thirty five
trying to get through the new
certification process there but
these day of sixteen like pilots
there that are switching over to
the m q nine cause they're just
not getting the hours in over
there to keep your flying status
and is it vocal or weird warden.
This chair center black i'm not
tracking the hotel or lewir
spaces touched fighter basis oh.
The dutch
to clarify and and I don't know
exactly their background but
these are full up in cunin air
crew that are teaching in canada
ftu instructor courses so if
they have a fighter background
it's kind of irrelevant to this
portion of their child they are
full up rounds teaching
americans how to play reverse
essentially and then.
As a version of instructor will
also teach netherlands or
italians they come through as
well yeah it's just two more
quick things and I said this
chair because some vernato
partners that are transition
from the old
uh sixteen c models the seventy
seventy two block it's an older
jet and trying to get the of
thirty five online um because
it's an end of life for this for
the sea model so that's why i'm
security plus that's a new
mission for nato as well so it's
good stuff.
Uhm lastly total force
integration uh mister chair in
regards to the new mexico air
national guard is going through
some massive changes right now I
think we have.
Two tail numbers for some one
thirty j models are are you guys
at all working with or have
plans to do any work with the
new mexico international guard
for potential missions for them.
Mr chair center block i'll have
to get back to you as first tif
I thought I can tell you we have
two reserve units it's the four
twenty ninth and the nine forty
fourth
which
provide additional instructor
meaning for the reebers and the
f sixteen respectively but as
far as the national guard i'm
not tracking I can get back to
you on that thank you mister
chair yeah just if you can get
back to me on the two things if
and p rates and any type of.
Any conversation is going on in
regards to.
Potential international garden
missions partnering with you
guys.
Greatly appreciate that.
And
thanks for all you do from one.
Airmen to another appreciate it
thank you mister chair thanks
for central
thank you mister chair thank you
current i'll think you misses
daily for being here senator
block hit on a couple of the
questions I had but I was
wondering if you could be in a
resident of our court over the
last thirty plus years I know
that there's been a lot of
talking the community over the
last five ten years relating to
to school districts and in
almogorno and issues that we
face their winter if and colon I
don't know if you've been spun
up on the history of that or if
this is daily maybe you could
speak in share just kind of
those struggles that you guys
have seen from home and
perspective over the last number
of years and have you seen any
improvement.
On that education side of thing
over the last several years I
know that you guys.
So I I guess maybe the the
question you know is not
necessarily directed to you guys
but to just share with the
committee so in alamo goreo I
know it's then when folks get a
signed parliament air for space
and I don't know if this is true
for current land and other basis
and new mexico it can or not but
it's become common knowledge at
least for halloween that people
get those orders and it's like
oh great and especially if
they've had family and if they
have kids and I think the
driving factor behind that is
the score system saying troll
you'd mentioned that the
elementary school on the middle
school perform extremely well
but then we get off base and we
start getting into the community
schools and that performance
level drops substantially and I
think it's a disservice to our
military members
that we are offering the same
levels of the education off base
there's folks that live off base
being able to have their kids
integrated into local school
district is necessary and
important and they want and have
quality education so I know that
it's studies had been done just
kind of on on the local school
district and didn't know if
there had been any other recent
studies to say hey if they're
been in the improvements from
four five years ago when the
last was done.
Yeah mister chair center paul
thank you for the question and
so I do know there was kind of
an information spirit incident
at the high school there there's
the one although high school
essentially are our air force
members have to send their kids
and so I believe as far as like
the safety side it has improved
and and last week five years or
citizens and instant so I don't
think anyone's nervous about
their kids going there I think
it's to your point a little bit
more about the quality education
we're trying to dig up some
numbers but just and it go to
the little data point the amount
of home school and you see on it
is surprising so we don't force
anyone to report that since a
little hard nailed out exactly
the percentage but the amount of
folks you'll see that end up
just homes going their kids is
notable as a reaction to the
concerns of the school system
thank you thank you colonel and
I don't know I know this is
military better affairs
commercials I don't turn it into
the education of many but I
think it it's something that
needs to be brought to my
because our neighbors you know
for my perspective at home and
air force based my wife and I
hit world becoming more involved
with home in made but I was a
honorary commander for a number
of years and now my wife stepped
into that role and so we get to
meet a lot of great folks that
are
you know
becoming life long friends and
it's hard to hear that our
schools aren't performing that
the medical care's not there and
I think that that is a state
issue it's not just a specific
tower with gordo issue and those
things that we have to look at
if we want to see these basis
continue to thrive and cr airmen
and women continue to thrive
those cannot appointment my
questions thank you mister chair
thank you madame by sure.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank for your presentation
and on slide sixteenth so
whoever put this together to the
backwards just
on side sixteen as far as your
air space
dod put out a
a map of
potential infrastructure for a
wind and solar and have you guys
right now the the base planning
committee peace emission is
really watching it to make sure
we have no conflicts with
with um the pay the training of
the mission of the base but have
you been keeping up with that or
do you know much about that as
far as infrastructure in what's
happening with deal dealing now.
Mr chair this is vice chair I
i'll have to get back to that
question i'm not tracking any of
the teoe developments
the other thing I think part of
it the
limit is pretty isolated and
getting teachers out there we're
trying to get teachers more
teachers out to that region in
all over this state we have we
are pretty rural state
but for teachers it's there are
when there is hospitals
hospitals close in bigger places
that's where they're going to go
so it's kind of it's it's a
difficult game getting teachers
where where we want them though
we want a supporter bases
we also have to look at the
pifas it's happening at home a
canon and you have holland and
leak pifas and it can in we are
not that we're the efforts will
not work with the government at
the state to figure out how to
clean that up so so there's
issues all over the place as far
as as military and being formed
air force
it's it's a hard period to take
when we we can't get my support
from our military helping our
state and our state helping our
military but
anyway I have no other questions
thank you.
Thank you matter by share and
thank you colonel thank you this
is bailey for the presentation
just going to slide seventeen
just one a highlight this I know
it's on the kind of light the
report card we get for the bases
and kind of rankings and what
we're talking about
I think you know hollow and just
has an awesome mission and and
where it's located provides it
for the air space and where you
could do a lot of testing and
you know it's mentioned earlier
and you weren't here when I
worked at ditcher we did some
stuff over the test track is.
Just awesome facilities the
native part of that it's and
it's in a place where there's
not a lot of people where you
can do a lot of these things so
when we talk about man power
when it comes to education and
child care health care
I think it's always a struggle
because you're going with
housing and child care but to
bring their stock sand there
they're looking at this as well
sand well if I move there how am
I going to get these services
and you know I agree with my
colleague a lot of this is the
role in the state and what we
can do and how we can make
improvements and I think that's
how we really have to look
equitably on how we're
supporting parts of the state
most of our state is rural it's
not satificable kirky los c.
And that's where a lot of people
live and still need the services
I think folks like me that live
in albuquerque can you get
comfortable anything
everybody has it like me and
they don't and so I think we
really have to recognize that as
a state and as a federal
government and how we kind of.
So I I just want to reiterate
that it's important that we
protect these missions but also
protect our state you know to
buy share brought up things in
our environment and what we're
doing when I want to make sure
that you know is air force
retiree that were good stewarts
of our land in our water in our
air as well and we can do both
she mentioned about what we're
doing right now with a lot of
the winter buying when energy
and DO
we did you will be all last
session to make sure that
companies that are going to do
some of these renoble energy
projects are working with the
military base planning
commission to kind of take a
look at that before these
permits are accepted because we
do want to make sure that we are
you know protecting the missions
and what you're doing here
at the same time once again we
really have to look at these
issues one thing I saw that you
put on the side is you mention
the cdc in the and and and the
backlog in that you talked about
the pay but then outside their
making more money right so even
if you do have someone that
wants to provider
you know how do we deal with
that how do we get to pay.
Same being with education
actually mentioned we can get
more teachers to go out there
but they're also dealing with
the housing issue everyone's
dealing with and what your
airman are dealing with right
when you come out here where you
g.
I just think we have a still
have a lot of work to do I
appreciate you laying this out
and reminding us of the wor.
With that I I appreciate your
presentation appreciate you
answer the questions and i'll
let you closer make any comment.
Yeah mister chair members of the
committee I just like to close
with it a few positive stories
at the end here so one detest
track were looking to build
another one that's a bit more
advanced they will do a little
bit more than this hypersonic
testing so the mission on and is
expanding kind of to your
reference even our project that
numbers are slight increase in
manning with you know who knows
what the future will hold it
also to say thank you for the
state subsidy for child care I
was remember the name of those
coming over here but there is a
subsidy that's been a big game
changer so so thank you for that
it's made
helpful as the partnership
between I said in the state in
mexico and then it just on a
personal note that's my first
time and in a smaller town going
to a base of smaller town and at
the partnership between us now
in the corner is really
something special I think that
big give program where we
partner with some donors and do
some stuff and it's I think it's
on maybe a case study of how to
partner with a local community
so are there some really need
aspects even just being a new
commercial holland and it's
needed a very core and a
rewarding experience already and
I thank you for the time at a
lot of present ourselves
i'm gonna pass it over the vice
chair she is another comment
last year not year before last
week has to build for a cdc for
child care so that
if a person is certified a
military person's certified
through d then you makes quite
automatically takes their
certification to help make it a
little bit easier for to get
more people
trying to take chalk area in our
daycare just about that thanks
and I just want it you don't
have to answer it you might not
I also just want to understand
kind of going forward i've been
asking a lot of the leadership
from the installations of how
your interactions are going to
be where they're early children
and care department and
universal prek and so just
realizing that we're going to
have young folks coming in with
his young children and I just
want to make sure that
how that's going to work out.
And and making sure that they're
getting the families are getting
the supports and the universal.
I know in some cases restore
ruling some of that.
Can have one follow up please
thank you
on the the f m p part brings up
a question regarding the sixteen
training here how long is that
training here is it more in a
hundred and eighty days
mr chair center block thank you
for the question so it is at
this program for eight months
it's running a roughly thirteen
of fourteen that is a pcs for
those members so for for those
mister chair that don't know
anything over a hundred seventy
nine days it's a pcs so
going to go through this follow
on vodafone it's coming out of
upt
if your family doesn't qualify
medically here you're separated
from your family I mean the
fight apply the pilots go to
accept the assignment at a up
there's no choice but if that
pilot
made a woman spouse or child it
doesn't qualify
that pilots coming here
basically in a remote tour and I
just want to make sure people
understand that so that's a big
readiness issue for the air
force so
thank you
thank you thank you answered you
appreciate you come out.
So we're finishing up a little
early but for our next present
eleven fifteen
I don't know folks had a chance
to look at the meeting and it's
from last meeting
and
I just want to make one change
is that something we can make a
change in the store board on it
and so the one change I see is.
On the
page three and motion to send
the letter at twelve forty
three.
On the votes it has represented
colon resented martin as a
senator block voted not to send
a letter I just want to correct
that I remember representative
of colin.
So I just want to make sure that
we're.
Is there any other comments or.
You have emotion
motion to adopt them and.
The.
All right do we have any
opposition to a provine the
meeting minutes from july
fifteenth.
We voted.
Yes she abstained osha so we
that's what i'm fixing
she abstained from.
Any other questions.
Any opposition to accepting the
meeting minutes.
All right.
You want.
Would you like to have earlier
ready
or will have you come on up or
gonna go next on the agenda
representative from the sea
valley community or hope no call
martinez the executive director
if you can come out up.
And it's good to see you again
the call I think you've done
this before you just press that
little personal narrative light
up red and that's when you know
you have a hotmage.
Thank you thank you mr chair
members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
be here today my name is nicole
martinez I am the director of
the message of alley community
of hope here in town
we are yes I have a set before
this committee but it's been a
couple of years think it was at
borrell last time so nice to be
here at the golf course.
Um the message I community of
hope has been an operation since
their nineteen nineties we
started out it's a day shelter.
And realize that while it's
important to operate a day
shelter that it doesn't
necessarily end homelessness for
people and so over the years we
have expanded to.
Provide as many services as
possible to address off assets
of homelessness and housing
insecurity
so I just asked when the okay
thank you
here is a a snapshot and aerial
view of the messy valley
community of hope campus we set
on city of last cruises owned
property
and we have a lease agreement
with the city of last cursors
and then you can see we have
lots of different service
providers that sublease from
community of hope there on the
property so it's one of those a
one stature communities that
addresses homelessness food and
security child care issues.
And housing and homelessness
issues
you can see our building there
are the messy of alley community
of hope and to the west of our
building is camp hope which is
an overnight at tenth city a
safe outdoor space that we
started in two thousand and
eleven sheltering up to fifty
people every night and then you
could see a lot of our our
partner organizations there up
in that left hand corner of the
future site of emit or crossing
we have started construction
there it's fifty units of
support of housing it will be
tenant based vouchers so the
community of hold holds a lot of
vouchers to and homelessness for
people both through hard mfsg
funding we have ssva through the
va funding for ending
homelessness for people and the
ideas that they'll be able to
walk into any of those units
with the subsidy attached to
them
next slide please.
So here are some of the the
services that we provide so we
still act as a day shutter so
people can come in sign in they
can get their mail ids for
certificates we can help with
jobs we can assist with housing
tendency at camp hope an income
support programs this last year
we serve ten thousand eight
hundred and ninety four people
at least that's how many we got
to sign in to visit our
organization the year before
that was
just barely over the ten
thousand line in the year before
that was a little over seven
thousand so we have seen an
increase of people coming to
utilize our services and we
think that that's also because
we have expanded our services
next like please
as I briefly mentioned we have a
community of hope so I can't
hope which is a temporary
shelter located right to the the
west of our building sheltering
up to fifty people every night
often times we will have
veterans that are experiencing
homelessness and will come to
camp hope and sign up for our
housing and that happens pretty
immediately community of hope is
still really proud to say that
we have are unhoused veterans
typically the majority in less
than thirty days
so we still are providing
housing assistance we own some
properties we also partner with
arab message of ali public
housing authority to operate an
apartment complex that's just
for our unhoused veterans.
And then we have income
assistance that we have
representatives who are trained
by social security to help
people apply for their social
security disability and we also
in two thousand and eighteen
started a day labor program
called money money.
And that program allows for two
vans to take unhoused and
precariously house people out
around the city to city owned
properties to provide
landscaping and trash removal
they get connected to services
they get work they get fed and
they get paid at the end of the
day we also have two hotspot
trucks that we started during
the pandemic and they go out and
address the increase in homeless
and countenance that we've seen
around the community so again
it's unhoused individuals and
their partners going out to
provide the services of
cleaning up around encountering
they don't dismantle them but
they also go out hand in hand
with our outreach programs we
have four staff that go out and
provide outreach at the time
that the day labor program is
also providing clean up for that
next slide please
you're just a a quick **** act
of some of the work being done
to read some encampments out
there and our cruise went out
cleaned up the encountments they
were abandoned at that time if
they are not abandoned then
outreach goes out and they're
offering services they're
offering first of all water and
just some compassion and then
talking to them about possibly
absorbing them into camp hope so
that they go into a shelter or
if it's more appropriate to and
there's an opening straight into
housing
and doing a and intake a
coordinated assessment with
people as they are living
outside.
Here are some environmental
specific services so last year
we served five hundred and
eighty two veterans as I
mentioned we partner with our
housing authority who owns a
twenty two unit apartment
complex.
And it is strictly for our
veterans exiting homelessness I
have a staff person that's a is
on site monday through friday
with the veterans there so
moving them in moving amount
working with the housing
authority on the leasing and he
notices they might get guest
issues and then working with
them on income so either you
know working through va benefits
or can disability through social
security it might be that there
more applicated to are doing the
day labor program just trying to
make ends meet
and then we also have another
apartment complex that we've had
partnered with the housing
authority called desert hope
apartments it's forty units of
permanent support of housing it
has a veteran preference for
vets exiting homelessness we
have support of services for
better and families funding
through the
va we begin that program in two
thousand and fourteen it's time
limited assistance for rent so
helping the veterans transition
out of homelessness into their
own apartments and then
providing all the support of
services they need to wrap them
up to make sure that they're
stably housed and that they
continue on independently
without the assistance of
community of hope whether that
they assume the full rent
themselves often times what
happens as the veterans that we
are working with that have
experienced homelessness are
more suited to exiting to had
vash vouchers so that they have
more permanent assistance with
their their rent and services we
also have a state funded grant
that is through health care
authority and it's the
intervention support of services
for veterans and we decided that
that intervention that community
of hope could provide would be
to provide therapy for our
veterans and non traditional
types of therapy with the
veterans who are currently
unhoused in those that are
trying to adjust and move into
a unit so we meet with them
according to to their schedule
you know might be weekly it
might be monthly with that
particular veteran and providing
those types of therapies and
sometimes it it's group therapy
were you know they're all going
out and doing a a barbecue
together
and in other instances it might
be things like mdr or it's doing
exposure therapy are doing.
War video games with our
veterans and working through
some of their traumas to make
sure that we're helping them to
be a successfully house as
possible next slide please.
Then the challenges we have
experienced is lack of
affordable units that have been
ready for occupancy while we do
have the twenty two unit complex
it's often fall
as you sorry you know over five
hundred better
seeking assistance from us a lot
of them were seeking assistance
that was to prevent their
homelessness and that ssvf va
grant that we have does provide
for homeless prevention
we also know in our community we
have just a approved in the city
of last cases a lot of new
affordable housing units coming
online and several of those have
veteran preference as well for
ending homelessness for our bits
aren't so many other challenges
we've received there are some
unknowns on housing policies and
practices at the federal level
the va has always touted using a
housing first model where you
move anybody in the veteran in
uh and then address some of the
issues that have lead to their
homelessness whether it's a
dictionary mental health issues
income issues those things can
be hard to address when you're
living directly on the street to
house people first but there's
been some push back with the new
administration on that so we're
not sure what that might look
like also not sure what time
frames might look like for
people so there's been these are
these are just a drafts and
things that we've seen coming
from at the white house that
there might be time limits now
coming forward on things like
permanent support of housing
like hud fash vouchers things
like that which then we would be
looking to our state and our
local partners to help us
to meet the needs of people in
terms of rental assistance until
they can be stably housed
we work with the unimex code
department of veteran services
they have provided funding for
us in the last few years there
was a period of time where there
weren't those funds available
but
with the help of representative
martin as we we've gotten
funding through new mexico dvs
again i'm helping our veterans
to transition last year we had
two grants with nm dvs one was
just to
serve veterans who were either
at camp hope or experiencing
unsheltered homelessness with
whatever they needed.
To make their homelessness as
brief and
comfortable as possible and by
that I mean like do they need
slipping back so they need a
caught what is it that they
needed while they were living on
the streets trying to get into
housing and it also helped to
transition them out of the
streets and into housing and
then we also had services that
were
strictly for
veterans at risk of suicide and
we can give one example of a
veteran who came in seeking
assistance
was a better in that we helped
to house the veteran was having
suicidal atiations but was to
afraid to leave their pet to
enter a facility to get
assistance with that and so we
were able to utilize the
department of veteran services
funding to board their animal
while they could go seek the
services that need they needed
instead of ending up with a
suicide next slide this is an
example of a veteran that we
serve this veteran came to
community of hope and was there
for years and years and years
kept asking me you know we have
funding set aside for veterans
but for whatever reasons and
things that this veteran had
experienced and kept saying no
i'm not ready
had a lot of trauma a lot of
distrust of government programs
of of agency programs and we
feel a community of hope that
it's our turn you know it's it's
our responsibility to be ready
when somebody says they're ready
and to encourage them along the
way and so with red finally one
day he said okay i'm ready and
we house read at one of the the
apartment complex at oak street
that strictly for our veterans.
And at the time we had some
generous donations from our
community one was a gift card to
walmart so each about that was
moving into their own unit got
the skift card and one day he
shot up in my office because he
ran our shower program so he
would help other people who were
unhouse to to take showers at
community of hope and he showed
up to a now his house is not
living outside but he still
showed up to volunteer and help
with the shower program and you
walked into my office and I was
like can I help you
and he had utilised that twenty
five dollars gift card to go to
one aren't getting haircut and
get his beard cut off
and so he yeah ended up being
successfully housed
unfortunately
from transporting
to his apartment he he wrote a
bike and was struck on the
streets of loscos it's no longer
with us and but he was housed at
the time that he passed away
next like please
just some more donations and
things that come to us at oak
street just wanted to highlight
how giving our community has
been with our veterans
i'd be remissive I didn't
mention that pickle ball
association here in los cruces
they always contribute funding
to message value community of
hope to help with veterans the
aaron gifford fund they utilize
which is of a veteran who did
die by suicide and they also
support those efforts at the
national level but realize that
there is an agency in town
that's trying to assist veterans
on the streets and as they are
transitioning into their own
apartments it can be really
lonely it can be really dramatic
and it can be isolating and so
we we do rely on our community
will rely on her our state
partners and obviously are our
federal partners as well
um and just again thank you for
the opportunity to talk about
the work that we're doing how
we're supporting our veterans
and
you certainly have our our
commitment to continuing to do
so thank you
thank you first up I have
senator pento does anyone else
will be able
to miss to chairman president
maybe thank you for the
presentation to what you do.
The one thing that came up in
when area when they were talking
about the honestness situation
was the baskie area and who has
just diction in that area
are you guys having some of
these
people in the situation trying
to set up camp in in your area
here
mr chair and senator pinto
we do have homeless encountments
all around last crucials and
done yeah
and we have an outreach team
that that goes out to work with
them often times people will
come to our organization but we
don't just sit around waiting
for people to show up that can
be really hard for people if
they don't have transportation
and so we do go out to where
they are and address issues that
they might have like do they
need to come over to community
of hope to they need to get into
camp help do they need to sign
up for housing so yes we have
seen an increase of encounters
around our community that that
really was around spurred by
covered times um we saw a lot of
our local apartment complex has
got barred out by out of state
corporations we saw rents rise
increasingly everywhere and we
just saw a lot of people
entering the streets even though
we were exiting people from
homelessness we were just seeing
new people coming in to our
facility daily
reason
well some of the reasons that we
can be of them in those areas
especially like given the
outcricky area and going to
surrounding areas because of
safety with enterman area that
there was too much that would
happen even though there's
please present in that area but
that area of the baskie and some
places to jurisdiction files
under the conservative it's some
kind of weird sticks
and that turn like well we make
sure that we're not burning them
down and not you know having
the way in the invasion of our
holidays that those.
The procedures to protect the
people of the community are
being followed that does not
being abused in in that instance
if they're in that certain area
so i'm just wondering thank you
thank you mister chair mister
chair thank you for those
comments we did a approach our
city responders with seven best
practices for addressing
unsanctioned encountments and we
took that from other practices
in other areas and while it
hasn't necessarily formally been
adopted like the the city was
really open to it you know
talking to long force men and
codes and other people that
might come into contact we have
park rangers now and some of
those were just basic prints
principles like if you see an
unsanctioned encountered other
times you will have to move
people and that we're trying to
cause the least amount of harm
and descalate as much as we can
so again you know some of those
principles would be like
notifying them of a time frame
that they have like we're gonna
to give you one week instead of
just going out be like you have
to be out in five minutes turned
on your tents things like that
also again using the outreach
team to see if we could absorb
them into our camp can be signed
as many people up for her
housing but miss mr chair and
i'm thinking for your answer but
also
could you talk about codes I
mean where also seeing it kind
of pushed nationally to squeeze
out the homelessness and I some
way to me i'm I already gonna
criminalise them and if we're
talking about our veterans and
bringing charges against them
for being homeless concerned a
place they're not supposed to be
I mean it's their stuff that's
happening like that I mean we're
not seeing
the not going to court are they
in this area mr chairs and at
this time I have not heard of
charges being brought
I
haven't sat down with our our
police chief to talk about that
because these are things that
are allowable after enough
supreme court rulings that
happen in terms of flake how to
address homelessness but so far
are our community realizes that
arresting people is not the
answer.
Um and so I feel like we have
you know pretty good
partnerships and open
communication about how to
address and approach
unsanctioned account and some
people who are experiencing
homelessness that we do it in a
way that is trauma informed and
that might have the best outcome
for people especially if they're
a veteran
the last thing we want to do is
is you know filler are jail
cells that's also very expensive
and then makes it harder to
house people with backgrounds so
we haven't seen that in our
community we hope to not see
that.
Thank you senator center on the
mister thank you committee our
personal I want to say thank you
because it takes a special
person to do what you're doing
and you know the we're living
somewhere rough times and you
know the big question that I
have are we seen
our new mexico vouchers going
over to other states in this
area and and what um where i'm
referring to is in my district
specially longer bordered we
have about shares that are meant
for luna county down to damning
new mexico and we have
we have a bands full of people
coming in applying for those
vouchers because they get the
voucher's pr.
And some of these people are
from california and they have a
ten year to thirteen year weight
for some of these vouchers in
california so the end of
qualifying for our vouchers here
and
their six to eight hundred
dollar vouchers and they need a
voucher in california for three
thousand dollars a month right
so the end of the end of moving
out of the state of new mexico
back to california so they take
the voucher with them so federal
funds that are meant for new
mexicans are being transferred
over or paid through new mexico
and transferred over to
california are you seeing that
pro.
In doing your mister chair
senator almost thank you for the
question in terms of like
vouchers so we might be talking
about different kinds of
vouchers so hard has in the they
have vouchers that are strictly
for people experiencing
homelessness and then our
housing authorities have at like
section eight so those are
traveling vouchers
and
so what what your discussing I
think is is porting a voucher is
what they call it
um we don't see that night I
don't work for the housing
authority sorry I can't
appropriately answer that for
you but I can sort of
anecdotally I think kind of
address that situation because
they are allowed to port their
vouchers in in fact I have seen
some of our clients ask to port
to other communities and that is
an internal decision that's made
by in a state to state by their
housing authorities on which
vouchers can be ported typically
it's my understanding this could
be wrong but as i've heard it
you know somebody usually lives
in the area for a year before
they can even request to port
that voucher somewhere else so I
think that there is like a
certain cap that's likely in
place where you can port so many
and so many can be ported in
for our vouchers I can tell you
they are only allowed in our
community so they're not taking
our unhoused vouchers that are
strictly for our communities my
va vouchers my hard voucher is
my esg vouchers through the
housing new mexico cannot be
ported somewhere else now they
can
apply for those vouchers in
another place but like you said
weightless serve are wild even
in nonprofit agencies at not
counting the housing authorities
which yesterday are years long
in ours when people try to come
to us and utilize our housing
vouchers if they are from out of
state and we do get people from
outer state we also get people
that lived in los cases go to
other states and and are using
their systems there is a weight
list as well we have to do
coordinated entries and
and then they'll be placed on
that waiting less the only the
only way that you really jumped
those does list is if you are a
veteran
miser cherry and.
Thank you for for the answer in
and I just want to bring up the
issue because we got to do
something about this and what
happens is we get a limited
amount of federal funds and it's
transferred over two places like
california so we're if we are
paying six to eight hundred
dollars for per month per one
individual then it gets shot
through california goes up to
three thousand dollars that
really puts a
real big hit on the part of
funding that we've already
happier that's f.
I we really need to look this
issue and and you know this
might not be an issue that
you're faced with but i'm i'm
sure that some organizations
you're have to have that problem
and it's something we need to
take care of it thank you very
much up.
Center but
thank you chair
thank you and a call for the
brief one thing that just came
out of dc that might be a little
bit too early to
for you guys to understand how
this is going to work but
there's the president just
signed a va bill hr eighteen
fifteen I familiar with that i'm
not so that is the va home loan
program reform act so what that
does and you might play a part
in this your organization it
authorizes the beer to take
certain actions in cases of the
fault on home loans under the va
loan program and establishes a
partial claim program cause it
looks like here when i'm looking
at slide you you're talking
about homelessness in near
homelessness as well so
I would ask if you haven't
looked at this hr eighteen
fifteen it was a a great bill
by paris and bill the president
signed it to help out those
veterans that are in a danger of
losing their homes and
defaulting on their loans and
i'm not sure that this bill got
a lot of press but it's one of
the best bills to come out of
congress
to ensure that that's aren't
losing their home so it's hr
eighteen fifteen a greatly
appreciate if you could take a
take a look at that in anyone
listening who is a
veteran's advocate or five one c
three helping veterans
really look close you have to
spill because it's it's going to
help a lot of people so thank
you for what you do thank you
mister chair
thank you and thank you in a
call for the presentation and
thank you for highlighting
really a lot of things that are
going on
and thank you for your advocacy
for veterans I think you
mentioned a lot of just.
Working with our state dvs
working with the ba and really
just make it sure that all the
resources and things that are
you know you can basically put
all those resources to be.
Can you talk a little bit about
really the prevention and
keeping folks in their home or
their apartment or where they're
looking because I think we don't
focus on that piece a lot
I think from me financial
standpoint that's cheaper right
to help them stay where they're
at
but I just think on the personal
level of the trauma that's.
Can you tell me about your views
on that and then also
are you doing any work in that
space on prevention
mr chair thank you for the the
question
I think that homeless prevention
is wildly important for anyone
and it's something when I i've
been at the community of hope
for nineteen years when I first
started there we did have some
homeless prevention that sort of
went away and the focus was on
rapidly rehousing people and
that didn't really change until
covered happened and from the
answer that I was like we're
going to need some homeless
prevention immediately because
we're going to see people lose
their jobs and lose income in
restaurants for shutting down
businesses we're shutting down
and so there was a lot of homes
prevention funding that was pump
through during that time a lot
of those coffers that were
through the american rescue plan
has started to dry up in terms
of homeless prevention on a.
Abroad level we go down to
specifics with veterans the
grant that we have the ssvf
grant it's it's rents only so we
can't address mortgages but i'm
still going to look at that bill
and look at who is you know
doing that because we do get
veterans that come in so who can
help with this while we won't
use our a funds for that are not
allowed we will use other
sources of funding for that or
referred them to the the
agencies that are addressing
those kinds of things but we
also get a lot of donations for
our veterans so that we can use
one time assistance if they
don't qualify for the funds but
the va that ssvf grant does
allow for homeless prevention
and always has they do have
you know some caps around that
so they want to see you serving
more veterans rapidly rehousing
them then you are helping with
homeless prevention but you can
get a waiver if you you show you
have way more people in need of
homeless prevention or you've
met how many you said you would
serve with rapidly housing then
you can serve as many with
homeless prevention so it are
organization we have funding we
also esg funding through housing
new mexico that's for homeless
prevention and we still have
some arp funding for that as
well so at our agency were
really addressing it but I know
in other places throughout the
state that it's a huge concern
something would continue to
bring to legislature that homes
prevention funds often go by the
the way side but yes I think you
know it's important that we are
keeping people in their homes
are not adding to the ranks of
homelessness in our communities
and I I think that that's
certainly something that's worth
continuing exploring and talking
about how to find sustainable
funding for homeless prevention
I also used a grow money
for that too for our general
population because a lot of our
grants you people sometimes just
need one month of assistance
like something happened and they
have to prove that something
happened and then we can help
them to prevent their
homelessness and so the grow
money
really helped us through that we
we were allowed to two hundred
thousand dollars for two years
and we spent at all in one year
quickly
so I know that the need is
certainly there.
And especially since we're
seeing just
unprecedented times in terms of
people exiting homelessness but
people entering homelessness
thank you I just think it's
really important and I think you
know what we did for example
what we did in the state as far
as property tax really far
disabled veterans
and what wishes passed in
congress but the reality is a
lot of our veterans it didn't
retire some of them are not.
Many of them are renters and
really bad those are the
individuals that are really at
risk right now
and I fear we could be seen more
this
you know
I think with what's going on
right now in the world in the
economy and and taraves and
another stock markets really
high inflation is still going up
groceries and straw high for
folks people are making top.
And I think people were already
on the verge of how do I make
rent this month
this could put them in that
situat.
That we have that conversation a
prevention but I think even as a
state we have to figure out.
We can't sit here and
act as if it's their fault their
folks are happened to do any.
My last question is going to be
about.
What you do with the community
of hole but specifically with
the veterans as well with that
facility
how are you dressing kind of
like the barriers for folks to
stay there and I say that
talking with folks at like the
bectures integration center and
kind of some stuff they're doing
I know a lot of time folks who
are on how it's rate have pets
some of them have kids and
sometimes even those issues
they're not al.
A facility or get the help that
they need how do you.
Mr chair we we have camp hope
which is a very low barrier
shelter so we can allow up to
fifty people to shelter at camp
hope and on a nightly basis
literally right next to
community of hopes of all the
infrastructure during the day
they have all of the the service
providers were federally
qualified health care center
right there with a child care
center here in the last year's
read on our campus as well so
addressing others issues uhm
campus low barrier I say that
because we we allow for animals
we.
It camp up was started by three
people who were experiencing
homelessness and the city of los
crucis was gonna ask us to start
removing people at night because
camping wasn't allowable on citi
property so we ended up at
listening to these refox who
brought forward the idea of
starting
an outdoor shelter a safe
outdoor space and took it to
council the council approved it
and allowed us to resolve the
area to allow for camping on
that on the property and we as
community of hope so we will
take the sign will take on other
glorious things of insurance and
port a parties and all the
things until we could build up
camp hope we also don't
have you know sorry issues or
sobriety like testing or things
like that but we do have
response teams that are
addressing addiction and things
like that and getting people
signed in so a lot of the
barriers that you talk about
when you're talking about
traditional shutters or things
that we have really eliminated
for people that are entering
camp hope you're sort of curfews
the camp is very autonomous I
don't have staff there at night
and I don't have staff there on
the weekends the camp residents
run the camp themselves we've
done this since two thousand and
eleven they elect a can't
manager that's a resident there
they have a safety team and they
meet with my paid staff
twice a week on issues that are
happening at the camp but I have
staff that's out of the camp
every day so the camp staff are
going out there and you know
signing people in and then
signing them up for housing all
you're a veteran this is who
you're going to meet with and
that that team is out there
every day light touches on the
camp or you're going into
permanent support of housing we
think you'd be a perfect fit for
our groupon that staff is now
out at the cap all day along so
monday through friday we have
that engagement but we are
believe that people are their
own experts and that they need
some autonomy and responsibility
and so ultimately you know we're
working in partner with the
people who are living outside to
be safe and to resolve those
issues and making it as low
barrier as possible.
Thank you thank you all right
and so with that I don't have
any other questions appreciate
you being here
and thank you again thanks
mister chair thank you members
of the committee thanks for the
invitation.
So we're little ahead of
schedule which is always a good
thing but are next on the agenda
is public comment at twelve
forty five we have one person
signed up so far
will we have a via we have a
couple one on zoom let's go
ahead and take a
ten minute break we'll be back
at eleven forty five and then
we'll do public comment.
I read everyone we're going to
go ahead and move on to public
comments we have one on zoom and
one in person will first go with
the in person
have a trouble reading the last
name but first name is john
you want to come up sir.
And we will give you three
minutes and just introduce
yourself and what you're going
to do is on this microphone in
the middle of the bottom in this
little person touch on that red
and then you're ready to go so
you have the floor three minutes
appreciate the invitation
to be here to address the
committee whenever last name is
ryan are why a
am
I
resident of basket firms move
there from upstate new york and
two thousand and eighteen
i'm here today
is the
grandchief to go over a veterans
organization known as the
fourteen eighth
relatively small national
organization who was founded
nineteen twenty
by
twenty world war one verge after
they returned from
france in a
american legend was formed in
nineteen nineteen these twenty
legendars formed the society of
forty nine or eight horses
significance of that name is
during world war one before
delvers mechanised the
transportative troops and horses
across france and europe in
smaller rare road bogscars the
carried easier forty min or a
doors.
We're
very very small
I became great in chef after
that here
that three years ago or well
three years ago became great
great two thousand and eighteen
these primarily on the fact that
I have been grandchief in new
york back in the two thousand
nine
one thing that road
hope is gampled here today is
big insurers the state of new
mexico
actually
realizes that we exist and we
are recognized as
national veterans organization
we are targeted
it's too the state of indiana
and I heard quarters as a in the
suburbs indian apples.
One of the main concerns right
now on
state levels thursday government
back in no do the excuse me back
in nineteen forty nine
you have about thirty seconds
because nineteen forty forty
nine france sent is greater to
for our support during or were
one and two french bags guards
d one said to new mexico is
currently on the state grounds
I am very concerned about the
possibility of the state
paragraphs being
relocated and the feed of the
barriers car if there is a
relocation of the fair grounds.
Thank you sir that's your time
but I will allow any of the
committee members that they have
a question we have some.
Alright.
Well thank you certain i'll come
talk to you after I just want a
little learn a little bit more
about the organization okay
we're not a high budget we can
afford
our points it is time we
understand no problem it's
like that
does fairly do reinstable
received membership no problem
thank you.
The.
And our next person signed up
for a public comment is on zoom
I don't know for ready for that.
All right good morning we have
mary k brady and you have three
minutes
thank you very much I wasn't
certain if I would be welcomed
at this meeting on my topic but
having listened to this i'm
certainly right down point
I represent an organization land
of enchantment many effects here
at home owners alliance
affordable housing is in crisis
and one of the crisis that you
may not be aware of is that
manufactured home community in
the state are being sworped up
bond up taken over by predatory
investors that.
Operate under the terms private
equity
there was a situation in alamo
gloria with the manufactured
home community where the
residents went without natural
gas for heat and cooking and
taking showers for over six
months while they're non
resident private equity
corporation said well you better
just figure it out
that could affect the people
that might be looking for
manufactured homes to live in
station there at holliman
los alamos is having similar
issues in one case with a take
over of the new owners the rent
went up eighty percent I don't
know anyone in whatever
structure whose income could
handle that
the attorney general has been
very low to take any action with
his various of greatest things
that are happening my point was
just seeing you all today and
bringing a to your attention we
didn't bring for a three
different bills in the
legislative session now passed
house bill before eighteen house
bill four four two and house
bill for two six none of them
gained any traction I think it's
not enough people know what is
transpiring out in the big world
and you will help more from me
and my organization that we call
lamo.
Land of enchantment manufacturer
the whole motor alliance I thank
you for your time the meeting
has been highly educational I
wish you had a wider audience
thank you
thank you mrs brady I think I
received maybe some email maybe
not from you both other folks I
know there were those house
bills dealing with.
Private equity purchasing
manufacturer home lights mobile
home lots and the speed issue of
raising the rep and folks
couldn't afford it and then how
do they even get there
home offer that land and losing
that as well I also had to build
banning private equity from
purchasing single family homes
and so I realize this is a big
problem we really need to look
at and we have to make a
decision or we really try to get
folks and homes or is this just
a profit driver and that's
really what it's become right
now for home so
I can tell you many of us are
listening but appreciate where
you're doing and reach out to me
i'd like to talk to you in your
group a little bit more about it
does anyone else on the
committee have any questions
alright thank you and that is
the end of public comment.
Alright so we're going to go
ahead and and move on to lunch
and I think we're going to go
ahead and.
So what's going to happen is i'm
gonna pass will power sell some
menus and you're gonna be able
to pick a selection of the menu.
I just want to think
and miss you and I don't know if
any organizations or did you
want to come up clean that's
okay.
Alright someone who go in house
alcohol and use and so do we
just go over to the
clayton who do we give this give
the menus to once they fell
amount do one bills here.
Alright so edin and break for
lunch and we will be back at one
pm.
