Good morning, everyone. We're
gonna go ahead and call the
military and Veterans Affairs
Committee meeting to order.
Um, you all should have uh
agendas in green in front of
you, um, with your packets.
And uh we will get started with
introductions, so we'll go
around the committee table, um,
and what I'd ask is, uh, let us
know um the district you
represent and then really, um,
your ties to military and
veterans or some of the advocacy
uh that you've done.
And so with that, I will start
with Representative Kuller.
Um,
OK, I'm Catherine representing
Catherine Cullen, District 57,
uh, my ties with the military is
my husband um was in the army
and the New Mexico Army National
Guard. He's a Gulf War veteran,
and my brother's navy
brother-in-law and marine, so
just family originally from
Colorado Springs, so you either
married military, your parents
were in the military or, you
know, you went into military.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Uh my name is
Angelita Mejia from uh Chavez
County District 58 and uh my
ties with the military, I had an
uncle that was in the Air Force
and um.
nephew that was in the Air
Force.
Representatives.
Thank you. Good morning,
Chairman, Vice Chair. Good
morning, everybody in the
audience, and at the dais, uh,
it's my pleasure to be here to
one of my favorite committees,
military and Veterans Affairs, I
consider myself a lifelong ally
and advocate for military and
veteran issues, and so happy to
be here. Thank you.
I, 01 more thing, I am the
representative for District 12,
part of the South Valley.
Mm
And me much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean, I
represent House District 21 in
Bernalillo County, um, when my
dad was Army, I was Air Force.
My daughter was Air Force and we
were in, she went to the Air
Force Academy, so we we were in
Colorado Springs quite a bit.
And my son was a marine, um, he
had 2 tours in Afghanistan, and
I do love this this committee.
I've been on it all 9 years.
I've been in the legislature.
Thank you, uh, state Senator
Harold Pope Junior. District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County. Um, I'm
retired Air Force started in the
enlisted ranks, um, went to UNM,
did Roy.
did some time in the reserves,
and got my commission and uh
retired at a Kirtland Air Force
Base in 2018. Um, so happy to be
here, happy with some of the
work we've done in the last 5
years with our veterans and our
uh military families, but of
course there's always more to
do, and it's great to be in this
committee because
Uh, I think for the most part,
it's not partisan and we're
really just focused on uh really
supporting our military and our
veteran family. So look forward
to this committee and look
forward to the the work that
we're going to do going forward.
Uh, with that, I want to give
Representative Ross a little
more time or you ready? I'll
I'll let him introduce himself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just,
uh,
I got him from Albuquerque
Albuquerque and uh
I'm looking forward to another
good year of uh.
Of uh interim work where we
listen to the needs of veterans
and get briefed on what we need
to do and
Um,
I got good news. I got my, you
know, my daughter's in the Air
Force and she was stationed in
uh
Okinawa, and she's now in
Phoenix.
A lot easier to see my daughter
and my grandson, so, uh, I'm
pretty happy to hear that, but,
uh, you know, I, I, I think you
said it right, uh, Senator, I
think we, we're, this is
something that should be
nonpartisan. We should just be
working together to see how we
can support veterans and their
needs, and uh I think there's a
great committee, one of my
favorite committees to be on,
where uh we give and take and
uh.
And, uh, and just support our
veterans. So, again, I'm from
Silver City, New Mexico. I'm
southwest New Mexico, uh, so
District 39 is Grant.
And uh Hidalgo and Katherine
Counties, and so I'm eager to
get some good work done this
year. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
now I wanna pass it over to uh
Aaron Bond, just to kind of
introduce the staff that I'll be
working the committee.
My name is Erin Bond. Um, if
we're speaking military
background, both my parents were
Air Force. Uh, I currently have
a brother serving in the Air
Force as well, um, and then, uh,
Jarrett Fleetwood has been the
long serving uh lead staff for
the Military Veterans Affairs
Committee, um, we appreciate
that he is sticking around to
offer guidance. Dominica Nieto
served on the committee last
year, um, and is preparing to
hopefully take over in the
future. So I appreciate you for
being here.
Thank you. Thank you for the
introduction. Thanks everyone
for being here. I know we, we
will still have a few more folks
showing up, but we're gonna go
ahead and get started with that,
you should have a handout in
front of you from the New Mexico
Department of Veterans Services
and uh we're going to get an
update, uh, from the secretary.
Jason Herrera, who is the, once
again, the secretary of the
veterans service department. And
so, uh, Mr. Secretary, you have
the floor?
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair, and
uh the rest of the committee.
Thank you all for giving us the
opportunity to come and give you
an update and uh identify what
needs we have moving forward
for, for the next year as we
begin the work that is uh in
front of us.
On the handout in front of you,
um, this is basically our, our
one-pager that talks about our
mission, vision, and identifies
each of our, our core programs
that, that we provide under
Department of Veteran Services.
So using that handout, I'll walk
through there and I'll highlight
a few things that are of a
critical importance as we start,
uh, the new interim between uh
now and the next legislative
session.
Or state benefits, uh, the, the
obvious
Uh, couple of points I want to
talk about are tax exemptions.
Um, we appreciate all the
assistance we got last year in
getting those one on the ballot
and 2 that they were uh approved
and with House Bill 47 being
pushed through. It has been uh
Uh, an excellent viewpoint for
our veterans and for those who
are returning from service back
to our state.
Um, as a critical benefit to
make that decision to show back
up. We've talked to a few
veterans already that have said
that, you know, with the tax
incentives and the, the um
military uh pension.
Waiver that that they're getting
with the state of New Mexico
that uh we're becoming a, a much
more uh popular place to, to
return to uh versus going to
some of the surrounding states
that provide those tax
incentives.
Uh, we've been very busy, uh,
for the veteran tax exemptions
up through this year.
We have done, uh, in, in excess
of 25 uh outreach events on
these tax incentives and we have
them planned through the rest of
the, of, of this fiscal year and
into next year to ensure that
veterans are receiving their,
their, uh, benefit.
We've had many new veterans
apply for the $10,000 the
veteran tax exemption of 10,000.
And uh
In addition to that, we've
already started working with the
assessor's offices throughout
the state, and we've been
processing the percentage-based
uh tax exemption that will be
applied in FY 26. We already
have hundreds of those uh
applications being issued and
the assessors are, are holding
them in, in wait until uh 1
January of 2016, uh, apply them
further.
Um, we had a lot of uh
significant discussion with the
assessors and we continue to
work closely with the, all the
county assessors and the
affiliate to ensure that we're
moving forward in a positive
direction, to ensure that um
there's clear, concise, and, uh,
consistent guidance out to our
veterans. We've been able to
solve a lot of uh, of issues
with, with veterans working with
the assessors directly.
Another major initiative under
state benefits that we've been
working with closely with, uh,
environmental and uh
Uh, with M-nerd is the day.
Camping the day and camping pass
that was passed last year,
houses 161.
Um, we are ready to roll that
out next week, there will be a,
a hearing for the final
rulemaking on how we're
executing that.
And um that's gonna be rolled
out on 1 July. We've been
working very closely. We have,
uh, put together a very
comprehensive package for our
veterans and that has been
included in our outreach since
immediately following the
legislative session and letting
veterans know about it, and
we've already developed our
application process, and we have
a few, I I'd say probably 125,
140 applications on hand ready
to be shipped once we get the
passes in and uh 11 July rolls
around for
Those lifetime passes for our
veterans for a free day camping
and unlimited camping throughout
the state of New Mexico.
Um, we're looking to, uh, to
comply with the state limits
that are seasonal based on, on,
on Park's guidance.
And most importantly is that uh
the utilities are being proposed
that those are waived as well.
The only fee a veteran will have
is if they use the reservation
system, which is a third party
that that manages that for the
state. So that's a huge win for,
for our veterans.
Under our veterans cemeteries.
You know, we have our 3
cemeteries throughout the state.
We have Fort Stanton, Gallup,
Angel Fire, and we are now in
currently in charge of the Taos
Cemetery, uh, that was
Passed the last legislative
session, although it was passed
with a special
For funding. Um, and that's a
long term project with
short-term funding.
Um, and it's, it's a, that's a,
uh, we've taken ownership as a
state of New Mexico and uh that
is, you know, if I will start
with that is, we must get that.
And the personnel.
Uh, made permanent on into our
general fund. Well, there's 4
FTE involved there, and this
year we were funded with a
special of a million dollars.
To start that program, and that
is largely a lot of the
equipment purchase on the front
side, which once that is done,
it'll just, we'll just have
maintenance. So we're looking at
a 500,000 recurring.
Uh
Add to our, our, our general
fund in order to have the FTE
and the services that are
necessary to run a facility of
that nature.
So that, that is something I'm
asking for help right away with
that I already foresee FY 27,
that's a shortfall that we have
to fix this year. Um, and I know
that the, the percentage of
growth conversation will
probably rear its head again and
uh
4 people out of 80 is a is a
high percentage, um, but it's
necessary, and we've already
taken the steps to take this
over and
It's gonna be imperative that
we, that we get that piece done
for the, the Tao Cemetery.
have also done our guard Equity
Act, which was passed 2 years
ago here, and we've actually
done a couple of internments
this year.
Or or or spouses and, and, and
uh
And members over the past year.
Um, that's been a little, little
slower start than we
anticipated, which is a good
thing. We don't, uh, because
many of the guardsmen who had
passed previously are already
incurred in the cost to have
that disinterred and and
reinterred in the state cemetery
is, is, is high, and that, that
is borne by the, the families.
So,
We understand that there may be
some people that are opting that
as they continue to weigh their
choices.
But um as we move forward, we,
we are glad that, that, that
they acqui act is in place and
we're able to offer that to some
of our veterans as, as, as they
uh present for their, their
final honors.
The um
Military funal honors program,
we have 32 teams registered with
us, 26 active right now.
And our, our ability to support
them has been enhanced with the
the funding that that the
legislature has provided. We
provide them with a uniform
allowance, equipment that uh is
the, if the firearms, the bugle.
And uh
and the training that we do
twice a year, we do in southern
New Mexico in Las Cruces, and we
do training in Albuquerque and
those are usually.
about 4 months apart.
During the the spring and summer
season, so that way we get all
these teams trained to uh.
Most recent updates.
In the DOD instruction as well
as uh
NCA regulations on doing the
Germans properly and was
authorized for every service
member.
That's been a very big success
and um that conversation,
depending on the way the federal
government goes with this next
funding, um.
would be impacted for our
ability to provide services for
our veterans in the city of New
Mexico because there is a
federal component here that we
work with the National Guard.
And those are that's funded at
the federal level.
For funeral honors and that with
what it's shrinking.
Um, that has been on the
discussion table, and I don't
want to get too far in front of
uh General line and the guard
talking about that, but that may
be a problem that
We have to be aware of and be
out in front of and not wait
till they till it's, it's
stripped for us to continue to
operate.
Uh, and he and I will continue
to work together and brief this
committee on, on the path
forward should that take place.
You know, our final honors for
our veterans is, is a critical
aspect of what we do.
And I think that uh that's
something that we may have to
look at.
Maybe not immediate.
Um, but
Uh, we'll keep you folks, our
field services, um, which
entails our, our veteran service
officers. We currently have 33.
Uh, certified VSOs throughout
the state.
We have a couple that are in the
process of being recertified.
Or being initially certified,
we've had a couple of
retirements and, and some
departures, some other state
agencies.
And um
We, we have done very well in,
in establishing a, a very robust
training program working with
collaboration with the VA.
as well as uh our other state
partners to ensure that that
that we have a very
comprehensive training package
for our veteran service
officers.
The increase that we were
provided last year, we were
given one additional ITE for a
veteran service officer and we
are in.
In bringing that into our, our,
our program now for the
continuous upgrade of of
personnel. We have 3.
Uh, both camps that we currently
use as VSO ones, and that's the
entry level for VSOs to start
their initial training and
understand what the process is,
and as we've had BSO vacancies
now, those people are moving.
Up. So we have qualified and
understanding individuals
instead of somebody right you
off the street. We've also had
some
So uh
So
Success in actually having
federal people coming back to
the state.
After the upgrade we did last
year with the veteran service
officer position descriptions
and um their pay bands were now
very competitive with our
federal counterparts and
obviously, you know, we offer
much more stability currently
than the federal government.
We we're we're attracting very
high quality candidates. We've
not had less than probably fixed
it.
Um, so that's been very positive
uh positive for us.
We're getting high quality
candidates and we're able to pay
them what they're worth.
Um
Our unit
I was funded, uh.
This last fiscal year and it's
been in contract.
are anticipating that delivery
on between the 27th and the 30th
of June.
And we intend to have a kind of
a ribbon cutting and an
unveiling of that mobile unit.
And uh
Uh, we have done
An excellent job in making sure
that we found
The, the ins and outs of other
mobile units throughout the
nation as well as within the
state for other agencies that
have it make it the most
efficient, uh.
Well, you know, we're gonna be
able to have and that will
enable us to have our veteran
service officers.
Out in the community in a rural
area.
And it is
Self self serving its self
powered will have satellite
connectivity.
And they are able to basically
park out of a, of, of
facility somewhere and actually
serve veterans on the spot, and
we'll have two office spaces
there with 2 veteran service
officers that are dedicated to
that every time it'll go out.
And we've already started
talking to some of our, our, um,
Other partners
Within the state of like maybe
DWS having uh Liber or Diva
person there to assist if
there's needs that you can
actually um assist with other
veteran services as we go out.
On the
So, again, in collaboration with
that and
It also includes our IAD
partners.
Uh
closely with him and the tribes
and nations to ensure that
they're standing up their
veteran liaison programs. We've
had a lot of traction in the
last 60 days there, um, of, of
interest for the Pueblo tribes
and nations to.
Establish that, and we've also
worked very closely with IAD to
ensure that training funds are
available.
Using some of IEDs funds for
veteran programs within the the
the tribes and nations to, to
assist with that.
So we are as a state and fellow
cabinet secretaries that have
touch points with our veterans
working closely together to
accomplish these these
objectives.
Under our healthcare
coordination, that is a, a
And we're, uh, we're staffed, I
should say middlely staffed.
Uh, agency, but we oversee
sewageide Prevention Act.
The transportation program for
the state as well as manage the
VA funded grants that we have
under the Highland Rural
Transportation program.
And we also oversee the uh
homelessness program there, and
that also provides much outreach
and connection to other services
within within the state to
ensure that our veterans get
what they need. Uh, we work very
closely with the VA hospital,
the veteran's home in inte seat
replacements, as well as even
some of the long-term care
facilities that have veterans in
them that have concerns in
getting the assistance forever
where they reside, we have a uh
certified social worker.
On staff there and uh she's
been, she's a spouse of a, of a
veteran than she understands
some of the challenges that that
that our veterans face.
That's been very helpful in
moving the.
Programs forward.
Women veterans program.
Um
We have got a firecracker of a
program coordinator, uh.
Emily Viner has come on board,
and she's really taking the
mantle and, and move that
forward.
quickly. She's been out doing a
lot of outreach. We have much
more visibility than we've ever
had there.
And uh
Um, you all should have received
an invite for our Women Veterans
conference on the 14th of June.
Impact of of
Representative will be speaking
to the, to, to the, to the body
there as a, as a, as a veteran.
And uh 12 juniorsom Veterans
Day, uh, which is New Mexico is
one of the, the top states that
that uh recognizes that. And I
think it's an important aspect
of us in in making sure that
this program moves forward.
We've worked very closely with
our VA counterparts in moving
the VA healthcare and their
expansion at the VA hospital in
Albuquerque.
And uh keeping very close
contact with, with them to
ensure that the programs that
are available for women
veterans.
are not going to be disrupted by
the federal level changes and
what's available to our, our,
our women.
veterans.
Um, so, obviously, we don't know
what the final answer is gonna
bring there, but we're keeping
close to the ground to ensure
that there's.
I've already talked a little bit
about what we do with our
veteran tribal liaison, Ms.
Beverly Charlie.
I, uh, has done a phenomenal job
of doing the outreach over the
last year and making contact
with our tribes and nations and
pueblos.
To ensure that we have
invited to many of the, of, of
their internal operations to, to
breath.
The tribal councils and the
governors and the presidents to
ensure that they're aware of
what um it's been very helpful
in, in extending our reach there
and getting some of our Native
American veterans within the
state, the services that they
need.
And understanding some of the
nuances as well that they have.
Uh, living on, on tribal lands,
you know, the better tax
exemption doesn't apply for
property on tribal lands or
within the pueblos, but they can
also use that for their motor
vehicle registration as well.
So, again, walking them through
what options they still have
and, uh, you know, I know that
they're, they are trying to get
some initiatives moving.
Uh, for some other type of uh of
of a
Be because of
The tax exemption not applying
to them.
Uh, we talked about the BSO
training amongst uh Ms. Robin
Wilson, who runs our field
services program. We've been
working.
very closely with our trying to
liaison and all the pu tribes
and nations to ensure that the,
the training oversight is done
by by field services, uh, Miss,
Miss Wilson.
And they are young blood.
They are
They oversee the training
program and work closely with
the VA to ensure that these
people can be trained and we
answer their questions. That
assists us because of the lack
of VSOs in every tribe in nation
if they have somebody there
local that they want. We work
with more closely.
They're there and they have the
outreach and they can reach back
to us for assistance, so, uh, it
helps everybody with uh the
cultural awareness and, and, and
the preferences sometimes.
Yeah, that exists.
State approving agency.
It's run by uh Kathy Cathy
Snyder, sorry brain cramp, uh
Cath Cathy Snyder, and what
she's been very involved with
over the last year is either
compliance visits and uh making
sure that every institution in
the state of New Mexico, higher
education, actually meets and
executes the GI bill
effectively.
And for as prescribed by by
federal regulation.
Um, she's also been, uh,
assisting a lot of veterans with
questions because of the
Montgomery GI bill, uh, decision
made in the last year that the
Montgomery GI bill could also be
rolled over.
With the post 9/11 GI bill had
it not been used up to a year of
that, but we've been engaging
some of those questions there
and ensuring that that that is
also available.
Based on, on the most recent
outcomes of of some of the, of
the court cases.
And our better business
outreach, Mr. Johnny Martinez,
who was recognized by the Small
Business Administration as a
veteran advocate of the year
this past year.
Um, uh,
He does a lot of outreach, does
the tradition assistance
programs and all of our active
duty bases and talks to people
about the ability to use
Specific resources available to
veterans who start up small
businesses.
As, as well as to improve
possibly small businesses that
they may already have.
And uh they have access to
different grants and funding
through.
Uh, the VA and the SBA as they
collaborate together to ensure
that we have successful veteran
businesses in the city of New
Mexico.
There's many examples of uh of
the collaboration that Johnny
has done throughout the state
that have assisted people to
stand up their business and uh
He's really extended that
program quite well since he's
been in charge in the last uh
our administrative services.
Um, goes without saying
everything we do is done.
Um, in, in accordance with the
state statutes and our CFO and
our acting ASD director Jano
Lucero oversees our HR
initiatives, which has been
critical to the our, our
programs setting up everybody
and getting them to where there
is parity amongst them and the
state of New Mexico and their,
and their peers.
But the contracting requirements
that yours because DBS is not a
service provider.
We don't, we have to contract
vendors and service providers,
so we do the vetting of service
providers to make sure that
they're on board. We get them on
board with the state and every
contract that scope of work is
run through the division
directors.
through our CFO and our
contracting office to ensure
that they're meeting the intent
of what the statutes.
funding that we were provided
in, in some of the specials that
that we.
Get it through our legislative
funding to ensure that veterans
are indeed receiving the
services that they are, that
they deserve.
Um, so it's a, it's, it's a lot
of work, uh, to keep this agency
running.
Background in uh in.
can tell you the amount of work
that, that they do to ensure
that our division directors with
all the great things they're
doing amongst our outreach. Um.
We may be rude as well.
So, in a nutshell, that is all
the programs that we run in the
state of New Mexico.
With 80 people.
You know, put something in that
because that is our whole
cabinet.
Myself included.
And we are everywhere we're
doing the outreach, and we
continue to strive to provide
the education and, and
The information for our
veterans, but also on site
provided where we can take in
services to them and, and in
absence of that, making sure our
offices are staffed
appropriately to ensure that
that when veterans do come in,
that they get their questions
answered and they leave with,
with not only the answers, but
the services provided that they
showed up for.
And uh with that I thank you,
Mr. Secretary. Do we have
Any questions from the
committee, Representative De la
Cruz, and then I'll continue
with the list.
Thank you, Chairman, uh,
secretary or the request that
you
see frequently from veterans
that maybe need to be addressed,
something we should consider
during the interim, that, that
we've either didn't
Passes as law or something that
we haven't considered yet.
I would say we, we respond to a
lot of emergent requirements,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative De la Cruz that
Possible home modifications,
that somebody may go in for uh
Normal procedure.
To the VA or to their doctor and
end up with a hip replacement
or, or
Something that basically makes
their home um
Unattainable when they return
home, and uh those are emerging
requirements, and that's
something that I've been looking
at and and how we could
Be funded, uh
And I, I'd be looking, you know,
for, for something that
with 300 to 50,000 have
contractors on on call.
be able to do that. There are
several vendors throughout the
state of New Mexico that do
this. A lot of nonprofits and
they operate off of donations
and it kind of work them out,
and I think that that's one of
the things that um
We would we receive a lot that
we need assistance with for
veterans.
the
Required access to their home
after a procedure or
So, um, something happens with
her and.
So connect to disability.
The VA does take care of that at
some point.
But because of the cue and and
the the
The process, waiting for
For a month or two to get access
back to your home, that's,
that's safe, you know, may not
be feasible.
Some of these emergent
requirements, I think are.
something that that we
constantly, it seems that.
You know, it would be
natural that the
secretary and his staff would
receive requests for service
that maybe were not always aware
of. I think this is a good, a
good one to consider for.
Thank you representative,
Represented to office.
sure, um.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Secretary,
for the presentation.
Um
question the and and I, I was
kind of jotting things down. Did
I hear that you
We're concerned about funding
for honors federal funding to be
cut, Romer says that what I
heard.
Mr. Ja uh representatives, yes,
um, the, the federal funding
stream that comes in that
supports the
Funeral honors programs
throughout the the the nation
comes into the National Guard
and you, uh, and if you've been
to a military funeral, you've
seen the, the guardsmen that are
out there in uniform.
Um
In their absence, it would be
probably tasked to the local.
Um, active duty basis.
And those are basically somebody
who's on a detail who may not
have the proper training and
they're gonna be showing up.
If they're available.
And if they're not, it's going
to divert.
That directly to our veterans
service organizations that are
nearby.
And
You know, we're, we don't fund
it for somebody from Santa Fe to
drive.
angle fire for
For for uh
Or um military funeral honors.
Or from
had to get all the way down to
Fort Stanton for, for
of
funeral.
So these are things that I think
that on the federal side that
federal funding is
In their budget
And um because there is a CRA
this year, I don't know what
their final budget will finally
look like, but that has been a
discussion point that that be.
Some of the funding cuts.
But again, I don't want to speak
before they've published their,
their, their budget, but because
it's an item of discussion
already. It concerns me in, in
general a lot on how we would
continue this to provide these
services for our veterans.
So, um
Mr. Chair, uh,
Mr. Secretary, I, I can tell you
that when we call for veteran
honors, we, because we're a
world.
come out of uh
Your local bases, we always ask
for an active duty members of
the military to come over uh
from each branch of service
depending on, on, you know, I'm,
I'm not sure if you know I'm a
funeral director, so, um, I
I had a couple of funerals and
we uh
call for them through uh through
the center one of our girls
takes care of that, but it
generally send somebody out of,
you know, sometimes out of uh um
the El Paso area, sometimes it
comes out of.
Um, sometimes it's one of the
national guard, you know, units,
um, and, you know, they work,
they
and even with uh
and this has been going on for
some time.
They don't give you full
military honors like they used
to, even if you're retired, uh,
you know, you retired, you used
to be that we had, they send you
a small team of 2.
before, and then if you're
retired, they send you a full
team, usually a 5.
Maybe more, right, to do the
full volley and and turn around
and send uh so they could do
taps, so they had they
streamlined it to you or they
didn't have to send as many uh
uh.
Personnel
And they would do the the
Uh, presentation of the flag,
and of course, the uh um
Uh, taps and, and the all the
gunfire.
But they're the light, I think
down to 5 do that, but anyway.
Um
We haven't seen that, uh, you
know, and I know that's a new
budget.
You know, I, I've heard a lot of
stuff about, um,
cuts here and cuts there.
And I think they're gonna, I
think my, this is just my own
personal opinion.
A basement I, I don't think that
the Congress and and Senate has
the appetite.
To really, really do deep cuts.
I think it's something that's
going on in the news.
I think uh we are gonna see uh
maybe
You know like when we go to on a
diet, you know, on, uh, January
1st and it ends about January
15th.
Maybe something like that.
But I don't really see it you do
deep cuts where.
Um, you know, they're doing some
massive things, and it's, and
I'm talking about it entirely in
general.
I, I, I just don't see that I've
had some conversation on and,
and no one's moving in another.
I haven't heard of anybody.
Fully in a deep deal so they are
trying to kind of slim it down,
clean it up a little bit, but I
don't see you because I'm not
too concerned about that, but
thank you for bringing it up. My
next question is, is, um, Mr.
Chair, angel fire and Taos are
pretty close to each other.
They're about 25 miles,
something like that from each
other. And my, and they were
both, I, I think Kings of Fire
was opened in 2019.
OK.
And so
You know,
I've been in this business for
37 years, so you have a lot of
improvements happening in
It
I
represent.
secretary.
OK, yeah, yeah. OK, so 150 over.
Period. I mean, it's not.
It's still, it's, it's normal
again. It, it, it's, that's
growing, that's a good pace, but
the, the question that I'm
bringing up is being that
they're within 24 miles from
each other.
How are you gonna stop that I
hurt your, your, your question
about staffing and how you're
gonna handle that.
And, and I know that we
a new cemetery, you're talking
about 150 people since 2020.
4.5 years in, probably, so if
you just do the math, you, you
get what I'm where I'm going
with that.
My question is,
How are you gonna stop it? Are
you gonna have one director
looking over both.
so close in proximity, and are
you gonna have just a um
Uh
A crew that was open and closed
graves and so forth that would
just bounce from one to the
other, being the third in such
close proximity to keep costs
down so you can operate.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Therasas. Thank you for the
question. So,
It's, I believe it's 3032 or 34
miles, but it's through the
mountain pass through sea. So,
so it's not as a crow flies from
from jamming the hats.
Uh, so you're talking an hour's
drive.
And having funerals scheduled in
both locations.
And trying to manage that to
have a crew going back and
forth, not to mention the
equipment is kind of supposed to
be repositioned on each side.
So the intent is not to have
The crews bouncing back and
forth because of, of what we
require because there's also
grounds maintenance, our
internment specialists and I are
not just doing that, they're
also doing the groundskeeping
and everything else, which is
very different from what you'll
see in a federal cemetery. Uh,
they have an a German specialist
and that's all they do. And then
they have a ground crew or they
contract out and there's other
things that take place are
people actually do the
groundskeeping, they do the
landscaping, they do the
interments. So because we don't
have a lot of people.
Consolidated a lot of those job
duties to ensure that each
facility is maintained at the
highest level. So it would be
two separate crews, and in both
locations, and that, that would
be the intent.
Perfect. And so my next
question, uh, Mr. Chair, he, he
is.
When you do those, do, do you
Those opening colors too.
Rephrases here in German so they
schedule it uh so many per day,
uh you limit them. I mean, it
usually like uh
for we're at 11, 1 and 2.
Is that something similar to
what you guys are doing.
Yeah
OK. No, I'm just trying to get a
feel for it. I, you know, I
haven't been to those
cemeteries. I I really need to
go see them, and I didn't
realize it was, it was a.
Black man's over there like
what's come out of the mountains
where I live. It's I, I could
get to them I'm 40 something
minutes, you know, so, and so,
uh thank you for that. I guess
that was my biggest question for
those and how they were coming
along because they're newer
cemeteries, they galloped this
2017.
Uh, first time 2017, are those
also I already have the.
is there,
do they have they also uh had as
many burials in both of those
that are growing well.
And
300.
No, I, I think it's great that
they have no cemetery, that's
good. I just wanted to get kind
of briefed on what was going on,
how that was doing. And then the
last question I have is, Mr.
Chair, is convers you have on in
all sites. Excellent. Yes, yes,
we do. All right, Mr. Cha, thank
you very much.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Thank you
And yes, there's uh to your
questions uh from representRaas.
There's a big difference between
the two, and it does take an
hour to get up there and it's
very windy and a great ride on a
motorcycle. I'll just say that.
And the weather changes
frequently and there is
construction and any accident or
anything else will back you up,
uh, and it's beautiful if you
haven't been there, I highly
recommend. I, I just, it's
incredibly beautiful and
something.
Um
here and secretary, uh, that
goes back to a good question
that uh representing Cruise
brought up.
Because I'm in the American
Legion auxiliary, my husband's
American Legion, and we're
usually the ones who go in and
build the ramps.
So I, I would love to see that
happen with the
You know, where they're
responding because we have got
people to get out of the
hospital or nursing home or
something, we go and build the
ramps for them or somebody in
the American Legion or and some
auxiliary group is building them
something and putting things up
for them, uh, with showers and
the widows and all that stuff.
I would love to see money for
that. The only issue I see is it
needs to get done here.
No
Right out. So I do like that
concept. I just don't know how
we would make it.
kindly.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lord.
Thank you for what you do first
of all, American Legion and
then.
Yeah
The reason I want that, that
type of funding, we would have
contracting sources regionally
based, so it's not that it
starts in Albuquerque and we got
to get somebody there in 2 days,
and if we, if we can prevent it
um
people that are doing this, and
we know there exist, just making
sure that they're prevented and
then obviously.
2 or 3 days delay is better than
a month or two. So, um, again,
having the capability of having
that, the the, the spread and
the and the contractors on on.
An agreement already.
make things much easier and, and
float much more quickly.
I think surgery into code.
Absolutely, yes. I think it's a
cause sometimes things just get
built because that person has
got to get up on a wheelchair
and walker, they don't have time
to wait for a code issues, so it
may be where everybody works
together, something gets put
together and then gets redone to
code so that when at home is
resold, it isn't, hey, this
isn't something to go to
something to take into
consideration, um.
And then the other thing I was
talking about with the services.
I, I hope there is, I
I would be very way, shape or
form. I know the veterans will
step up because sometimes it is
frustrating. We'll have somebody
who's passed away and we're like
sometimes there's a scramble to
get people, and I know it's, I
get, I give a lot of shout out
to the American Legion and the
Patriot card writers, they
usually throw things together.
It's, it's amazing how they do
that, um.
I don't know if there's a if
there's a central hub for where
people call, but there seems to
be kind of disjointed,
everyone's scrambling. It seems
like every time I go that
there's a scramble.
can you Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, as, as, uh,
Described by the representatives
earlier.
Yeah, the casualty assistance
center, and that's usually that
is based in Fort Les, Texas.
Any military funerals with that
call goes from funeral homes for
a veteran that goes that the
cat.
And from there it'll be
dispatched by by service.
to the closest location and if
somebody is unavailable,
usually, especially we work
closely with the National
Guard.
And that they're outside of
because it's army specific.
If they're unable to make
something, they will make phone
calls and even to our office and
we'll call on American Legion or
a VFW who's closest and ask if
they're available, actually get
a team on site.
So we will work with the the
funeral homes as well as those
people who are.
tasks were possibly overcast.
Because of the cuts, you know,
uh, you know, I I'll I'll
mention, I know the National
Guard team used to be over 2020
individuals statewide that were
available on call. They're down
to about 7.
So the cuts it and people are
are not saying they're happening
are happening.
They like, they've got 3 of the
personnel to still do the same
mission set.
And our, our teams, and that's
why we're pushing so hard on our
VSO teams now.
better service organizations to
get more teams involved.
But they're, those are all
volunteers and we do pay them
for the services, um, they get
paid up to $300 per service.
When we're scrambling people, we
do our best to get it.
People out there, so we are in
the background assisting our
veteran service organizations
and helping to guide the closest
team to it if they're available
to to assist or to ensure a
veteran doesn't go without
proper owners.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you for explaining that kind of
that process because sometimes
it seems like it's such a
scramble. Everybody's just
trying to get this, we get it
all comes together, but it's
always seems to be a scramble.
Uh, I think that's all the
question I have. I do like the
idea of the whole modifications
and figuring out how we can drop
that and make sure that there's
some urgency and some quing and,
and there are people that are
contractors and ready. Thank
you, Madam.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. I
just have some quick questions.
Um,
So did you see how many ces
total you have over a year.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
you're asking about the number
of, of of of of services that
that ceremonies that you do,
yeah, for, for, for funeral
services.
pardon the interruption. Can you
hear me? Did you just come step
up to the mic just so the
public.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, as
of last week, we're well over
700 just for this FY.
Like 756 total services that are
on our teams have uh completed
that we have, uh, assisted with
and paid for, so what's your
average in a year? Do you have
an average?
Mr. Chairman, was, I think we
did over 900 last year, uh, so
we're pretty close to that
again.
Thank you
Um, and if you want, I could put
a book in Alex's ear just
saying, you know, this is what's
happening, could happen
federally, so we can make sure
we have money in there. And, and
I think that's, that's why I
brought it up. I.
Vice chair for the simple fact
that I think we need visibility
and if we wait till
It's all gone or it's cut to the
point where we can no longer
execute. We've waited too long
and.
So
I've seen the trends, and I
don't want that to to become an
issue and I, I, I believe that's
the, the, the biggest thing that
I, I put on the table there is
for visibility between myself
and, and the Department of
Military Affairs, who runs the
military aspect of it.
It's gonna be critical on how we
get at this and, and, and I'll
work with General Ragula to make
sure that we have a plan to move
forward on how we would.
could execute this on behalf of
the state.
Mr. Chairman, so, um, I got, I
got a call from my constituent
on the National Guard reserve,
the burial Equity Act, what, and
you have on here um resting
place for qualifying National
Guards and reservists. What does
that mean exactly?
National Guard and reservists
means that they had to at least
serve 6 years of, of continuous
service in the, in the, in the
guard reserves.
Without a qualifying federal
deployment because it would be
buried in a very, in a, in a VA
cemetery, you have to have
minimal.
2 years, not counting your
training time.
Uh, to qualify to be buried in
the federal.
VA cemetery, if they don't meet
that requirement, but they need
the guard requirement for those
who have served.
They will be interred in the
state cemetery with the same.
Uh, privileges of, of that of a
federal cemetery. We will.
For ways. The opening closing.
Interment and the headstone on
behalf of the state of New
Mexico.
And they could go through
government website to see if
that it has to be continuous,
and they will let them know if
there's any.
If there's any question
first place to start if they
believe they're qualified for a
um for a burial is to go to the
VA.gov put their paperwork in
and it'll tell you if they
qualify for the, the federal
level. And, and if they qualify
there, they're done.
And that there's a certificate
to issue that can be put with
their, their uh transition
papers for.
future reference. If they get a
declination there, they can
reach out to any of our VSOs and
our state benefits. We will
assist them to make sure that
they're qualified and they
identify where they want to go
and do the same thing that the
federal does and identify what
cemetery they would like to be
buried in, they don't get to
choose which space under what
tree, but they, they, they get a
reserve spot.
OK. And I just wanna um say
your, your woman's um veterans
program is wonderful, um, and,
um, just to put a plug out there
listening the the conference
this year is June 14th, starts
at 8 o'clock and then we're also
having a better um for anyone
who'd like to listen to, um, our
main speaker is committee.
Caucus. So
just want to bring in as many as
we can. One of the things for um
So I'm the only 9 years in the
legislature.
And um
the only veteran in the House of
Representatives. So one push
we're doing is trying to get
more veterans to come out.
Right, but thank you again for
your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Sherry.
That
Uh, thank you, Mr. uh secretary
for the presentation. Um.
I share kind of jumped in. I
think we always get that
question on where a veteran.
Federal at the VA cemetery at a
state cemetery. So thank you for
kind of laying that out cause
that's a question that I get.
It's a question I know, so I
appreciate that and uh we're
online, always remember to.
Quite plainly and
the information to move forward.
Um
One question I have been uh
wanting more clarification you
mentioned about
Folks that are veterans who are
unhoused and looking at working
with the VA, working with the
veterans home I'm trying to uh
help these individuals.
Um, what are the requirements to
actually
Get into
Mr. Chair, um,
I'm not an expert on, on that. I
would, I would.
I would want to get back to the
Department of Health and make
sure what
criteria they've laid out. What
we do with uh what we do do to
work with them is to identify if
there, if there are vacancies,
and then we refer them for
their, for
registration and, and
with their staff to be onboarded
there and if they're unable to
be placed there.
Cause a lot of, a lot of
veterans don't want to leave the
town they're in, you know, you
have somebody in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, would you like to
relocate to your Cly though.
right here. Thanks.
And, uh, you know, that that
that's that the
discussion to have, so we look
at other options, you know, we
do um have the VIC here in
Albuquerque, the veteran
integration Center, that, that.
that helps provide services for
veterans for
on house veterans as well as for
suicide prevention. And we also
work with Goodwill Industries,
and they have programs that they
work within in every community
and I think they're in they're
Different, like 9 different
locations throughout the state,
where we can actually work with
him for not only uh for, for
homeless.
And unhoused veterans, but for
other services as well, even
underemployed veterans to
provide services to them as
well.
So we work with several
different vendors throughout the
state to ensure that there's
equity and there's availability
is, is.
you know, the state is. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. I, I just
think it's important we have
that discussion and I think um I
wanna to talk with.
Health as well. Um.
I just want to understand. I, I
think.
From I think most of our
understanding is the veterans'
homes for veterans who are, you
know, getting up in age, having
some support, but I'd like to
understand a little more.
One of the services they could
provide the folks who are
unhoused, folks who were dealing
with behavioral health or
so.
Aspects of what's going on in
their life, or maybe they can't
provide those services, or maybe
you can't get in. We just want
to understand that a little
better, and if they can't, what
can we do?
a state to maybe.
Um
You mentioned.
You know, the
possible cuts to
Um,
The
funerals as far as being able to
fund detailing National
Guardsmen, uh, to give these
progresses,
um, are there any other areas
where you're possibly concerned
with.
Cuts at the federal chair we
are,
are watching closely.
The, the plan that the the VA is
gonna be laying out for
Secretary Collins and what, what
their plan looks like.
Um
Uh, the, the first.
cuts that they provided, um, at
the VA with the probationary
employees and stuff did affect
that and I know that there's
been many retires, um.
I'm working with uh
Doctor Weintraub, you're in
Albuquerque VA as well as uh.
large to understand what cuts
there are and what branches and
sequels from the actions taken.
Will affect our veterans. They
guarantee that there will be uh
any uh
Medical
Availability cuts for veterans
that the services that are being
provided right now are gonna be
done as robust or more and that
there are plenty on on.
On trying to provide a balance
between in.
Hospital care as well as
community care.
Um, with, with that plan that is
not yet published, it's hard to
understand that, but I am
concerned that the branch is the
sequels that the
Administrative staff that
supports functions that we
provide.
Could be affected for the simple
fact like a VSO that has
If they cut it administrative
position that oversees the
security of systems.
Would impact one of our VSOs
getting their gift card. It's a
personal identifiable validation
guard to actually provide
services to veterans to get
access to the systems.
That process gets elongated by
any period, and there was a,
some hiccups there because of
some of that that caused our
guts to be delayed, so that
means it's uh BSO couldn't get
it on the system to assist a
veteran. So,
I think they've slowed their
process and are trying to look
at
The branches and sequels and how
it affects the bigger picture.
But again, I can't really speak
to a plan that's not yet been
published, but those are my
concerns that they overlook
something that is not obvious to
to them, and they take a deep
cuts that are not well thought
out.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I just
think it's important to reflect.
I, I just remember being on
active duty, coming in,
especially uh being enlisted
folks, but even the young 2nd
lieutenants or when you first
came into a base, um, hey, this
is your additional duty, uh, to
these, to these funerals for a
week.
And even that didn't cover the
Response that really was needed.
for veterans, right?
Um,
So
For cuts to happen to our
guardsmen that were already
stepping up as well.
Um
This could be catastrophic, and
I understand that we have our
veterans servants organizations,
you know, um.
VFW
Oh
American Legion.
be
Um
But their stroke have.
Older
Demographic of members, they
can't be everywhere.
hasn't been the earrings. And
so,
It's just really important that
We, uh
Use our voice and our positions
too.
really reflect.
And with all due respect to the
representative, you know, I, I
respect where he thinks we're
going with this, but
I'm just concerned that um
When you propose 80,000 cuts.
I had a meeting with Senator
Heinrich with some of the
employees from the VA that were
let go, some were brought back.
Um
The fear is still there.
Even if you say that it's only,
it's not gonna be.
Medical folks or the folks that
And the technicians.
We all know those make the
appointments are just as
important.
Um
Because we've been talking about
for years.
about how the VA has not been.
So to make more cousin make.
and so um
Just giving a heads up to
everybody as these things come
down.
I think it's our role.
It's to step up and say how
these will and it shouldn't
matter who's in, in the, in the
White House, what party they
are. We've served on this
committee and sent letters.
Uh
President Biden to say don't
close these rural clinics.
So I think that's where our
focus is to buy. We'll close it
there and say, I appreciate what
you're doing, continue to let us
know what we can do.
Uh, to help
I think we've done some great
things, uh, both sides of the
aisle to really help.
in our state.
military members.
Um, that are serving here on
active duty and our
installations, but also the
families and the kids that are
here.
Because we want to make it out.
Um
I will send it right back to the
representative one more time. I
think I interrupt.
and, and, you know, I, I think
uh
I just wanted for people, folks
that are listening in our
veterans that are listening,
there's, you know, you said
there's, it's 24 months to
be eligible.
Uh, just for those people that,
uh, for everyone's knowledge.
It, uh, that's if you serve
after 1980, September of 1980.
Unfortunately September 1980,
it's a 90 day, uh, period, and
I, I think everybody used to
know like this.
listening there, there is a
disparity there and, and, you
know, we deal with a lot of
people that are suing had served
in Vietnam and and uh and and
before that. And so I, I think
we're seeing that number more
than than the newer uh
requirement, um, and then
I think uh
We're blessed to have the Marine
Corps League and the American
Legion and all those other uh um
um.
Cups and, and or organizations,
I guess, that support us because
without them, you know what,
Senator, we would be.
the military and I, I wasn't, I
think articulate enough to
explain that.
those two teams, uh, uh.
the people that were sending us
in with two teams, or excuse me
without saying that to active
duty teams.
We're able to do full military
honors because of them, but
you're right, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
they're older.
Um, we haven't had any problems,
um, with, with getting them and
scheduling them those times,
even on weekends or coming, not
everyone gets buried in an
actual cemetery sometimes they
do it.
Uh, private cemeteries or
whatever, um, and so we haven't
had any issues, but, you know,
you
are, it is valid for the chair
to say that we should be
concerned. I don't, I, I don't
wanna, I don't want to dismiss
it. I just haven't had the, I
think that it's a big.
I hope it's just a bigger.
Um, news deal and what really
hits the ground and and because
I
Uh, at least that's what I'm
here, so, anyway, thank you Mr.
Tre. I just wanted to clarify
those, those things. Thank you.
And I'll let you close.
Uh
Mr. Chair and uh
But the committee. Thank you for
again allowing the opportunity.
And I, I did this by design. I
wanna make sure that I leave you
with a parting thought. Last
year I, I requested $600,000.
My, my
Personnel budget to provide
stability.
The state is transitioning to
these new pay bands that were
directed by the LFC and have
been overseeing it, and in order
to maintain
Professional people that we have
and the retention that we've
worked so hard to, to, to build
and
PBS.
I need that.
that personnel budget.
So I don't have to continue
doing physical gymnastics to
accomplish the objectives that
have been set forth for one of
your smallest cabinets.
And uh I, I really want to put
stump that at the end of this so
that as we go into the next
fiscal year, you will be seeing
that request again.
Um, and, uh, I don't ask for
anything lightly. Um, I'm a
steward of the taxpayers'
dollars, and I'm gonna, I'm
gonna emphasize that and make
sure that you understand that I
will.
using it to the utmost benefit
of our veterans, um, but many of
our employees are veterans as
well.
And um I got to provide that
stability for them within our
agency, so I, I would ask that
you take that in consideration
with everything else I presented
today, and I look forward to
future conversations with you
and uh
assisting our veterans. Thank
you.
Let's just take one more
question I'll follow up. So is
that 600,000 to cover for those
payments? Has there been an
increase on there or just for
the last year and a half, we
we we were pressed to get our
VSOs in the proper pay band and
to provide the updates if
necessary. I've done that not
only with our VSOs but across
the board that had not been done
in many, many years. And uh
that, that is right now our,
our, our deficit, uh, for, for
our payroll.
And uh I, I really want to
ensure that that um
You all understand I'm doing
everything we can with as much
as we can, but if I keep
expecting more people, I've got
to provide stability for them to
to continue to do the jobs that
we're asking.
Uh just to confirm, uh, my
apologies. So this is an
additional 600k because you were
in the deficit and this was to
cover for mystery chair, yeah,
that is correct. That's what I,
I requested it last uh.
Lessession.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you. We appreciate you coming
here. Thank you.
All right, next, we will move on
to the proposed work plan.
Uh, in your folder, you should
have one.
sheets stay together.
Um, I think
We'll go ahead and
Just
I'll start off and, and read it
off and so.
What my thoughts are on this,
some of this was taken from the
last couple years on areas that
we wanted to focus on, uh, we
added a, a few, few more details
and I'm open to some more ideas
from the committee, uh, for any
other additions. So, um, I'll
just start off and kind of read
off of
we have so far.
Um,
want to receive updates from our
New Mexico military
installations.
We want to study issues relating
to female veterans.
We want to receive updates
regarding college credit for
military service from high from
the higher education department
and the veteran service
department.
We want to receive testimony
regarding jobs and business
opportunities for veterans.
You want to study long term care
options for veterans.
I want to study
Transportation to and from
medical providers for veterans,
particularly those living in
rural areas of the state.
I want to receive testimony
pertaining to educational
opportunities and outreach
offered by state educational
institutions and public
community college colleges to
veteran students.
We want to examine options for
the prevention of homelessness
and support for homeless
veterans in areas throughout the
state.
Who want to receive testimony
regarding health care options
both within the Veterans
Administration system and
outside of it, including
behavioral health care, suicide
prevention and treatment for
post-traumatic stress disorder.
want to examine actions in
Mexico can take to improve
quality of life for military and
veterans' families.
Um, and we want to examine
processes for veterans to
receive, and I'm gonna change
that. I put fee waivers, uh, to
receive tax incentives or
discounts for services provided
by local.
state government. And so really
what I want to look on there is
the, the great work we've done,
uh, the last few years.
the state parks, the property
tax exemption, um,
I want to be able to understand
how these processes work and how
we can make it better for
veterans. I think we've all
gotten emails and calls, right,
where someone's like, why are we
doing this or why can't I do
this online, or why do I have to
bring this in. And so I think
it's good to understand that
process. It will be examined
issues relating to New Mexico's
active duty reserve and National
Guard military personnel,
veterans and military families.
And examine various issues
related to veterans and taxes.
And examine housing issues near
New Mexico.
Terry installations.
And so with that, I will pass it
over to the committee if they
have any other ideas or
missions, I'm gonna go to the
viceer first and.
Mr. Chairman, um, I want to add
on the military side, um, we've
been looking at different areas
that keep our that report to our
bases so that when um the
federal government looks the
higher ups, look at our bases,
so we need to continue on with
avoiding military and families
with special ed needs.
Um, with child abuse reporting
with court representation and
with concurrence juvenile
jurisdiction. Those are things
that they already have them. We
also need to, we got um
I have 157 which created a a not
a not.
No referring or um
funding to the state treasury
for military-based planning fund
area.
Um, for everything that the base
needs, and we got the
The fund, which is the money was
stripped out in AFC so that we
could get the funds, so we have
to get that money back in.
Um
And that's to help all our
bases.
Um
And I want to look at um
PASalmon this might be looking
at bringing someone in from the
federal.
See how the cleanup is going.
Um, I know there's a lot, so we
wanna make sure we have a big
part of you understand what's
happening we can speak on that
and really, you know, we have, I
believe we'll have landers, I
believe any of them were
cheating.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. Do
we have any other additions?
process, then we'll go to
Stephanie Lord after.
Representative Lord, my
apologies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I was gonna ask uh sorry I was
pausing I was gonna say, what
we're doing ladies first or what
we do anyway, Mr. Chair, I think
on in the scope of this work,
are we going to address what the
secretary just asked us about in
budgeting issues, or would that
fall in, and how would we amend
this to, how would you like to
fix that, Mr. Chair, I think
it's something that he's asked
us a couple of times just, uh,
and, and it is.
You know, he, you know, I'm
happy that he
Uh, took the initiative and
giving those raises. Did you see
it anywhere here that we can add
that or is it already in there?
I don't want to be redundant,
uh, Mr. Chair, I represented by,
I think that's something we want
to add, and so, um, I think.
There's something basic even
like saying.
impact to federal cuts to
military veterans and military
families, something like that.
Um, I know we already have that
new committee that has stepped
up to look in general um at any
federal cuts and how they can
impact the state, and so maybe
we kind of leverage and work
with them and, and figure out
what their, what they're seeing
that is really in the lane of
veterans and military folks,
maybe that's how we address it.
And I think Mr. Chair, um, I was
kind of more.
focused on on his budget
shortfall on his regular, and,
and I think maybe I didn't
explain that properly, Mr.
Chair, but it was more for his
budget shortfall because of all
the races that he gave in
compounded through his
administration, um, I think
that's, that should, and I, I
didn't see where we could, you
know, where it would fall in
these categories, so I don't
know if you wanted to add that
as a as a as someone to carry a
bill to, you know, fund that
shortfall.
Uh, and I thought that would be
something that we could add. The
other thing, since we are on the
work plans.
I don't know if we're gonna
separately so we'll, we'll add
that. Yes, sir. Uh, the other
thing, Mr. Chair, is I didn't
know if we were going to um
During this discussion, that
does that include the us our
discussion on the schedule, or
are we gonna do that separately
to this.
Representative will talk about
the schedule after this.
I think that's all I have. All
right, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a few
issues I want the second what I
represent Sariana said about the
PIIS issue. We don't want to,
it's an interesting balance. We
don't want to.
Necessarily penalize our base,
but we definitely want to know
what's happening with the PIA's
cleanup, especially now that
it's in the Ogallala.
Uh, aquifer, which is the
biggest aquifer in the world,
and it's going from in and out
in there and I'd like to know
what's going on with the cleanup
on that.
Um
So apparently I guess Lael just
sent thousands of gallons of
water to Texas.
Be true, which it could be
treated that way, but we need to
see about the cleanup here. Yes,
on the budget issue they brought
up, I'd like to if we can get
anyone to come and talk to us
from the federal level by any
cuts that are going to affect
our veterans. I'd like to know
exactly what is happening. I
don't, I don't want, I don't
like to deal with.
What if I'd like to see exactly
what's going on with that.
Uh, that home modification that
uh representative Dela Cruz
brought up is important because
that happens so quick. Somebody
gets out and boom, they're
making calls and people are
making ramps, makeshift to get
people into their.
Um, and transportation is always
a big issue for me, especially
out in Torrance County because
they're in this limbo land where
our veterans can't get to the
VA.
But yet we don't have anything
out there.
All right. Thank you. I think.
I agree. I think it's really
getting the information on POs
and
I think it's about penalizing,
but we have the communities, but
I think it also deals with um
You know, viability of the base
in the future. So it's important
that we figure that out. Uh, we
still have line.
dealing with transportation, I
think it falls in that area and
we can still modify.
Friday if we need to.
And
I think part of the federal side
present.
Represent.
Um, so.
I did get, get a message on
behalf of Senator Block.
Um, they would like to request
that.
I think we have.
I think for me it would be
fall to
seems to have the income tax. It
used to be, yeah, we took, we
took that one out since we have
the 30K.
Maybe we can just add looking
again at taxes, I think in
general.
Yeah, so, yeah.
I think would just say that he
falls into that.
All right, so we're gonna go
ahead and move on to the last
page, which is the proposed
meeting schedule. So today we're
meeting June 4th here in Santa
Fe.
Um, just to let everyone know,
uh.
We really were only assigned
for.
meetings and so we asked for an
additional um and
You know, it always becomes more
Albuquerque, Santa Fe central
location, so we have scheduled
for July 15th in Albuquerque.
August 13th in Las Cruces.
And then we're looking at going
to grants or Gallup, October
14th.
That to another part of the
state.
Uh, but I think also it's
important to go up, um.
And then November 5th we would
finish up here in Santa Fe.
Kind of been the comments or
questions about the schedule.
office.
I was only gonna ask Mr. Chair,
if at all possible we could move
the August 13.
To Silver City.
a lot of veterans there, um.
And the National Cemetery there
is something that would be nice
for you guys to see the, the
cemetery and all the uprising
made.
And to see uh forebears, which
is right next to it, the the old
fort.
Um, and I believe we could.
Possibly have the meeting if
you'd like, I could um.
of
that and have it there at or be
in the in the theater.
place so you just get an idea of
and right next door to the uh
National Cemetery, um, I, I
believe this, this whole entire
time that I've been on this.
we've never been in.
I
See if we can do that for our
veterans there. I have any other
questions or comments?
Serverson
I think, um
And I probably want to talk with
him.
For they say look at those days.
I think that would be great. I,
I'd like to just, I mean, we've
been in a few times in that area
and I just thought it would be
nice to do that since we have
the national cemetery there.
You know, it's come up such a
long way, Mr. I, I, I would, I'd
like to see something in so City
so I mean, I, I know that we
You know that that is important
too, and I want to respect
everything that you're, you're
the work.
Or re to this, um.
Schedule. I, I was just my
request if we could, yeah, I
think the October 14th is a
little more flexible and and I
didn't have a chance to go
through. Yes, sir.
I think for the sake of this,
we'll add that and continue to
look.
Absolutely, I'd be glad to help
and I, like I said, um, Mr.
Chair, right, right adjacent to
the National Cemetery is Fort
Berg, um, it's an old historic
fort, uh, and I think
You
Something that you
Appreciate um Buffalo soldiers
were there.
Um, and it's, you know, it's got
a lot of old burials there that
then it's got uh the old
buildings were, uh, well, they
knocked down the, the hospital
that was there, um, the
tuberculosis hospital.
There's still all the words
there for the uh.
Uh, the nursing staff and the
doctors and so forth, it's got
its own museum, and.
I think it would be a good place
to have it in.
Um, there, and it would be.
close to,
if you want.
To have everybody wants to go to
national heritage and
To have everybody wants to go to
national her something
to, no, I think that's a great
idea. It's kind of what I
mentioned.
racial infections in the
community.
So we do
Thank you.
Right
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Do we have any other questions
or
Um
OK, so we have uh July 15th,
Albuquerque, August 13th, Las
Cruces.
October 14th would be Grant's
Gallop or Silver City.
And then
Come back here in November.
So
Or we, um, move on and
Vote on this work plan I'm gonna
go.
representative Mia was appointed
a voting member for the.
Perfect timing. So with that,
we're going to
Take a motion to approve the
work plan.
I remember
voting members, as always, like
we were just doing in the
discussion, your input as an
advisory um is always occur. I
could get.
Mr. Chairman, I move that we,
um,
That the work or
Because the work um
has the proposed work plan and
meeting scheduled.
I submitted, OK.
Right? We have a motion to
approve the work.
Plan and the schedule Ariana.
2nd and by represent I just
instead of doing a roll call or
anything, I would just for
voting members is anyone
opposed.
To the work plan.
So the work plan passes.
Yeah
All right, I think said, we're
28, we have public comment at
I'm trying to think what we
should do right now. It looks.
I'm gonna
Unless anyone is opposed to
this, I'm gonna go ahead because
usually.
We don't have public comment and
so folks are probably weren't
gonna sign up anyway, but this
is something that in will allow
and give folks, and maybe in the
future, we kind of do it.
You know, more at lunchtime or
in the daytime to where.
Kind of waiting
With that.
You're going to go ahead and
adjourn uh the first MEC
meeting, uh, for this interim
