Morning everybody thank you for
your patience we finally have a
corn so we are going to get
started I have course one of
begin by thinking the convention
center for hosting us thank you
mf for bringing your snack
powers all the way down to the
corner we really appreciate it
with a coffee I know I
definitely do and so why don't
we begin with
committee introductions and
center consultants start with
you.
Good morning you know thank you
well and what a beautiful
building you know had solved to
everyone that within the recites
within this area i'll state
senator robert though bobby jack
on silence district six which
encompasses part of something
they look solomos really want
and again
very for the very nice facility.
Thank you.
A good morning madame chair and
madam vice chair thank you
senator michael per the also
service the senate majority web
and i've been in this committee
the entire time my thirteen
years on the legislature madame
charity have to confess
something I did not realize that
socor came all the way over here
I i've always been on the main
drag there so this is really
kind of exciting to see the rest
of this town and I just want to
think the community for hosting
us and all the staff and
everybody for doing such a great
job of supporting us thank you
thank you madame chair amount of
ice channels matter by share of
state senator her po junior
district twenty three northwest
albuquerque burn wheel county
book into best to high school of
antonio ranch area booking a bit
of high school is where I
represent happy to be here
thanks.
Did that work
it's a small enough room I
probably didn't need to do that
but
anyway well it supplies your be
here sir
is one of my favorite drives so
I forgot that it was ten miles
longer than I remembered so I
apologize for being a little
late
and
i'm married and matthews are a
state representative from
district twenty seven in the far
north east heights of
albuquerque I think it took me
longer to get to the highway
then it took me to get to here
with the road construction
everything and albuquerque and
really glad so many people
turned out and looking forward
to having a great impositive
meeting thank you.
Thank you madame chair and
restaurants are state
representative for district
thirty nine I live with silver
city new mexico and uh cover
grant cattering and and he
thuggle counties I came over the
mountain this morning over the
black range and so I didn't have
any self service for most of
those kind of nice um but then
when I got in here we know at
home i'm a few funeral director
so I had a family call me that
their son had passed away so
that's why I was city in the
parking lot on the phone sorry
that I don't walk in earlier but
it's a beautiful drive we had a
lot of rain we definitely need
it and i'm glad to be here thank
you manager.
And thank you madam chair i'm a
representative of kathleen kates
from district forty four
district for before it covers
all of coralist parts of rear
reinshall nor is a pacific north
day and
so the blinkie is to park and
tell trade score um I I am
always happy to be in the
beautiful town of sacro and I
just for the record want to let
everyone know how much I really
admire and respect my colleagues
but I need to be sitting here
and outlet so thank you.
Hi good morning everyone i'm
senator linda heo senator strick
twenty four which is the city
different santa fe happy to be
here today thank you for the
treats they are delicious arms
corros kind of a regular stop
for me though so I just want to
say thank you to the city you've
got a beautiful test like
charging station and I stopped
here quite regularly and so
thank you for that really
forward thinking
ability for us to as we're
driving down the highway that we
can stop here and charge up I
appreciate it alight.
This.
Thank you everybody for those in
reductions i'm representative
general new nor knew I represent
house district nineteen that's
the fair grounds the
international district and other
current new mexico and I want to
think you all committee members
and visitors for coming all the
way down to score christine that
informs me she did a little bit
of digging and apparently this
is the first time that mfa has
met on site somewhere other than
albuquerque somewhere other than
the officers and the first time
that would be taking a tour of
an mfa project which I thought
was really important for us to
see what the hands on
experiencial of walking through
what this organization does it's
much different than looking at
the slide deck so think you
offer coming making history with
us today
so some really brief
announcements we have a hard
stop around twelve fifty to go
over to the tour site which I am
told is very nearby the address
doesn't actually technically
exist yet so we were not able to
come up with a map to provide
for you so we are going to meet
in the parking lot and caravan
together we will be following
jeff curry I believe is in the
room there is in the back death
you get to lead our expedition
alright excellent to the tour
site will meet the parking lot
again and
get ourselves organized for that
the first or of business that I
want to do before we have is the
present is the approval of the
minutes of our last meeting
well move for pool thank you and
a second from senator gozalis
and center to heal.
Do we need to do a roll call
vote on that okay great
excellent is it
great.
Good morning madam charity
members of the committee
good to see you all here today
when before I start with some of
my updates I really wanted to
thank a partners that came here
to be with us today and make
some presentations we have out
natalie green and david wear
from the city of los crucis
thank you for coming up here now
that I just met this young way
here she's with him as well so
thank you we also have a jeff
currently that you've already
mentioned I long time partner
with the housing new mexico they
do a lot of development across
the states or want to thank them
for coming little bit later on
will have mister what messenger
with a faulty also part of the
presenters that'll be up here
don't know that he's here yet
and then we have a one of our
board members although he's not
representing our board today
mister randy trainers will be
present and also on the
development site so thank you
member trainer for for coming.
Uh
tab one you'll see some as
lights that provide you an
update on the new mexico housing
trust fund that once again we
want to thank you for supporting
the house in press one data the
first page page one of seven
gives you an indication at a
high level on the allocations
that we received uh in twenty
twenty four the thirty seven
million twenty twenty five the
thirty four million and end up
fifty million dollars for
creation those last two so a
total of eighty four million
dollars we fat for just a about
twelve months a little shy of
twelve months that we've had
access to those funds you'll see
that the total awarded is a
hundred and four million dollars
which is eighty six percent of
the funds and if you take into
account that eighty four million
of that that we've had for a
short period of time
the expenditures are you'll see
there are a total of this light
shows forty percent if we were
to add the
last month in there were
actually at forty two point six
percent and forty fifty two
million dollars that had been
expended just as a one of the
ways that when we allocate and
award the funds we do not
release the funds on the day of
the board awards it we go
through a closing process and
then as we receive receipts and
confirmation that homes are
being built or the apartments
are being built we do it on a
reimbursement basis so that's
why you will see a lag on the
expenditure because we don't do
not disperse the funds right at
the very beginning.
If you go into the next page
page two of the slights
this gives you an indication of
that total funding and where we
are with the activities where
the funds have been awarded
you'll see that the activities
with the highest uh allocations
and expenditures are on the
rental housing development which
is right about the middle of the
page and then on their left hand
side you'll see the down payment
assistance which is for up folks
that are purchasing their homes
the next couple of pages just
gives you details on the funding
here so uh page three years for
the first allocation that we
received at thirty seven million
dollars it shows you where the
uh allocations are gone and the
expenditures and you'll see that
the same trend as you see on the
overall slide
page for there's the same thing
for the second transfer the
ukraine funds which is the
thirty four point six million
dollars
and then if you look at the
fifty million dollar
appropriation on page five uh
you'll get the same type of
details and you'll see that we
really allocated a lot of funds
towards rental housing
development and single family
development so more on the
development site than we had in
prior years
if you look at the very colorful
slide page six uh couple of
charges there that give you an
indication.
On the activities and how much
money was allocated to him
you'll see that that totals a
hundred and four million dollars
which is consistent with that
first light we saw a number that
you had not seen in previous
largest on the right hand side
there and it shows the number of
families or households that were
impacted without that funding is
five thousand five hundred and
thirty four families impacted
with those programs in the award
that we made so I want to thank
you for your support there and
the impact that it's happening
if you look at the slide uh
seven this is the third
allocation of recording funds
that just became available to us
on july the first it's forty
five million dollars our board
awarded those funds or allocated
those funds to the activities
that you see there are the
highest activity is that thirty
five point five million dollars
that goes to rental and single
family development.
Uh so you can see where our
priorities are with the board
and they're not to down payment
assistance eight million dollars
and then to single family
acquisition we have in resell
the restoring our communities
program for one point five
million dollars
so that's what I have as far as
lights I do have a couple of
other updates and i'll give you
briefly
some of the other production
that the organization are
overall production year to date
uh in our year fiscal year
starts in october the first so
we're what seven eight months
into it we were overall assisted
twenty five thousand families
with four hundred and sixty
million dollars some of the
highlights on the home ownership
side we've had reservations for
people that are purchasing their
homes of two thousand and sixty
six homes and reservations for a
total five hundred and eight
million dollars
the average weekly reservations
are activity that we see is
about twelve point seven million
dollars in reservations that are
made for home buyer program on
the rental development side we
have a total right now of fifty
one different developments
across the state that are in one
phase of construction or another
totalline over forty eight
hundred units uh that's in
nineteen different
municipalities in fourteen
different counties so they are
spread out across the uh the
state the economic impact of
that which is something we don't
talk about very often is
estimated to be one point three
billion dollars just for fifty
one different developments in
over fifteen thousand jobs that
are being created um switching
gears to you a little bit from
the production side uh i'm sure
you're aware of the federal
build reconciliation bills
one that I was signed on july
the fourth in another one that
is currently being considered a
not going through the process on
the bill that was signed on july
the fourth as some positive news
there.
We one of our most competitive
programs start at a housing new
mexico is the low income housing
tax credit program under that
program there are two different
types of our tax credits or
allocations when elements are
nine percent tax credit and the
other one is a four percent tax
credit on the nine percent tax
credit there was a big win there
are their legislation increase
the capacity by twelve percent
so we'll be able to develop more
housing with the twelve percent
that increase there and that is
a permanent
increase to that tax credit
program in addition on the four
percent tax credit that require
private activity volume cap to
be issued along with the
development for those tax
credits there was a fifty
percent test which required that
for the total cost of a
development let's say it's ten
million dollars that you had to
issue private activity bond caps
which are limited and need state
fifty percent of that they call
it the fifty percent test
they lower that to twenty five
percent so you can basically all
things being equal be able to do
twice as many four percent tax
credit apartment complex is
across the state so that's very
positive it does come with
challenges because the more
development you have the more
get financing that is going to
require so now it's a finance
shoulders and with your help to
allocate more funding towards
housing so we can be able to
make maximum use of the nine
percent in the four percent tax
credit.
On the something maybe not so
positive that bill that is
currently being considered uh we
understand and obviously it
hasn't gone through the whole
process yes a lot of things
could change between now and
once it's uh finalized but the
federal home program which is
funding that comes through heard
to the state and we had housing
new mexico get about five
million and some change that is
currently zeroed out and will
not be continued under the quite
currently being proposed on the
positive side uh it appears that
the project based contract
administration which is
sectionate vouchers that the
funding there has increased at
the national level so we believe
that there are a minimum here in
new mexico will see at least a
steady and no decrease in that
funding for us same thing with
the homeless programs there was
an increase there of about the
time
a hundred and seven million
dollars for the homeless
programs uh so those both of
those are formula based so we
may be getting a little bit of a
bump on those programs which is
positive if if that holds
through and we're hopeful that
there's a turn around the home
program
the last couple of things I
wanted to mention is that we do
have a housing summit coming up
that you I hope you're aware of
it's on the seventeenth through
their nineteenth of september
we're hoping that you register
registration is open we
currently have just shy of a two
hundred individuals that have
registered and we'll say that
the capacity for the hotel is
five hundred in the last couple
of years we've sold out so on
we're hoping that you register
and not if you plan on attending
please try to register some
there is a twenty percent
discount I believe for for
legislators that the website
will give you in the last thing
that is a gone looking at the
agenda we have some great
presentations here there's the
needs assessment uh that'll be
presented to you by our staff uh
it's something that we do on an
annual basis to update the
housing strategy that we
published in twenty twenty two.
So you'll get some information
there were always looking for uh
the waste to make that better in
uh update the information
they'll also be stummed
planning and zoning
presentations and what some
communities are doing for
efficiencies and now you'll hear
from some of our developers that
those are some of the challenges
that they have that are
increasing cost and then we have
a the builder's perspective will
have three different individuals
uh also present into you to
count and give you a number of
you are some of the successors
and some of the challenges and
we plan on doing this on a for
next three meetings following
this was kind of bringing some
additional presenters into thank
that picture for you so madam
chair with the ad i'll take any
questions that you are the
committee members may have thank
you very much is the are there
any questions from the committee
rep keys
thinking manager and think you
see an and you have so much.
Um that you've reported on and
and I I am very much grateful
for and I see the big things but
I have to I want I want to talk
about the home improvement
program which I know is a a
smaller program compared to all
the other ones how to e have
thirty eight homes that have
been able to access this program
how do they access the home
improvement program are are you
is this uh like the town payment
we have relationships with
lenders are you al adibility
advocacy groups how how do they
know how to individuals these
thirty eight homes know about
this program
madame chairman representative
cakes thank you for the question
the we call it the the hip
program at home improvement
program is actually fairly new
to us you may be a where we
don't that deliver many of our
products directly we use our
close to four hundred partners
across the state that deliver
the services for us directly we
do have some areas of the state
where we don't have partners so
on a pilot bases we created the
hip program where we have staff
internally that take the
applications and the go and seek
the contractors to do the work
on the homes that need some
rehab as we have no magazine
remember after top of my head
right now we have several
counties that we've targeted but
we don't have partners and we're
going out there and we're
advertising and seeking
applications that way so it's
not that statewide at this point
but we hope to wear actually we
hope to get partners to service
those counties but if not will
continue to spread out to the
areas but we don't have partners
so that's there's not a specific
priority for individuals is just
that they need to meet their
criteria mostly based on income
limits and the condition of the
home thinking so much manager
and thank you iz and thank you
for that when you talk about
partners partners traditionally
with mfa or lenders correct.
Madame chair and representative
of cats
are lenders are some of our
partners exactly a lot more
diverse in that we have a
wilter's lenders we have four
profits nonprofits developers
local governments tribal
governments public housing
authorities regional housing
authorities the whole slew of
folks that are working on
housing thinking manager and and
thank you as he i'm just trying
to clarify the home is this the
home improvement program that
will also help
individually stay in their home
to make sure that their home
stays ada compliant
madame chair and I
representative kates this
program can help with
accessibility so that is one of
the things that this program
does thank you madame chair and
thank you is you so I would just
respectfully ask it maybe
putting together a one page fire
to send to the.
Or developmental disability
adviser so some some of the
average account acts the arch is
an advocacy group for the entire
state development disability
council is also an advocacy
group from the entire state just
so that that would be a partner
for
I would want you this non
traditional for the mse but for
this particular program I think
would be very helpful and thank
you very much for everything
that you do first date.
Thank you and vice church heal
think you madam chair and think
using for being here I have a in
regards to the forty percent
forty two percent that's been
expending you identify are there
any.
Challenges that are being
experienced that we don't get
that hundred percent out the
door.
I know that's that sounds really
aggressive but what kind of
challenges are making it more
difficult for that to happen.
Manager under trukio the.
The.
I think the the things to look
at here out of the we have
procurement for all of the
activities and awards that are
being made at a high level the
expenditures is really the
process that we follow in that I
might have mentioned a little
earlier that we don't desperate
the funds are hundred percent to
say an agencies award at three
million dollars we don't give
them the money right at closing
we wait for that developed once
they close in the start and
break ground i'll use a rental
development program as an
example here they may have
different funding sources and I
was being one of them once we
get to closing uh then it takes
some several months to break
ground and depending on the
funding sources that they have
they may be required to say
expend some bank funds before
they spend or drop down on our
funds and a development and I
think some of the developers
that we have here jeff curry
will talk to this could very
wear from say eighteen to twenty
four months to complete that
particular development I think
this other so coral was that
much longer time frame
so that draw downs come within
that say 18-24 months period
versus all up front when the
long is closed on probably make
the award so and if you look at
the on the rental development so
we've allocated a lot of funds
there so that would be part of
the reason for that one in the
programs that does expend a
little bit faster to say that
down payment assistance program
once somebody makes a
reservation they're generally
going to close within the lounge
on the long within forty five to
sixty days and so that money
will go out the door but it's in
smaller amounts that say ten
thousand dollars versus a three
million dollars allocation to a
rental development so those are
just some of the details behind
the expenditure is that they're
always gonna lag behind because
we don't release the funds
upfront that thank you madame
chair thank you dizzy so I I
think I think you're seeing to
me the same thing that I hear
from local developers is that
it's not necessarily that
coordination of them getting
other funding that kind of seems
to come together.
It's still just goes back to the
zoning the permitting and the
inspections if if i'm here in
you correctly
madam chairman sinner tro here I
think that's part of it and kind
of getting out the gate and once
they come to us
for funding in a lot of cases
they have all that already
locked in um so but it does take
a while to get there and you'll
you're here a lot more detail
from the experts that I have to
live in every day thank you
thank you madame chair so you
mentioned that there was attacks
credit is after the builders not
the not the individuals not the
beneficiaries.
Madam charade that sender took
her the long income housing tax
credit that I mentioned uh their
federal tax credits are not so
jeff has done many of these and
you'll talk to it a lot I have
better than I will but in
essence when we award those
let's say it's a million dollars
allocation to an organization
they go add and syndicate that
so
institutional investors may come
and say what by those tax
credits from you but we'll pay
you say ninety since on the
dollar and they have tax
liability federal tax liability
that they use those tax credits
for in their work uh ten times
that so that million dollars
ends up being a ten million
dollar tax credit and they may
pay say nine million for that
and they all get that developer
nine million up front as equity
to develop the the development
and then that investor will use
those night ten million dollars
in tax credits over the next ten
years to defer their tax
liability but it uh on the nine
percent tax credited funds
between sixty to seventy percent
of the development on the four
percent text could as that funds
maybe around thirty percent of
the development and the rest has
to be loans or cap financing
thank you very complicated yeah
i'll think you madam chair so
does that help reduce the cost
of building housing
madam chair sender to hear it
does help because that's what he
does come in and that does not
need to be a repair back thank
you madame chaired one last
question in regards to the
I think you said over a hundred
million uh four homeless
strategies remedies but you said
it was formula based as that
formula based already identified
and if so is it based on
population or.
The.
What might it be based on madame
chair and center chokio I don't
know the exact formula it's from
the federal government and had
in this case but I think it it
takes to account population
poverty levels homelessness a in
each of the states uh so we
definitely won't get that the
full increaser but I had a very
minimum moment
if this is the bill that's
currently being considered I if
it stays the same that won't we
will not have a reduction and
what the state currently
receives for those programs
thank you
thank you center center.
Thank you all member hope is
here what were the dates again
for the for the summit.
Madam chair now sooner than all
this is seventeen through
nineteen september
okay it will be at hotel alva.
And we can get the more
information on that okay
moturo we talked a little bit
about this so I think was at the
other medium first meeting.
And the for members that have
not attended really encourage
its probably one of the finest
you know conference that's put
together and the correctly if
it's not accurate easy better
you only have it every other
year right
made insurance in a room as
always that is correct although
this year we we skipped one year
to consider with our fiftieth
anniversary this year but
generally every other year
oh very well thank you
thank you senator representative
matthews
thank you madam chair
is he don't do any of these
programs that you've been
describing for us include
manufactured housing also known
as mobile homes.
Madam chair and representative
matter was yes
or homeownership program that I
mentioned earlier allows
manufactured homes in there to
be purchased and I would say
right now we're be about fifteen
percent of the reservations that
we have or for manufacturer
homes and a single family
development side uh we also
allow manufactured homes to be
for them to access loans to
develop manufactured homes we
have a development in the hubs
i'm forgetting the amount of
homes josh would know here is
that like.
So we recently funded with the
approval of our board at
subdivision from menu a
manufactured home subdivision
which will be foresale homes in
hobs for a eventually a total of
two hundred and thirty homes
that will be there
so yes and we're working with a
manufacturer housing association
on these things that say another
example would be under our we
have program sometimes the
manufactured home that they're
living and it's not rehabile so
they all take that manufacturer
home away and replace it with a
new manufacturer
thank you madame chair
is he
they hubs
two hundred and thirty homes
mobile hung park that you're
funding or
individual home purchases i'm
just not I wasn't clear when you
describe it madame care and
representative matthews it'll be
manufactured home subdivision
that will be the manufacturer
homes will likely be for sale
they are not going to be rented
so is that they're developing
the infrastructure with our
funds are going to come back to
us for a line of credit on the
manufacturer homes and then
they'll sell those homes once
you're in place
madam chair is he thanks I
appreciate that and in the fact
I think you and I have talked it
robin at theorious times that
one of the things that would
help with affordable housing is
to increase the development
parks and so i'm really glad
that you're doing that
and if there's any way to do
more of that I would definitely
include yours to do it because
it's excellent affordable
housing
helps with allowed to seniors
and families
and
is is kind of a
it need kind of at risk now in a
lot of places because of efforts
to transfer the property to use
this that are more financially
beneficial to the owners not not
the owners at mobile homes.
But the honors of the parts
man sure the other question I
have or when asking much a
question but
I want to uh second the
recommendation from
representative
and.
And I
just add that I would hope their
mfa would be reaching out
and having some connection with
any of the areas advocates for
disabled people who need special
housing or housing and um
orch is certainly what around
but I think there are others are
in the states that are
organizations that help their
members with those kinds of
issues and.
I I would I would like to see
that
you know they were really that
the mfa is really seeking out
a role in that maybe you are and
i'm not i'm just suggesting that
you're not but i'd sound
something we've talked about
before
but it's it's very hard for many
disabled people to be able to
get the housing they need or
people who have children who are
disabled so thank you
thank you very much for that
representative matthew senator
pedea
thank you very much madame chair
and thank you is if your
presentation so I just a couple
of questions on your
presentation on page two when
you talk about down payment
assistance is it still about
them chair as it's still
available the down payment
assistance
is there anything in that part
of money left
madam chair in uh sinder but the
yes that we have
still have the dump payment
assistance money is available
we have.
Just allocated and additional
eight million dollars to that so
that we have a good one way with
that we don't foresee running
out of those funds at this point
thank you madame chair and that
was actually gonna be my next
question when you say you
allocated eight million how do
you put money into that funnel
because I know that that has
been very helpful to people and
I want to make sure that work so
as we have all of this sort of
new housing coming on lane who
want to be accessible to people.
Manager not sender by the
outdoor let me back up a little
bit also we have two different
down payment assistance programs
one of a misfunded from our
general funder health and
opportunity fund that is four
percent to the sales price of
the house so i'll just use three
hundred dollars or three
thousand three hundred thousand
dollars as the sales price so
that particular program that
could get twelve thousand
dollars the four percent times
three hundred thousand dollars
in then under the housing trust
fund we provide an additional
ten thousand dollars per home
and that's where we allocated
the eight million dollars from
the housing trust fund then you
part of money that we received
on the first of july so for this
particular example of an
individual could get the twelve
thousand plus two thousand so
twenty two thousand dollars in
down payment assistance okay so
what you see a good run away for
that and it's going to continue
that's a correct matter
since thank you very much
with regard to some of the tax
credits that are available to
the developers and builders and.
Some adam chair a couple years
ago it might like chinesely all
the years go together it's crazy
up here are doing this kind of
work so the grt credit that we
don't know if your member is you
when we talked about this couple
years ago I still hear this from
builders and from developers
that they would sure like for us
to come forward with some sort
of grt credit of some kind it a
is there one and b how should it
be designed or do you want to
comment on that because it seems
to be pretty important to them
and they they mentioned it to me
you know a couple of times a
couple of people have larger
developers medicare now sinner
by the other that tax creative
i'm talking about are totally
different they're federal tax
credits for different purpose
but I think you'll hear you if
you don't mind me deferring to
our presentations a little bit
later III think it's something
that doubt we feel it would be
good and lower help lower the
cost of housing but they can
talk to it a lot more detail in
the impact that is currently
having on them
so madam chair I just will throw
this out there that i'm happy to
work with whoever wants to get
that done and that we can do
something like that in the
thirty day session as we know
it's a budget session coming up
so this isn't something that
we'd need to wait on I think we
need to poll manager all of the
stops out of the way of the
folks trying to build homes here
in new mexico cause we just keep
digging a depending per hole for
ourselves and the lower the
inventory the more unreachable
homeownership becomes cause you
know I have two sons in one of
them is back in new mexico has a
really great job and everything
i'm very proud of him but it's
extremely hard for him to act to
get into his own and so we need
to pull everything I think this
is one that could probably help
us to put more invitory on the
market so whoever's going to
speak about this later i'd like
to help you with that thank you
thank you very much center and
less but not least represented
three
thank you madame chair thank you
is it always give good
presentations I like that I was
going to pick up off over what
representative
just matthews new math is just
talk about real which note to
hit you
and represent matthews was
talking about the mobile home.
A issue and how that is
affordable housing we've talked
about this before in prior
meetings how is how is madam
chair how are the
inspections for mobile homes
going along have you seen a
change because I there for a
while there was a lagging a lack
of of response it seemed like it
was sticking sometimes three
four five months to get a mobile
home inspection and I think
that's a big deal when someone's
trying to invest in and and
purchasing a new mobile home and
they're renting and they're
trying to transition and in that
transition you can get your your
your your c o right to
certificate rocking because
they're not being inspected.
Give me a update on that please
madame chair and representative
there are so there is a question
I do not have an answer to you
for you right now I can find out
I can not talk to some of the
folks that we've been dealing
with are working with and seeing
if they are seen a delay or if
there are still some
delays and in them getting the
inspections and I can get back
to you in the committee I don't
have an answer for you right now
thank you as the item I meant
sure i'd i'd think that I had
heard a lot of that talk I
haven't heard about it as much
uhm I know that there were
builders that
would make the ya foundation
rams and stuff and so do you
work at the pedestals and i'll
column stem walls or whatever
them to set the mobiles on some
of those guys cancel frustrated
got out of the business just for
that reason so i'd i'd be
interested in hear that the
second thing I I was going to
ask you was the how
how do you fix it maybe this
might be a better question when
you're the presentations are
come up how are the
the effects of low employment
participation rates affecting
our ability to
produce housing which internet I
was connected in the capacity of
not being able to keep up so
it's like a restaurant you know
we don't have enough cooks would
have been of people we can't see
enough people are to cash flow
so we would use our time readers
that is open it affects any
business how's that affecting
the construction sir
madam chair not representative
that also if you don't mind all
different that to the folks that
are actually on the ground
working and a little bit more
about that the cruise and the
rotations in the staffing levels
that they have there thank you
very much there are also issue
how many phases
are you guys do you guys find in
percentages on when you're doing
this reimbursements on new
construction I heard you said I
know it's a phase out.
And so of reimbursement so hurry
phasing out you do the
foundation at twenty percent how
do you put what it what is that
fees up
look like.
Madam chair now representative
to us as if you don't mind a
charge can you come up here he
can speak that he works in that
area with the on the single
family development mostly in
there looks a seas draw downs
and can give you a little bit
better schedule tonight i'm
going to be able to under when
those draw downs come in at what
stages and the percentages.
So i'm just round the
development on manager and house
new mexico how are you.
Good good do you repeat question
for a basically I just want to
know the fate that the freeze
out schedule that the you guys
are a reimbursement or it be a
long schedule but it's a
reimbursement in a re-
reimbursement site so I know the
words if i'm building a new
house I I get the site ready to
get a certain percentage ten
percent when I poor the the slab
I get another twenty
the the
you put up the the framing the
scabbing that and you can just
go on and on the whole fees
other how do you guys feel that
in percentages is it and in the
reason i'm asking is going to
want to know if someone wanted
to invest something.
Um how much money because
sometimes you then can carry the
same amount over and only put
you got fifty thousand bucks
every time you you get
reimbursed to fifty and then you
roll the to the next fees and so
forth i'm just trying to kind of
get get a grasp of what what you
guys are doing sure i'm chair
member trust us so
generically speaking I mean that
so I was in banking for twenty
years prior to becoming on here
in did some single family there
we've got maybe two two deals
right now that we fully
completed out the closing and
we're starting to find one of
them is in the middle of funding
typically I have them submit.
Usually a six to seven draw
schedule now that that's going
very depending on if i'm dealing
with you know paulty homes or an
across or brazil or someone
that's in roseland mexico i'm
dealing with now that's you know
a small time contraction
outstanding you know twenty
houses.
Is some of those guys can float
that and they may take three
draws because they don't want to
pay for inspections you know so
many times.
So usually you know i'm talking
about um you know i've got a
german now that's doing a twelve
eighteen month trial is what
it's going to take him to build
his twenty twenty nine homes in
phase one um in right now he's
taking he's taking monthly draws
but again is a small tax smaller
time builder so we were
typically see that down in
probably six to seven draws over
that eighteen to twenty four
months it would be typical he is
taking a monthly.
So i'm manager so that that's
interesting to me because that
so you inspect once a month you
see where there are you get your
release lean releases and you
know for from there okay so that
that's a different so I I just
because usually it's you you
poor you get fifteen percent and
twenty percent then twenty five
percent then at the end of your
your
finishes I don't five or ten
percent I remember what it is
but okay so is you're doing this
but I like manager I like that
your birthday with them I think
that's cool because that you've
got people that are a big big
time and smaller guys and it
shows that you guys move with
what you're dealing with
uh the other question that I
have was
gap financing so when your
financing these give me a just a
quick little breakdown cause I
mean you you talk about gap
financing you talked about or
are these loans been
but are they participating loans
where you've got multiple
lenders and then a gap and how
many lenders are involved is it
just too as it just is at you
and and in and i'm strong others
so they don't ask you fifty
questions and then are on this
twenty two thousand and ten and
the twelve are those grants or
they have to be paid back.
Uh madame chair representative
that asked us so it'll really
very depending on the deal but
that if we are talking about a
rental development in their
using tax credits the tax rates
will fund you know sixty to
seventy percent less the equity
so they had to come up with say
thirty percent of other funding
in some cases there's a
depending on the size of the
development that could be in all
seven eight nine different
funding sources that includes
not only maybe two or three
funding sources from housing new
mexico but maybe a commercial
inter as well so they all really
very when it's lounged out that
we make they are in most cases
uh loans nut grants although
they're very there could be zero
percent interest rate or maybe
two or three percent with terms
as long as thirty to forty years
which is not as generous as
obviously it's what the
commercial bank would give you
sold
there are some funding sources
that we have that are federal
funding sources like the
national housing trust fund that
uh becomes a alone but it's a
cash flow long only that
if they had the cash flows that
are showing up then they can
they can pay on the loan if not
in they don't have to make any
payments on it that would be the
most generous of soft long that
we make if you will most others
are going to be the housing
trust fund whether it's a uh one
or two percent interest rate for
her thirty year term
but i'm sure that's incredible I
mean that's free money really
and it's really
uhm an initiative in that case
that's just from the banking
world that's unhurt of right I
mean it's just it it's just can
even be done so gotta be able to
cash low are you having any
defaults on any other loans
madam chair and not represent if
there are so I can say that
right now we do not have any
longs on default in the
for the period of time that i've
been at housing new mexico I can
only recall one loan in my
thirty plus years that has
actually defaulted.
Well anybody defaults on that
kind of stuff their numbers were
really really bad so they had
some reason cause that's on his
in right and the last question I
have is on your on peach seven
you said your rental housing
development preservation they
have a single family housing
development key explained to me.
When you see development and
preservation you've got thirty
five and half million thirty
five and half billion dollars in
there
how much of that went to see
your family housing and maybe
you said this and I didn't catch
it as trying to multi task here
and to rental housing
development preservation and and
explain the different from
development I think I know but
i'd rather hear from you
development and preservation
madam chair and represent if
there are some
this is new money that we just
received the allocation on july
the first it became available to
us so this is how our board
allocated it to these activities
we haven't uh in this particular
pot that your questioning rental
and single family housing
development
we are flexible in there and
depending on where the demand is
and what the request are will
take from that thirty five
million dollars and if it's more
rental demand this year than
than single family development
that's a where the the funding
will be allocated I think to if
we look at the history in the
prior years on quite those funds
were allocated you'll see that
the best or the majority of it
has been on rental development
versus single family development
dollar that we're seeing a a
trend here and a lot of interest
on the single family development
side I think we have about eight
or nine different developments
right now in the pipeline on the
single family side so will just
had to see where that money goes
up as a as the applications come
in I work on the with regard to
the difference between
preservation and development
preservation would be somebody
that comes in to rehab an
apartment to complex versus
building new or inacquisition
rehab if you will it would be
moreover preserving something
that says so that it stays in
the affordable realm
so
madam chair sir when you do a
rehab generally costs a little
bit more than new construction
so what are the rates on that in
the north that's the end of my
question sorry
want to get that in my head I
want to understand what you're
doing.
What what is the difference from
new constructive because those
loans I would imagine our
structure differently and maybe
finance differently.
Metamaturing are representative
that are says that our interest
rates are actually in the terms
are pretty consistent we don't
ever ensure the whole lot
between new construction in
rehabin i'll look at josh here
of make sure that he gives me
the thumbs up uh
yeah so not a whole lot of
difference in the terms that we
provide for either we think auto
important we need more housing
united but we also
don't want to a unit that needs
rehabin doesn't get rehab to go
out of the market if we lose a
hundred units it's harder than
hard to replace alls with new
construction so we offer similar
terms
thank you very much for a
provider thank you is for that
presentation and next we have
and the state wasn't state wide
housing needs assessment was
stephanie guns others and some
role there.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee today
we are here to present the
twenty twenty five new mexico
housing needs assessment.
This report will depend state
level indicators related I
apologize tab to
this report will depend state
level indicators related to the
demographic and economic profile
of new mexico while addressing a
housing market that has become
increasingly difficult for all
but the highest income level of
new mexicans to afford this
comprehensive report will
include over forty data points
today we will be presenting data
points specifically on the home
ownership market the rental
market building and permitting
and homelessness
so first I will cover the
demographic part profile of new
mexico I believe that the
demographic of the state of
mexico will demonstrate the
needs of the state when it
pertains specifically to housing
in the southwestern region of
the country new mexico is
trailing behind its neighboring
states of oklahoma arizona
colorado texas nevada new tar I
would like to highlight that
utah most notably has seen the
largest growth within the last
year or so uh um seven point
five percent
in addition the poverty rate in
new mexico is five point seven
percent percentage five point
seven percentage points higher
than the national rate at
eighteen point one percent for
new mexico.
New mexico has a higher
percentage of single family
homes than the nation and makes
up the majority of our housing
options which can be seen in the
patrol depicting sixty five
point seven percent the rate of
manufactured or mobile housing
is nearly triple that of the
nation.
A housing market provides a
diverse housing stock that
allows renters and homeowners
options within the states.
On the next page we will look at
the home ownership market
hard to find housing as
affordable when no more than
thirty percent of monthly
household income goes to housing
costs including utilities and
insurance in the state of new
mexico the median monthly income
is four thousand eight hundred
and ninety four dollars and
thirty percent of this household
income is one thousand four
hundred and sixty eight dollars
currently the picture in the
graph you will see that the
average cell price of a home in
new mexico is three hundred and
forty five thousand dollars this
puts the monthly mortgage at two
thousand seven hundred and
twenty three dollars.
Only thirteen and a half percent
of new mexico renters could
afford this mortgage at this
time.
On the next page you will see a
year over year change in the
median household income and
median home pricing in mexico.
In the last five years the
median household income
increased twenty five point nine
percent while the media and home
price has increased fifty nine
point four percent in this
higher interest rate environment
and coupled with inflation the
lack of growth and income is
making common home ownership
that much more difficult to
achieve.
Yeah.
In equities in home ownership do
persist while hispanic household
comprise forty eight point two
percent of the states population
these households only account
for thirty two point nine
percent of homeowners.
Similar differences occur among
black or african american
households as well as need of
american households within the
seat.
On the next time we will cover
the rental market.
The graph on the left shows that
rank group from eight hundred
and forty four dollars to one
thousand twenty one dollars over
the last five years this
translates to a twenty three
point three percent increase in
rent.
Renters off are also
experiencing how housing costs
that outpace their income growth
from twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty three renter income
increased four point eight
percent which trails the median
rat increase of five point seven
percent in this day the increase
in rent coupled with inflation
and the increasing cost of
living are putting pressure on
renders specifically the low
income renters within the states
this segways into the next page
where we will get housing cost
bridgen in new mexico
a housing cost and household
pays more than thirty percent of
their income towards gross
housing costs renters are more
likely to be cost than their
home owner counterparts in new
mexico and like the rest of the
country renter households
earning less than fifty thousand
dollars or more cosportant than
the higher income renters in new
mexico seventy six point six
percent of renters that are
learning that are earning less
than fifty thousand dollars are
cost britain with the mistake.
The.
We will now as I wait into a
building permits in new mexico
we know that housing development
has been at the forefront of
everyone's minds on this graph
we see that building permits
within the state of new mexico
have maintained an upward friend
over the past few years however
the number of building permits
for residential construction
decreased by four point seven
percent in twenty twenty four
from the prior year.
The next p which we will cover
homelessness
in twenty twenty four the total
number of individuals
experiencing homelessness
increased from three thousand
eight hundred and forty two
individuals to four thousand six
hundred and thirty one
individuals there's data is from
a hour point in time count which
is limited to the number of
people in home shelters
transitional housing and
unsheltered locations on a
single night in january many
families and children staying in
hotels living in vehicles or
saying in other places not meant
for shelter are unlikely to be
included in this point in time
accounts homeless advocates in
new mexico estimate the true
number of homeless individuals
to be closer to twenty thousand
individuals.
How do we move forward we have
covered key data points outlined
in the twenty twenty five
housing needs assessment on home
ownership and rental markets
building and permitting and
homelessness by enlarged these
housing challenges are driven by
limited housing supply
continuing to fund avoidable
housing development and
preservation is key to
preventing worst housing
opportunities in addition to
subsidy solutions local and
state reforms to land use can
boost production that not only
promote affordable housing but
market rate housing that is
naturally affordable within the
state.
Please see the fault of housing
these assessment on the housing
new mexico website for a
complete breakout of this data
at the state level and county
levels which are compared to the
national level national level
which has been included this
year most notively this year we
have also included a summary
page dedicated to tribal data
points around the states
we can now stand for any
questions that the committee may
have.
Thank you very much for that
presentation speedy presentation
were back on track for time so
then it exited her for the we'll
start with you thank you manager
only have twenty seven questions
pick your top thirteen and then
I will sort them from there I
think you're going to love this
but madam chair and presenters
this is excellent information
like excellent information so
what I would hope i'm just gonna
suggest this to the chair and
maybe other chairs that might be
here that your other committees
and stuff at we need to see this
in front of other legislative
committees this very
presentation so that more the
legislature is aware of this
i've come forward with multiple
pieces of housing legislation
for several years now and we've
gotten some done in son as but
has been run over and backed
over and run over again to make
sure they got it and but I will
see if this is excellent in some
adam try highly highly recommend
that that we get this presented
at other committees that's what
I was my comment thank you.
Thank you very much senator I
representative keeps
I thank you madam chair thank
you very much I agree with the
senators
very concise twenty three
questions um and so we
definitely we need to pull this
out and provide this I know
health and human services would
like it as well
you are on
the phone was
you.
Talked about the number of units
owe on your slide now
the residential building permits
and you're showing the what I
would call density of housing
would have single family harms
and whatever the density of
housing being built correct
correct.
Madame chair representative kits
are yes the residential building
permits issued in new mexico
include single family as well as
multi family units thank you
very much manager can you tell
me do we have a i'm already
beeping up your report from when
you do it to the lfc into other
agencies
other committees can you tell me
where I want to see where in the
state these numbers are so
obviously that are largest or
half of a posted population or
in the metro area the albert
crickets in a few area but
I would like to see how this is
broken down if if not by county
I understand moving countries
too much but i'm at least by
area by district at least like
five districts and in the state
of new mexico please
do you did you compile these
numbers can you give us any
feedback that is not on the
slide that couldn't help us
thank you madame chair and
representative
we can take it to a lower level
in terms of the data
this does come from the united
states center spiro
surveying department and this
doesn't quite get down to the
local levels in terms of
counties or regions but they can
further break it down to mse's
around the state
thank you madam chair so i'm
adding that slide and then i'm
adding another slide um.
If they're if they're breaking
that down I i'd like to know the
time.
What is the time permitted
between the request of the
permit in the approval of the
permit.
Um this will help us inform on
investments and infrastructure
for
for individuals who do this type
of service and it do we need to
invest more in the southeast
then we do in the metro area um
so that would be a good slight
point of data that we would like
to see that timeline to see
where we can do investment work
force thank you
thank you madame chair and
representative kits we will look
at be think of this side
thank you very much repairs
representative matthews
thank you madame chair and thank
you for centers is that those
are really kind of stunning
figures.
But
it seems to me that there are
many factors that can contribute
to the price of housing other
day and the income of people who
live in the areas and i'm
curious whether.
And amounts suggesting that well
wages are not a problem and I
see a single ad at all but I yim
couriers about whether or not
you look considered or have any
research in some other possible
sources
that cause this problem and i'm
one of those is zoning and I and
use restrictions did you look at
that at all.
Representative excuse me madam
chair representative matthews
we're all that that are next
presentation is dedicated to
land use issues that we want go
into those and details okay
then i'm gonna ask madam chair
i'm gonna ask one other i'll
leave out promoting right at the
moment but is there an maybe the
next presenters will cover this
lack of work for us to do the
construction perhaps
made even worse because of the
the roundabout with the car the
round up of immigrant labor
madam chair representative
matthews we certainly know that
labor costs increasing labor
costs also contributes to
increasing home price i'll
probably defer to our builders
in the room to speak more.
About their experience with the
work force challenges okay then
out a manager I will could ask
you cautions until the next
presentation thank you think you
represented matthews represented
through us
they came out here I also have
some questions but I think it
sounds like it might be for the
next group
first question of chair
presenters good job
is there a reason why we don't
have twenty twenty four on some
of the some of the
slides but we do have it and
others
madame tear representative that
assess yes so the twenty twenty
five housing needs assessment is
based on the um american senses
survey and that trails behind by
a year so that is why you will
see many data points that refer
back to twenty twenty three um
at this point in time this is
our most reliable source of data
and in other cases you will see
twenty twenty four such as the
median home price because this
does come from the new mexico
relators association and so they
have the twenty twenty four
numbers
and that is the reason for the
discrepancy in years okay and
then i'm just gonna because I
think some of these questions
over the next presentation of
chairman uh leaders we have so
i'm gonna also
go along with the other two
representatives and matthews
were these some this data points
on page nine I think they should
be wait on rural and urban I
think you'd be nice to see
because there's a lot of
combinations of reasons that
this has happening.
It's not going to target I don't
I don't believe that it's going
be one thing we can be
interested rates that can be
labor participation rates it can
be the land use code it can be
regulations new construction
regulations it can be lack of
permitting
timely
inspections and so forth I mean
I could go on but I think we
need to see it county by county
I think i'd like to in and that
would let us see rule of in and
and because we don't have
building inspectors the same in
rule new mexico.
You go over there in the billing
and spectrum we come in that all
cities have their own billion
inspectors I think they would
have other that I think I i'm
going to wait to ask whether
questions to keep us on time and
that we can smile at me again
thinking manager.
Thank you very much for
represented the assess and thank
you to for that wonderful
presentation I go senator for
the sentiment that this needs to
be heard in several other
committees I believe lfc was
mentioned i'm health in human
services was mentioned I would
also suggest economic and rural
development.
Cause they are inextractively
like the housing of the work
force versus the economic growth
in the state so but spread the
word get the word out there and
we will definitely help you with
that as well so thank you very
much.
Next planning zoning and
administrative efficiencies to
advance housing development.
Okay.
Thank you madame chair and i'd
also like to think natalie green
and david wear their forth with
the city of lots crucials not
only is the housing in the
neighborhood revital
revitalization administrator and
david is the development a
community development deputy
director over community planning
so I called on them last minute
as we were putting this
presentation together and I said
you guys could probably answer
more questions than me stuff I
invited them and they came so
thank you for the opportunity to
am talk a little bit about um
planning and zoning and how
certain local jurisdictions and
states have tried to address
some of these issues that we
we've been talking about today I
think it's great to hear all the
questions of the committee in to
start you know looking at these
things in a in them more macro
level of saying there's not just
one answer there's many many
things that need to come
together just for housing
development and to
get all the pieces of the puzzle
together so i'm behind tab three
of your packets will begin there
on slide to
there's
we've kind of identified several
ways to advance housing
development one solution is
subsidy right we have federal
local federal state and local
subsidies that often times go
into affordable housing in fact
the majority of time
and then there's also the
the planning and zoning
modernization and we'll talk
about what that means in this
presentation and then
administrative efficiencies in
this context refers to
strategies that streamline
processes such as permitting an
approvals to a short and
timelines and to make
to save cost
on page three
you may be aware that ah
governor michel du restaurant
and other governors from the
western states recently.
Issued the brand west report
building resilient and
affordable new development in
the west this report proposes
government solutions to make
housing more affordable the
brand report is pretty
consistent with the new mexico
housing strategy that was a
report that housing new mexico
could commission and published a
few years ago
but a lot of the information
applies um including to offer
policy actions that kind of
boost residential construction
uhm support the work force
provide education technical
assistance trades
also advocating for changes to
regulatory barriers and
streamlining state and local
inspection processes so we're
happy to see this report amount
this report also details what
other states have done it goes
into a lot of stee
initiatives that have
helped
legislators would have come come
up with these ideas on get them
enacted in their states
so on pitch for i'm sorry i'm on
slide three it says page for a
mystery but it's actually sight
sorry for good if I got you off
track there.
Yeah.
So some of the ways that.
Local jurisdictions and states
have approached modernizing
planning and zoning is to really
allow for more density a lot of
our
cities have a lot of single
family homes and a lot of single
family dwelling so changing
changing zoning
to promote more density
increasing the number of units
that can be uhm developed per
acre from single to do plexto
try plex to multi family and so
on and also to allow.
Multi unit or mixed use
development in areas that are
more commercially zoned for
retail office commercial etc
in districts that are near
transit employment and
commercial areas population
centers and promote.
Eliminating or reducing parking
requirements minimum light sizes
are set backs and building
heights
building height limits of for
example and some neighborhoods
you can't go above three stories
or
you have to have certain
esthetic requirements included
we all we all know where those
are esthetic requirements have a
lot of impact but they can
impact significantly the cost of
development so these strategies
are referred to his abzoning
which is again basically
is the
idea that you allow for more
intensive developments.
On the next slide slight four
encouraging metal housing this
this term middle housing is
referring to single family
holmes that are smaller um and
larger apartment buildings they
can include due plexis try
flexes for plexes townhouses
cottage clusters and eighty us
or excess accessory dwelling
units
so some bullet points there to
increase middle housing
are listed and I won't read the
modus for the sake of time but
it's just the encouraging of
that development of those
starter homes entry level homes
that type of uh building which
has not been
something that's kept pace with
with the needs of the steep.
The.
I'm on the next slide slide five
some administrative efficiency
strategies are listed here
one way uh several weeks you
to create those strategies are
to eliminate impact fees so an
impact fee is when a developer
has to pay for
infrastructure power water those
type of things for new housing
development so that fee is going
to go directly into the cost of
the home right they're not going
to necessarily absorb that
improving review timelines and
potentially using third party
contractors to do that
allowing public comment on
zoning and language plans rather
than on specific developments
there can be a lot of delays due
to
approval processes when.
When
uh
I guess neighborhoods in another
community.
Community advert advocates c
changes coming into their
neighborhoods.
So some of these strategies
because they are at a local
level can can sort of be
considered maybe an easier path
but also
these things can be done through
process improvements and
technical fixes rather than
perhaps changing zoning codes or
doing state white policy that.
That would take longer and be
and be more difficult to get
consensus on.
So i'm h six we have a beautiful
picture of a new apartment
complex in los truces called
three sisters
we really
been seeing a lot of development
and lost truces they've been
able to
access our tax credit program
quite effectively and really
sort of build up on their
affordable housing stock um and
when we started looking at how
they were able to do this so
efficient efficiently
wanted to have not already in
david calm and sort of talk
about what.
Why you guys did that and how
you did it and i'm i'm not going
to read the slides you
but i'll rather have them talk
about about their success.
Good morning madame chair
committee thank you for having
us here i'm david wear um i've
been a planner and can be
development administrator for
the city for over twenty years
wife kind of seen the progress
progression of our development
codes and what I wanted to start
the presentation i'm here to
talk about the update of our
development codes we call it
realize last creases but I want
to start about three or four
years before that when we
updated our comprehensive plan
one of the things we called that
realized last crew you elevate
last cruises and we one of the
things we changed there instead
of looking at development from a
utilities land use housing
standpoint we looked at it more
of a systems and so we looked at
our local economy local
prosperity are livability and
our environment and so by
looking at a systems approach
we've identified kind of gaps we
needed to address where it was
missing metal and additional
opportunities for people to have
a more livable community uh type
of approach that was adopted in
twenty twenty we immediately
went into the development code
the realized process and some of
the major things that we did one
as we went away from the
traditional zoning where you
have a single family
neighborhood that there's only
allowed his housing to do multi
family had been a multi family
zone for officer had been
officer commercial commercial
want again one of the big big
changes we went to neighborhood
zoning so we have three
neighborhoods it's based on
density which we increased from
our previous zoning code it
allows single family housing it
allows that missing middle that
duplex is the trip lex's
cottages it allows multi family
twenty eight or twenty units or
more it also allows a
neighborhood serving commercial
so we went to this type of
approach and we were able to do
that because our complaint said
that this was the way we want to
approach development loss
crucials more of an enable or
neighborhood.
If the public services there
support it would allow it to
take place and so that was a a
big change the other thing we
did as we identified urban
suburban and rural areas and so
each of those have a density
that's appropriate for that and
again it's uh ties into the
infrastructure that can support
that type of development
and.
There was also a pretty bold
statement is that
we will increase the loud
development of their way we want
to encourage it into the
downtown and so some of the
other points that were made that
you see of across the country of
density has been increased we
made a statement if you have a
residential automatically
allowed to build a necessary
dwelling union if you like so
all across the city that you can
do that.
Uhm.
Also we have some areas where we
know that there's a crossroads
of major streets there is the
infrastructure there that you
can do even more development
above that base i'm so are
around our hospitals in
university some of our major
highways the downtown has even
higher uh density that's allowed
in those areas
for urban area we eliminated all
parking requirements so that if
you want to go into either build
new or renovate or
do adapt every use of the site
that's a barrier that's no
longer.
A burden for you to address uhm
and then we also kind of downs
are down greater requirements in
our suburban areas so that in
the past apartments had to have
two dy or two parking spaces per
unit now this just wants so
again trying to load those
barriers provide additional
flexibility for the community as
as that goes through uhm.
I'm trying to think of a
fortunately lost crucials has
never had a minimum housing size
so there's not a barrier on
there that you have to make us a
home certain size we rely on the
building code of affordable
building code and we kept that
in the update of their code uhm
and then we also made.
Allowances to reduce the set
backs and other things so that
you can be more dents
you can be closer to the streets
and you can be closer to your
neighbors um in consolidation
without we.
One of the conservations I guess
you would say is as delve
development takes place replaced
requiring more open space and
parks to be built along with
though so those were they kind
of the key factors that have are
taking place with that.
I would also add that some of
the improvements we made to a
permanent process is adopting an
expedited permit review for
particular projects.
Um we've also gone to online
permits systems of people can
upload all of their development
plans um we've also done some
pre app changes so if a big
project is coming in expert tax
credit they can meet with
everyone up front i'm get all
those changes made in an expert
at that permitting process in
addition to that we've layered
in things like impact free
waivers we have reduced fees for
affordable housing and then in
some of our infill core we will
actually reimburse all the
permit fees
and so one example of course is
that three sisters they were
able to get all of those permit
fees a.
They have to pay him up front
but we'd pay them back at the
end at the completion of the
project.
Alright thank you david and
natalie and i'll just cover I
won't go into the city of
albacore if you're interested
there's a couple of slides on
the progress that the city of
albuquerque has been making and
some winds in some losses it's a
little bit
but they keep trying and so
that's I guess the positive take
away there um but if you want to
skip over to slide nine
we looked at a couple of states
just to give some some state
level
ideas on on what things have
been successful and so
in oregon they created a
house bill in twenty nineteen or
they enacted it twenty nineteen
that required um cities to have
increased density based on the
size of the the city so for ten
thousand plus population or a
twenty five thousand twenty five
thousand plus population they
have
additional requirements there to
allow tray places and multi
family more multi family housing
and they also gave a cities
local municipalities a timeline
a little bit of a runway to
implement some of these changes
again based on the size of the
population
and they are so
have a requirement that if the
city fell to adopt the
development codes or become
compliant with the development
quotes that the state's model
code would automatically come
into a fact
I don't think our state has a
model code but that would be
something uh to consider and
then also they provided funding
rate them the money to provide
the technical assistance for
local jurisdictions to be able
to actually implement these
changes they do in organ they
also have an enforcement
department that can issue
specific enforcement orders for
non compliance issues
in then on.
Slide excuse me slight ten.
So how did they you know what
was the approach on this one of
the things that we found was
that they started by passing
smaller bills to sort of create
some more mental
to build up their advocacy
coalitions they encourage choice
and focus on goals rather than
mandating action on the again
the belt of broad coalition of
supporters who could speak to
these issues and then
god also got local government
support that would be necessary
to implement some of these
changes so the outcomes have
been that they've actually seen
i'm an increase in this sort of
middle housing is the most
prominent type of housing that's
being built in single family
zones and it's resulted in a
huge savings of as you can see
their two hundred and fifty to
three hundred thousand dollars
less than what new market single
family detached homes are going
for there so certainly a more
attainable and potentially
smaller but
that has been a good result for
them
the second said that we looked
out was montana meeting guys
might have heard of the montana
miracle this is a suite of
legislative legislation that was
enacted
the montana miracle kind of
refers to sort of the unexpected
political coalition behind the
reforms which was a mix of
libertarians conservative and
conservatives and urban
democrats and then just the
overall scope and impact of the
legislation so you can review
the senate bills and these are
all linked as well in this
package if you want more
resources on that but um.
Pro housing policies that
unrequire cities of certain
sizes to adopt a selection of
these policies that think they
had ten or fifteen different
policies that local
jurisdictions could select from
um they are requiring
zoning their transit and job
centers this is a bill that
mandates that cities of a
certain size increase in fill in
and density through up soning
and then the parking reform
prohibits cities from imposing
minimum parking requirements
something that we've heard first
hand as can actually work
and then on flide twelve sorry
my vision is bad so i'm trying
to keep up here
so the way that they approach
this legislation was sort of a
values argument the kind of turn
to
looking at their open spaces and
kinda said look if we infel them
less sprawl will happen and we
can keep our our beautiful
treasured open spaces without
without impacting them again
creating a coalition including
the montana league of cities and
they drew on data that sort of
demonstrated how strict local
zoning was contributing to
unaffordable housing
so this is relatively new
legislation cities have until
may of twenty twenty sixth to
update their codes
so we'll haven't probably seen
obviously the full outcome of
that and then there has been
some litigation around these
requirements but I think that's
to be expected when when you're
in acting in this sort of thing
so
we can go into a lot more detail
on these the next page kind of
gives you all of the resources
that we use to put this
presentation together and i'm be
happy to send for any questions.
Thank you very much robin and
think you both through this
amazing presentation a lot of
really good information in this
in the section here I will open
up for to the committee for
questions
before we do that I want to make
a quick announcement and maybe
an enticement to the committee
that there is the whole way
thank you again m f a for being
so generous with with your food
we really appreciate it so when
we're done with questions i'll
break and let us for everybody
by the way we'll do maybe ten
fifteen minutes to grab a plate
and will come back and work
through lunch to make sure that
we get through all the
presentations today so with that
we will start with
representative matthews thank
you madame chair and thank you
presenters this was an awesome
presentation and it really
starts to focus on solutions as
opposed to the problem
and I think it's it was fabulous
so let me start there by asking
a couple kind of legal questions
and I it may be beyond which you
were looking at but is there any
limitation in the new mexico
constitution or new mexico law
their prohibits the state from
having a state wide.
And what do I want to call it a
statewide
zoning law.
That would cover the kinds of
things we're talking about.
Madam chair and representative
is i'm not sure I I don't know
the answer to that but that's
certainly something good
starting point to find out that
that's if there is a limitation
on that.
Okay and then my madam chaired
my second question is
whether or not in lies crucials
there was any blow back to what
you were doing and how much blow
back there was cause i'm
guessing there was probably some
and.
Um whether or or not
there was any litigation over it
ever got to the point of any
litigation about what you were
doing.
Madam chair and and represent a
matthews there was a little push
back when the uh city council
additionally adopted realized
los cruces a citizen group got
together and petitioned its
adoption and asked that it be a
referendum for a city white vote
unfortunately well fortunately
are unfortunately the group did
not get enough signatures to go
forward with that and council
went ahead and adopted the code
that part of the
the is also allowance there's an
eight month eight month period
where the existing the previous
zoning code can be used or the
new one.
Can be used
um but other than that one group
that protested that there was a
lot of local support also I
think some of that can be
attributed to one of there was a
very.
Large and I know you over use
the work robust but public
engagement during both the
adoption of the land he's
planned elevate lost cruces and
then also the adoption have
realized it's owning
developments it was a four year
process that was initially only
supposed to be too we ended up
having a technical committee
where we had all stay colders
throughout the community had a
vested interest a lot of their
recommendations were
incorporated into the code and
then we also did a lot of
outreach before adoption
throughout the city and so.
Strangely like said the resolve
probably more people in support
of the changes then there was
opposition to adopting.
Okay
man chair that's a
a thank you day with that sir
reassuring that there's a path
way forward maybe
I am curious though what impact
have your efforts had on housing
prices and or availability in
which is used to city of last
cruises or donate account it's
just to see
madam chair and represent a
matters i'll i'll give my anadol
ideas and then let natalie also
add in that
loss crucials has always had
about a three percent
growth rate
and we continue to see that we
probably is the last three or
four years we've issued between
nine hundred eleven thousand
eleven hundred single family
building permits.
Uh even during the discussion of
the development of the code we
saw a lot more duplex and try
plex uh I items come in forward
we also saw some major apartment
complexes and course narrowly's
program has done more of the
attainable housing but we also
saw market rate apartment
projects coming in I think some
of it was just through the
process of that engagement.
Letting the developers know that
there was a housing shortage and
that that what the numbers were
and so they they helped them and
they're getting the finances for
projects again my anadol.
Thoughts on it.
I think you tear a
representative matthews very
similar to david we have seen an
increase in for plexes to boxes
we're starting to see a lot of
interest in the accessory
dwelling units so prior to the
adoption of this code um
accessory dwelling units were
allowed but there was especially
use permit process and some
limitations on who could build
those and sell it with that lift
it we're starting to see a lot
more interest and development
across the city.
And i'm sure thank you for this
for those answers
and
I think this will be my last
question if
if we were interested if there
are people interested at looking
at some kind of a statewide
solution but particularly for
municipalities and.
Some of the more popular
counties
who should take the lead and
trying to make that happen the m
f a
i'm not asking which legislators
you're going to get to sponsor
it are passing sort of where
because it seems to me that it
calms based upon your experience
and as crucials it comes from
the people who are having to
deal with the zoning
restrictions the whole price
says if you all are not on
board.
Uh the funders the potential
tenants and so forth then this
doesn't go anywhere so i'm
wondering if the you have any
thoughts on
who should be there
what per dog on this
madame chair and representative
matthews you know I think you
know in doing this research and
sort of work what we presented
on oregon and montana is that
it's got to be more than one
person taking the lead on that
right you have to have buy in
from multiple uhm multiple
levels including local
jurisdictions and so you know I
think highlighting
the fact that it wasn't a broad
brush for the whole state but
rather
um some consideration was given
to the size of the jurisdiction
and to also help in them with
the technical support um kind
of.
Offers more of an ability to
perform those coalitions and so
that that would be my response
to that I don't have a specific
person in mind for but I do
think that it does take
coalition building to to really
make.
You know these changes do up on
and i'll just take my city had
offer a moment I do think it
will be a challenge as many of
the local meanest penalities
have home role and so they would
be very hesitant to give up
there.
Duristics and all authority so
you know it would take some
collaboration with like the
municipal league and and the
cars and some other groups but
my city happened
madam chair thank you thank you
for that answer I think you're
right i'm picturing this in
albuquerque
where any kind of zoning change
or anything else seems to create
a flood of controversy and
difficulty
but this is an exciting idea and
I really appreciate your putting
a together these materials and
giving us some sense of
potential ways for it so.
Thank you very much
representative matthews
representative thought assess
thank you madame chair
thank you for the presentation
quick question just that I know
how to go with this.
Are there state minimum level
use codes that cities and your
restaurants work with it I I
understood that
local control cities can I adopt
ordinances and so forth of their
land his cousin you give me some
information on that.
Um I don't believe there's like
statewide donning codes what you
will find out state level or
things around development fees
building code is a big one so
the state adopts a stateway
building code but zoning is
typically left to each
jurisdiction and manager
presenters that's kind of my
point is is we already have a
state building code that you
know regulates what.
Each room for instance this room
if you need the fire suppression
so
whatever um I think it would be
I don't think it would be smart
for us to take local control
from uh from minutes of parties
and counties of doing that I
mean I think doing a broadband
brush against you know
my opinion across the whole
entire state now doesn't mean
that we can't address some of
the issues I think just having
legislation says you have to do
this across the deal could
really really i'm have a meet
your impact on I and I believe
in local control cos I mean
those are the people that are
living there those are the
people that
you know.
Have invested in whether it's
her home whatever
and I know you know sometimes
this can get they can get dicey
but that the matter is I I just
have some questions.
Um.
Legally how did this do home
orders associations what it it
do to uhm what did you do to
different
you know.
Well we'll just start with that
home i'll i'll start with that
kind of normal i'm going with us
but manager and and represent
torosis.
It didn't affect any of the
existing development
anything that existed is allowed
in the new zoning districts.
Umm so it also didn't impact
private covenance
development so the citizens in
the neighborhoods uh can
enforce those on a
on a civil type approach it
actually just opened up more
opportunities for people to
actually use their property and
more ways.
Going for
just if I could matter and I
representative trusted you know
one of the things that we saw
during the last legislative
session was about fifty or so
different bills on housing that
got introduced um some were
talking about
zoning said whine zoning
somewhere talking about you know
various other
issues that including including
the right to protest in those
types of things and so I I do
think that you're right thick is
a slow process it's slow to get
everyone to the table and so
some I think some of these
incremental steps that we've
been taking you know just sort
of open up the the ideas that of
what could be done versus
mandates yeah and I guess what
i'm seeing um metal chair is and
and this is what we're supposed
to do to as legislative supposed
to have this conversation see of
your points
one of mine is let's see you
have a gated community it's a
fifties in over sixties and over
or its maybe you have
you can only your dwalling has
to have a tatt's garage and you
get what i'm talking about you
go into a neighborhood with has
a golf quarter send is is set up
that way are there any
exemptions that you put here
where or is it just a is it
anywhere they can build if
there's a lot they can just move
in there is that that that can
be like oil and water with your
with your homeworkers
associations where people you
know I went up respect
everybody here
and when you want to respect
everybody to the best of the
ability you have people that
have invested in their homes
that may be everything they have
and that may affect their values
they might affect you know some
some people want their parents
to be in a certain area.
Up for safety purposes I mean
are in our friends we we live in
a and a state that doesn't have
the big best public safety so
people like their gated
communities and so forth and
whatever
inside I I think that can cause
some problems if you have a
vacant lot that's two acres well
we can just put a multi
necessary apartment complicates
in there how would that affect
legally their homework is
association and those type of
things
manage representative to roses.
The.
I guess the on the ground
answered your question is we
have other standards that at
being compatible with the uh
neighborhood that it doesn't
increase and of course
everything is
gets to the building codes so
that makes you their safe
structures etcetera but it
the overwriting thing is that
they're still zoning in place
they're still a process that you
have to go through to designate
land users but the densities
just change and that's something
that in the donor are previous
code took place it's just that
you used to have to do that
through a zone change for a
specific land use now it's more
administrative and then what
actually gets built on the site
goes to review to make sure that
it's compatible that doesn't
have negative impacts on those
other land users
so manager let me make sure I
understand and this is why I
don't know a lot about what i'm
just listening to what's going
on here so i'm just I don't know
what's just coming out to my
mind when you say it's
administrative does that mean
they there's cause normally if
you want to change just like you
said if you want to change a
certain area from residential
and be
commercial a c one I mean they
got they've got all kinds of
different ideals you go through
a process for you turn around
and you
you have to put a a thirty day
deal where you mark it all up
and everybody in the
neighborhood gets coming come to
the plane's own in meeting and
if there is one right because
usually that's what that means
if I can internally gone through
with the city planner and you've
talked to them and they say well
in order for us to make this
next step we have to go through
the process of going through
this thirty day notice and so
forth is that averting that now
we don't have that now person in
administratively makes that
decision about what i'm
understanding
represent drops
not.
Really um currently in the
zoning districts if you meet all
the requirements of your zoning
code you're permits approved
administratively what this is
owning code realize does it up
sold it allowed a lot more land
uses in it but going forward as
somebody has a project that's
not in character with these
neighborhoods owns they still
have to go through that zoning
change process we have a
like if if
if it's a jason to a residential
area in a commercial area wants
to expand they have to go
through his own change to change
it from a neighborhood zone to a
commercial zone or an industrial
so and so I would still have
that it's reviewed by staff
plans on commission makes a
recommendation in city council
approves.
And these neighborhood zones
there there are certain uses
that again the estate redwalling
in so loud by right if you if
you have a home you can add
another unit um but they're
still regulation on it there's a
certain density that cannot be
exceeded so if you go into a
neighborhood you know that it's
not going to be more than twenty
twelve years breaker or forty
eight williams breaker or
downtown sixty twelve usaker so
there still are some guide rails
but there's a lot more
flexibility and and hopefully I
don't get to want to technical
that response no it's just that
you know I i'm open to
understand it I think there are
some things that you guys did
madam chair that a good some of
your setbacks I don't know what
they were before and what they
are now that sometimes at twenty
feet what are what were they by
the women
and previously our front yard
set back for twenty five and we
reduce them to twelve and so
that was a big change they went
from like seven to five and the
rear from twenty to fifteen okay
so I think there's some to to
obviously get more in the in
that deal I think there's one I
think some of the stuff i'm i'm
okay with and i'm learn learning
of what you did mountain so I
don't have all the answers but
what I would would say is
in all fairness that i'm sure
that there's going to be
litigated probably problems in
this going through this because
it's quite new I would imagine I
don't know this for a fact but I
would imagine that if you go on
you place a
multi story
apartment complex in one of the
influence neighborhoods that has
a couple acres five acres you're
going to run into a lot of this
cause it's going to be
completely different from
the association rules that
they've established and have
been enforced i'm just bringing
this up i'm sure you guys are
probably seeing some of this
stuff.
Do you have any any statement
concerning that I will cher
represented that I says one
number biggest tools that we use
as our master planning process
and so before and i'll use one
example that's coming up it's
going to be messive is there
development it's gonna open
about eight hundred to a
thousand acres and some of that
is state land that's been leased
to the developer and as part of
that i'm he works with the city
and we build in those multi
families zones and especially
affordable housing so it'll have
almost a forty percent set aside
specifically for affordable and
attainable housing and so
we don't anticipate to see
actual construction for four
five ten years from now but
we've already built in those
zones into that so as
neighborhoods go in it's already
expected in anticipated
it but if I may just add one
thing we didn't talk about was
ourselves dividing process of
the subject land we also updated
that and that's where the master
planning comes in and that's a
public process that goes with
planes owning commission and and
can go to the city council and
again so that's something where
public notice goes out to those
jason properties have an
opportunity to comment before
those larger developments take
place and so manager presenters
I I you finally hit what I was
looking for and that was because
that what I did I pull up my
hunting map okay which is tells
me other zoning where tells me
that the different deals are
shows me who owns what property
there's a lot of state property
there and that's what's
important is there are there's a
lot of adjacent property here
state property that is right
there right next to the the
utilities and so forth that
there's canceled I appreciate
that the second thing is I think
we should just be cautious when
we just do.
Across the board legislation
like that
I think
for me and I and I mean this
with all the respect sometimes
you guys already took the bite
of that apple
got bless you and whatever
happens week as a state can see
what the the the
what the implications on what's
going to happen with that I
think
I think it's smart to allow
things to happen first before we
just say you know what I think
that's a great idea and we've
jumped in hit first I think and
and i'm because I have had that
used to be part of my district
on the animals part of my
district and I used to get a lot
of complaints about the zoning
are concerning canada
and how it affected people's
homes their home values their
ability to just enjoy their home
that they're smelling you know
money one throughout the whole
season whatever the cycle is I
don't know but
I think that's important you
know to to recognize is that
sometimes when we rush into
things we're now trying to fix
the legislature trying to fix
mistakes that we should have
just learned from another stay
and taken it and sometimes we
just rush into things rather
than then and do that that's
just my business background and
wait a minute I usually when I
build something I generally will
study it for a couple years and
i'll visit a bunch of these
places I take pictures I take
notes and then I take the best
and they separate the worst and
then they make a decision
because it's it's a door die
when it's your own money right
and so manager that's just what
I would I would i'm just
listening to all this net that
wow this is a lot so thank you
thank you very much think you
reported it to us as we will go
to kits next I just want to
highlight that we are bumping
into the time for the next
presentation and we still have
to break for lunch so.
Um be mindful of questions but
mindful of keeping somewhat
brevity in your answers and for
the next presenter since we
since it is jeff and we are
going with jeff to the site if
you have a question for jeff
take it with you on the tour so
we were not representative it's
thank you madame chairman thank
you for your innovative approach
for time management I think you
very much robbin and presenters
I very much appreciate I mean
this was a very exciting
presentation obviously
a lot of time in their sheet in
the research and I do appreciate
the innovative ideas I will
first turn off the I am excited
that we are having developers
and builders at our next
presentation I respectfully ask
the cheer to consider a possibly
having somebody to come I know
this is the mfa oversight but
they have somebody who is zoning
expert in the state to really
talk about
the process of guiding means
palodies in his own what zones
apply for what
just to also let's do some a
little clarification of uh for a
state of new mexico we talked
about which is what other seats
do they did they do the
statement you called AAA state
model code of for ten k
population or greater just for a
reference we are only slightly
under ten k and silver city
corrala cuba reslightly over ten
k and last vegas these are
things to consider about you
know or these areas that we why
village at you know or does we
need some kind of density and
what time so I just wanted to
make sure because uh cause
portland oregon the greater
portland oregon area has a
million more people than the
greater albert area has so I
just want to make sure that we
all understand that.
I I want a just to keep
whispering in your year as you
continue to and then I do that I
promise manager have a question
of a different zoning so makes
use of a mix of zoning it's my
understanding can be a
residential commercial
opportunity correct and some
ways
you are correct okay thank you
thank you so I will say that one
of the innovative approaches I
would like for consideration is
that you know if if I am person
who could not afford a four
hundred thousand dollars house
without an income generator
whether that is
a you and the and the back that
I can rent out or we have a one
little small model unfortunate
place but in the great in the
burning of county area where
it's a large garage in the back
their town houses large garage
in the back upstairs is the two
bedroom two bath residential and
downstairs is an open it could
be either a storefront
a conference i've called them
enterprinter housing a hundred
whether or not you can use that
as conference from restore front
and I have you run into any I am
kind of concerned about this
that second hand talk i'm
hearing that's coming out of
burning county are you having
problems and donna and
accounting of
um considering these income
residential areas to be a taxed
in a commercial and losing
residential property tax status
matt madam chair in
representative case i'm not
aware of that but one way week
addressed the entrepreneurship
is we have a very liberal home
occupation
section of our resulting code
that allows people.
To start in their home and as
they expand then move into other
areas that sounds excellent to
hear thank you very much madame
chair and thank you yes I I am
concerned about this losing
residential tax set as I
understand if there's more than
I see that there's a proposal
here for a citi council on
alberto for one car per work
force I would hope it be two
cars I would hope you be allowed
to have a spouse was allowed to
have a car by arm so I would
hope they would consider two
cars um I now I am very
concerned about the burning
county
if it's above two cars I
understand if you have a a
beautiful place that it's more
of an event center than maybe um
it's appropriate to consider
losing your residential tax
status but these these
rental these area places I hope
we can keep because this would
be reasonable to be key for home
ownership is being able to
figure out a way to generate
whether you're going tomatoes
and taking them to the farmers
market or renting space I think
that that that's important I
would just also like
we have mobile home zoning but
we've yet to create zoning for
tiny home parks
and I I would consider I would
like that to be considered as
well as a possibility I know for
developers is a completely
different kind of development
because it can't be deeded in
that way it has to be completely
an investment property but there
may there may be
that in then another question
that maybe we can find out later
on the free adding plans that
burnlyo albert is offering I
wonder how many have actually
been used and night pulled or
visited the websites but
actually got permits to build
i'm i'm interested in how many
of those.
Does free plans have been
accessed and used in permitted
for and and thank you again
thank you for it thinking of
innovative approaches
because it is the key for
financial stability so thank you
thank you very much
representative keeps am senator
pedea I think manager i'll be
real briefer on this one so I
think i've heard a couple of
things is there actually a
defined and that we have the
former superintendent of
regulation and licensing sitting
up in front there and her very
nice beautiful pearl right
necklace there blouse everything
um so I and i'm not sure that it
would have been in there but is
there a defined housing code in
new mexico I think I heard both
there is.
It's a building code not it's is
the housing current building
code I don't though if they're
the same thing about him chair
senator yeah so the building
code just has the requirements
in it around encounter fall over
if the wimbles and that type of
thing that we hope that as an
app yes I think the the land use
code is what the state does not
have and I I don't want to say
that emphatically but that's
something will definitely look
into my house for senator
helping to a little research on
that but that i'm aware of there
there is no state land use
code III know there was at least
one piece of legislation that
was introduced
in the last session around
language and zoning and so I
would venture to say that there
wasn't because maybe that would
have reference reference and not
legislation but definitely need
or thank you chair and think you
robin into the presenters you
guys are always fantastic in so
christina also manager with i'd
like to know about what this
conversation i'd like to be
included in that thank you
thank you very much and opening
a
senator to heal thank you madame
chair and think you guys for
being here and presenting um I I
just a couple of comments cause
I really want to get on to our
next group
on page five there's a
streamlining permitting and
approvals in it talks about
allowing public comment on
zoning and land use rather than
specific development I will just
say that my history of uh land
development and obviously
limited more to stand up base
specific developments have to be
resound and so there's always
seems to be a zoning issue when
you're talking about a specific
development that's just been the
course and I hear from builders
and those who are trying to move
those forward that that can take
years and that's a huge issue
that's a really big issue so um
I you know we've got a group in
santa fe that it.
Are taking advantage and i'm
happy of the upcoming local
elections with so the counselors
and our marries up our mere
position will be up and they're
asking for three basic things
that we increase affordable
housing their literally only
asking for the approval of two
hundred units per year of
affordable housing that's a big
stretch for santa fe and it
shouldn't be it should not be a
big stretch because that doesn't
even address for example are
teaching staff in santa fe and
the affordable housing that they
need so they don't have to live
in in in real rancho or burning
the county
the
on page six
I appreciate that last curses
it's looking at ways to improve
your online system I would be
really interested in and rather
this is more for you in how many
of our local jurisdictions and
there's not a lot right there's
not a lot that have their own
building office how many of them
actually have digital online
processes where you can submit
your plans your plans can be
reviewed your plans can be
approved you can get your permit
issued and you can request
inspections i'd like to know how
many have that kind of
comprehensive system because
again we have a lot of anecdotal
information that permits are
taking forever or inspections
are taking forever I see you're
saying you're getting done in
forty eight hours if you have a
digital online system you can
prove that an and and I
appreciate that but I would like
to know how many do and how many
don't because i'd love to get
more than just anecdotal
information I would love I think
the first step before
looking at montana are looking
at oregon and I like those two
examples believe you me but
if you look at page twelve it
really kind of speaks for itself
montana drew on data that
demonstrated how strict.
Local zoning regulations were
contributing to montana's severe
housing crisis I don't feel like
we have that information and so
getting that information has
been really important to me it's
just stalled in the legislature
and i'd love to see us really
and work together as a group
here in particularly in this
committee and come to some
agreement that let's leave start
getting the data right thank you
manager
thank you very much service
rehail and thank you community
members are really good
questions and comments thank you
again for this presentation
experience like for i'm also
really looking forward to the
next one as well alright we will
break for lunch last
presentation committee members
can we be back in a receipts at
twelve thirty five
please.
I didn't know
I had a function
of time
you have transferred
more.
Yeah.
Okay
Yes.
The.
Right.
All right back in business thank
you so much less.
Last presentation of the day and
by far probably the most
anticipated thank you so much
ready and jeff and wait for
being here so whenever you're
ready take it away.
They came out and share and
committee members of my name's
jeff kurry i'm the director of
development at the jail gray
company we are a development and
management company that has been
working on affordable housing
since nineteen eighty five we
manage about a hundred and sixty
apartment complexes across the
southwest sets about seven
thousand units and i'm here to
offer a developer's perspective
on developing multi family
housing in new mexico I think
weights going to address single
family housing.
Um particularly what we've
learned of years of development
in the state and what changes we
could do to help the statement
forward I want to say that
there's already been excellent
information that's been laid out
better than I could have laid
out so this is more a personal
perspective
earned what i'd like to start
with is just the visiting secure
timeline in the the cost of
housing delays we right next
door and we're going to take a
look as the today's quarrel
property and this project
represents a seven year effort
to deliver thirty two units um
so housing especially affordable
housing is difficult because
it's complicated
when I have regular contractors
talk to me about building a
purported complex as they look
at me like i'm crazy but there's
a light that goes into trying to
make an apartment complex whose
rents are stuck at an affordable
level and unfortunately building
affordable housing is not cheap
there is so much that we have to
do ahead of time and so much
groundwork that has to be laid
out that we spend a lot of time
with engineers and architects
and contractors talking about
prices and and then trying to
find money that we expect to be
able to have two years from the
date that we get an award most
of affordable housing is
financed by
federal tax credits long can
housing tax credits nine percent
and four percent tax credit and
that just is just a difficult
process so if we look at the
timeline here in twenty
seventeen el communa real
housing authority had to start
changing their buy laws to allow
them to
place section eight vouchers at
a property and have that
property hold the vouchers and
that took a couple years then
they went out and started
applying for tax credits they
applied in twenty nineteen
didn't get an award.
Applied in twenty eight twenty
twenty we're on the bubble and
then had their work taken away
and then in twenty twenty one
finally got an allocation of tax
credits
that allocation wasn't enough
and then we went around looking
for well we had we then.
Built out all of the plans and
then we went out to contractors
for say okay here's the final
plans how much is this going to
cost we were guessing for a long
time and talking and contractors
and then unfortunately even post
covered things were still kind
of out of control in costs of
had ballooned uh in twenty
twenty two we've we've got a big
trunk of financing through the
cost of connection grant and we
were incredibly grateful for
that unfortunately this.
Presented a large problem we had
difficulty for over a year in
four months I think it was
trying to make that money fit
into a tax credit program and it
ended up that we couldn't agree
on how the money would come in
and in the normal way and that
cost a lot of time and it could
create created delays and are
costs went up in ultimately
they were very gracious we we
came to an agreement and they
ended up giving us twice as much
money to fill in the gaps and
the time that we last to to make
it possible and then in twenty
twenty three as we were trying
to close we still had AAA final
gap in a new mexico housing mfa
saved us with a final grant from
teacup funds and pushed the
project to allow to close we
closed in december of twenty
twenty three it was a fifteen
month contract and they actually
closed ahead of schedule though
contractor was able to build a
head of schedule but it just
represents that
long drawn out processes in
these deways cost time that time
is expensive it costs money in
that just means we're doing
fewer projects because we're
doing so many things
land surveys time out when
you're doing in its market
studies time now environmental
reviews so not only do you have
to do all of these things that
are from but then you have to do
them again when another source
of funding comes up so it's just
one of these things where you
know I I feel like it's normal
that I have to go out and
powered my head against the wall
several times a month but it's
it in the market rate world it
really isn't
and if there is anything new
everything that we've talked
about today I agree with
but if there's anything that I
would say it's like if.
There's a way to simplify this
process that's what we want to
focus on um moving forward to
talking about tax credit
allocations the big beautiful
bill passed and increase in
ninety percent local housing tax
credits but it's a twelve
percent increase in credits that
means that there could in theory
be twelve percent more funds
going towards affordable housing
but I I want to just caution
people that there is going to be
an inflationary reaction to this
the value of the credit is going
to deal down because there's
just a fixed pool of people that
are looking for those credits in
the competition is suddenly
going to be decreased increased
supply reduced demand so that
means that we need to not let
off on the gap find it funding
resources which is home funds in
housing tax uh housing trust
funds
other grants that are available
those with things that make this
actually possible um
moving towards what makes new
mexico competitive for investors
we brought up gross receipts tax
other states around us don't pay
tac gross receipts tax they have
a sales tax but more importantly
they gross receipts tax taxes
labor and none of the other
stakes tax labor there are taxi
materials only uh we estimate in
when I have a most of my
builders come in from texas
we're about seventy eight
percent higher on multi family
housing
than other states just because
of that gross receipts tax
property taxes the increasing
property taxes there's been talk
about this in the legislator
legislature for a while but we
need to make sure that we're
controlling the growth of
property tax because our
investors who are coming in or
investing for fifteen year
periods or longer and they they
have to know that the property
is going to survive through this
period of time and for
affordable housing where were
locked into what rants weaken
chart so.
Property text increases need to
be controlled and then again
complexity and inconsistency and
new mexico make deals less
attractive we are competing on a
national stage we want to make
sure that investors are looking
in mexico and sale yeah that's a
great place to go because things
are simple right now they're not
simple eh eh even if it's not
simple consistency if we know
what we have ahead of us and if
rather than adding regulations I
really I really believe that
incentives are the right
direction to go and strip away
regulations
the last couple slides here more
supply means more affordability.
Affordable housing that I do is
not the only answer any house
any housing that we can do will
redeese reduced the strain on on
housing for everyone it will
provide a place to migrate when
they've you know either outgrown
in the house that they're in or
the family there was a large
family drops down to just the
the parents will gives it an
attractive place for the the
parents to move to a rent
control and mandatory affordable
set asides couldn't actually do
the opposite of what our goal is
we are trying to make housing
affordable for people but when
you start applying more rules we
we help a small subset of people
but we end up hurting the larger
group.
We want to support your
development we won as many
houses as possible that's what
we're missing and we can't we
can't help that by just
controlling pricing so uh to
finish up
I think we need to protect and
expand gap funding resources we
need to consider tax policy
reform that supports housing and
doesn't hold the back and we
wanna promote a clue climate
that attracts tax credit
investors on the national stage
to come into mexico thanks
and I pass it under way messages
good afternoon and everyone
thanks for having me
wait messenger i'm the division
president for politicals up to
mexico i'm a native new mexican
born and raised an albuquerque u
and m grad aps product and have
a passion for home building in
housing in the markets that we
serve which is why i'm here
my conversation had with with
easy which was kind of the other
empathyset of me coming today
was we're just talking about
some of the challenges that
large home builders have
bringing more homes
at what we would call attainable
pricing in the markets that we
serve now for the most part
although polty homes is a
national home builder third
biggest in the country we are
also one of the biggest builders
in in mexico but really
concentrated today lost of a
cricky real ranchel.
And so when I started to think
through what might be one of the
better ways to articulate some
of the challenges were having a
case study felt like it might be
kind of a fun way for us to
think through it so I put
together real simple things I
must prefer some home I am a
simple home builder
so i'd put together a pretty
simple power point I hear there
is some pagination issues on one
of the other slides that I i've
i'll probably talk to when we
get there so this is a new new
project that came to market has
filled the market a couple weeks
it's in southwest heights all
trick in new mexico at an area
that I think we would all agree
is a kind of a key location that
we would want to bring more
housing at an attainable price
point to it so we see this
possible as parcel come to
market as a home builder and a
developer we start to evaluate
what would be the appropriate
product homes how many homes
would go in in this site so you
see that on the the next page
where it says identify the
property we start to look at
market studies you'll you'll
studies.
With that comes in evaluation of
what we believe are cost will be
from land development house
costs and then what we think the
consumer can afford in those
areas.
And so ultimately when you kind
of flip to the next page here
you see the analysis produced a
recommendation that we should do
forty white houses
gets us a yield of four and a
half days per acre which would
produce sixty home sites in this
area.
All doing a simple cma would
tell you that the average cells
price in the albert cricket
mse's per this analysis and
obviously a snapshot in time was
for a weight however I was able
to come through the local most
stats and established that
they're unsacted on the
subsequent page or I have a
detailed out that this area of
southwest heights the average
sales price and that market was
two ninety seven and so really
the suggested price would be to
ninety seven.
Per the data points that we
received on the on the from the
listing broker into and the
information they had showed a
three mile radius of average
income of seventy five thousand.
I spoke to see in his group and
I saw what would that get you
from a affordability perspective
right what to do and you said
the ideal recommended purchase
price for that home owner would
be two thirty five to two forty.
Sorry see in a dynamic that is
occurring here average sells
price I will tricky for a weeks
average sales price in this area
to ninety seven recommended
price points for this would be
two thirty five to two forty and
I guess when you flip to the
next page you'll see just that
background state line just see
you know I didn't make these
numbers up.
Well then the next step then is
to
establish where we think our
counsel are our costs are going
to be house cost and land of
element costs.
So in this case we're using what
we would call should costing
methodologies should costing me
as we extrapolate based on
similar type projects in the
albertricky and rerantial area
you cast those over a based on
the unit costing the acrid size
the prolonged basis
the last sizes and so on and so
forth select first to give us
are underlying analysis on
whether or not this is a
feasible project okay so you're
seeing the left column is your
total costs.
The right column is going to be
a per lot at this point this is
more of a developer perspective
on a per large basis.
So
one more at one more point of
emphasis it's kind of the top
ten groups or all we would call
in track so that's really taking
the parcel property line it's
really going to be everything
that's gonna be inside of the
property parcel.
Towards the bottom you're gonna
see an offsite line assumption.
Or as we go down we have all of
our costs we do have the the
gross receipts tax line that we
were referencing earlier
I was good alignment with some
of the previous presentations
did you can see that's a
substantial amount of costs per
lot to the two to fifty seven
hundred.
On the off site this goes round
this goes down to what we would
call sight readiness potentially
any any of the minisapalities
jurisdictions that you represent
you could evaluate your sites on
sight readiness in what the
additional costs would be this
was not a a the definitive
number
frankly this could be
significantly higher I doubt it
would be much lower some of the
offset obligations here you can
see on the right hand side that
we just had for examples would
be the department of
transportation in my avenue
signal that needs to happen or a
lane expansion you could have
water utility improvements you
could have a math go
improvements a powering gas
expansion as those was services
aren't there same thing with
sewer services so I did kind of
a flat number there five hundred
thousand but as a mentioned
chances are this would be
substantially higher based on
the lack of sight readiness
associated with us
so total per lot costs.
Roughly eight point three
million this include the
purchase price of three nine.
Now we're gonna start a building
houses so now as a a large home
builder but also a developer I
now turn my head on to what it
would look like to build a house
so this is AAA plan that we
build in an adjacent community
in the albertricky msa so these
are actual costs associated with
a home that we would construct
in this community itself so
you're seeing really that top
line is gonna be permits and
fees working through our house
costs summary lines
admittedly these are kind of
industry jargon right meps is
going to be a mechanical
electrical plumbing son and so
forth.
Once again you're gonna see an
additional line item for gross
receipts tax were not just we
don't have groceries at just one
the land of element sides you're
now going to have this on the
house construction site so
information you're talking about
roughly twenty thousand dollars
and gross receipts tax is going
to be passed through the omar.
One other note
the we have adopted the twenty
twenty one acc building code
that includes a pretty
substantial green adoption it is
a very energy efficient home
however this twenty twenty one
has not been adopted by many
minister polities across the
country and it does add about
fifteen to eighteen thousand
dollars per house to meet that
code standard today
I don't say that in a way to
imply that we should adjust it
as of now but just think I think
about that if at any point in
time in the future there's
additional quoted option or a
request for more green code it
just adds a lot of costs to
frankly a small amount of
housing options that are being
brought to market I think
present some of the previous
slides were talking about six
thousand homes constructed per
year
that's really not moving the
needle but is putting a lot of
additional costs on the homes
that are coming to market and
frankly when we look at this
project whether or not this is
even going to be feasible.
So when you get to the the next
page you're going to see a
summation.
This can include your raw land
your house costs your offsites
permits and fees and gross
receipts tax I overlay just
assuming that we could sell
these homes at the average sales
price and the southwest highest
area this came up with a minus
twenty eight thousand dollar
prof.
At that point this project does
not work deemed you know not
feasible.
To the right I made a small
assumption which would say or
maybe a brand new never before
lived it lived at home with some
brand brand new energy
efficiencies appliances and
features could warrant a price
increase above and behind your
market you know the existing
resell home so without
assumption I came up to three
hundred and forty two thousand.
As the purchase price
are you as I mentioned in
thursday there's a column that's
missing which shows the same
overlay on the three hundred
twenty six thousand dollars in
cost would get you a fifteen
thousand our per home profit.
So it really articulates in this
case how either number one
you're not gonna have any
housing cause column left with
equal the project that never was
a column on the right what do
you call housing at a price at
above where you would probably
want to see it especially for
this part of the community
the last page that we put in
there was well what if we looked
at a couple different variables
that could exist and want to get
not specific to albertricky this
would be something that you
could potentially look at in any
one of your jurisdictions I
assumed a small price reduction
in the price to the roll and
piece.
I started look at whether or not
we could reduce
seventy five percent reduction
in permits and fees seventy five
percent reduction and gross
receipts tax and I wiped out any
of the offset obligations
assuming that that would either
be absorbed by that minister
via as a site readiness at that
point we were now able to
actually get your price back
down.
To two hundred ninety seven
thousand average sales price in
that area and still have a
potential profit towards a
project or somewhere in between
so like I said really just some
suffer you to think about when
you go back to your jurisdiction
is site readiness gross receipts
tax permits and fees that exist
coded option all of the above as
that's the analysis that's going
to come together when home
builder or developer are trying
to decide whether or not this is
a feasible project and whether
not these homes are ever going
to come to market and all of
these factors are or what's
continuing to create a
limitation on the amount of
homes that are coming sue any of
the jurisdictions that you
represent and then the
subsequent price that those
homes are listed at when they do
come to market
okay
madam chair render my name's
randy trainer in the lobbyists
for the new mexico home miller's
association and the apartment
association of new mexico
I want to thank you for allowing
us to sopportunity in all the
years i've been doing this we've
never had this opportunity so I
think this is huge and I just
want to thank you for that
you've you've had the option to
listen to two of the largest
housing providers in the state
and I think part of the picture
here that we're trying to paint
is that we can do better
and I I i'd like to also just
talk about a little bit about
the benefits of housing
you know when we come to the
legislature and we asked for you
know some some like let's say a
gross of case tax reduction that
the question is what's to get a
cost would I can't put a number
on this stuff that's it's really
hard but I think that we all I
think everybody knows room would
agree that there are huge
benefits to an individual into
the community
to have good safe housing.
Ord our problem becomes how do
we have to be class down out how
we put a number on it in you
know it's almost like asking the
legislature to just take a leap
of faith in to do this but I
still want to
make the point that.
It is the right thing to do it's
the right thing to do and it has
benefits that go far beyond just
housing to your health education
employment for a lot of other
benefits to having good housing
and so.
New things when when we're
talking infrastructure and wait
did mention this the large time
we took talk about the
infrastructure I don't know that
we all understand or appreciate
that there's one side
infrastructure everything is
within the boundaries of a
particular property and then
there are offsite improvements
there have to be provided
extensions of waterline
superlines intersection
improvements those types of
things and that's so all those
things need to be done including
the public utility are the
private utilities electricity
gas cable telecommunications all
those kinds of things all of
this has to be designed all of
this has to be built before you
even start building a home so
you are way way out from from
actually building a home takes a
lot of money takes lost paying
power there's a huge amount of
risk in doing this.
Uhm in in and when you get to
the actual part of building a
home there are fourteen to
seventeen different trades
building trades that are
involved in building a home.
You know you've got tens of
thousands of parts here to be
assembled correctly two code and
inspected
it's hard to build homes.
I would like to make a note
particular inspections and
others but a lot of discussion
over the last few years about
timiness of inspections and
those types of things and I want
to I I want to make a
distinction here when everyone
understand that we have an
inspection for a commercial
property it's entirely different
than inspection for a home and
the difference is that if you
have an inspection on a
commercial project and say the
inspector didn't show up on time
there's a hundred other things
that that crew can do to keep
busy on a home it's it's linear
if I don't get this approval
here everybody goes home
everything stops.
It just starts.
You know we do food inspections
for rest rights they keep
serving food.
We don't we aren't allowed to
keep building the home so that's
a problem for us it becomes a
problem and I I know center
trios very familiar with these
issues we've talked a lot about
these
i'd like to hit just several big
picture items here that we've
talked about is an industry but
I think are important to to what
i'd like to see this group doon
would like to see the
legislature tackle one is
entitlement processes.
Taxes infrastructure work force
building codes financing in
housing policy.
Let me just talk a little bit
about each of these i'll try to
get through this quick
entitlement processes these are
largely local government issues.
Um your local government they're
the gatekeepers to housing they
control the flow of housing
but when you hear people talk
about what they do for living
here they often talk more about
the process than they talk about
the actual standard that they're
having to meet.
Process is a very important in
this in this industry.
So
I guess in fairness here I
should say that the this issue
of process in inspections and
timiness it really isn't a
problem across most of the state
the smaller communities
everybody knows everybody there
most of a lot of these
communities are welcoming
somebody to come and build a
home in their community and so
they make it happen
I think it's pretty clear to say
it's probably an albuquerque
santa fe problem problem is
that's where most of the people
the evidence where the biggest
need is.
And so it is that it is a
problem in those jurisdictions
no doubt
taxes.
Gross receives and property
taxes of last year there was a
bill in the house house bill
three twenty five it was a
a grocery season tax reduction
bill
mill didn't didn't pass
a lot of the difficulty we had
with headers and the FIR which
is stated earlier is how do you
how do you cost this out it's
just really really hard I would
say that I believe my memory's
correct with the number because
we put some restrictions on what
to supply to and stuff that the
number wasn't huge it was ninety
million dollars
you know maybe we can find that
in the suffers that they are
somewhere in the chairs or
something but um and then the
other issue that has come up is
properly tax specifically
related to multi family housing
last year there was senate bill
one eighty six which was pretty
controversial really between the
assessors and the industry and
there was we have gone to a
point where if we increase the
property taxes the way that
probably should be done because
there's no doubt that these
properties are under assessed
but to make their jump from
today's assessment level to what
should be
would have shut down the
industry and so we were trying
to grow that increase over time
there was a lot of confusion and
I think there was a lot of
misunderstanding and and and
fear about what was actually
going to happen I I would say
that on both of these issues
groceries these tax and property
tax you're going to see a little
bit different bills this year a
particularly on the property tax
issue I think it's going to be
presented as more of an economic
development approach in the
state of washington I think it
is has this has done something
like this before
infrastructure as they stated
earlier you know providing
infrastructure it's it's risky
business it's early money it's
big money it's risky money.
Um you know we've done a number
of things with the opportunity
housing development program uh
to we I think we had a hundred
and twenty five million that we
put in there for that
we had a hundred and twenty
hundred ten million last year
for infrastructure development
and other things the innovative
economic development site
readiness act was passed which
applied to residential.
And.
You know the several years ago
their governor pointed the house
the investment council was easy
and senator padion natalie was
on that I was on that uhm and
really the i've shot of that was
that we felt if we just had to
pick one one item was the one
item we could pick that would my
the might make the biggest
difference in providing housing
and it was infrastructure again
it's early money it's risky
money it's a lot of money.
So the next item is is work
force
you know doesn't do much good to
do any of the stuff if we don't
have people to build it in this
is an issue maybe we can expand
a little bit on that I think
particularly in our smaller rule
communities it's it's hard to
get people to show up they just
don't they've all moved away
I think we need to do some
training to to get some people
more interested in these types
of trades are a lot of people
that be the start in the
construction trades start in the
residential construction
industry and they may move up to
commercial and and go through
those apprenticeship programs at
that level but it's it's always
been kind of a feeder program to
the apprenticeship programs
building codes.
Yeah I would say again weight
mentioned the the idea of the
energy efficiency I I would
suggest you that we have picked
all the low hanging fruit on
energy efficiency for housing.
And that to get to get this much
improvement now in energy
efficient in the energy
efficiency cost this much money
it's a lot of money to just get
a little bit of movement on the
dial so some point we need to
discuss is this really making
sense to do that we can keep
making it more efficient it's
just going to be more and more
expensive.
And I would I would also suggest
to you that if you really are
interested in energy savings
maybe we should be looking at
existing homes and we have a me
and homes that were there or ten
years or older that could
probably stay in to have the
windows replaced and alone
more installation provided which
would really make a dent and
energy use
financing I am not a finance guy
but you know the cost of money's
an issue the economies and issue
you know this industry because
the timeframes are so far out
these guys have to look into
their crystal balls and say okay
you know five seven years from
now five seven years from now
what's the economy going to be
like with the market going to be
like well I have any buyers for
this particular product that i'm
trying to build now.
That's again very risky
business.
And finally else only and here
with just talking about housing
policy.
What is new mexico's policy on
housing we don't have one.
In a week debate this issue of
office of housing of less
several legislatures.
And I would just like to
encourage you all to think a
little bit more about I think
enough of entalked about today
that certainly there's some work
here that are office of housing
could do
to address some of these needs
that we've heard from everybody
today.
Um I would say yes we do
an office of housing.
So I guess the question is
because what's the goal here.
I have some time talking my
clients and we get into these
deep conversations and I have to
stop him and say what's the goal
it is back up a little bit
what's the goal here I think the
goals to build more housing.
We can do that.
The industry can do that
you know a lot of the programs
that we have are very good
healthy programs but they're not
going to build near the numbers
that we need to build to address
this problem and so I i've
observed them maybe i'm just a
terrible lobbyist but i've
observed over the years that
this industry has never invited
in on the discussions about
housing it's it's been just this
last four or seven years and
that that's happened and it's a
good thing but you know took a
long time to get to this point
and so I would ask to you know
thank you for inviting us keep
us engaged we're here to help.
Um
and so what I would like to ask
of this committee is that you
invite us back you've got a
couple of extra meetings left
yet this year and i'd like you
to allow us to come back and
talk to you in specifics about
gross receipts tax and property
tax
because I think there will be
legislation on that and I I
think your input is critical to
that so without being said or
start up and these guys can
answer all the other questions
so.
Thank you very much for that
presentation a lot of very
interesting points for raise
that I know the committee has
questions so before I opened it
up to the committee do need to
point out it is
one ten
we're supposed to be in the
parking lot and at the site by
now so please keep out of mine
with your questions I am going
to do a thing I hate doing I am
putting everybody on a timer you
have maximum five minutes
absolutely no syllagizing no
motor login
and we will start with
senator
thank you all madam chair and
things I have
really actually could be to risk
this presentation in the ones
prior then I have a four things
and though you can get back to
me later though that I would
like to see because so they are
important and they are expensive
one is water
and then the other one is
insurance
costs and give you a real first
example like what's happening in
las vegas and not more than real
also this our area said even if
they get a new home what is
going to do to them the cost of
insurance.
Then they're not another one is
so historical zoning and where
i'm going with this says there's
a lot of families that own very
valuable families that have been
in new medical for years that
own valuable property but
they're like tide you know to
some of the zoning that some
regulations historical zoning
and then on a zoning itself I
was so shown with our senator by
the ear that are prior is a few
years back I served for sixteen
years some eight years in the
extra territory was zoning and
also with a town of towers
zoning.
And never once did we get any
formal training or any kind of
you know to make a decisions
which I really see he and
especially in the end origin
that I serve a disconnect
between zoning and county
commissioners.
You know because source a lot of
times this groups are prove
things but then it gets to that
level earn it doesn't happen and
we have madam chair on fine
thank you very much senator
senator hills thank you madame
chair i'll be very quick
hopefully you'll not be five
minutes um
what would be the difference in
costs and i'd love to see this
between twenty houses per square
birth per account versus sixty
cause we just had a presentation
on what those middle homes might
look like and what would the
cost be if you looked at the
sixty instead of a twenty
number two
randy I would love to hear more
as to cause I tried to do this
before how do we move to virtual
inspections and it's not popular
with the industry I I mean with
the inspection industry I get
that but it is popular with with
with your group and I I would
love to you know how can we
start moving to virtual so that
this you don't have to wait for
an inspector to show up
somewhere there may be some
things that you have to but
let's talk about that and i'm
trying to figure out what do you
mean by keep building waiting
for the inspection because you
have to see you can't build over
what's going to be inspected how
would you do that
you you indicated that like it's
a restaurant you just keep
serving food the problem with
allowing builders to keep
building as that the inspector
is looking at something that's
under what they're going to
build so how would you how would
you
do it take photographs godger
okay alright thank you umm in
then
I see that a good portion of the
cost on then I don't see the
page number here for the polity
group.
Housing cars is the framing in
the lumber are there all turn it
to the materials that we should
be looking at I mean I
understand that there's like
print printer homes that are
going to be built somewhere in
santa fe.
Sure thank you senator trio
thanks madam
I think just a couple examples
that you have here today that
you know to answer your question
for the most part the land of
element costs
if you wanted to go to twenty
home sites rather than sixty
it's just simple math rate and
this is a accelarant to dragon
drop there's some things that
are specific to how many homes
how many peter stores and things
like that
how many acre feet of water you
might need
things like that but for the
most part the land of element
costs are going to be blended
just divided out over homing
home sites that you're going to
be able to build and that's
actually why you're seeing a lot
higher density and a lot of the
communities that are coming to
market sitting so smaller home
sites smaller houses and a trend
is really a current as cost to
ballooned and interest rates
have moved in a commencer and
amount that makes the other
average home not attainable
because of those two factors
transfer your question regards
to three g printing and things
like that
it's it's a lot of talk it's
really difficult to establish
whether or not those products
and materials would be accepted
in in your local code whether or
not your inspector would be able
to believe that they meet your
your called credentials
you're engineering and all those
things would be associated with
those and there there's no
guarantee to be less expensive
frankly than you know using
number now number today is
actually one of the products
that come down substantially
because that's a commodity sale.
Based on random lengths where is
a lot of the other things that
are randy talked about are going
to be labor base so that is not
come down at all
thank you madame chair i'll just
finish up with
you know I grew up in a two
bedroom house there was five of
the we had one bathroom I didn't
even know what a garage was
so we had no where to park our
car is except for on the street
so
III think you know we've come up
with I I am looking at this
design that you have as to car
garage looks like three bedrooms
probably to an out bathrooms
like I think we need something
in the middle and and the last
thing you know my daughter's
closing on her house today and
um uh moving in this afternoon
they're probably already in the
process and the really cool
thing about it is within this
price range rate
but the really cool thing is as
it's navigated community.
But they absolutely have three
swimming polls multiple parks
they have their own elementary
school they're building their
own middle school and they have
all the amenities at there's
grocery stores now being built
it's a walkable community it's a
safe community and it doesn't
have to be behind a gate texas
is doing some really incredible
things in home building and i'd
like to see as move in that
direction so that we have those
resources instead of just
smashing families in and not
having parks and grocery stores
and schools and such thank you
madame chair thank you center
that was perfect timing
representative threats us
thank you
start on teasing
manager thank you very much for
the presentation like there's a
lot of things that that are
making this whole equation given
t can change voucher it's a
simple supply demand that cost
of money which is interesting
for plans that you're doing this
the regulations that the taxes
labor labor participation reads
there's a lot of things that are
that are making this happen so
when you your interest rates are
going up within something else
has to give them a square
footage and yet you want that
house to be able to be resold we
got to remember we want that
inventory to continue for
generation so it to me it's
important to keep a three
bedroom house I was as brat home
from the hospital in a trailer
that back home to a trailer and
then we had a thousand square
foot home and it just is just
the way it is in one in and my
dad became a contractor but
and I dropped in the
construction business I kind of
know this somewhat but I think
what's what's important is that
we had a target manager with
with is he about a year and a
half ago when I said you know
i'm looking at the cost of money
i'm looking at what the raw land
cost you three million dollars
for a foot is at thirteen acres
that's crazy right.
So i'm thinking why is it the
state doing a public private
project where they come in and
they see look we have this
property that's on both state
we're gonna sell it we're not
going to we're not gonna we're
gonna sell it and we're not
gonna ask for the money now you
call in with it an agreement
possibly man in chair where you
go and you develop it with the
understanding that you get for
permits and so forth in all in
an orderly fashion and then as a
cell each one of the lots
at a reasonable price and I
think there's some
constitutional things that would
fall in place here how that
would happen what prison point
you could give
you could possibly sell these at
lower lower costs to the
individual which will reduce the
customer of the of the home as
it in itself it would be less
money for you to have to borrow
an invest if the beginning for
your start up it be less risk
and you could you could get this
constant has a trum medicine of
of property and whether it's a
school
district or it's some sort of
state or public land that is not
being used that could be somehow
up with this public private
partnership and then as as
you're working your way out the
ideas you know you sell the
socialist twenty lots and I
don't know what is going to make
you keep it simple that hundred
thousand dollars each slide is
five thousand dollars going back
to the state or
state or city or county getting
paid and you only have that that
amount so that you don't have
that interest expense rate to to
go back to in the cost of the
home other things that are just
off the cough see I see that you
guys have landscape being and
you have some other things that
that mean that need to be there
that may be can bring the cost
down and so I thought when it
when I had this conversation.
Madam chair with using I said it
would be nice to get a squirrel
a cosport square foot
you got two or three types of
homes that could be that there
are built maybe two three four
plans keep it simple any
upgrades they would pay for the
upgrades on their own if they
qualify for that but the key
thing here is supplying demand
to increase the supply and III
just think it would be a way to
kind of pass pieces and allow
me to be investors to come in
and say you know what this
project now is something that's
feasible because now you know
thirteen acres for three million
dollars to a lot of money maybe
it can be worked out I think
just those are just some of the
things the frozen labor
participation rates what how is
I never talking about in the
rule areas it's really bad my
dad was contractors stopped
willing he was doing the lorry
model on the doctor's home him
and how he would always as uncle
okay lieutenant governor we're
working on this house by
themselves they're in their
seventies cause it couldn't get
anybody come to work and my dad
said I don't need to do this
anymore I was just doing it to
stay busy and equipped so that
that's what you're seeing you're
also seen
I think we need to work on on
regulation for
to get people their license
keep them at license you're make
it simple and easy appreciate
programs like both tech centers
and so forth we need to start
amount young and make it a
process where it starts in june
your high high school college or
is continuous I I lasting
manager is like for them to come
back because this is where two
big of a
all this without that was
presented to have a three minute
conversation over thank you
manager thank you very much
representative to us as
representative kits thank you
madame chair thank you very much
thank you very much for this
presentation this is very ex.
Citing presentation I very much
appreciate that detail that one
or one understand we are not
home builders here so walking
you through the detailed process
is so very important
are you buried the lead let's
take a moment to say he said he
had a builder that finished a
project early I I want to know
that builder's name that's very
exciting and I want to think in
my fa to make sure that they are
acknowledged getting this very
long and treacherous during
covered and everything project
through I mean that is a great
testament
very very quickly when it should
take a moment and use you talk
about seems
i'm a licensed relative so I may
be the only person here who
knows what the cmas so please
say it allow for people thank
you.
So a cma is a competitive market
analysis it's basically
extrapolating data that shows
what homes were being sold in
that area at that price point so
puts it together and says this
is what the home should go for
in that area thank you so that's
how he came up with that price
just so you know it wasn't like
with magic lines or anything
he's using established industry
data
you also skipped through like
all in them will have sight
readiness like like the let us
happen is pretty easily in a low
cost so let's talk about sight
readiness now we were able to
pass his legislation for to get
some site radios um and thank
you senator for your support on
that as well so let's talk about
what does it take
yours you are assuming that we
must palities and your in your
analysis you're assuming this
policies are paying for sight
readiness which border the
committee that is roads sewage
water electricity that are all
kinds of crazy stuff and know
that I always tell people
land is cheaper new mexico water
is what makes it expensive so
access to that water access to
that is super expensive y does
it normally cost a site
readiness but we can tell us
like per per acre or per what
what how do you establish an
industry so to see that dollar
amount two site readiness
thank you for the question madam
caters in madam charlotte so I
intentionally came and cannot
breast over the site ready to
part is I I was not really in a
position where I came with an
ask.
As is in a spoke he said he talk
about the challenges of.
What you're seeing in your
industry and this was a good way
to articulate it but it wasn't
really my position or my goal to
come and say we should do this
this and it's so I wanted to put
it as a as a concept that you
guys could start thinking about
species you go back to your
respective jurisdictions and
sort of thinking about sites
that maybe you could bring
infrastructure to that could
help bring that on board since
every piece is different it's
really hard to give you an
estimate in some cases we need
to bring a water and sewer a
mile or two.
Which is millions of millions of
dollars in other cases it could
just be a couple hundred feet so
that's where I think it makes it
each one of these these
conversations are difficult to
really garden that and I put in
the third example saying if that
site was ready it was that the
upstate infrastructure was
including the previous examples
but it was really just saying if
that was gone the same was rate
ago how could that reduce some
of the overall costs associated
with that project to make it a
functional feasible
parcel that equals housing for
the citizens that we surf thank
you so much and thank you I know
we are all slim for time right
now I very much appreciate that
I just wanted to pay harmages of
the fact that that was a much
bigger thing than what we in the
in the presentation for and I do
appreciate you put that
i'll just
I know you didn't ask for my
advice but if you're in front of
the legislator whether it's for
coffee or you've been invited
the committee you will put an
ask and that is what we are here
for you need to at make an ask
at all times we may not be able
to give it but you got to make
an ask and so a great I will
keep talking about it maybe the
senators can help us this is an
issue all on the the great with
labor of the way our tax
structure is
we're going to pay it or in a
pay and property taxes were to
pay an income taxes we're gonna
pay in guarantee we're gonna pay
it we just got to figure out how
we're going to pay it if the grt
is preventing it and and I will
say once again we need to
increase we keep talking about
increasing or trades I really
appreciate all the focus we've
been giving our trades but we
need to make sure that um
a building inspectors
and
and and are water controllers
are water
skilled labor those are part of
the trades it will not talking
about rate now and their
essential to make sure that
we're moving in our plane so
this there's no reaso.
And for you to be sitting on
your hands waiting for an
inspector to show up if they had
enough inspectors thinking
manager thank you very much
representative caters senator
pity think a chair and I I don't
really need to go too long and
everyone's talked about the
great issue I brought that up
this morning in you know I
really want to help you with
that I but I I do want you to
meet you go out and find some
model legislation of some kind
that maybe we can just learn
from what how this affected
other states madam chairman I
i'm also kind of more inclined
to not make it just sort of an
open ended kind of thing where
maybe we look at it five years
and then then ten years and on
on a sunset so that we don't you
know but I also want to learn
from you is that something that
builders would would see what
gash you know they took away the
grt but it's only for five years
in our planning cycle is you
know whatever I I need to
understand that part in order to
make get this done you know for
our state so so just the
question that I have out in
chair is what what and I saw
this was really good by the way
I was looking at the
presentation from the the policy
organization so what is the grt
due to the cost of a home right
now on average can you give me
just like a percentage
yeah I think the math that I put
together here was
twenty thousand dollars on on a
three hundred thousand and that
was combined land of element as
well as house construction costs
was roughly twenty five or
twenty thousand dollars to each
other so you're looking at that
a four percent something like
that so so just to everybody
knows that where there's no
confusion in the room so homes
are four percent more expensive
right now for the time being
because we're doing this to
ourselves it's it's it's a
dollar figure that will it will
take a hit on in our state
budget but if we looked at it
from a five and ten year sunset
standpoint may be adjusted at
some point on how it would work
best for us I don't know why we
would lift that tax for a period
of time to really stimulate this
this this building crunch that
we have right now so just want
to make that mention so if you
want to send me something I
think the industry should be
very excited about this working
with me on this I need your help
on this to make sure we fully
understand it thank you.
Thanks chair thank you very much
center pidea thank you committee
members for excellent and saying
questions today thank you
presenters are so much so much
good information I really want
to thank all of you we will go
ahead and meet in the parking
lot to get start on the tour I
really want to encourage the
committee members to come on
this to her it is different
thing in person than in slides
and we so rarely get to see
these projects in the context of
their community which I think is
really important so thank you
very much and we'll close out
you
