We're gonna go ahead and get
back to get started again in the
meeting reconvene and so next up
on the agenda we have a dreadful
hill the marketing and emissions
director from in a metal state
because home and can it show
you can come on up and
on the table you have to make
there will be a little person
there in the bottom in the
middle they don't light up red
and that'll let you know when
the mike is hot in you're able
to talk just ask that when
you're not speaking or someone's
ask you a question kind of turn
it off sometimes we get the
feedback with that you have the
floor and go read it.
Good afternoon mr chair and
esteem representatives thank you
it is an honor to present on the
new mexico state veterans home
today my name is andrea trikio
i'm the marketing and admissions
director at the new mexico state
veterans home
so we will begin
the new mexico state veterans
home is currently home to a
hundred and twenty eight
residents with room to house up
to a hundred and thirty one and
I I would like to change the
slide since we did the slide we
admitted two more veterans and
were up to a hundred and thirty
with a four applications for the
one open bed so we're predicting
here by the end of the week will
be totally for with the new
homes and the annex as well
which is last time we reported
to the committee that was one of
their concerns can we you know
utilize its beautiful homes that
were built for a veterans and
i'm here to say very completely
we have and it's totally full.
The new mexico state veterans
home is a long term skilled
nursing facility we offer twenty
four hour nursing care while
safely assisting residents to
live it's independently as
possible the new mexico state
veterans home vision statement
is working together to provide
the highest quality of care and
the best quality of life for
veterans and their.
Our facility overview
our annex building holds five
units with the total of fifty
nine beds those includes secure
units to support memory care
needs their private rooms with
private bathrooms in our annex
building contains our beauty
shop a physical therapy jim and
a movie theater
our newly built homes we built
six new homes that house twelve
residents per house they're
designed to create a home life
environment and promote
independence again they are
equipped with private rooms and
private bathrooms and we also
have two couple rooms for a
couples who wish to live
together in those boat and those
rooms are both filled by
couples.
All right are eligibility
honourably discharged veterans
with ninety days or more service
and their spouses are eligible
for admission a preference is
given to new mexico residents
when there is a waiting list but
every veteran is welcome to
apply we are not restricted to
new mexico veterans only a gold
star parents who have lost
children in the service of their
country are also eligible as
well as certain members of a
reserve component of the US
armed forces who meet the legal
residents requir.
The population that we currently
serve we offer a diverse
population of residents were
currently home to men and women
with approximately thirteen
percent women and eighty seven
percent men out new mexico state
veteran home service from world
war two the korean war the
vietnam war and including the
gold for a residence range in
age from early sixties two over
a hundred years old
new mexico state veterans home
residents have a variety of care
needs to include medication
management and assistance with
activities of daily living all
the way to full assistance at
support and we also have ptot in
speech for any therapy needs for
our residence so we also I think
later in the slide will have
dental services that come into
the facility all their dentures
and everything is fully paid for
with the contract that we did
with the deniso there's no lot
of pocket for the veterans and
we just are having a wound dot
com to the facility once a week
so we're trying to limit it as
as you know weren't tear scene
it's an hour and a half either
way we go to so we're trying to
get services to come in to the
home are there in tear seats so
the veterans on at the spend an
hour and a half mile box.
Our population broken down is we
have currently one world war two
veteran we have eleven residents
that served during the cream war
seventy eight residents served
during the vietnam war
six residents served during the
golf or eighteen residents
served during peace time and we
currently have fourteen
residents that are spouse.
Up our population by payer
source so are service connected
veterans which is seventy
percent service connected or
higher is forty two we have
seven that are private pay sixty
eight that are currently on
medicaid we have eight that are
medicaid pending and three on
hospitals to update the
the chairman here last time we
were
you're giving a report one of
the questions with our medicaid
pending through the secretary
and the leadership of the
department health we review to
work in me with the department
that runs that I could say now
we're down to a turn around time
about thirty days.
Which right now is is helps and
if it goes and made it really
impact on.
That issue that was brought up
last committee it's been sold.
Our financial so the va covers
the cost for veterans with the
service connected disability of
seventy percent or higher
medicaid medicare and private
pay are also accepted forms of
payment and monthly payments are
determined from an individuals
in common assets are financial
office reviews that required
admission documents to determine
the financial responsibility
prior to admission.
From when we get the total
completely the application to
get the approval is running
about forty eight hours so we
get back to the veterans really
quick that need our care and the
turnaround time has
significantly improved from only
first started this project so
now we're down to a forty eight
hour term wrong time from a
completed packet usually the
complete packet the only thing
we're hang up is getting some
stuff from the veteran's family
or the better than themselves
but even without really running
about a ten day time on.
All right our veterans home
projects so the mexico state
veterans home past the ba
recognition survey in march of
twenty twenty five so earlier
this year which officially
recognizes the six new homes
that were built the state
veterans home is also become a
model to build similar
facilities throughout the US
increased staffing at the new
mexico state veterans home
allowance do you have to provide
more services for a veterans and
their families and then max cost
back from home receipts
community support from many
organizations to include the
department of veteran services a
veteran service officer that is
there once a week as well as the
best center
services that are there by
weekly that offer counseling
services for the community in
from the last time the committee
met one of the required as for
months was to reach out to the
community to get patron services
involved for that not just for
the bedson but the community and
with our building in their space
where able to do that working
with the veterans affairs
and service officer and having
counseling I will tell you that
a lot of people are very
appreciated in t c they don't
have to travel to los cruces
around with her they're seeing
that service that right here in
her home town of tier seed so we
keep working with the secretary
of veterans affairs and keep
expanding our role for services
we can help the community b.
To get into pictures of our
facility so the next slide is
the front of her annex so are
anex again as our security unit
i'm the next spider shows a
picture of our beauty shop as
well as our movie theater that's
located in the annex
and the movie theater the
activity department has where
they could bring they have a
family
afternoon where they could bring
their grandkids then whatever
and they tell us what move they
want replace a movie and give a
popcorn so they could really
feel like they're in a movie
theater with their f.
All right so this next slide is
a picture of one of the units in
our annual so the first picture
depends kind of the central
seating area the rooms are along
the outside of the unit and the
next picture is the kitchen so
one of the things that we're
proud to
express is that each of our
units have independent kitchen
so each unit in the functions
independently they have
housekeeping they have cooks
they have the nursing staff so
each unit is meant to feel like
it's.
The annex in the homes we have a
long table it's it's seat they
could have their families there
at meals our staff sits down and
eats with the batteries so
they're not eating by their
cells the table could hold up to
twelve people.
We're always having somebody and
the better inconvenience anytime
they or night there's always
something some since the
kitchens right there the
caregivers could cook anything
if they want it a egg sandwich
at three o'clock in the morning
that's one of our biggest hits
that the examines at three
clock.
So the next couple of pictures
are of you inside one of the
rooms in our annex so again
private room private bathroom
the first picture is just kind
of looking in from the door the
second picture shows the
furniture that does come
equipped in the room to include
the door there is the closet and
the next slide shows the
bathroom so they're walking
bathrooms there's no trip
hazards going in and out of the
bathroom especially for our
bedrooms and wheel chairs are
walkers
and their next picture is the
secured courtyard so each of our
annex units have attached
secured courtyards so our
veterans are able to go outside
spend time barbecue in gardening
whatever they prefer to do
outside but in a seaf area right
and one of the projects will
work with gsd is to get more
shaded area as we build the
antics in the homes we the
architects try to plan for the
sign but now we're working to
get more over hangs and will
shaded areas and their projects
it's probably.
Right so getting into our new
home so this is a front view of
driving in the driveway of our
flag polls including the new
homes in the back and if you see
right there by the flags yes to
overhangs that's like a parade
area where we get together for
the veterans
where the it's actually got a
little golf course to put part
thing shuffle board and also
just like a parade area f.
And it also has picked.
All right so the next slide is
just if a view of the front of
one of our homes so you know
nice large covered porches
lots of furniture outside
there's a couple of of seat
sitting tables so this is
something that are our residents
you realize daily we have a lot
of residence allowed to just set
out some
so this is just kind of looking
head on at one of our homes
are the next fight is the entry
way to our home so each home has
a little entry way we've we've
improved and turned it into a
coffee bar so the table that you
see there is now being utilized
as a coffee for our residence
their gas families anyone that
visited visits it's it's open to
to them for use
and then those the doors on the
next picture and lead into the
home so the first thing you're
going to see when you when you
walk into one of our homes is on
the next side is the the big
living area so this is our our
communal living area the homes
are set up like your home would
be
it
so central living area central
dining area big open kitchen so
we do encourage our residence to
come out and spend time together
we encourage family style eating
but it's also their preference
so if they choose not to them
that's up to them
the next side is kind of a
closer view of our dining and
kitchen area so large kitchen
and like I said each home is
equipped
with the kitchen so this is in
each home that we have on our
campus in all the kitchens are
designed to.
Veteran where their family want
to cook it's all real cheap
accessible and.
On the next side is kind of
looking into a resident room so
each room has a a message board
that staff uses to welcome a
resident home to remind them
that there's bingo or poker that
day kind of whatever we tailor
it to the resident and they're
their like so if it's their
birthday if they have family
coming this is where staff will
kind of leave them a little no
just to even if they just need
little words of encouragement
for the day the top
the top doors there are where we
keep individual resident
medication under locking key so
the nurse is the only one that
has access to that residence
medication but read medications
are capped in the residents room
to prevent met errors or
confusion or mixed ups or
anything like that and then the
bottom doors are utilized by
housekeeping so housekeeping
keeps certain supplies in there
that's needed for that resident
so when they're in that room
there easily accessible and
they're able to take.
I the next side is again this is
kind of as you keep going into
the room so each room has the
the bed and it also has a
sitting area so it comes with a
recliner and a sitting chair a
table on are more for their
clothing addresser there's a tv
mounted on the wall so each room
comes equipped with all of the
furniture that you see that is
something that is provided for
their use while they're staying
with that not so many each one
of the rooms that have the hoyer
lived that's how to the ceiling
neck taking veteran from the bed
to the toilet to the shower all
on the same or you're lived
without hav.
The next slide is looking into
the bathroom so again private
rooms private bathrooms so each
bathroom
the toilets have the days and
they also have motion sensor
lines so that whenever a
retrinder resident walks in
front of the toilet the lid
automatically lists as well as
the sink is excessive for
veterans and and our residents
that are in wheel chairs so it's
so successful in a wheelchair
and in that first picture you
can see at the very very top the
hoyor lift that comes from the
bed so the the higher will bring
i'm straight from bad to the
toilet
the next slide is so this is
kind of fun so each home has its
own spa room
so it has a nice huge huge spar
room with the large therapy top
that you see
residents are able to use that
for therapy purposes as well as
just leisure purposes
so we've gotten some good
feedback from residents that
enjoy taking about the tub tilts
back so they're able to kind of
relax and it has been useful for
therapies as well yeah in the
safety feature of that is if you
see the handle on the top
there's a drain that slowed
stand so we have to have someone
this having medical problems
we could push up their handle
the water run out there's a
dream or doesn't roll into the
next room it goes right down the
drain underneath the spa which
the floor is slopped.
I shall think from george
bargain the director of facility
management division and our
administrator finished.
Alright thank you both beautiful
facility we've got the tour you
know it's.
Still waiting for her there's
only one room available i'm not
ready to go yet so probably one
opens up later on with that do
we have any questions from the
committee
senator block
thank you mr chair
on slight five just curious
curious
how many people are in your
weight list
currently we have about twenty
people on the weeding less
than he was to share with the
average wait time for them to
get into the facility
the way time is is really
difficult to determine because
the only way that I have a room
become available as if a veteran
dish charges and goes home or if
they pass away so
we don't have a lot of in and
out and a lot of turnover for a
resident so it's.
Thank mister understand but are
you guys kind of keeping that
metric though just to
yes that's chair we we do that
we do keep damaged my trick and
if you don't have it now no I
don't have to get it curious
about great data thank you thank
you mister chair only goldstar
parents are in there are any in
there I know we currently don't
have any thank you mister chair
instead certain members of a
reserve component the meet legal
resident requirements
is atches is the ninety days the
only requirement or something
else
that would be if you're talking
about it's a title ten which is
your unactive duty national
guard here doesn't during peace
time really didn't get activated
other than their training which
is entitled to the government
there has put in there we do
have one national garden
reservice but the federal
vagestar recognized them for the
per dm but we can't take them if
they live in served in the new
mexico national guard and lived
in new mexico for ten years I
think it's the requirement but
we do have we have one if it's
that criteria but it is far as
the v eight recognize them is a
through veteran because that's a
stake upon it is a beat of
federal component countries I
help you I think we should share
I would assume your number is
going to grow based on the
deployment
that have
been going on for the past
twenty years or twenty five
years twenty four years since
nine eleven fact we have the one
two hundredth
brigade right now that is
deployed on a ten month tour to
the horn of africa so I assume
since they're under title ten
they would qualify because
that's in their record if they
want to go to this facility
correct my apologies to remember
a win.
You get done that you're not
talking please your bike for the
feedback so that measure yeah
just just when you're not
talking just okay mister chair
center I can answer that
question yes you are correct
after ninety eleven before
ninety eleven most reserve units
were still under state component
since the va congress and the
senate and.
The states agreed that they put
the national guard under a fault
force multiplier which now
buying executive order can
become titled ten with all the
different call for wars there
being so yes a lot of those are
going to meet the requirements
to come into the veteran the
part we're talking about is
prior to that ninety eleven
biggest chair yeah those more of
a traditional role back back in
the day.
One thing I I did see on her
county curse staffing is zero
like a some type of medical
professional on staff twenty
four seven like an around or AP
a
somebody else yes mister chair
we have a twenty
sorry we didn't add that in
there the art we have twenty
four houring coverage which is
the federal va regulation which
we are monitored through twenty
four seven r and coverage twenty
four seven nursing staff we have
twenty four seven care givers
and then all the different
supporting departments with that
thank mister I can I assume that
you have contracts out for a
certain specialty doctor pa's.
To come in
this chair yes we do have
certain contracts with our
medical director that comes in
once a week we also have a
contract for the the time
interested dentist and the
wounders there again is as I
stated it so that way those
services come to the veteran so
they're not sitting out of bus
for an hour and a half and
thirty forty minutes and a
clinic but I guess you are
correct ask them thank you chair
great answer then lastly here
one more quick question of to
that it's going to be what you
need from us i'll be my last
question but before there says
private pay seven what's the
what's the cost for for that.
Yes mister charles so currently
the private pay rate is twelve
thousand six hundred and twenty
five dollars and success per
month.
Thank you mister share so you
have seven people that pay over
twelve grand a month to be.
Thank you mister chair is that
number is that kind of a
consistent number is at higher
low of the seven people from
some historical data you might
have
is chair center if you could
particularly you're questioned
because we're the only really
federal the veterans home in the
state of new mexico if you're
comparing it to texas
now okay so we're there's no
measuring stick I I get i'm
sorry I guess to make it easier
for you share
if you take the amount of
patience or clients that you
have been there and then you
take a seven in the percentage
traditionally is up in a high
number that be the consistent
number that percentage
the answer question center
that's been the most consistent
okay
to you go into it to your answer
we've been able to have a over
the last two years of my staff
has been able to reach out the
va and lost cruises and all the
turkey which dining percent of
our missions are coming from
them from the ba hospitals or
the vacant so that's why we're
getting a higher service
connected number and reduced
private paid number
they could just mister chair
then lastly are there any
requirements that you're not
meeting where you need to help
from state legislature
mr chair at this time
no there's the you have as we
seen these are beautiful homes
we got a mouth we got a filled
were served in the veterans and
new mexico there was nothing
right now I could say I need but
he asked me i'm I would drive
home I probably will have a list
for you sending
mr charities like we always get
something during the session
which is more than appropriate I
think it was chair thank you
both.
Matter by sure thank you mister
chairman and thank you for your
presentation we did tour it and
it was beautiful wasn't done but
just that kitchen and the living
room were just amazing in the
rooms and the it was just a some
day I would be a great place to
live but i'm so as far as I
think it was my answer my
question was first kind of
answered so reservists also were
do they fall
if the reason
I chairman if the reservation is
a new mexico state in mexico
state garden garagement then
they could qualify if they meet
the next two qualifications but
when I say federal va since they
didn't serve on title title ten
the value doesn't recognize and
what they reckon so yeah if
there are we reserves depending
again if they serve down their
title ten times not include
training I guess that's where a
lot of people get when we went
to the two week training that's
not titled right yes okay
so mister chairman you don't
have any problems with doctors
cause so many of the via's are
finding they're retiring with
this new new bill or this
administration's kind of a lot
of more leaving so we don't have
that problem at all
chairman
not that we ran across but i'm
i'm more aggressive by
personally getting there and
figure out what you need what
you need for me what do you need
from the secretary department of
held I think I i'm not a one
person hey can you come I go out
and do my own recruiting.
But right now we're fully staff
but I know throughout the health
care facilities and clinics
around the state it is a direct
me I will tell you I had to
reach out till pass out to bring
in physicians because of the
lack of physicians or the
positions that are being used in
new mexico are overloaded trying
to help everybody in new mexico
so most of my physicians come
out from the past
mister chairman that that that's
my biggest complaint from my
veterans and I have a lot of my
district is is they can't see
doctors concert is not there at
the va anyway so that's great
that you don't have that problem
charge further to follow with
your question we have been our
trip in the city of t r c i'm
meeting with them in the next
two weeks because they have been
certified doctors but yet they
won't see my veterans or they
limited the developments in the
community and I I agree with you
that we need more doctors for
these batteries and what i'm
finding out is the clinics are
not a ticket leading your
understand the qualifications
wide veterans could go to there
because the veterans world is a
specialty and he got to know all
the corks to get it to get it
going
on my question ups do you have
any renewal will energy in your
in your solar panels anything
like that as your facility is
sharing sorry to put that sign
in there either i'm getting old
and I think i'll beat you to the
bed there
yes but yes we do with the new
homes are all one hundred
percent solar in we actually now
are selling energy back to tier
c
getting my check for months like
pulling teeth
but yeah it we are solar on the
campus the annex is still on
electric and I think for twelve
twenty seven or twenty eight
there is a project maybe to.
Yeah.
I'm excellent that was
determining glad you're doing
that because we need arbitral
and when the other renewal
energy we can get especially at
this time thank you.
Thank you again for the
presentation really enjoyed
being out there I need to come
out visit again with some of the
the residents have some great
conversations and now I think
it's great to just listen and
hear the stories and the
perspectives of how different
folks serve for nation I also
want to acknowledge the support
from a former representative
harry garcia you know he was a
huge ability
and fighting for the funding and
what what what we have now and
so I think we all need to
acknowledge his work as well
one question I have and I was
almost losing my my train I
thought there I remember before
we put more money into the
facility and and the
improvements there was always
talk about the location of the
facility and work force right
being able to hire enough folks
and it's not just at the
breakfast home i've heard the
same thing about the big
behavior a health clinic that we
have in las vegas right of how
do you get the workforce there
and also competing with and
sometimes mcdonald's pays more
than some of the wages for
people who work and these
important jobs
do you talk to us about how
that's going how you're managing
that and is anything that the
sta.
You are correct is along with
everybody else in new mexico
where you know getting care
providers nurses different
things I don't want to we're
still struggling we are in the
project working with gsd about
building some apartments there
housing in t r c is is is
critical there why the home was
built in tear see the veterans
home is always been interesting
I think
they the community supports it
it's in a good location now for
the future that would be up to
the the state legislature to
figure out what would be the
next area the issue that the
beds home had is with no one did
a study on is everybody got
older but there was no new
younger people moving into the
area and I think that's the same
thing with everybody else's
halley when I did the study
working with the hospital we had
been groups of people retiring
but not you know we may have a
hundred people retiring and only
three new ones moving in
so I think it's a struggle I
don't have if I knew the answer
i'd be the main there
I I don't know what to tell you
even el password struggling for
health care but it's a
nationwide crisis so I wish I
could sit here and give you more
a detailed answer I just don't
have it but what we came up with
the secretary of department that
health and the dhd secretary is
we are in the next eat two years
maybe less bill department so we
can get higher our own staff
give him time to move in to find
housing and then that's how
we're going that's how we're
trying to sell group but other
than that it's a chairman I
can't answer your question
no problem I think if we all
have those answers you
know working with us to get it
down so appreciate that.
And and once again I I think
it's great that it's interesting
I just remember those were those
discussion.
And I think you're right in some
areas where
you know we travel around these
committees and can communities
and you just don't see the
larger families and kit growing
up rate that new crop of younger
work.
I think it's something that
everyone is dealing with and you
mentioned el parcel you would
think what why would it but you
know that's it that's a big
metropolitan.
So I appreciate what you're
doing and thank you for the
presentation
hopefully we get to come back
and do a c.
This chairman and
and representatives here I would
appreciate your nearly please
stop I would want to give you a
tour and thank you for
everything you have done for the
veterans.
Thank you thank you.
And up next we're going to have
a white sands mister range
update I don't know morgan I
know if you want to come up
earlier we can give you a few
minutes
looks like you're ready to go
so we got kernel andrew morgan
senior commander white sands
missile range
and looks like you already know
how the button works
you'll have the hot make the
only only thing we ask is when
you're not talking are asking
for a question to turn it off we
do give you back so you have the
floor
thank you can everybody hear me
ok they are the first I just
like to say welcome good
afternoon everybody i'm actually
colonel done you moser colonel
more again and you're morgan he
is the new sear commander but he
could make it so he sent his the
next best thing his garage and
command or so he's a senior
commander on the gear's
commercial he always like to say
he's the mayor and i'm like the
city manager so he puts me you
know certain places being anyway
i'm happy to be my in my
apologies the last name on the
name
is
we both start with the you know
this all good now no worries
so again good afternoon first
just a little bit about me real
quick
i've been on active duty for
twenty five years I listed in
nineteen ninety four and then I
got my commission in two
thousand and active duty army
for the last twenty five years
so it's been a great ride I just
want to first thank you all for
everything you do i've been in
this area for a while i'll
actually live in al past because
I was stationary for bliss and I
have a my daughter my middle
daughter is a graduate of new
mexico state so she's an aggie
and she's getting her she just
graduated this past fall and did
she's getting a masters right
now that she'd be graduate with
a masters in december and then
my youngest we just got him out
the house he's a freshman a new
cadet they called rats I believe
in new mescal military institute
so he's he's also on the
basketball team there so he's
he's going through it right now
as as a new cadet at namey.
And then my wife is also she's
been working at the last
crucials
feedback with the va for the
last five years though I
appreciated everything you all
do for a service members are
military spouses and are
dependents who really appreciate
everything you all do so would
that be and see it i'll just
real quick again current morgan
since his apologies he really
wants to meet all of your
but
a little history i'm sure you
guys are very familiar with
white sands milsa range but as a
gears and commander of white
says miss range I like to
briefly share our stories legacy
through many of although mean if
you already know much of this
understanding our history
underscores while we where a
bital to national security and
research why say is began in
nineteen forty one as alamo
gordon bombing and garnery range
by julat nineteen ninth nineteen
forty five it had became the
white sands proving ground and
just nine days later the trinity
test history's first atomic bomb
detonation took place eighty
years ago or in july sixteenth
nineteen forty five in the
immediate post war years we
hosted hosted capture german
vito rockets and the scientists
behind them between nineteen
forty six in nineteen fifty one
sixty seven p two launches
prepailed the us into the air of
rocketry notably on february
twenty fourth nineteen forty
nine a modified b two became the
first US rocket to reach outer
space two hundred forty four
miles above earth shattering
boundaries and spurring
innovations and missile programs
like red stone nike atlas our
signal court teens also began
early radar upper atmosphere
research here evolve being into
vital agencies that support it
missile performance and
atmospheric science through the
cold war in nineteen fifty eight
the proven ground was a fishly
renamed white sands milson range
over time we solutified our
reputation as the birthplace of
america's missile and space
activity.
Conducting over forty two
thousand rocketed missile tests
across thirty two hundred square
miles more than three thousand
test annually serving army navy
air force and now space force
commercial and international
users
so fast forward to the day
last year the army deployed his
first operational hydrogen power
nano greet at white sands the
unit provides clean silent power
to remote surveillance and
weather monitoring equipment
reducing reliance or diesel
generators and supporting
environmental storeship in
february worry of this year
white sands inaugurated a ten
point nine million dollars water
resume see micrograde featuring
seven hundred kg solar ray and
five hundred kilo what natural
gas generator and a five hundred
kilo white lithium battery
system this insurer's continuity
of ground water
operations up to fourteen days
without external power boosting
mission assurance and
sustainability we also mark the
milestone or july sixteenth two
thousand twenty five we
commemorated the eightieth
anniversary of trinity site
remembering the test it forever
changed the world and just weeks
before in july ninth two
thousand twenty twenty five we
celebrated white sand missile
range is owned eightieth
anniversary of america's premier
missile testing activity
regarding our military housing
this year our soldiers and
families at white sands mills of
range have told us that they're
very happy with where they live
and we recently received six of
wars to prove it two
neighborhoods on white sands
columbia and patrick received
our highest recognition for
excellent service and strong
response for residents sharing
their feedback three other
neighborhoods colombia persian
and trinity also received how
marks
because so many neighborhoods
are doing wheel white sands
bills arrange also earned a
special war called a crystal
service award from income this
shows our commitment to
providing a great quality of
life for everyone who lives and
works here.
And we're proud of the pause of
feedback we've received from the
community
and then most recently in june
of this year colonel andrew
morgan and army astronaut and
space operations officer assumed
command of white says miles
arranged bring in a wealth of
operational space related
expertise to our mission these
events reflect our continent
continuing legacy of innovation
remember it's a service to both
national defense and local
communities.
With that historical and current
context said i'm honored to
share today's topic I see to
slide up here
we have most recently last week
we had a business from
congressman basquers
so just a little bit about that
visit colonel morgan wanted to
highlight to the congressman
just some of things that are
going on or white stands he had
a product of office call with
them and then he had a really
nice installation tour the visit
senator on a comprehensive
overview of white sands with
specific focus areas impacting
our soldiers families in and our
national security a discussions
in coptus ongoing ongoing
quality of life improvements
efforts to address housing
challenges unique to remote
installations are critical
national security posture
current funding levels in the
vital need for to rebottle eyes
white sands missile range is
aging infrastructure a key
component of the tour how
lighted the importance of white
sands most range museum and the
white stand school to both the
installation of local community
this engagement provided a
valuable opportunity to directly
communicate
why say it's misrates priorities
and challenges to the
representative of ask where
next
just though you all are where
this one of the priorities for
colonel more again the white
sand school and I know we have
representation the school is
actually ran by the last cruises
public schools and they do a
great job and they really have
been support as along with them
and the loss cruises chamber
commerce so just let you know
our priorities insurance safe
and effective learning
environment for the children of
our service members at white
sands mills arrange which is
currently ranked among the
highest performing schools in
new mexico scoring above the
seventy fifth percent overall in
exceeding the ninety of percent
all and key indicators.
However the school face a
significant infrastructure
challenges despite being listed
as number eighty one on the
sector defenses public schools
or military installations
priority list and unfortunately
receive no funding through the
ps program at fiscal year two
thousand twenty four a currently
the library experience is
flooding during the radio season
calls an extensive carpet damage
and require and books to be
restored or pallets
more critically the school
building suffers from extensive
and costly roof damage required
full replacement and contains as
best is containing materials and
selling tiles in particularly in
florida and chalk boards
furthermore two stores buildings
are unusable due to damage and
the buildings outdated
infrastructure is incompatible
with modern technology
enhancements these conditions
necessitate urgent attention to
ensure that safety and quality
of the education for a students
so as you can see the schools
fairly old is nicely built in
nineteen fifty one the first
part and we've had a couple of
add ons but we're really pushing
in I know lost cruises public
schools are is really push in
along with the chamber they've
had folks go out to pena gone
actually this year to push for
this and we're hoping that we're
going to get some deal
definitely soon to help us put
you up be able to build a new
school so we already have an
area where we want to put it is
just a matter of getting the
funding for it
are next likely.
So just want to talk a little
bit on the left side there the
white sands mills arrange museum
there are potential impacts or
white says mister range museum
stimming from current
discussions regarding the
possible closure of several army
museums nationwide the white say
has missile range museum as a
critical component of our
history in a significant draw
for tourism contributing to the
local economy you we view this
as the opportunity should
closure proceed for new mexico
to a potentially assumed stewart
ship of the museum a model
successfully implemented other
installations are simultaneously
we propose a vital
infrastructure improvement
constructing a new entry gate to
white stands mills arrange
specifically to facilitate
museum access this would allow
visitors to experience the
museum without required access
to the secure installation
enable enough to annex the
museum properly and expand our
capabilities we believe this
dual approach preserving a vital
historical asset enhancing
visitor experience presents of
compelling case for
congressional support and
demonstrates white sands mills
ranges commitment to both is
mission and surrounding
community so if you ever been
into white sands mills arrange
our gate is fairly close to the
actual contonent area we
actually is kind of a security
concern so we've been trying to
push to get milk on project to
get a new one bill but right now
just a way of the current focus
of the army most of the deod
budget is going to technology
and the future fight so very
little is being could against
infrastructure requirements so I
know other installations are in
the in do the they've had been
successful getting the state to
potentially build some of these
projects or one of the things
that are colonel morgan's
looking at is is there potential
for a state of new mexico to a
build a new access control point
into white sands and then
participate an ex off.
Part of the land where the
museum is to wear the state can
run the museum and and then you
don't have to come on post the
off to worry about getting your
your scan you can just really
drive to the museum because
people love come people come to
white they have just to go to
that museum has been remodeled
you got renovated in the last
year so if you haven't been
there in the last year is really
they did amazing job renovation
or museum but that's something
that we're looking at because
currently there's a lot of talk
of museums being closed
throughout the army so
they paused it for now but there
is
a good chance that the museum
could close there's no it's not
closing yet but there is their
possibility so corner morgan
would probably be talking more
about the potential of maybe the
state taken over the museum
because this is so much history
in that museum I mean it's just
priceless really we believe
their whole us seventy core door
there several museums there all
we up to rose wheel and maybe if
you guys kind of look at how you
market it there's potential
there for how we are you know
capture all the history this
around that area
lastly I just like the highlight
of white sand up between good
next lot thank you so two things
wine is treaty to open house
i'll start there why say it's
missing range will commemorate a
pill little moment in history
and it's own significant legacy
with with the special eightieth
anniversary open house they
trinity side on saturday october
to eighteenth this year from
eight am to two pm you're all
invited
to any deciders where the
world's first atomic bomb was
tested on july sixteenth
nineteen forty five and event
that dramatically altered the
course of history and ushered
and the tomic age this bit of
one thousand five hundred acre
national historic landmark
includes ground zero the
mcdonald ranch house where the
bonds core was assembled and
remnants of the original base
camp visitors to open house will
have the opportun.
View these historic locations
and reflect on the profound
impact of disadvantage which
continues to resonate globally
as why saying the range and
barks on its own eightieth
journey this commemoration
offers a valuable opportunity to
honor the past and look forward
to the future last year we we
went down unfortunately we had
to go is a big life for us to
put on this event everybody
loves it and I know up with a
historically they've done two
open houses and we went down to
wine only because of some of our
own personal cuts and would have
you is just a big life so that's
why we went down to wine open
house but last year we get over
six thousand people came to
trinity site to to be a part of
this this event and where we
believe it's going to be them
and that was without any
advertisement this year we've
been pushing hard of about the
eightieth anniversary so we
believe we're going to get even
more of a crowd coming out there
so that's going on on white
sands and then lastly you all
for me with the bottom memorial
death march this year it's going
to be saturday march twenty
first two thousand twenty six
why say it is misrange is proud
to continue this long standard
tradition of honoring the
courageous service mariners who
endured to baton death march
doing what we're too so this is
big event new mexico state
cadets are the ones that started
this over thirty years ago and
it gives bigger and bigger every
year we have people from all
over the country to comes out
here is really up a off road
miraton will lot of people just
walk it or or they do it with
the france we also have honorary
half married done that you can
do a we've changed up the course
a little bit again based off of
shortages and
and some of the support we
normally get we had to change up
the course but is actually a lot
of people say it was harder last
year than it did because you had
to go through the same part
twice so a lot of people thought
it was harder but where we've
altered to course again we're
we're including a different
route that has a lot more
elevation everybody's in for a
treat if you like that kind of
thing so recommend you all come
if you if you want to hear more
about it.
The big thing for us is all the
money that we get from whether
it's trinity open house or but
time or more death march all
that money goes back into our c
y s program shall you service
program so all that money goes
back to service members so the
biggest thing that where we
could get more help is a
sponsorship so the website down
there but time march dot com if
you know of anybody that want to
help the sponsorship they can go
to it website to sign up so
that's all my
topics I hate pauls or any
questions.
Thank you colonels are
appreciated that any questions
from the committee center block
thank you chair
colonel thanks for what you do
as the garrison commander in
leading ever every day they're
appreciated very much.
I was at a
economic development committee
yesterday a bit un valencia and
space port was there
in one of the things that.
One of the issues that were
having at space port there's
several but one is related to
range I was talking to offline
to the
head there space port regarding
rage infrastructure so these
guys do like everyone else they
do an integrated master schedule
i'm sure you you've seen those
there and then they they'll
either have their vertical or
other other watches down there
and when they coordinate that
they've had some range issues
related to the infrastructure
being old and affecting
operations why that's important
to new mexico is we're trying to
get more economic development
into space board because we
spend almost half a billion
dollars of new mexico tax period
and we are way in the red and
when you see companies that will
not come here because of range
is potential range issues or
range infrastructure issues and
that's kind of an issue can you
tell us broke with what you guys
are doing for range
modernization and how you
coordinate those scheduled
delays with space
yeah thank you mister chair
thank you representative block I
would tell you I will take this
down our the person that runs
our range is colonel matthew
johnson he's borrowed though why
say his test center they are the
range control for all the
testing so they manage all tests
to go on on white sand so this
is the first i'm here of concern
from space port i'm sure he
meets with them probably
regularly as my intuition but I
will take that down as a concern
in and make sure that we may be
if there's a communication issue
i'm not for sure exactly what
infrastructure
issue space port is having but
i'll definitely take this back
as a concern please get back to
me take a mistake please get
back to me i'm not saying
what he saying is accurate i'm
just telling you what what I was
told yesterday in relation to
some scheduling an
infrastructure issues.
Are going back to your school
mister chairman do you do you
have a slow on
on the gersen
yesterday mr chair of
representative block we do have
a slow school areas on officer
names can really array so she is
connected with the last cruises
public school so mister chair
you said that school is part of
under the lots crucial school
but it gets funding from today
no we do that get any funding
from the data but because this
on the military installation
there are pots of money through
department of fancy as the
program is it's on the slide
yeah I I saw it so that's where
you're getting your your funding
is from ideal yes that's where
we're trying to plug in to get
the funding I mean the state
because it's in the last course
of public schools the state
could find it as well but we get
a better chance I think through
the department of fence because
there is special parts and money
for
for a public schools on military
installations right now thank
you mister chair and that's
that's what my kids did in
europe with spain dollar and I
know it's a dodgy a school but
they were getting bill card
money or october facility money
it's not but I just want to be
clear it's not a day in school
no I understand okay they were
on
on the base in german it was a
today school but they were
getting money from that right
that part you were talking about
so there's no state money are
you guys looking for state money
for that school is it strictly
deal
I don't I would have to ask the
loss cruises pop the school they
can give us more detail get more
information on it I want to say
yes there's we're trying to get
fundamental wherever we can
answer okay colonel thank you
sir thank you mister chair
matter by shirt
thank you mister chairman and
presentation
I can check for you i'm on the
public school capital outlay and
I can check two on
what needs to happen as far as
them there getting on it.
Getting i'm with the state
because we just helped them
currently
aps put in with that this the
government the federal
government to to build a school
or update the score so and was
possible so I can check on that
for you to are it so have you
talked as far as the the base
distance from the front have you
talked to the have you been
working with making from the
military base planning
commission we have make she
actually came and visited a
while back and she's aware of it
but we didn't really you know we
have a new senior commander they
all kind of start their own
priority so this is fairly new
so
we haven't really talked in
detail about this bar is taken
on are we talking about the
build of the access control
point yeah this fairly new so we
haven't really pushed it hard so
you're kind of one of the first
audiences to hear about that
opportunity but there's
definitely some current morgan
was to pursue and last year we
had bill to create a part of
money for four military to help
out our military and different
things usually outside the base
but
that is something we can poor
from right we got the fund which
didn't get the money so this
time i'm putting in for at least
a twelve to
ten six to twelve million
dollars just for the funds we
can help our basis and in what
they need so like we say we
believe this opportunity
especially if the army goes
forward with closing down some
of the museums we don't have the
manning to run it so we believe
there has been other states that
have been successful in taken
over those museums
and management great thank you
thank you again
a cold for the presentation I
think you are going to probably
have another huge crowd.
Opening and opportunity sight
you know last year was another
open hybrid movie but I think
that's still.
You guys will be busy that
I remember
when I was when in in the used
after good a to start in on the
north and I remember when a day
happened and I was like come
with the north gate like what is
going on with line of cars and I
do realize it's going on but it
gets packed
I love your idea about the
museum and trying to maybe
transfer that.
And i'll be currently curtailing
you right we have that national
and.
So I think that's something w.
Um
about the earlier pres.
You talk a little bit about are
you having any issues as far as
you're cdcs as far as child care
centers and issues with housing
and it's a little different yeah
I mean being with the options
and lost crucials and i'll pass
her but could you talk about
those issues if you have any
I would say is mainly a success
story at white sands as far as
the housing we have over three
hundred families about three
hundred twenty units were fairly
small and white stands we got
about little over yet three
hundred twenty housing units as
you can as I told you before is
ran by bill for pay they're the
privatize house in manager
they're doing a really good job
like I said the ten it's we just
did a big ten at satisfaction
survey this year and got a lot
of great feedback so
that's really a good new story
with the housing our cdc for a
while there whenever the current
administration did the bring
back to work we saw a big uptick
in in our children that needed
the the needed care so our cdc
but we were good we bame able to
hire because they're not
appropriate funds we've been
able to hire caretakers so we
actually are are getting a lot
of the airmen out of halloween
because they're bigger
installation but we actually
have quite a few
holiman residents that are
bringing their keys to our cdc
because we have space for it but
right now we are meeting all our
requirements when it comes to
child care we don't have any
issues with the cdc our child
development center or our school
age services so doing really
good in that area so no issues
right now with there
thank you and as far as health
care access how is that and how
old are you your folks deal with
that and try care yes there so
we have a really good really
ship the art we have a mac if
you we have a cleaning medical
clinic call mc medical clinic
they are are sponsored through
william bow mine at four bliss
though they're the primary
hospital but so that there are
some things that you know that.
Because that were remote
isolated in the sense of
that the medical clinton does it
have all the services we need so
there are s you know some
services that we have to try our
family members of service
members have to travel to way
and bombard which is you know
good fifty minutes to pass off
it's not terrible but there
there are some things that they
travel to william bombard to
that hospital for certain
services and into los cruces for
dinner things the nature a lot
of folks have to come in the
last cruises or ill parcel but I
mean it's not terribly far is is
is duable I would say so not a
lot of concerns when it comes to
the medical support.
And my my last question is how
is the origin population on the
white sound and I was almost hit
a couple of few times
there there love in his rain I
mean they're all going up they
can get all kind of good food up
there in the mountain so they're
not out as much right now with
all the rain actually that's
what my environmental folks I
guess there's more types of
vegetation they can eat up in
the higher elevated parts of the
rains but there is about six
thousand of months so yes there
are for those you don't know I
mean you see these or etc really
from africa and it just looks
wild and just how they've just
prospered out here but they
don't have a predator right but
just also understanding just
that
desert area and when it does
rain just how you get these
different frogs and other
animals at just have been able
to exist rate in this climate
and right and come back when.
Ecological aspects of it so
thank you very much we
appreciate you thanks for coming
in early in understand the
process it was great i'll let
you close there's anything else
you actually know mister charita
of representatives thank you all
for this opportunity like I say
what you're all invited to white
sands we love to get you out
there if you are if you ever
want to do one of these meetings
at a different location
where we open the invitation out
to you also thank you for having
us
thank you.
All right everyone committee
members that is the end of our
agenda
I do want to give folks and
opportunity to make any
announcement sir let us know
about any upcoming military your
rections answer upcoming you
have a florida committee even
such a center almost I just want
to do too were let you know
louise trusses could make it he
apologizes he did have a death
in a family is uncle past time
and he really wanted to be here
today said this is one of his
favorites been the ranking
member one on the house sight so
just wanted ninety two extender
those words for him and
you know wishing the best thank
you thank you for that and we
always.
Center block
think the situation I handed
mispond a letter similar to the
letter that we had last time if
the other members have a copy of
that.
We'd like to take a look at that
we can discuss mister chair but
we'd like to have a vote and
send it off to secretary
collins.
At a chance to look at that and
I tell you that that's something
that we're not going to
entertain in th.
Mr gerry had your letter your
you had a letter that wasn't on
the agenda you handed it out we
asked her modify it you said no
and you still went forward with
it I would ask the same
consideration.
Once again senator i'm not going
to entertain it
this wasn't on the agenda mine
was on the agenda it was passed
out before
and
this letter
I don't even know this letter is
true
and which you talked about on
the previous letter about
politicizing that's what this
letter is
but they should share your
letter was not on the agenda.
Mister I mean center block i've
already stated that.
Mr chair is is there a rule that
says a committee member is not
allowed to sum it a letter
senator there is a rule that
the chair can make that decision
okay so the up you serve you
certain on a county commission
correct.
Yes you did you entertain every
a letter or motion that another
member may
you know how it works for it
thank you sorry appreciate that
yes in santa bar county the
chair entertained all motions
that were on the agenda that
were on the agenda or other
motions in discussion as well at
the end of the meeting your
letter was not on the agenda you
sent it out I we asked to look
at it yeah you said no cause we
did have some changes the letter
is true there's sources in the
letter as well and I I just if
there's rules for other for
certain people in doing and then
we're under separate will say
i'd like to hear from other
committee members if they think
that is fair
center but
my letter was given at the start
of the meeting
during the meeting
I let folks know that there's a
letter and we will be voting on
it after lunch
so i'd appreciate it if we tell
the full story here
thank you mister share the full
story is the letter was not on
the agenda we looked at the
video senator I didn't say it
was on said it was passed out to
you at the beginning of it was
not it was after lunch mister
chairman yes it was
now that's not sure we can even
pop up and your letter just give
an after lunch
your letter once given after one
because remember.
And we can play this game
the vote we had was we were
trying to have the vote before
lunch so how do I give it after
much back to the webcast we
voted on it after lunch mr chair
we tried to tell you what we
tried to vote before correct
well you didn't have a I think
you need to get the facts for
you didn't have a quote from
because the the speaker had to
make some advisory members
voting members that's that's all
that way what I do i'll tell you
what let's do this you have to
go through the chair
the situation let's do this then
you have the letter for the next
meeting let's have it on the
agenda the next meeting.
At this point senator i'll look
at it again but once again i'm
not going to entertain this l.
Well I appreciate the
inconsistent leadership but
bring it next well center you
can
see what you want to say not and
i'll be happy to see the
the tick talk video and we can
have that discussion and we can
talk a little bit more about
what happened at the last
meeting the games being played a
break warm we can talk about
this we have to share it was
engaged for the corner because
we didn't have a quarrel senator
block I did not acknowledge I
still have floor
chairman
senator pinto
mister chairman and i'm centered
a back as a chair another
committee
then he's any senator any member
legislator bring up their own
letter and they don't have to
unless you want the committee
support then that's a whole
different thing so if you're
requiring for information from
secretary of defense by think it
should go to our congressional
leadership first so they can
clarify it and then you go up
the up the latter but
yeah that that that's that's my
perception on it before
didn't anybody can do a letter
from.
Center romance chart what what
is proper decorum on this
committee when it comes to the
letter or a subject to speak in
front of this committee.
I think you know if we really
want to have a discussion
you don't bring
literally this guy handed to me
after we.
And look if folks didn't like
the last letter
they voted nowhere did whatever
that's fine your name wasn't on
it
but to argue that the last
letter was political and i'm
looking at this
I mean come on let's now do tip
for attack you might not have
liked that letter and once again
that later I did not get
personal item attacked the
administration we just asked for
questions about what was
happening and so
if we want to work together and
actually like have letters and
like talk about issues at our
effect and better
i'm all for it but this letter
this is
this isn't even helping the
issues that were even talking
about in committee
seven the industry chairman
thank you for it for your answer
I I agree with the central pinto
when something is put out to the
board
it should be anyone should be
able to be heard and if this is
what senator block wants to be
her like I think he should be
given the opportunity and if it
has to be on the agenda I think
I think that's even better right
I think anything that goes
through board i've served on
school boards county commissions
in on the state san antonio
served on the on a municipal
council and
anything that is discussed in
these boards has to be on the
agenda whether it goes through
the
county manager city manager
or or chair it it should it
should be put on the agenda for
discussion
I know some have been delayed in
summit and some instances but
they still they still get on the
on the agenda or we're not at at
least to discuss it and give the
person that is on that board.
The opportunity to express
themselves on that situation I
wasn't here on the last meeting
and frankly I I really don't
even know what your letter said
but III think it's only fair for
transparency to allow anyone to
bring the letter to this
board to be heard whether it'd
be today or be the next meeting
that's that's my opinion and
i've never seen it to were
something that on the agenda is
actually spoken about during the
meeting unless it's just for
discussion purposes only not for
a decision thank you very much
mister chairman.
Senator pinto mister chairman
address represent
it doesn't hinder anybody you
can send if you have a letter
you can send it to the whole
committee for consideration or
to any member of the legislature
if they want to say not
and then if the motions taken or
if we have a presenter and they
present an issue in my committee
if we want to make a motion to
have a letter draft it with
certain plates put out and then
the motions considered they're
voted to weather that's going to
be done or not and then our
staff you're not drafts it up
brings it back to us
but if something sent out there
and it's already um
given any rate you have the time
to read it and I think that was
one of the points that you're
trying to see while it's true
timing
parently and all dictates there
was time here because I just
stepped out of my dish like
what's going on so
please consider it I think it
was to check.
Center office sucks or
misreturning this letter that
went out last meeting was that
put together by.
It was
I drafted it and then staff put
it in the package for the
meeting in the folder so mr
chair that that was that was put
in the
packet but it wasn't on the
agenda
it was not on the general
then stuff is happening some
stuff doesn't end up on the
agenda it depends what was there
if you have corn because you can
take a most unless you have
physical corn
on anything in the committee
stone general but that's how it
works supposed to be done I mean
you know I mean some of us some
committees they don't do
anything and then you get to
session and then they expect you
to
be without any influence or
anyone on it but I think there
has to be consideration of them
time to read it in assessor I
mean if he wants to have a
considered nothing stopping from
sending
some my party center almost each
other for no no problems to as
some issue what you get the
chair and I haven't charged
since two thousand twenty so has
what are the rules for the
chairmanship on the rules for
the commercial meetings.
It's online and there's there's
some things that are not
how would you say back a week on
there and it's up to the chair
as far as consideration entire
and weather
you it's actually gonna be
listed on the agenda or if we
have time to add it to the
agenda if you start to meeting
if the agenda is going to be.
Reviews don't change during that
time even the chair has the
program to at the spur of the
mom it is something comes up or
is an on there that's the
program because we're in the
inner it's a little bit less
formal but yet it is what
everyone is a check mister
mister chairman I I think for
the sake of transparency we
probably out of come to some
kind of consensus to say okay if
if we're going to be presenting
this letter for one person we
should present it for everyone
in the same manner i'm just for
transparency and and if if one
letter was voted on for the sake
of transparency then another
letter if another
member wants to put it out there
should have the same opportunity
for only for the sake of
transparency and and again I
haven't even read the first
letter I don't even know what it
said but for the sake of
transparency I think that we
should all do the same me maybe
make it a committee rule that if
somethings can be put on the
agenda out or something to be
voted on it she has to be on the
agenda so that people can
research it and I mean it every
committee that i've been on like
a serve from from school board
to
the
county commission when I was a
county clerkers put all the
generals together nothing was
put in unless a member requested
it and i've never seen it too
where things are voted on when
it's not in any channel but then
again if that if the rules made
by the chair then I mean maybe
that's away it works here but
let's be transparent and let
each other know that this is the
way it's supposed to be in the
way
they're a lot
so senator almost eight i'm
listening to your concerns and
what I will tell you
is i've been going forward I
will acknowledge what she said
and I think.
How we will do it is regardless
of who has the letter we we
won't do it unless we add it to
the agenda no matter who comes
from but at the end of the day
it is the program with the chair
whether it goes on the agenda
and so i'm fine with that but
what I do want to tell you that
on other committees
helping human services are
sometimes these happen
and then the day before so you
have that committee meeting that
day in or like we need to drop
the letter on an issue and it's
brought to the committee for
vote and so for those who
don't like it or whatever you
know where there's always a
progressive to vote it down or.
I just.
You know and people might not
like it but I just.
I'm just not going to entertain
this letter
if
this is sent to me again
you know am I want to look at it
and we can look at maybe putting
on the agenda.
Night and I don't have a problem
with that going forward that any
letter from any memory that
myself that it becomes on the
agenda but I just want to be
clear that from my understanding
and from other committees i've
served on that's not a rule and.
Mister chairman
center block
mr chair first of all you said
the letter was in the packet
it's not in the package i'm
looking at the packet right now
from july fifteenth it wasn't in
there
that's not he said it was in the
packing center blocked when we
that day it was putting your
hold.
When did I go out handing it out
right that mister chair why are
we I don't some way we're on
these points mr chairs.
We did not get the letter until
right around lunch time it was
not in the packet we got the
letter around lunch time so
where it is center block if we
try to vote on it before lunch
we did mister how did I give it
to you a lot mister chair I did
say that I said I did not no one
received the letter it was
passed out by a staff member
right around lunch time midday
that's when it happened so it
was not in the packet this is
not a political letter yours
questions policy
**** questions policy that's not
political or ask if this
administration is going to
continue some policies on your
quote your letter asked if this
administration is going to do
these cuts that's holidays and
then we offered to say hey can
we just look at the letter
alternative digestive no you
can't there was no discussion
about the other side looking at
the letter so it wasn't in the
packet it wasn't on the agenda
and that's that's really
that's all let's tell the whole
story rate you wanted more time
in the letter you stepped
outside
and you sent one of the house
members and you threaten me that
if I didn't give you the time
you're going to break home
correct so is tell all story
sure is to share if I still have
the floor I asked you politely
said hey.
The state is just throwing the
sign us let's work together
let's work together
and we might have some questions
you said no that is not what our
commerce yes yes it was done the
republican said myself and I
believe I catherine colin
represent column was there said
well we might just step out if
you're not going to lease work
with us then yes we're going to
step up so we don't have a
quote because you're not going
to work with us you're you're
the chair you're the leader you
got to work with us but if you
don't want to do that I get it I
understand it I don't accept it
but it is what it is and that's
how the story went down mister
chair and if you want for other
explanation to be more and happy
to take the floor back.
But I like to deal with
some facts and honesty here
so i'm not going to have this
discussion anymore could you not
be in a honest person right now
that's
that matter I don't appreciate
that all mr
I told you the fact he missed a
chair
even if you look at this letter
it is very political there's no
fact checking I would like to if
even if we thought about looking
at this this would all have to
be fact checked by the by the
staff for someone because it
doesn't look very factual to me
but it is a private of the chair
excuse me I am talking
it is
okay
thank you thank you mister
chairman I can't believe this is
committed down to this I know
well
block said a romos I really
listen to what you had to say
and I will tell you that going
forward.
Any letter from myself for
anyone else will now be on the
agenda but once again it will
still be the program of the
chair whether a letter goes o.
My decision right now that could
change.
With that
I went everyone to get home safe
meeting a direct.
