And I didn't have my
speakerphone.
Um, I just, um, wanted to say hi
to everyone. Glad to be here,
and I was going to say that I
can't believe we're here again.
I thought we were just here, but
time goes by so fast. I know.
How many more meetings do we
have?
We got 2 more in September. OK,
got it. Thank you so much um
we're gonna start the um call
the meeting to order, but before
I do, um, I'm going to have
members introduce themselves for
the record for the webcast, and
then we can go on.
Of that. So let's start with
Representative Roybal Caballero,
can you do that?
Representative, thank you. Good
morning, Madam Chair and Vice
Chair, members of the committee.
Those in the audience and those
viewing, my name is Patricia
Royal Caballero and I represent
House District.
13 and um my primary care
physician indicates that COVID
is on the rise in our state, so
she has advised
myself and my husband, uh, to
wear our masks just to make
sure. So I'm just stating that
uh because it's a worthwhile
point of information that we
need to, it's, it's worth it to
keep our hands sanitized and to
try to do all the practicing
things that we've been doing for
COVID.
So I appreciate her telling me
that, so thank you so much and
I'm glad I'm here to be with all
of you.
Um, Representative Borrego.
Thank you Madam Chair. Good
morning to everyone. Um, I'm
Representative Cynthia Brego,
and I represent the west side of
Albuquerque over by Cottonwood
Mall closest to Rio Rancho,
um, sometimes people forget that
we're part of Albuquerque and I
had to actually remind the
mayor, um, when he came to Saint
Jude Church, uh, for the annual
um, uh, uh, celebration of our
police and
Fire, uh, mayor, we are in
Albuquerque. This is not Rio
Rancho, so I'm happy to be here
and uh excited.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair, Vice Chair, uh, state
senator Roberto Bobby J
Gonzalez, District 6, which
encompasses them part of Los
Alamos, Ria Riva, Santa Fe Taos
and again, uh, good morning to
everyone.
Senator, all right, we're going
to go back to our representative
here. Thank you, Madam. I
stepped out for just a second.
My name is Harry Garcia. I
represent House District 69,
which covers part of San Juan
McKin Ebola Bernaliu Valencia
Secoro I think I got about one
of the biggest districts in the
state of New Mexico, the most
rural district in the city of
New Mexico it's so rude it's
almost frontiers in some places,
and you know some of these
things that are on the agenda
are good for people out there
cause there's a lot of need.
Everywhere in the state of New
Mexico, especially rural New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. All righty,
we're gonna go on. I'm gonna
start on this.
Oh, I didn't see. I represented
Montoya walk in. Can you
introduce yourself for the
record, please?
OK.
Um, yes, I'm Representative
Montoya from House District one,
so I got the vanity plate.
So
Um,
anyhow, uh, I'm from Farmington.
I represent Farmington Aztec La
Plata, uh, Flora Vista, um, up
in the northwest, uh,
corner of the state, um, where,
uh, we would love for you guys
to come and uh enjoy our, our
Navajo Lake, which finally the
summer is over, so all the out
of state tourists are gone, come
New Mexicans and come enjoy a
good weather.
Thank you, Representative. All
right, Representative Anan Nuno.
Almost there. Oh, madam chair.
Thank you. Thank you. Good
morning, Ram Chair, committee
members, everyone, thank you for
being here. I'm Representative
Janelle Eonor from, um, House
District 19. That's the
fairgrounds and the
International District in
Albuquerque.
Alright, thank you very much.
All right, uh, Senator Baca.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, good
morning, everybody. Thank you
for hosting us as usual, uh,
Gregory Baca, Senate District
29, I represent Greater Valencia
County and the southernmost
portion of Bernalio.
Thank you, Senator. Happy to see
you again here. We got Senator
Padilla. Good morning, Madam
Chair and Mr. Vice Chair, um,
Senator Michael Padilla serve as
the Senate Majority Whip
represents the southern portion
of Bernallio County, uh, have
been on this committee the
entire time, my entire time in
the legislature. I've learned so
much, um, was with the chair and
others on, um,
On Monday and Tuesday and then
got up on Wednesday and had uh
eye surgery and so, uh, I didn't
think I was cool enough, so I
thought I would start wearing
these glasses around, and I
really, Madam Chair, I wanted to
know really what John Anderson
really looked like, so I thought
I better get my eyes done, you
know, but, uh, I tell everybody
here today, please take care of
your eyes, my eyes just suddenly
started dimming about 50-60%
like overnight. I don't know
what happened there, but uh
please take care of yourselves
because it's a pretty big deal
and I'm like really like freaked
out here, so thank you. Oh my
goodness. Oh.
Yeah, that is scary, Senator.
Thank you. Happy that you're
here though.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
everyone. State Senator Jerry
Ortizipino.
I represent the area that we are
in right now, Senate District 12
downtown Albuquerque.
Uh, and parts of the, uh, west
side, uh, have, I think about 13
or 14 precincts on the west side
of the river that are still part
of this district. The district
incidentally, will vanish.
Um
On December 31st, re-emerge as a
pumpkin up in Rio Rancho and
Taylor Ranch, Senate District
12, that number is being used
for a brand new district that
will be, uh, on the west side
where all the growth has been.
Uh, this district is divided up
between 6 other senators, so I
think you get a little piece of
it, uh, Momais gets a little
piece of it.
Um
Linda Lopez gets a little piece
of it on the west side.
And on this side, um, uh.
Antoinette Cedo Lopez's district
will get a piece of this one,
and then, um, now it'll be
Debbie O'Malley, uh, if she wins
the, the, the general election,
uh, we'll get a piece of it and,
and, um, um, uh.
What's your name? Katie Doig.
We'll get a piece of it. It's
been chopped into 6 pieces and
added to other existing
districts and the number is used
up on the west side. Thank you.
Thank you for that explanation,
uh, Senator, and just, I have to
say it again, I don't know what
we're gonna do without you truly
throughout. It's, you've been a
something, um, greater than.
been great for New Mexico, not
only your district, and for this
committee, we couldn't have done
without you. Thank you.
OK.
I thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm Representative Kathleen
Cates from District 44. Uh, my
district is all of Corrali, uh,
parts of Rio Rancho River's Edge
1 and 2, Crowli Heights, the
circles in Rio Rancho, and then,
uh, east of the river down to
I-25, but north of Passa del
Norte, so northern Albuquerque,
Kerala, some parts of Rio
Rancho. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative my
vice chair, former judge and
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. It's an honor to serve as
your vice chair. I am
Representative Elio Lecon
representing District 6, which
is part of Sibula and McKinley
County.
And welcome everybody.
Oops, there we go, button again.
I am Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez from Santa Fe, uh,
chairing the committee again.
Um, this is my twenty-ninth year
and, um, I am happy to be here.
Good morning to everyone again.
Thank you, and I had written a
note here introduce staff and
our great senator had to remind
me. So, staff, our great staff,
we couldn't do without you.
Thank you, Christine. You're
very efficient, by the way. All
right, who else is here? Back in
here, here I go. City council.
Hi Erica. All righty, this nice
gentleman who takes care of all
our pictures, everything we see,
web.
Leo Gonzales webcaster. Thank
you, Leo, happy to have you
again. Um, all righty, I think
we're we're
Oh, I.
Numbness.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, great
to have you all here today. Uh,
we have a pretty lengthy agenda,
so I'm gonna keep my comments
short this morning. I do want to
thank the partners that are here
to present on some of the
programs and the activities uh
that they partner with us on,
and that would be Lisa Hawley
with BHSD uh Healthcare
Authority, uh, and then Isaac
Perez with San Felipe uh housing
authority, they, they just do a
tremendous job for us, uh, or
with us, um.
I want to remind the committee
here I mentioned it at our last
meeting that we were going to go
through a rebranding. We did not
legally change our name from
MFA, but uh we do think that
housing New Mexico better
describes the full continuum of
housing that we provide across
the data across all the corners
of the state, so wanted to uh
remind you of that, uh.
I do want to also say that this
is going to be our last
oversight committee meeting in
this building. We are moving uh
here in the middle of September
to the new building. I think
our next meeting of this
committee here will be off site,
uh, likely at the maybe CNM uh
buildings on the north side of
town. Christina's arranging
that, I believe, and then our
November meeting we do plan on
having at our new location and
we look forward to.
you there, uh, we'll also be
having an open house there on
December 10th that you will be
invited to formally via an
email. So looking forward to uh
having you at that building, um.
The
For those of you that uh uh are
in the audience and would like
to maybe have a viewed the
packet that we didn't make
enough packets for today, but it
is available on the website if
you want to search and follow
through there um and we'll take
you through a
tab one if you don't mind, madam
chair and uh just the highlights
that I wanted to provide today
were with regard to the housing
trust fund that we want to thank
you and all the legislators and
the governor for providing the
funding to us for the housing.
fund
So behind tab one, you'll see a
table there and then I'm gonna
direct you to some charts here
in a little bit, uh,
the print is a little small at
least it is for me, maybe
Senator Padilla can see it much
better now with his eye surgery.
So the uh.
As you know, we were able to
start getting some recurring
fundings into the housing trust
fund. So the first uh uh
availability of those funds came
to us in July of last year,
2024, that was $37.5 million so
that'll be the top line right
there below the the dark blue.
You'll notice that we've
procured for 100% of those
funds. They've all been procured
for. We've actually made, uh,
which means we have a either
RFPs or uh notice of funding
availability or alloc.
to the various programs that we
have.
Out of those we've awarded $33
million so that's 88%.
And in a short period of time
we've already expended 40% of
those funds. Some of those
awards that were made were made
to some uh multifamily
development and as you know, uh,
those uh take 18 to 24 months to
complete, and we do not give
those developments of money up
front and it's on a
reimbursement basis, so those
will start trickling in now as
well, so that's uh update for
the 2020 what we call the 2024
money, and I think it's the
state's fiscal year 25 money.
Or the state's fiscal year 24
money which we received in 23.
The middle line there is for the
uh money that just become
available to us in July of this
year, so a month ago that was
$34 million.
Those $34 million have already
been 100% procured allocated to
programs, uh, and we have a 100%
allocation or award of those
funds as well. The expenditures
are just 2% at this point, but
we're just a month into it and
we see those increasing here
pretty quick, uh, the last item
that you'll see on there is the
allocation of the $500 million
that came to us just became
available actually on July 1,
uh, and so that at that 50.
$1 million is the largest
allocation that we've ever had
into the housing trust fund. So
thank you all very much for
that. Uh, what we did with that
money, our board allocated $24
million to be immediately
allocated to some activities and
then we had about 2060 $25
million and some change we put
in what we're calling a uh.
a reserve, so based on those
activities we allocated those
moneys to where there's more
demand, we'll have that money
available to allocate and plug
that uh that that demand there
uh so it's available and I'm
happy to report that out of the
24 million that has been
allocated to actual activities,
$23 million or 96% of it has
been awarded.
And then we've actually started
uh forward allocating last month
and we have $100 million that
were awarded to developments and
some of those our board will be
approving some additional ones
that this upcoming board meeting
next week. So some great success
there, um.
The next couple of pages gives
you the details of uh where
those funds went, uh, you'll see
the, the names uh and the
locations of some of those, uh,
uh, programs there, uh, so
there's 3 sheets worth of that.
Uh, I'm not going to highlight
any of those. It would take a
while, um, I will, uh, have you
go to uh the page that follows
that is um a bar charts that
you'll see there a couple pages
back, um, basically gives you
the same information that I just
covered just in.
Graph form, so, uh, of the $37
million it shows there, $33
million awarded, uh, in 14.9
million expended with the
percentages that I mentioned
earlier.
If you go to the last page in
that tab, steal a bar chart like
this, uh, it's going to show the
$34 million with a 100%
procurement and awarded in that
area and then the $50 million
which is on the far right side
of that last graph, that is the
$50,000 and how it's been
procured and the awarded amount
as well. So just want to thank
you for that and letting you
know that we here at MFA uh are
uh with the direction of our
board.
Uh, in your guidance that made
sure that these funds were
available immediately and I
think if you add up the total
amounts in the last year,
there's $76 million of what's
been awarded to the housing
trust fund that has been, uh,
already awarded and put to good
work so I want to thank you for
that and uh prepare to take any
questions at this point, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, thank you, Izzy. Um,
let me write the names down to
make sure we're, I don't leave
anyone out, so we've got
representative Garcia and OK,
Senator Tino and Representative
Kates.
OK. Anyone else? Yes,
representative, OK.
OK. Thank you very much. We've
got Representative Garcia,
you're first. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thanks for the presentation. I
just have one quick question on
this money that are going out.
What parts of the states are
benefiting more of more from it
because you know, I see here uh
Las Cruces Albuquerque laces,
Albuquerque, Albuquerque, Santa
Fe.
Where's the majority of this
money going to?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Garcia, uh, it is
available statewide. You'll see
there from the charts there and
I, I didn't analyze it or
didn't, we didn't group it
together by location to Camia,
look at that, give you a better
analysis. Uh, you'll see some of
it is statewide, some of it is,
uh, southwest New Mexico, uh.
Central New Mexico, there's some
on the tribal lands with uh with
San Felipe and a few others that
have received some awards there,
uh, Albuquerque, uh, so it is
statewide that you'll see some
pockets there of where it's
going, um.
Tao Roswell, um, Tas, Rio
Rancho, so uh.
Navajo Nation, so it is spread
out and what we can do is we can
group them a little bit better
together and maybe put them on a
map with some dots so you can
see uh where the money is going.
I will tell you that overall
with all of our production, not
just the housing trust fund,
which just depicts, uh, as of,
uh, last, uh, time we analyzed
that we had loans or programs
going to 32 of the 33 counties
in the state, uh, and
That with all the programs that
we have, so.
I don't know if that answers
your question. Thank you for
that, Madam Chair, maybe I,
maybe I missed, uh, did you on
what I asked the question was.
What parts of the state are
getting the most benefit from
this. I know you're spread out
through the whole state but you
know there's project shift for 3
or 4 million, and there's
project here for 500,000.
You know, and, and I'm looking
at this and Albuquerque is
getting big parts of money and
my concerns is
Is the ruin Mexico having the
same opportunity that
Albuquerque is and I know
there's a Madam Chair, I know
there's a.
population Albuquerque, of
course, but it always seems that
Albui Santa Fe, Las Cruces get
the bulk of everything and
everything else in the state of
New Mexicana gets uh.
Not as good as they should. I
would like to see find out.
And those two communities, how
much money is going to those
three communities in comparison
what's going out to the rest of
our state.
Madam Chair and Representative
Garcia, we will definitely get
that and get you the pro rata
data. I don't have it exactly on
this. I, I can give you one
example on our uh most
competitive program we have here
at MFA is the low income housing
tax credits. We are a pro rata
basis, it's going evenly to the
urban versus the, the rural
areas, um, but we'll do an
analysis on this and we'll get
it to you so that you can see
the actual numbers, Madam Chair
and uh, presenter, thank you for
that because you know it's very
important that everybody.
He has
A first shot of what's going on
if you have $34 million and and
three quarter of it is going to
uh 3 communities. It's not very
fair for everybody else. That's
just a thought and I'm not
saying it is happening, but I
would like to know.
How was it divided? Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
questions, um, well done because
I know that Representative
Garcia has had very great needs.
We've talked about it at LSC in
the past, all throughout grants
and all the, the area that he
represents from homelessness,
um.
To other infrastructure, uh,
that is needed to, uh, to
provide some help, so we do
understand. Thank you,
Representative.
All right,
Senator, you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, uh, thank you, Izzy for the
presentation, but my question
has to do with, you know, during
the last session, we had the big
controversy with the governor's,
uh, attempt at creating her own
housing department, distinct
from MFA.
And I saw recently on television
a whole big thing about what
they're doing. Is there some
effort afoot to make sure that
what the governor's housing
office is doing an MFA are
somehow collaborating,
coordinating, do you meet with
them regularly? And is there
some effort to make sure that
whatever it is that they're
doing doesn't
Uh
Whatever duplicate or
become redundant to it for
cheerma.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Ortizipino, thank you for the
question, uh, the, we have been
uh working and meeting with uh
Mr. Daniel Warworth from the
governor's office who is likely
the one you've seen with some
articles and some uh, some
television spots, uh, we met
with them, uh,
Approximately a month ago, and
we actually have another meeting
scheduled with him on this
Tuesday, so it's kind of become
a recurring meeting uh that uh I
think we're gonna be having, uh,
he does attend each of our board
meetings and we've given them
the opportunity to speak at
board meetings and he's invited
to all of them. He spoke uh at
our board meeting the the month
before last, so there's some
collaboration going on between
us and them. Uh, he's also
invited a couple of other, uh,
departments from the the state
to participate uh
In DFA and Ms. Lisa Haley, who
may be behind me here, uh, also
participated in the last
meeting. So some collaboration
going on, uh, and uh I think we,
our intent is to, to work
together uh to help solve this
housing problem,
uh, and our, our
thought and the things that
we've talked about is uh maybe a
focus on the policy side from
the governor's office and
changing, uh, working on
changing some policies around
the state, so that's where I
think we're headed with that and
MFA continues to
To do, uh, you know, the role
that it's had in serving the
state with the various programs
that we have.
And just a quick follow up then,
Madam Chairman, and, and is he
the, the, the explanation that
they gave during the session was
that they were going to focus on
Workforce housing as if that
were somehow distinct from what
you're doing, is that still kind
of the direction they're taking?
Madam chair and uh Senator Ortiz
Pino, uh, there is a lot of
discussion on the workforce
housing. I will tell you that
the vast majority of what MFA
does is workforce housing or
working families, uh, uh, you
know, that's uh.
That that's who our programs go
to the first time homebuyer
programs or the rental programs,
everybody else, uh, I think that
there is a lot of focus with the
opportunity enterprise fund uh
that was uh funded this last
year with the support of the
legis legislators and the
governor $125 million the roles
are currently being finalized
for that and the intent is that
those funding sources would go
to what they're calling a
workforce housing uh at higher
income levels that would be
income levels that are higher
than MFA can currently uh
support with a focus on doing
infrastructure for that
workforce housing and then if
they do some actual housing or a
building of homes that it would
be at those income levels that
are say 150% and higher up to
300% of the area median income
is what the focus is of that
fund.
Well, thank you very much, and
Madam Chairman, I think this is
an issue for us to keep, you
know.
An eye on and make sure that
that collaboration continues.
Uh, it's, it's great that, that
he's coming over to your
meetings. I, I would hope that
you would also get invited to
some of their meetings and
participate fully in both sides.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator, uh, well
said. And if I may just
elaborate on that and then I
promise to go on to
Representative Kate next and
then Representative on a Nuno,
um, is that, um, I, I think one
of the main issues last session
during the time when legislation
was proposed was that we don't
have a
Housing office in New Mexico and
a proposal was made to establish
a new housing office. Well, that
was a fallacy because we do have
a state housing office in
statute, it says that the MFA,
the mortgage Finance Authority
is, in fact, the State's housing
office. That language is pretty
clear in statute. So to make the
or to draft legislation based on
a
premise is never going to get
anywhere.
That was one of the main reasons
why the legislation stalled. I
want to elaborate a little bit
more on that and say that, uh,
that the idea here is to expand
the services for housing. And
for that, I give the governor's
office, um, of course, always
the mortgage Finance Authority,
which you do a wonderful job,
Izzy, you and your staff and
your board.
And, um, of course, now, uh, we
have funding through the NMFA,
the New Mexico Finance Authority
for workforce development and so
on, and together with Marquita,
she's wonderful too. I have all
the faith in the world that
together we can get more
housing, uh, services and
housing infrastructure for
people in New Mexico. We know
there's a huge deficit.
But that being said, um, I
wanted to make sure that we
start off in any discussion that
we start off with, um, expanding
and augmenting the services that
we currently have, not
supplanting the services that we
have or uh through an MFA that
we the efforts out there don't,
um, um,
Inadvertently or in whatever
manner do anything to suppress
the good work that you're doing.
Uh, we don't want to do that.
And so I believe that together
we can work to establish a good
system, uh, based on
collaboration and, um, and good
planning on something that will
be meaningful and we can take to
the future to really see some
good results for, for new
housing developments for people
and also rental assistance and,
and, uh, rehabilitation.
weatherization, and so on. So,
um,
Just wanted to say that and
thank you for for being involved
Marquita did fill us in, by the
way, from the NMFA at the last
meeting and mentioned that,
you're all working together to,
to see how we can launch this
new venture of, uh, of workforce
housing development. So, and to
help our veterans and, and so on
as Representative Garcia has
always been a very big advocate
and others too. So thank you for
that and I'm going to move on.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
very well said. Thank you, um,
for once again keeping us
focused. Um, I, um, I want to
just make a quick comment uh
regarding to the data that
Representative Garcia was asking
for, if we could, I, I love the
idea when you tell us, oh,
there's funding and in 32 to 33
counties. I think what we would
like to see is dollar per
capita.
I think you may want to say $1
per capita that meets the
income.
Um, threshold of, of, um, of
your programs like the housing
trusts. So, um, I, I think that
that would be very.
Uh, specific and, and, and in
great data to have and, and I
bet you have it sitting there.
um I am just asking a quick
questions. Under home
improvement program. You have
statewide, is this home
improvement, um, for only
certain categories such as age
or disability or is uh what what
is the criteria a brief criteria
of this home improvement, uh,
program.
Madam Chair and Representative
Cates, this is a new program
that was uh made available, uh,
with the, the housing trust
fund. Uh, this is a home rehab
program. We have providers, uh,
San Felipe and Isaac back here
being one of them that provides
uh rehab uh in certain parts of
the state. There are areas of
the state where we don't have
providers and we are uh
generally reliant on partners
out there to deliver these
services for us. There are, uh,
I forget the number of counties,
I believe 7 or 8.
Counties on the eastern part of
the state where we did not have
a provider, so, uh, for the
first time I uh in MFA's history
we ventured into doing some
direct services uh on a pilot
basis which is this HIP program
to provide rehab uh in those 7
counties and now EMFA being the
provider, since we cannot get a
a partner out there to do that
currently our preference is
always to use a partner. So the
criteria for this uh is that the
house needs some
improvements, I can tell you
that based on the applications
that we received, they're
generally elderly and uh folks
that are very uh uh don't have
the resources, uh, you know, in,
in poverty and in a lot of
cases, so we don't have strict
criteria on that, but that's
generally the applications that
we've received and that we're
working on right now. Uh, it is
in the pilot stages, so it
hasn't fully taken off, but it's
gotten a good start.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Izzy. So just so I can recap, so
this particular home improvement
program, which we're at $500,000
is specific to the seven
counties that there is no
providers. Um, it is mostly
going to individuals with um
challenging abilities, age, and
income, um, and, and MFA is
acting as their general
contractor, uh, not really sure
when you're saying.
you can't find a provider.
Madam Chair and Representative
Cates, no, we, we do not have
general contractor's license, so
we are not doing that. We are
taking the applications
directly, evaluating those, uh,
applications, seeing if they are
eligible and then we're going
out there and we're procuring
for contractors and doing some
of the administrative work
depending on the funding source.
I will mention that there's uh
$500,000 here is just a portion
from the housing trust fund. We
have some federal fun
from HUD under the home program
that are also funding this and
actually the majority of the
funds come from there. The
reason we set aside some of
these funds, uh, is that the
federal programs have a lot of
requirements and constraints,
uh, and this gives us some
flexibility if we need to act
quickly that we may not need to
the time to go through the full
process that HUD requires but no
we are not acting as general
contractors, but we are
facilitating and procuring for
those general contractors. Thank
you so much, Chair, and thank
you, Izzy for your
answer as always. I have one
less, uh, last.
And small question. Your Rio
Rancho leased housing authority
is this a program to build um
units or to provide vouchers.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Kate, uh, I do
not have an answer to that. I
don't know if I know Robin is
back here. I don't remember the
details of that particular award
there or if somebody in the room
may have details to that that I
definitely do not remember.
Sorry, Madam Chair
Representative Case, I didn't
quite get the question. It's
under Rio Rancho leased Housing
Authority, uh, Sandoval Flats
gap financing, um, create more
housing, but it says leased
housing authority. I'm just
wondering, are is, is the
Sandoval, uh, housing building
more units, larger buildings,
additional housing, or is this
like for to increase voucher.
Um, opportunities or is it both,
Madam Chair and Representative
Cates, I believe in Izzy can
probably correct me now that
he's on track, but it's to
provide gap funding for the, uh,
capital expenditures, not for
the vouchers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. All right,
Representative Anan Nonu.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Izzy for that
presentation. I was hoping you
could drill down just a few
points for me. Um, this is very
small print.
In this booklet, um, so I was
wondering if you can tell me
what the total amount of the
housing trust fund currently is,
including that 50 million that
was appropriated from the
legislature.
Because I'm sure it's here and I
just can't, I physically can't
read it.
Madam chair and Representative
Anarno, close enough, I'll take
it.
Uh, I'll do some quick math off
the top of my head and I
apologize that we didn't put a
total on here so if we add the
34 and 37 were at 71 plus 50, I
would say 121 million ballpark.
Uh, that we currently have
available it maybe not available
because we've awarded some of
those funds that are currently
in play uh with the about 76
million of that actually awarded
and the others in definitely
procured for, but in the process
of accepting and evaluating
applications. OK, great. Thank
you Was my math correct for
those of you Bern Dotty, yeah,
OK.
Thank you. uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Izzy, and how
much of that, I guess we're
saying like 121 million ballpark
roughly. Um
How much of that can be pulled
from the fund for use this year.
Madam Chair and Representative
Ononarno, uh, all of that, uh,
is available this year. We did
set some money aside, uh, we're
calling it a reserve or in a
reserve status. So if we have
more demand in one category than
another based on what the board
allocated that we can tap into
those funds and fill that gap,
but it is all available and we
anticipate that uh at the pace
that we're going right now, if
it continues at that pace, uh,
will be anxiously awaiting for
the new rollout.
The new money next year in July,
uh, and, uh, for successful at
requesting some additional money
at this next legislative session
that, uh, it would be much
needed. OK, great. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Izzy. That's fantastic to
hear. Um, so,
So since we're talking about all
121 million is that a
significant increase in
available funds from previous
years and if so, by roughly by
how much?
Madam Chair and Representative
Onionarnu, uh,
it is a significant increase.
I'll give you a number here
prior to us getting the
recurring funds, uh, in a
17-year period we received $27
million into the housing trust
fund.
That was exceeded by just one
year of recurring funds in the
$37 million that we received. So
if that gives you an indication
of, uh, you know, the, uh, the
capacity uh that we have with
our partners to put that money
out the door as a money
increases and also the need out
there, uh, so does that give you
a good indication, it definitely
does. Um, I have like 3 more
questions and I really want to
drill down on, um, down payment
assistance because what I'm
seeing in my district,
In particular
As people are moving out, we've
got a lot of houses available
for sale, but the market price
is significantly more than um
what people bought their houses
for initially. We have a lot of
renters looking to buy a home,
um, they've maybe lived in their
apartment for 30 some years, but
they can't afford the house
that's gone up for sale like
right across the street from
them that's also been there for
the same amount of time. So,
um, if there's somebody who
knows a lot about the down.
Payment assistance program who
wants to help chime in here,
that would be great. So of that
121 million that I realize is
for the entire state. Do you
know roughly how much will be
allocated to down payment
assistance programs, and that
includes the, I know a lot of
these programs are like
stackable, um, that can be used
in conjunction with each other.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Onion warn you,
I'm gonna point you behind tab
one, there's a couple of areas,
uh, that talk about first, uh,
down or down payment assistance,
uh, and so at the top of the
first page table it says
homeownership department, uh,
and it's got 9.6 million. So if
F Dadi can help me with the math
here, 9.6 million plus another
2.5, uh, and then, uh,
15.5 million on the second page
at the bottom plus another 4.5,
so that's about uh 20 million
there plus another.
11
13 million so we're at about 33
million of that that has been
allocated toward down payment
assistance some of that, uh,
that is the fastest uh uh
activity if you will, or program
that uh where we're getting
reservations and uh making
awards in the highest
expenditure rate right now,
current down payment assistance
program, uh, has, uh, two pieces
of it. One of them is 4% of the
sales price. So on a $300,000
home, uh.
Which is actually below the
median here in Albuquerque right
now, but as an example, that
would be $12,000.
Plus an additional $10,000 so
somebody purchasing a $300,000
home right now could get up to
$22,000 in down payment
assistance. And, uh, I will
mention that, uh, our production
this year and in large part due
to the housing trust fund and
down payment that we're able to
provide. We are way ahead of the
last 3 years' worth of
production, uh, we're averaging,
uh, I think, uh, just under $13
million.
A week and reservations this
year and last year I think we
were at like 9.6 million of
reservations or applications
being taken, if you will. So a
lot of uh demand, uh, a lot of
production and DPA is a big part
of it. Fantastic. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair Izzy. Um, so would
the increases, the allocations
that you listed that I see here
now. Um, is that a proportional
increase to what you've been
able to give in down payment
assistance in previous years.
Like the roughly 27 million over
17 years compared to 121. Does
that make sense, that question?
Is it like Madam Chair,
Representativeornu, I think I
captured the question. It is
significantly more than we've
been able to provide in the
past. We haven't had that uh
$10,000 if you will, uh, on a
regular basis we've just been
funding that 4% that I mentioned
earlier of the sales price. All
right, thank you. And
Lastly,
So, Madam Chair, is he, so my
very last question here is,
Of that
I don't know, we didn't do the
quick math, but of the money
that's going to be allocated for
down payment assistance moving
forward, how much of that
translates directly to client
assistance like and minus
overhead, like what,
what are we looking at? Madam
Chair and Representative Onionar
knew the numbers that I
mentioned there, the 4% and the
$10,000 goes directly to assist
the client and lower their
payment, none of that money goes
to MFA or the
Or it's a direct assistance uh
down payment assistance and
closing cost assistance so it
goes directly to, to that.
All right, awesome. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Izzy. I know that we've got like
home now that's, um, available,
and that's like $77,000.
Which without stacking that with
another program like a $7000
assistance on down payment is
wonderful, but when we're
talking about like a $300,000
home and people who make less
than 80% of the AMI like $7000
isn't gonna cut it. And I
believe like these programs when
stacked, can get up to but not
exceed $35,000 but $35,000 in
down payment assistance is
really life-changing money. So
thank you very much, Madam Chair
Izzy for those.
answers. I really appreciate it,
Madam Chair, and I will mention
that Representative Marano that
those uh
Those amounts that I mentioned,
they are not grants. They are
loans that get repaid back and
at some point the repayments are
coming back and we're building
up that housing trust fund, the
program income, so in the future
we can have more money to put
out the door, uh is that program
income increases with all these
loans and the repayments that
are coming back.
Wonderful. Thank you very much.
That was all I had, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Izzy.
Thank you, Representative. Good
questions. We're going to go on
to Representative Borrejo.
You're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Izzy for the
presentation and I worked with
Izzy for lots of years, and
before, even before Jay Zar was
around building housing in
Albuquerque, Bernlio County, um,
and I just want to say that I
know that your staff does a
really great job, so I just have
to say that.
Um, so I wanted to ask um a
couple of questions. Is he about
the report, and I, I do agree
with uh Representative Cates,
um.
In terms of um
I think that's her last name,
right? Kate's K A T um.
Per capita and how much money
goes proportionally to those
areas, and I think that was the
question of Representative
Garcia, um, because I think that
those are important statistics,
um, because it does, in looking
at this, it does look like
Bernalio County gets the uh a a
huge proportion, but, uh, Madam
Chair, one of the questions I
have is that people apply for
this money as well, right? Like
the sawmill project that's
ongoing, they apply to
Receive some of the money, so if
they don't apply in those
counties in those rural areas,
am I correct? Then
That consideration is not given.
Madam Chair and Representative
Borrego, uh, yes, uh.
Individuals that are seeking
down payment assistance have to
apply through through a lender.
As an example, uh when it comes
to developments of uh uh rental
developments or under our
innovation program, the the
agencies do need to apply for
those funds, uh, and we, uh, put
the word out, uh, you know, to
the various media sources,
social media and newspapers,
etc. to get the word out across
the state, but people do need to
apply. Thank you, and I just
wanted to make that point
because that's a
Really important point in terms
of how people do receive this
funding. If you don't apply, you
don't know if you don't know,
you don't apply. Um, so I think
that that's, that's just really
a a key thing that a key point,
um, Madam Chair, the next
question that I have.
is with regard to, and I'm
sorry, Izzy, but you know me, I
get into the details and the
weeds sometimes, um, so you have
Southwest Regional Community
Development Central New Mexico,
housing, North Central economic
development, and I'm just
noticing in the report that most
of these are to preserve
existing affordable housing, and
so the funding that's going to
those is to rehab basically
affordable housing that's
already built.
Am I correct in that?
Madam Chair and Representative
Borrego that two of the agencies
that you mentioned as examples,
they are actually using that
money to do rehab or
weatherization of single family
homes. The other agency, which
is the North Central Council of
Governments, uh, they are
actually using that money to do
some rehab for uh and uh
accessibility improvements for
seniors. And Madam Chair, the
reason that I raised that issue
is because most of these
Um
Housing groups are located in
rural areas, and, you know, it
doesn't seem to me from looking
at the report, and I don't see a
lot of new housing being built
in these rural areas, and I sort
of on track with that, is he or
not?
Madam Chair and Representative
Borrego, uh, some of the
development or some of those
loans that are made on there are
for uh multi-family complexes,
so it's building new
developments, uh, and I will say
that actually just last month,
our board made 2 awards for
single family development, one
of them in Roswell, uh, for
40-ish units. I'm forgetting the
details, and then another one in
Taos for 81 units, uh, and then
another one in
Santa Fe through Homewise, uh,
That was a couple of months
before then and then we have a
couple of other applications
that are likely coming to our
board at the next month's
meeting on single family
development as well. So some new
construction is being built.
Could you at that next meeting,
um, let us know how many units
are being built in uh for
multi-family and single family
in those rural areas.
Could you bring those numbers to
us? I can definitely do that and
one bit of information that I
have off the top of my head, and
this is on the multi-family
side. We currently have 52
developments across the state
that in one form of construction
or another, one phase of
construction or another totaling
about 4500 units, um, and, uh,
I forget the dollar amounts that
those composites I think in 21
different municipalities and 15
counties. Uh, so,
There there's that's just on the
multi-family side, but we can
definitely provide you the data
for both that and the single
family, Madam Chair, I think
that would be really useful to
us in terms of, you know, if we
had a map of the state to show
where those are being built, so
that we can kind of get a
glimpse of exactly where we're
getting multi-family and where
we're getting new single family,
um, and then one last question,
I'm sorry, Madam Chair.
So, when you, when, when these
groups in the rural areas like
central New Mexico, Southwest,
north central, do you actually
give them a grant and then they
distribute it, or how is that
money allocated.
Madam Chair and Representative
Borrego, I would say that in the
vast majority of the cases,
these are actual loans that will
get repaid back so we can
continue to grow the housing
trust fund.
In so limited in some limited
instances, uh, they are grants,
and I'll give you some examples
like the uh.
On the weatherization program
this generally go to elderly
folks that are in poverty.
There's not repayment on those.
The example in North Central New
Mexico where they're doing
accessibility and improvements
for seniors. Those are, those
are grants and not loans, but uh
in the down payment assistance
in the development of
multi-family and the development
of single family, uh, all those
are loans, very good terms with
interest rates ranging from 1 to
3% in uh uh lines.
and in some cases long-term
loans, but all those are blo and
I would say that.
Uh, I'm shooting from the hip
here, but I would say definitely
north of 90%, maybe 95% of the
funds are loans in the smaller
amount is uh our grants.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for that
indulgence.
Thank you, Representative. All
right, we've got one more and
then we're going to move on
because we're gonna flying
behind here looking at the
agenda. So we've got
Representative Royal Caballero,
you're next. Thank you, Madam
Chair. As a discussion was
Evolving, it occurred to me that
there were 2 things that I
wanted to bring up. Fir first
question though, um, thank you,
Madam Chair and Izzy. So in the
report that you gave, I just
want to right now, um, you have
a column that says strategic
impact area, and it says create
more housing.
Is that where the new housing
comes in, is that, would that
create more? Does that mean new
housing?
It's the 123, 4th column over.
And several pages.
It just refers to build create
madam.
Madam Chair, Representative
Robal Caballero. We have uh
under the housing trust fund
under the state Board of
Finance, the severance tax money
that we receive has some
restrictions on it uh that we
had to go to state board of
Finance and their bond council
to approve, so there was I
believe 3 categories, create
more housing, um, was one of
them, the other one was preserve
housing, uh, and then the other
one was homeownership
opportunities, I believe, so
under the Create housing, you
are correct that that's where we
would uh.
Either through single or
multi-family development create
additional housing units. OK,
based on what the line of
questioning was, I just wanted
to further clarify. OK, so that
column, that, that.
Means new. So thank you for
that. So then I just have, uh,
Madam Chair, final suggestion
based again on the conversation
that we're having and, and that
is that um there have been a lot
of questions related to the
processes. So I'm visual and I
like flow charts. So I'm, I'm
wondering if based on what
Representative Kates and Borego
and
Anya mentioned, uh, perhaps you
can create a flow chart.
For us that that shows
The actual process of
application to whom, because you
have these named here, um, and
then just how it flows.
You know, how that process flows
between um who you allocate to
who applies for it, and um how
it relates to either single
housing and multi-housing.
That flow chart might just give
us a better organizational view
of how money comes in and how
money goes out and whom and what
areas that just adds that
another component to the charts
that you've been requesting data
that
you've been asked to do, uh,
perhaps a bigger flow chart. I
don't know how it will flow, but
I think it will help. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Lizzie.
Thank you, Representative.
We're gonna move on to the next
item, um, and we are, we're
still on the executive director
update and a lot of these
questions I think would have
been, um, appropriate also
including for me or comments on
the next item, but we're going
to move on to preserving
affordable housing, Donna
Maestas, Troy. Hi Troy, um, good
to see you. Isaac Perez, um,
from San Felipo Pueblo Housing
Authority. Hi, Isaac.
Are we going to be on tap 2?
Yes, OK.
What of it?
All right, well, good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, so Troy and Mr.
Perez are here with me,
um, so please, if you could keep
your questions till the end,
till after, uh, Mr. Perez's
presentation just so he gets an
opportunity, we get an
opportunity to get through the.
Thank you.
Thanks. OK, uh, next slide,
please.
So this is a list of, um,
Housing New Mexico MFA programs
to preserve and improve existing
and affordable housing and to
catalyze redevelopment. And in
the following pages we'll go
through each one. Next slide,
please.
Uh, the emergency housing needs
program is a mechanism for MFA
to quickly deploy assistance to
respond to emergency housing
situations as they arise.
Um, the home improvement program
is a brand new direct services
program and I he kind of
mentioned this, um, so it's for
MFA to administer our homeowner
rehab program in the counties
where we do not have service
providers. And, um, there's
actually 8 counties. Um, it's
McKinley, Union Harding, Quy,
Rio Riba, Guadalupe, San Juan,
and Los Alamos. In all the other
counties throughout the state,
we do have service.
writers that, um, that
administer this program. And so
the home rehab and veterans
rehab programs, these are those
other programs where we do have
service providers, um, it
provides rehab of homes for
health and safety issues,
accessibility modifications, and
code compliance upgrades to
qualified homeowners at at no
cost. So this is a grant to the
homeowners.
Uh, next slide, please.
Um, the housing innovation
program addresses housing needs
that are currently not being
served through other MFA
programs, and it's an
opportunity to fund innovative
housing projects and community
tailored housing solutions.
The New Mexico preservation Loan
Fund provides funding for
at-risk multi-family housing to
support preservation and keep
those projects as affordable.
Um, restoring our communities or
rock program. This is another
brand new program like the HIP
program, and it provides funding
for the acquisition, rehab, and
resale of vacant and abandoned
single-family homes. Um, and
these homes, once they're
rehabbed are sold as affordable.
Uh, next slide, please.
And I'm going to turn it over to
Troy, and he's our expert in
weatherization.
Thank you, thank you, Donna,
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I'm happy to be here and
uh my name is Troy Cucciera. I
am the Green Initiative's
manager for the weatherization
program. I would like to make
sure that we understand
weatherization is first, the way
that we define it is it's an
assistance program that provides
energy saving assistance, and
retrofits to homeowners
throughout New Mexico. The key
term here is eligible
homeowners. There's also a
definition that the Department
of Energy provides. I won't
restate that because
There's a lot of words within
that definition, and we have
simplified it.
They, um, they do like to
emphasize that this program also
creates jobs.
Some of the benefits of the
weatherization program provides
is obviously it reduces the
energy costs which results in
the lower utility bills for the
low-income people.
As a result of that, it improves
the health and safety of the
homes that are involved. Those
two things go together. It's
going to improve the environment
because carbon emissions are
obviously going to be reduced
because of that, we're also not
relying on foreign energy
sources and most importantly,
the occupants end up with a
sense of dignity because they
can no longer have to worry
about whether or not their
furnace or their cooling system
or the water heater is working,
uh, once they have already.
worked an entire day and they go
home and they're not having to
worry about those things
anymore.
Next slide, please.
Uh, we do have a number of
testimonials that um that flow
into the program
are
Our providers are conditioned to
actually count the misses and
not the wins because these
things happen so often they
focus on the clients that are
not happy to make them happy so
that we do end up having more of
these letters that flow in. Next
slide, please.
Just a little bit about the
history, so there's an
understanding as to how the
program has evolved. It was born
out of the energy crisis in
1973. The grassroots concept of
this program was people were
going into homes as volunteers
to seal up the drafts and
install different things that
they thought the homeowners
needed.
And this was a volunteer effort
from their time. Eventually
these groups of people would
have started to find smaller
grants, local grants to help the
people out.
One of the things that was
happening was something that we
no longer practice, which is
plastic being put on the
windows. Some of you might
remember that happening when you
were very young.
In the 1980s, the Department of
Energy figured out that
The weatherization program and
the measures that are going into
homes are not something that we
can just do without any proof
that it works. So a lot of
different diagnostic testing was
put into place, including energy
modeling and blower door
testing. And what they found was
you don't just go into a home
and seal up where you would
think the drafts are.
You only do what is proven to
work. It's a, it's a building
science-based program. And so,
therefore, the result of that is
a lot of money was not wasted.
The only installed things that
are cost effective rather than
putting plastic on windows, the
entire windows are replaced.
You don't seal the windows if we
don't need ceiling if it's not
found to have drafts going
through the windows.
In the, in the early 90s, these,
these technologies progressed
and evolved to the use of
infrared cameras and they
started looking into what the
homes need at a more
sophisticated level.
A lot of you might remember the
Ara period between 2009 and
2012, that resulted in just a
ton of homes being weatherized.
When that happened, the
Department of Energy and NRL
teamed up and developed what's
called standard work
specifications.
What that basically means is
Even though New Mexico has a
different climate than
Washington State or Hawaii. The
way that we do things are still
going to be the same. What we do
might be different, but how we
implement that is going to be
the same. How we perform our
final inspections are gonna be
the same. So that there's an
equality among all the states
and territories.
In 2020, we all know what
happened there. One of the
things that I'm very proud of
for this program is we looked at
what was happening and said, how
can we
operate without anybody missing
a paycheck and without anybody
getting sick.
Our community college.
Started consulting with John
Hopkins University. We looked at
what the medical professionals
were doing so that they can stay
employed without themselves
getting sick and we developed a
training program that ended up
being adopted nationally. Not
one person in our network missed
a paycheck. We continue to flow
with work. Jobs continue to be
done, and the reason for this is
because we understood the
importance of the work that was
being implemented.
We know that some of these
things that were happening are
life saving.
And so this flowed through and
we set the standard for the for
the rest of the nation.
In 2022, we got hit with the
bipartisan infrastructure bill,
and that's very similar to AA.
We already understood what that
meant to do a lot more, so that
was not much of a problem. And
most recently, we started
looking at innovative grants.
And next slide please.
We can break weatherization down
into 4 easy categories to
remember. The first thing that
we do when we go into a home is
we look at the mechanical
issues. Anything that would be
um that would require a
mechanical license, heating,
cooling, water heating, those
are the first things that we
look at that is going to spill
over into health and safety. We
can't do one thing without doing
something else in a home. It
would be putting the occupants
at risk.
Then it gets into something
that's a lot more interesting
for the network and that's the
building envelope measures.
Building, building your vote
measures, that's a fancy way of
saying air sealing and
insulation. Those things always
go together. We want to address
the entire home. And then we
look at the baseload measures,
which is basically um what's
happening within a home
seasonally that does not change.
Light bulbs, refrigeration. Next
slide, please.
The local program changes very
much the same way that the
national program does. We are,
we have now added repairs and
rehabilitation to our um book of
items that we can do within
these homes. That's something
that we have not been able to do
in the past. Um, we have, um,
cooling now as a measure that we
can take on for many decades we
were used to telling people, no,
we can't address your cooling,
which is just not appropriate
for some of the hotter climates
in New Mexico.
We're working with a lot more
funders and the reason for that
is because that can help us
solve more problems within the
homes. Uh, we've gotten into
electrification, and that's a
huge buzzword right now. I'm
sure that you've talked to many
people about that, and we have a
way of approaching that that
does not harm the low-income
people, and we're also starting
some um pilot programs for
solar.
Next slide please.
Income eligibility.
The clients must be 200% of the
poverty level, or they must be
receiving a Social Security
disability, TANF or Laheap. He
can also have a hard tested
program at 80% AMI. As far as
the structure goes, we want to
make sure that it's not for sale
or scheduled for demolition.
It's very easy to remember and
implement. We try to
decomplicate the program as much
as possible.
Next slide, please.
Uh, slide in for that, please.
Here we go. vulnerability.
This is not a first in, first
out program. So the way that
this, this happens is the
vulnerable populations are
served first. If, if you and I
both apply at the same time and
we're in the same demographic,
and I happen to have my elderly
mother and two children with me
and also somebody who's
disabled. I will get the
services first.
As a result of that, we end up
with people that are on the wait
list in certain counties for a
longer period of time than we'd
like. That's the reason why we
still, we go after other funding
sources so that we can solve
those problems.
The areas that are determine
that vulnerability of
disability, children, elderly,
and high energy burden. That's
what drives it.
Our funding sources, and next
slide please, are divided into 4
different categories, actually
3, but we do count the federal
that passes through the state as
an additional category because
there's another layer of
complexity that is added on to
that.
Next slide, please.
We have to get into
electrification because if we
ignore it, someone else is going
to do it and they're probably
going to do it wrong. We want to
make sure that when we approach
electrification it's done right.
I have heard countless times
just switch them all over to
electricity, and if they can't
pay it, that's just too bad.
That is not the right way to
think with the low income
people. Our first, our first
thing that we look at is to
create no harm. So New Mexico,
as you know, uh, natural gas is
less expensive than electricity.
So if we switch somebody over
from electricity or from natural
gas to electricity, their bills
are going to go up.
We cannot have that happen. The
only way that we can approach a
natural gas per person and
switch them over as if we have a
dual fuel system. A dual fuel
system is a heat pump with
what's called a balance point.
Once the temperature gets to the
balance point, it switches over
to natural gas so that the low
income person is not spending
more, and we also make sure that
we install solar because a lot
of these low-income people, they
don't have any ways of cooling
their homes. They've never had a
way to call their home in the
past. Now we put it in a heat
pump and it's there. We
Make sure that they're not
increasing, we're not increasing
their utility bills in the
summertime as a result of that.
Next slide, please.
This shows our funding levels.
And it's kind of hard to show
this on an annual basis. So some
of the funding sources that you
see there do cover a longer
period of time, that number of
29.9 million. That's going to
fluctuate from year to year
depending on what funding
sources we do have at any one
time.
Next slide, please.
Uh, there are several grants
that we have in place for
electrification. We do stack,
layer, and braid as much as we
can to comply with all the
different regulations that each
of the funding sources have.
Next slide please.
Available units by county. This
is, this is an important piece
because it will address some of
the questions that were asked
earlier about the distribution
of funds throughout the
counties. Our providers are
located in Albuquerque and Las
Cruces. We've got one in the
Navajo Nation and we brought a
multi-family provider that will
appear as if the majority of the
funding is going to Bernoullio
and Dayana Counter. The way that
we run this program is we, we
allocate the funds the same way
the Department of Energy does
for the state, which means
that every county in New Mexico
must receive some sort of
funding. The funding does not go
directly to the households, it
goes to the service providers.
Those service providers will
carry out their tasks and each
of the required units for those
counties.
Now somebody had mentioned
earlier about the lack of
applications. That's probably
one of the biggest challenges
that we have within 2 or 3
counties. Most of the counties
that are on the waiting list,
um, are, are they, they comprise
the waiting list have a lot of
people waiting for the services.
One of the counties that we've
always had trouble receiving
applications at Los Alamos. Some
of the pueblos we do have uh
some difficulties obtaining
applications from. However, when
there are applications in the
counties, the
Agencies will hit those required
units.
Uh, here's a, a map coverage on
the next slide, um, so those are
the four service writers and
then that shows how the money is
broken up between the two, north
and south single family
providers, and then of course
the Navajo Nation is snuggled
throughout several different
counties.
Next slide please.
Um, a little bit about, um, the
emergency funding that we
receive. I mentioned repairs
earlier. This is the CSLRF or
FRF Fiscal Recovery funds, uh,
those are for emergencies. When
somebody calls it an emergency,
which an example would be a roof
leak or an electrical problem
that is unsafe. that is
considered to be a priority. We
do not follow the vulnerability.
We do not put federal sources
into that home. However, that
triggers full weatherization so
that client does not go back on
the waiting
so that we're not having to go
back 4 or 5 times, which would
be inefficient.
Um, next slide please, that
would be the last slide, and I
think that would be done, yes,
and so this page shows our
production statistics for
quarter 3 of this fiscal year
and um that just ended in June.
So the total household assisted
was 2,268 $240450,039 and now I
will turn it over to Isaac
Perez. He's the executive
director of the San Felipe
Pueblo Housing Authority.
Thank you, Isaac. You're next.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Committee members, it's good to
see all of you again. Uh, my
name is Isaac Perez. I'm the San
Felipe Pueblo Housing Authority
executive director. Uh, I've
been at San Felipe Pueblo for 22
years, which is, uh, must be
some sort of world record for a
tribal housing director, but,
um, I'm proud of that and I'm
honored and it's a pleasure to
be here before you today and I
just, first of all, want to
thank you and all the work that
you do for affordable housing
and low income, uh, residents.
New Mexico, not just the tribal
communities. I don't think you
get enough credit for what you
do. And I think what we're doing
at San Felipe is just a little
bit uh based off of what you're
doing and supporting for all of
our tribal members throughout
New Mexico. Uh, I have a very
brief, uh, little presentation.
I don't wanna take up too much
of your time today uh with some
pictures and just a little bit
of structure on how we're made
up as a, uh, I would like to
think as a successful service
provider for MFA Housing New
Mexico uh I did wanna.
Make a couple of comments if I
could, Madam Chair, before I do
my presentation, uh, to assure
your, all the committee members
that, uh, MFA Housing New Mexico
is a vital component of
affordable housing throughout
the state and our tribal
communities, um, I could sit
here all day and and give you a
lot of success stories. Uh,
there is a, a really neat video
on YouTube if any of you have
time that was generated by MFA
staff, I believe, uh, maybe 6
6 to 8 months ago, if you have
time, I would, I would ask you
to go on there and search it.
It's really neat, uh, on a
couple of our affordable housing
rehab projects that we do, but,
uh, MFA's Housing New Mexico's
rehabilitation affordable
housing programs in my opinion,
are rivaling right now the HUD
funding that comes out to all of
our tribal communities and uh
that's a big feather in MFA
Housing New Mexico. I'm here to
tell you that personally because
I deal with it daily with
and USDA and all the other
federal funding, uh, people that
we deal with so much so that um
Our audit two years ago I got
questioned by HUD up in
Washington DC that uh our audit
was not getting looked at enough
for HUD funding, uh, because,
uh, we were receiving so much
money from New Mexico mortgage
uh MFA and MFA's programs were
focused on more in our audit
because we are receiving more
funding from MFA than the actual
federal government
My response to that was, well,
give us more money and maybe our
auditors will pay more.
Attention to your programs. MFA
is doing that. They're doing
that throughout the state of New
Mexico and that is a true story,
so we right now have, I believe,
3 major programs through MFA
Housing New Mexico for those of
you that don't know, major is
7,050,000 or more in dollars
that has to be audited every
year, so we have one HUD program
with that amount of money, so
that tells you a lot about what
Mr. Hernandez and the staff
here.
Housing New Mexico is doing for
our tribal communities. So with
that, uh, I'll go on with my
presentation and answer any
questions you have for me and
try not to take up too much of
your time.
Um.
We are the San Felipe P Housing
Authority. Uh, we don't just do
affordable housing, the new
housing or renovation projects
we do counseling, we do home
loan processing we have uh our
own internal apprenticeship
program which has the largest
and the largest tribal workforce
in the state of New Mexico on
tribal lands, depending on how
many of our guys show up in the
morning, uh, could be 70, could
be up to 90, and we're pretty
proud of that. It's been in
effect since 2014.
And we're able to keep a lot of
costs down with that. We build
our own homes. We renovate our
own homes, and keep all the
money within the pueblo and on
the rural areas and to me that's
real true self-determination for
the pueblo to keep the dollar
there, so we do that, uh, next
side please.
Uh, I've been at San Felipe
Pueblo 22 years, as I said, I'm
only able to do what I do
because I have a wonderful,
excellent staff, uh, most of
them have been there with me,
believe it or not, for 21 years.
Uh, so I must, I don't know if
they like me or or if I just pay
them too much and they like it
there or what, but I'm very
fortunate that they have stuck
with me that long and we have
that cohesion as a staff and
that's what really makes a lot
of these programs successful,
uh.
In a lot of the times it's not
so much, uh, are you offering
this money to, to tribes or the
rural areas, uh, is, uh,
Commissioner Borrego mentioned
earlier, they have to come and
ask for it. They have to come
and get the money. It's there. I
will tell you this right now.
Funding is not an issue. It's
getting it and having the, the
correct staff and the experience
and people that can come and
access that money because the
funding is there, uh, but a lot
of times unfortunately.
There's a lot of turnover,
specifically in tribal housing.
You're lucky if you're at a
housing authority for 2 years,
uh, with all the the way the
tribes are made up, the
political structures, the
leadership changes so
frequently, um, just, just not
there. So uh I will assure you
that the funding is there. It's
made accessible to tribal rural
areas, Commissioner Garcia, it
is there, uh, so we're, we're
happy to say that and I just, I
wish more tribal entities would
come in and
Apply for services. I think
there's, uh, 3 or 4 of us that
do get the majority of the
tribal funding and so, um.
Just wanted to say that next
slide please.
Uh, little bit about what we do
and how we get people eligible.
We have at any time of the year
two waiting lists, a new
housing, affordable housing
waiting list, and a renovation
housing waiting list.
These lists, uh, at any given
time of the year, uh, show, uh
family income, family
composition.
Uh, certain things like that so
that we are always at people
eligible for services whenever
funding does come out. Next
slide, please.
We leverage funding sources
through MFA in New Mexico with
the uh CDBG Community
Development block grant Indian
housing block grant 504 uh USDA
program and MFA's Veterans
rehabilitation program, which I
didn't see on your list there,
but that is a very successful
program that you also oversee.
Next slide, please.
This is an example of a house
that we just finished uh I think
it was 4 months ago, um, 7 or 8
months ago, there was nothing in
that area that is a brand new
affordable housing unit that was
finished 3 months ago. Uh, that,
that particular family there is
a single mother with 4 children.
Her monthly payment is $275
which includes full coverage
insurance through Amarin Risk
Management. To us that's
affordable. Next slide, please.
This is another house for a, um,
Family of 7 individuals. It is a
5 bedroom, 3 bedroom house, uh,
the payment on that house is
$34848 a month, which includes
full coverage insurance. Again,
we are able to keep these these
prices down because we build
these homes ourselves. We do not
bring in a general contractor
and pay 30% on top of what you
would normally build, so we're
able to control a lot of those
costs. Next slide please.
This is our home, uh, renovation
project. I'll, uh, I think the
picture speaks for itself from
the before and after there, uh,
this, this home was renovated
with MFA home funds and if a
veteran funds and also HUD ICDBG
funds. Next slide, please.
This is one of our veteran
rehabilitation projects that was
just completed a few months ago,
uh, this house, we spent
$115,000 on we leverage money
from MFA home and HUD ICDBG
funds and again all the work was
done with our tribal tribal
workforce. Next slide please,
real quick, I'll take any, uh,
questions you have. I have a big
mouth commissioners I can sit up
here all day and and and talks
you probably guessed that
already.
But I know we're short for time
and uh just want to acknowledge
my staff that's up there on the
slide with me. They're the ones
that actually do all the work. I
get a lot of that credit
specifically here at MFA, but
it's my staff that really,
they're the ones out there
meeting with the families or uh
my force accounts out there in
the cold and in the heat today,
uh, and in fact, we're having a
big barbecue for them today and
I'm headed back that way, so,
um, anyway, um, uh, it's an
honor to be here and I'm uh I'm
here to answer any questions you
have.
Thank you very much, Isaac just
a little good presentation with
just a little correction and
that, uh, want to make sure that
our legislators are addressed
properly and I know you said
commissioners, but they're
representatives in the committee
and also for the legislature.
Sorry about that. No, I meant
committee members.
Sorry about that. Yeah, thank
you. All righty, we got
Representative Caballero. You
are on the list and then we've
got Representative Harry Garcia
and then Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, panel for your
presentations.
I believe that this question is
probably a um we'll go to Troy
on page 14.
Of your um PowerPoint.
Uh, number 5, you refer to um
solar.
And it occurred to me that, um.
This is a critical.
Point of a critical point that
needs to be addressed. And so,
because as we're building new
homes.
And then as we're renovating and
weatherizing homes.
Um,
My viewpoint is that we should
be preparing.
To enter into the renewable
energy world.
In order to do that, we all have
to be prepared. So first
question real quick is, has MSA,
and I'm not sure maybe Izzy
might need to answer this or
whomever, um, has MFA been
involved in the regulatory
discussions concerning community
solar. Uh, it's been going on
now for going on 2 years, I
think, um, it's been a little
bit of a nightmare of a process,
but it's a critical.
Process because the regulations
will affect
What we do with our housing in
those three areas, so that's
question number one, Madam Chan.
Madam Chair, Representative
Caballero, as for the
weatherization program, we have
not adopted any kind of
community cellar because um of
the apprehensiveness to adopt or
to endorse one company over
another, um, and we are not
working with any type of um
Uh,
legislation to make sure that
that happens in pre preparedness
as the houses are being built,
um,
Because we, we get into the
homes after they're built. So
it's more of a retrofit on our
end. I, I'll probably uh defer
to Izzy or other MFA staff to
answer Helen FA is addressing
that as a whole.
Thank you, Madam Chair is the
answer. Thank you,
Madam Chair and R Caballeroa. I,
I, Troy is a little humble here.
He's actually on some national
committees, and he has attended
a lot of meetings with the MR
department here uh and
discussing uh community solar
and those type of things, but we
have not, uh, gone in front of
the PRC or any of those folks to
advocate for one way or another
on that. Well, it's not, Madam
Chair and is
And panel, it's not so much
advocating, it's watching the
regulatory process, what they're
deciding and how it's going to
affect the implementation of um
the we all these projects.
That's what I thought would be
critical, and that was the
Advocate on behalf of any one
thing or any one person or one
developer or anything of that
nature, but the regulatory
process is important because if
it's going to impede your
ability to carry out the
projects however way they may
be, then that's the important
point, and that's what I was
leading to, um, Madam Chair, so
I, I guess if you haven't, you
should probably look at him and
maybe give a quick cause it's
still in the process. That's one
part of the question.
The second was, um, and it also
applies to how geothermal is
going to unfold, Madam Chair, so
it's in those two areas that's
really important and actually
that just addresses the whole
area of renewable energy because
what we want to do, Madam Chair,
I think is not have to go
through the expense after the
fact, an example of
weatherization to make a home
ready should the owner.
To tap into, say, a community
solar.
That's available for that
particular housing area, and
that's why and geothermal as
well. That's why this is really
important. So if you could keep
your tab on all this development
and how best that we can tap
into it so that we can continue
to make homes affordable and
just one final point on that is
that in our capitalist society
competition uh drives.
Pris called competition and
volume.
So the more people that tap into
renewable energy, it's going to
bring down the costs and so
that's that's, you know, always
the, uh, the driving force. So
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Representative. Um, we've
got 3 more people on the list
and I want to make sure each one
gets enough time when trying to
allocate the amount of time, uh,
left. And so, uh, we're gonna
have to keep our questions and
our and our responses as short
as possible. Thank you very much
before we lose
Our quorum. That's usually what
happens if we don't move it. So
all right, Representative
Garcia, you are next. Thank you
for your patience, sir. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
One on page 2 on preservation
programs.
Uh, my concern is, it's a home
improvement programs.
My concern is a lot of these
houses out here are multiple,
multiple generational houses.
And a lot of them meet out of
Adobe and, and I'm looking down
here and it says bring him to
code.
How do you propose on doing that
and that question would be kind
of for him because you know,
he does a pueblos and stuff. How
do you bring a house that's made
out of adobes
to code, very carefully.
But the reality of it you can't
bring the cold that put them out
of the out of the program, it
does not and that's a great
question, Representative Garcia,
um, we deal with a, with a lot
of Adobe people can get very
creative and how they add on and
build to their homes, uh, the
adobe homes that we renovate do
after there is a specific type
of way to wire the homes to
plumb the homes.
Because you're dealing with
2030, 40 years of Adobe blocks
that are there in some cases,
it's impossible because they've
collapsed due to moisture and
leaks and
flooding issues, uh, if we can
put more adobe on them, we will.
If not, we do not keep them. We
will knock knock the wall down
and actually frame it out with a
2 by 6 wall if we can, but as
far as the codes, uh, we follow
all the state building codes.
For renovation projects. We have
not built any new homes that are
adobe, but the Adobe homes as
far as renovation are really
tricky. We, we've even got homes
having to try to bring in the
code representatives that have
rock foundations from way back
in the early 1900s and it's very
difficult to try to bring them
into the current existing code
with keeping the the structural
integrity of it up. And so in a
lot of those cases for
renovation projects, we, we put
new
Walls or new foundations for
them.
Uh,
Madam Chair, thanks for that but
you know, uh, your rancher
didn't suit me very well because
you can go into an adobe house
and knock walls down. It just
doesn't happen that way. And you
know, some, how do you put a,
how do you uh your doorways are
too small. Every everything's
offset and you know, and a lot
of these people are not gonna
let you knock their house down.
Because you know they've lived
there for generations and you
know what, what you answered, I
don't know, didn't make sense to
me on how you address these
issues other than you don't do
it.
And that, Madam Chair, being
said well that's being said. In
other words, all these people
that have these older houses do
not qualify.
For what you're doing here.
To the chairs on the bottom of
the page it says eligible
homeowners. What does that mean?
Who's eligible and who's not?
It's by income representative
Garcia and maybe I misspoke. We,
we do in our renovation
projects, we don't knock
complete houses down we if there
are areas in the adobe, in the
old adobe areas of homes that
cannot be repaired or fixed, we
do, we don't knock a whole wall
and have to reframe a whole
house so we will work on that
specific area, uh, to get it up
to code, whether it's got to be
uh more Adobe's brought in.
or walls furred out or
completely reframed and all of
the people that do qual uh apply
for assistance, they all are
income qualified, pre-qualified
to get services. I think they're
below 80%, or low to median
income.
Thank you Madam Chair, one last
question, uh,
Yeah, you have a deal for
veterans here. What's the
difference on a veteran and a
non-veteran.
How you know say a veteran has a
uh
An adobe house and you're, you
got two different kind of people
here. You're saying that these
home rehabilitation to eligible
homeowners, and what's the
difference on an eligible
veteran and a homeowner.
There are 2 specific programs
that MFA Housing New Mexico
offers one is specific just for
veterans. Uh, I think it's
called the Veteran
rehabilitation program. There is
a separate rehabilitation
program called Home and so
depending on if they are a
veteran or not, and we determine
that by uh establishing our
waiting list, so on our waiting
list, we know who's veteran and
who's not. And if they are a
veteran, we do, we do targets.
Them for the veteran
rehabilitation assistance, but
they are two separate programs,
uh, in, in the event that um we
do have a veteran that is also
eligible for rehabilitation
assistance through HUD or MFA
home funding, we will try to
stack that assistance available
to provide them more assistance.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Maybe when I started the
question I should ask the whole
board instead of just you
because uh you're doing Pueblo.
These other people are doing
statewide maybe the question
should have gone to a hall of
you instead of one person.
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, with weatherization when
we use veterans, um, funding of,
of any sort. Uh, the difference
in what happens with the home is
no difference between using that
funding and other funding. Uh,
the only difference with the way
that household is treated is if
somebody is a veteran, and, and
we, we know that otherwise they
would be way down in the waiting
list. We don't need to put other
fun.
Other federal funding into that
home. So therefore that veteran
could receive assistance more
quickly than some of the other
people in that county.
Madam another end with this
because I know we're short on
time, you know, I spoke with the
governor of uh Sleta Pueblo
Governor Zuni, and, and they're
having big issues because 90% of
their houses are made out of
adobes, and they cannot come in
with into compliance in any way,
shape or form other than because
they don't want you to bother or
or disturb what they have so
these people that are have these
adobe homes are kind of being
left out because this just.
And qualify cause you just
cannot fix them, you know, and,
and, and these programs are
good, but they're not good for
everybody and you know, I'm just
putting that out for people are
aware because not everybody's
getting treated exactly how they
should on this program with
these funding that the states
now. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much for that.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you very much for your
presentation. It was, it was
great, full of lots of
information. I have a general
question. I don't know if it's
as as we move from MFA to H&M as
we become the H&M, um, I don't
know if this, uh, is we changed
the name or the scope of
weatherization or we do uh I
know we're going to have an
upcoming of special needs, but
here's my concern.
is that I've been told in other
committees that these wildfires
across their state are going to
be every single year.
We, we are not going to have
years without wildfires,
uh, given our climate changing
and what is happening. So that
being said, with the air issues
and um the health of the quality
of the air as well as the
climate has changed where places
we never needed air
conditioning, we may need air
conditioning if we are
vulnerable. I see on your slide
you say health and.
Safety on it,
so would you be expanding your
services or it would be a
different department to have air
filtration systems or even air
conditioning in certain areas,
especially during disaster
relief. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Kate, that is a great question,
and there are several things
that are being done to address
that specifically, and I'm going
to summarize it so that because
we're short on time, one is
right now there is an
experiment. The pilot project
happening.
With the University of Colorado,
uh, I'm sorry, with Colorado
State and our providers that
would cause the air that is
being introduced into the home
for ventilation to be filtered
so that we can comply with full
compliance with Ash 622. And,
and that is not something that
has been done before in the, in
the past we're just introducing
fresh air. So that's
specifically for the wildfire
problem. Secondly, in areas
where people are using apor.
which is just bringing in air
from the outside. Those are some
of the areas, especially in
southern New Mexico, where we're
starting to install heat pumps
instead of the evaporative
cooling, combined with solar
because of course it goes back
to the, the higher Coling bill.
And so that that's how we're
addressing it through those two
avenues. Thank you so much and
thank you for concise answers,
so I am assuming that as we move
towards a different uh name for
the agency itself, maybe
weatherization uh will end up
becoming efficiency.
And safety, um, I'm not so sure,
but thank you so much. I'm so
glad that you're already ahead
of the game. Thanks.
Sen.
All right, we're going to go to
Senator Gonzalez. You're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'll
be very brief, um, uh, first of
all, thank you to the panel and
uh your experience really shows.
You know, and that's really
great, you know, to have that
kind of institution to
A program for the number of
years that you have been there,
um, what I was gonna ask you is
um the location of these homes
that we're talking about are.
The ones that are right off the
freeway.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, some of, some of them
that I think you're referring to
our blackness subdivision.
Which is near the the I-25 as
you go up to Santa Fe on the
west side.
Yes, that's those are some of
them, but we did complete that
is 150 unit subdivision. Wow.
Um,
all right, thank you. And the
other question that I had is,
um, do you have any uh
Of.
Someone that's homeless that
transitions into having a home.
Yes.
And is that a large number or
just is and
and Senator Gonzalez, what,
what, what our problem is and
what a lot of the tribal
community's problems is with
homelessness is tribal members
that do come into Albuquerque
into the bigger city area uh and
become homeless. There is not.
From my standpoint of being at
San Felipe as long as I have a
big homelessness issue on the on
the reservation itself. Most of
the the homelessness occurs as,
as we would call in the urban
areas where tribal members from
San Felipe or Santo Domingo or
or different pueblos come to
Albuquerque and don't have
somewhere to live, and I am also
on a committee working with all
the pueblos.
To try to come up with some sort
of funding to assist tribal
members that are in the urban
area and are considered
homeless.
OK. Thank you. The last part,
Madam Chair, is, uh, for
example, on a.
On page.
I don't see the number now, but
it's this one where the vacant
property and then you show a
home.
So
Where were these people before?
Madam Chair, Senator Gonzalez.
Typically, a lot of family
members in our tribal
communities are
intergenerational, and they,
they stay and live with mothers,
grandparents, uh, you'll have,
it's not uncommon to have 4 or 5
generations of people living it
within the same house and uh uh
a population of 3 bedroom house,
have 15 to 18 members living in
that house with maybe one if
they're lucky, 2 full bathrooms,
uh, this particular.
family, this particular home
that you're looking at that you
pulled up on your slide was
living with her parents.
With 3 single mother with 3
kids.
Very well, thank you. Thank you
to all of you for your work.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, for your
questions, always very good
questions and lots of wisdom as
always. Um, we're going to move
on to the approval of the
minutes before we lose our
quorum and I finally have a
motion for there's a motion on
the floor.
OK, Sara sinus and then a second
from Representative Garcia. All
in favor signified by saying aye
opposedcast.
Thank you very much for that
addressing the needs of special
populations and we're moving a
little quicker because we
want to make sure we can stay as
close as we can to the time
here, addressing the needs,
Donna Maestas and Lisa Howley.
All right, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so we'll we'll try to
go quickly and if you could save
your questions till the end of
Ms. Sally's presentation.
Um,
So let's see, um, next slide,
please. So this is a list of
Housing New Mexico MFA programs
to create stable housing, and
I'll go through each one of
these in the next pages. So next
slide, please.
Um, continuum of care is a
federal program that provides
housing assistance and
supportive services such as
medical, financial, and
educational programs to
individuals and families that
are experiencing homelessness.
Uh, the New Mexico coalition to
End Homelessness actually
manages the federal funds, but
at MFA we provide the match
funding for that program.
Um, the emergency homeless
assistance program that's funded
by Federal Emergency Solutions
grant funds and state funding
and that supports homeless
domestic violence and youth
shelters for operations,
essential services, and data
collection.
Our HA program or housing
housing opportunities for
persons with AIDS consists of
federal funding that supports
residents with a documented HIV
or AIDS diagnosis, whose income
is at or below 80% of the area
median income.
The program provides
tenant-based rental assistance,
short-term rent, mortgage and
utility assistance and permanent
housing placement. And the
program is designed to prevent
homelessness and increase
housing stability for this
specific population.
Uh, next slide, please.
So the landlord engagement
program, this is a brand new
program. It's um a joint program
with MFA and the City of
Albuquerque. It pays for damages
above the security deposit on
rental units of individuals that
have housing vouchers from the
city.
Um, the landlord collaboration
Program, a very similar program,
is a joint program between MFA
and CYFD. So again, it pays for
damages to unit above the
security deposit um on rental
units for youth ages 18 to 24
that exited foster care. So it's
very difficult to find landlords
that are willing to rent to
these youths because they don't
have credit scores and some of
them just getting out of foster
care or just getting into the
work.
Force. Um, so this is like an
insurance company for the
landlords. Um, I, I'll let you
read that testimonial on your
own to save time. Um, next slide
please, page 4.
Uh, the rapid rehousing and
homeless prevention program is
federally funded through home
ARP, American Rescue Funds, and
emergency solutions grant funds,
as well as some state funding.
So this program assists with
short and medium-term rental
assistance to folks that are
homeless or at risk of becoming
homeless.
Um, the recovery housing
program. These are federal funds
used to provide stable
transitional housing for for
people in recovery from a
substance use disorder, um, some
of the activities that the funds
allow are the acquisition of
real property to, um, to
actually build transitional
housing, construction of new
housing and rehabilitation of
existing housing.
Um, the section 8 project-based
rental assistance, um, housing
is a government this is a
government funded program and
it's available to low-income
households in privately owned
and managed rental units. So the
vouchers stay with the building,
so these would be buildings
where the entire building is
available for section people
that qualify for section 8. that
rental assistance covers the
difference between the tenant
payment.
Which is 30% of their income and
the properties' contract rent.
Um, next slide, please.
Uh, the section 811
project-based rental assistance,
um, provides rental assistance
for extremely low income people
with disabilities, um, who are
linked to long-term services.
Um, the program works like
Section 8 where the rental
assistance covers that
difference between the 30%
income and the property's
contact rent. And, um, different
multi-family properties can
apply for vouchers, so say, um,
maybe they have 100 units and
then they can offer.
Um, they can ask for certain
vouchers, maybe 10 units would
be available for Section 811. So
those vouchers also stay with
that particular property.
The youth homeless demonstration
project is a HUD program
addressing youth homelessness,
um, YHDP serves unaccompanied
youth ages 18 to 24 that are
actually homeless, about to be
homeless, or fleeing domestic
violence. So again, the New
Mexico coalition to End
Homelessness manages the federal
funds of this program, and, um,
we give those agencies match
funding.
Linkages um is a state funded
permanent supportive housing
program and it's effectively run
by Lisa Hawley and her team. Um,
it provides long term rental
subsidies.
Utility assistance, supportive
services to individuals with
these serious mental illness,
um, whose income is less than
30% of the area median income.
There are two parts to this
program. I'm going quickly.
And one part is the um
supportive service
administrators, um, they're like
the case managers for these
folks, which keep them on their
medication and then MFA we, um,
service the housing
administrators to find them
quality housing. Next slide,
please.
Um, so this page is our
production statistics for
quarter 3 of this fiscal year
ending in June, total people
assisted was 4,784 with
$8,195,0977 and now I'll turn it
over to Lisa.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
representatives, thank you for
having me today. Uh, my name's
Lisa Howley. I'm the supportive
housing coordinator supervisor
for the Behavioral Health
Services Division, Health Care
Authority.
Next slide.
And as you know, there's a need
out there to address
homelessness and the need seems
to outpace the resources.
BHSD, however, we oversee
several supportive housing
programs and housing assistance
programs. And just to give some
perspective on the growth that's
happened at BHSD for
housing-related programs, um,
In 2004 is when we started with
the Supportive housing
coordinator by 2010, we had a
budget of 10.
By fiscal year 2019, we were at
3.4 million and to date we're at
over 12 million.
The programs that are funded and
supported. They are supported
with state general funds, so
it's part of our base budget and
reoccurring, as well as we have
two federal federal grant
programs, the path and opening
doors programs. Those are
outreach.
To date, we have 65 contracts
and 35 plus providers.
Next slide.
The range and types of programs.
Next slide please.
are seen on this slide, VHSD we
contract with a provider who
conducts training statewide for
providers for MCO managed care
organizations for anyone who has
interest in, uh, the topics that
this trainer offers. They offer
fair housing trainings, um,
aurora training, so forth.
And as you can see, we try to
touch the whole continuum with
services. So from training we
also have outreach, SSI, SSDI
outreach, access to recovery?
We do support some homeless
shelters through a fiscal year
21 legislative allocation.
We also have housing assistance
programs, transitional housing,
recovery housing, and permanent
supportive housing. Today I'll
touch on our housing assistance
and our permanent supportive
housing programs.
Next slide please.
This slide just has a list of
the programs that are available.
And that viewSD overseas next
slide.
If you could please going, keep
going. I'm sorry, to the
next slide, there we go. Thank
you.
So linkages as uh Donna
mentioned, is a permanent
supportive housing program. This
program began in 2007 with an
initial state allocation
legislative allocation of
$300,000.
This began in 3 sites with 65
vouchers and it's a
collaborative effort between our
strong partner MFA, um, and BHSD
we contract with support service
agency agencies and as Donna
mentioned, MFA, they contract
with Housing administrators.
Next slide please.
So from when the program started
in 2007, to date we're at 5.3
million is the allocation for
work for linkages.
This funding has increased
significantly in the last few
years, um, we were at 396
vouchers statewide?
We've had some updates where we
have increased rent allowance to
115% FMR. We also have Hotel
hotel and motel vouchers to
support individuals who do not
have housing from the time their
voucher is issued to the time
they find the unit.
Linkages is 46% of our, our
total budget and 80% of that
budget goes to rent.
I'm sorry, I'm on the wrong
slide. Keep going, please.
Right here, uh, thank you.
This is where our vouchers are
located. We have 8 sites.
We have 11 support service
agencies and 8 housing
administrators.
The eligibility criteria for
this program is serious mental
illness co-occurring, which has
resulted in functional
impairment.
Homeless, precariously housed,
and it's noteworthy that that's
not the federal definition of
homelessness. It is flexible.
Um, and extremely low income
level at or below 30% area
median income.
Next slide.
So the next program that we have
is the special needs or set
aside housing program, set aside
housing is also a permanent
supportive housing program.
And this is where units are set
aside within low-income housing
tax credit properties with rent
restrictions for individuals
that meet eligibility criteria.
There are 372 units within 43
properties located in 19
counties.
Next slide, please.
This is the eligibility
criteria, as you can see, it's
very broad.
DHSD we contract with what's
called local lead agencies who
screen for this eligibility
criteria.
Which includes at or below 60%
area median income.
Next slide, please.
Next, so we also have a move-in
assistance eviction program.
This program has 7 providers and
covers the entire state.
The eligibility criteria is
serious mental illness.
Or severe emotional disturbance
if the minor has um the
diagnosis and homeless or at
risk of homelessness. This
program offers a grant of up to
$1000 per household.
For rent, utilities or anything
that is housing related.
Of me. Next slide.
The opioid use disorder movement
assistance eviction program is
is is exactly as the move-in
assistance eviction program I
just explained.
However, this started with
opioid settlement funds that
were received in the last
legislative session.
And
The eligibility criteria is
opioid use disorder instead of
the serious mental illness. Next
slide, please.
Next slide.
Next slide. I'll just touch on
the rental assist the housing
assistance and permanent
supportive housing next slide.
OK
Next slide.
So the fresh start rental
assistance program. This also
started with opioid settlement
funds, BHSD we received 6.5
million.
Whereby 2 million were dedicated
to housing.
The Fresh Start rental
assistance program began in
December of 2023 and, and it's
still functioning. We identified
9 providers.
Next slide.
The providers are listed on this
slide, and this program supports
individuals with opioid use
disorder with up to $110,000 of
rental assistance for 6 months,
we, we have since extended that
to 9 months of rent, whichever
comes first.
Eligibility is opioid use
disorder, homeless, precariously
housed, active in recovery, or
behavioral health services. And
this also has a 60% at or below
60% area median income
requirement.
Like
And that that is a very quick
overview that you are
magnificent. You got it all
together and just a little bit
of time. Thanks so much for your
consideration. All right, we've
got a couple of people here on
my list and we got Senator
Padilla. You are next and then
we've got, uh, representative
Caballero and Senator Ortizipino
3, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'll be very quick. mine's more
of a comment, so created, I
created the fostering
connections program back in 2020
and just want to make sure that
you
Connecting all of these services
for the aging out foster youth
to the age of 21. It seems like
there's a lot of money available
there to help with some of
these, um, you know, a
connection expenses that don't
get funded anywhere else. Do you
know if you're connecting with
fostering connections at CYFD?
It's a great program that's
already in place and has a lot
of great funding literally for
this purpose. Yes, absolutely,
um, representative, Madam Chair,
representative Padilla, um, in
fact, I was at.
I was presenting to CYFD
recently, and all of the state
departments are really trying to
coordinate better on all of
these programs and collaborate.
So yes, we're we are in
connection with um CYFD
Department of Health Office of
the Governor, and so forth.
Wonderful. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and so I'm just really
glad to hear that. If there's
any other changes that you're
going to need to that program to
make it work more because you're
the actual, you know,
practitioners that actually make
this stuff happen, uh, so I
appreciate that and I just want
to let you know.
Chair, I don't know if you and I
were sitting together, who I was
actually at Izzy, your annual
housing summit when I got the
idea for that program. It was
literally sit listening to your,
your uh keynote speaker that
year, and I like said, well,
ding ding ding ding we got to
get this thing, we got to do
something here in New Mexico
based on what he was describing.
And so that's actually where all
this came from. So thank you.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you. That shows that these
conferences and summits and so
on are very valuable. Thank you
very much. All right, we got
Representative Roybal Caballero
and then of course Senator
Ortizaina. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you for your
panel. Since we're addressing um
special needs, I'm interested in
knowing how you assist of the
special needs of hearing
impaired, especially hearing
impaired elderly, um.
It's, it's a particular concern
to me only because we have had
several incidences that I've
been called to assist with where
the elderly was hearing
impaired.
had an emergency, didn't know
somebody was at the door,
couldn't hear the doorbell, um,
and the suggestion was made by
the emergency personnel, they
should have a flashing light or
they should have some sort of
equipment, um, a number of
things that were suggested, so
in in this happens in rental as
well as single single family
owned housing, but these
For individuals that are
requiring assistance. So I, I
don't know how that overlaps or
how that, how do we equip those
homes? How do we make sure that
they're equipped necessarily.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Roy Caballero. So
in our um home rehab program,
which we talked about in the,
the last presentation. Um, it
deals with health and safety
issues, so that would be
something that would be eligible
to.
To put in the home if somebody
was hearing impaired and
qualified for the program.
And
I, I missed the the last
meeting, so the question
associated with that with the
individual um that needs the
assistance they would have to be
the ones that qual I mean
applying, um, yes, they would
apply to our home rehab program,
um, and we do that program with
our HIP program is covered
statewide. So if you wanted to
to ask a specific location we
could tell you where there's a
provider.
So it, it would be, um, Madam
Chair, renter or owner of the
home rehab program is actually
for homeowners.
Is there any assistance, Madam
Chair, for renters?
How would that happen if this
was a tenant renting the
property who
Obviously we have a great deal
of low income elderly that are
renting that don't know. Yeah,
Madam Chair, representative, I
believe that any of our
affordable housing properties if
they ask for that accommodation
from the management company,
that would be something that
they could do.
Like the Madam Chair from the
company or the owner of the
home, correct?
Um, if they're renting a home
from the, the home of the
landlord or the homeowner and if
they're in one of our affordable
communities, it would be from
the management company.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you and thank you for
asking that question, uh, very
important to make sure that
hearing impaired people are able
to communicate and get the
assistance they need. Thank you,
Senator Ortizipino.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
thank you for the information.
Very good presentation. A couple
of quick questions. First one is
for you, Donna, the on page 6,
your chart there.
I just found it curious that
recovery housing program.
uh
For the quarter spent $418,000
but served no people.
What's that over, Madam Chair,
Senator, so again these
programs, this particular
programs on a reimbursement
basis. So this would be um
somebody that I, I believe this
might be Hoso Center. This is um
a recovery center in the Gallup
area and so as they're doing
their repairs, they send us the
invoices and we are reimbursed,
but we don't actually count it
as one until the project's
finish.
So, so that one is not gonna be
the individuals served by that
program.
It's going to be the projects
completed by the program.
Um, correct, or at the end, I
believe we, we would count the
number of rooms that they have,
and I, I don't know off the top
of my head if it's 8 or 12, but
actually when the project is
complete, then.
Then we'll count the
individuals,
so I mean I guess I just had
never focused on the fact that
we had this program, and I think
it's great, a great idea. Um,
did that deaf community center
that was built here in
Albuquerque, you know, the one
I'm talking about, the project
on.
Central near San Mateo, near
Highland High School, actually,
it's a 4-story residence for the
death.
That is correct, and that was
specifically for people, uh, for
folks that are handicapped
leader with uh uh eyesight or
hearing impaired folliperaal was
sold housing built at it's a
great development and they're
actually uh uh a finalist in
receiving an award for that uh
that was this money, was it
funded through this program or
some other uh HUD program or
your program, Madam Chair and
Sen it was uh MSA provided some
tax credits and some, uh, New
Mexico.
how, how's New Mexico, how, how
in trust fund money to it. It
did not have the recovery
housing money in there that uh
Donna that you just questioned
on.
Then, Madam Chairman, thank you.
First of all, that's great and
that's a wonderful facility. It
deserves a price, um.
Oxford House. Do they get any of
of of the money from this
program for their facilities, or
they just rent houses that are
on the market? Is that how they
do it? Yeah, Madam Chair, I mean
Senator Ortiz Pino. So Oxford
House did not get this specific
funding, um, I think Lisa has
more information on that, but
this is an open NFA. It started
as a pilot program. It's federal
funding, and so it is an open
Nova, um, we just did an award
at our last board meeting.
Um, but that particular project
did not receive these funds,
would it finance both
Construction and rent or lease
of a building or a purchase of a
building? Yes, it would, yeah.
Yeah, there's a lot of
activities in
in this funding.
Is there a limit on how much is
available?
Um, at this time I'm, I wanna
say there's maybe 20 or a little
over 2 million available?
And so the, the allocation for
New Mexico, correct, and it
comes through you, correct.
Can you say something about
Oxford House, Lisa? Yes, Madam
Chair, Senator Ortizipino, BHSD
does contract with Oxford House.
We are not their entire funding
source, however, um, we are
supporting them for the 19
houses that they have statewide.
We have used some of the opioid
settlement funds to support them
further, and we've created a
revolving loan fund so they have
funds that if a community is
interested in creating an Oxford
house within that.
They can utilize that revolving
loan fund, um, and it just
consists, it's consistent
funding throughout the years,
uh, but yes, we fund them, I
believe their allocation is uh
337 per year, and that's an
increase from 165 and previous
years prior to the opioid
settlement funds. It's a great
model because the Madam
Chairman, the, the residents pay
the rent and, and to get jobs,
they have to have a job and they
pay.
I just love that model, um, now
let me ask one final question on
on on on this particular funding
stream, there were 2 projects
that came before our Health and
Human Services Committee over
the last couple of years in Las
Cruces.
Las Aillas or Los Amigos and
then then the
something house Soteria
could they use these funds?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Tipino,
not at this time because they're
specific to the programs that
they're allocated for. However,
um, I'm not aware of any funding
currently that they may be
eligible for.
they're they're seriously uh,
you know, serious emotional
disorder.
Wouldn't they qualify for the
rehab money?
recovery money or I guess
recovery is just for SUD, but
there was another program that
you had that it was for mental
illness.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Artizpito, possibly the crisis
housing program is what you are
referring to, and I didn't
really cover that program in the
presentation. However, that's
limited funding and we we have
not expanded that program in
some time, but we can definitely
um explore that.
OK, we'll look into that. Thank
you, thank you, Ma. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, OK, I
think we're gonna move on. Let
me say thank you to Don and and
of course uh Lisa again, thanks
for putting up with our pressure
reducing the the presentation
for because of time,
OK, on to Affordable Housing
Act, Julie, you are patiently
waiting back there and then we
have the regional housing one
Donna, you're back on after
this, so thanks Julie. Let's
get.
Morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, I can go
quickly because I know you all
are very familiar with
affordable Housing Act. Um, as
you know, this was a act created
by the state legislature, and it
allows the state, county,
municipality, and a K through 12
school district to donate uh
resources uh in furtherance of
creating affordable housing and
so that can be new construction
or preserving single or
multi-family. Uh, next slide,
please. So I just wanna
To put a friendly reminder we
throw around terms like
affordable housing, but what
does that mean? And HUD defines
it as, um, if a household is
paying 30% or less of its
monthly income towards rent and
utilities. And so just wanted to
uh include an example of that,
and I guess what I would really
draw your attention to is, you
know, some of our most
vulnerable household incomes,
you see that gap of um what
would be considered an
affordable housing costs for
them versus what a fair market
rent is and unfortunately that
gap keeps growing.
Uh, next slide, please. Um, as I
mentioned, uh, these are
considered the eligible donors
under the act.
And what the next slide please,
with the real meat is, is what
they can donate. Um, and the
legislature, uh, had great
wisdom in making this as broad
as possible. Um, obviously land
uh for affordable housing
construction, uh, in the
preservation of existing
housing, uh, we can take an
existing building or conversion
and renovate it into affordable
housing.
Uh, a lot of times, uh, getting
the necessary infrastructure up
to those projects and then also
provide or pay for the cost of
acquisition, development,
construction, financing, etc.
Um, as I've shared with you, I
think in years past when I've
done this presentation, what we
see most counties and
municipalities, uh the, the
majority of the donation, um, is
usually for land, a lot of times
infrastructure, um, but also
that, uh, last bullet there on
helping
With the acquisition costs, etc.
Um, so how does the community
get there, um, MFA has the role
of oversight under the Act and
so uh we ask that a community
develop an affordable housing
plan, and we on the next slide
have what is included in that
plan, um, and then also pass an
ordinance so that they can
legally make that donation and
not run afoul of the
anti-donation clause.
Um, and we really used the plan
as just a roadmap. We're not the
police out there saying, well,
if you didn't meet your goal,
you know, um.
Nothing like that. We really
want to be their partner and
helping them capture and make
sure that when they do develop
affordable housing, it's at the
right price point for the
demographics that they're uh
serving in their county or
municipality.
And on page 7 and 8, I always
like to give you in this yearly
update, um, the list of all the
communities that are
participating, uh, we're up to
39 in total, and since I last um
was able to join you in this
presentation, uh, we added Rio
Rancho, Santa Clara, Teary, and
Valencia County and um in
progress, um, we have, we're
actively working with Sibula
Grant and Sandoval Counties.
Uh, Grant will probably be, um,
have everything approved within
this next month actually, as
well as the municipalities of
Hurley Baird and Angel Fire.
And next slide, please. Um,
And so the donations um are
usually handled through either
uh a request for proposals or an
application process.
And the donations can go to
private individuals, for profit,
not for profit, tribal housing
agencies, you name it, um, so it
is again a bright a broad group
of people that can consider and
be eligible for the donations in
order to bring that affordable
housing into the community and
be a partner.
Uh, the other thing I wanted to
include in this year's
presentation, um, next slide,
please. It's just some examples
of some really recent examples
actually of where donations uh
from a county or municipality
resulted in affordable housing.
Um, 1 in Hobbs, um, Hobbs has
been a great partner and been
very active in donating funds uh
for some senior apartments, um,
and you'll see there 56 units,
which is a real game changer in
the community of Hobbs.
Um,
and at the, um,
Percentage of income that those
units can serve as well as the
amenities, um, that are included
in that development. Yes,
housing was the developer in
this instance and construction
has been completed and then just
recently, and I believe our May
or June board meeting,
um Riodoso uh donated $1000 and
is leasing the land to a project
that will be called Elk Meadows,
um, and this was just a very
recent award, um, they also
Received the 9%, uh, low-income
housing tax credit. So between
that donation and then getting
the 9% tax credit, you know,
those kind of partnerships is
what gets um housing projects
like this across the finish
line.
Uh, next slide, please, and then
the project uh Senator Artizy
Pino that we were just
referencing, um, that I wanted
to let you know um.
Again, just an amazing project,
such a unique project, um, and
being recognized as, um, Izzy
said nationally, um, the city of
Albuquerque, uh, came in with
quite a sizable donation, uh so
again was the developer in that
construction is complete and not
only will it serve the
individual that may have the
hearing impairment, but their
family members are eligible to
be with them, and so a lot of
those great um you know.
very specific things that you
need to keep those residents
safe. So great project.
Um, and then qualified grantees,
um, again, those are the um
entities that are eligible to
receive the donation and be that
partner with the, um, county or
municipality.
And um.
You know, we help provide
assistance both in developing
the plan, helping with the
ordinance, um, if they have any
questions about who should be
potentially approved as a
qualifying grantee to make sure
that they can indeed come
through on that project and be a
great partner.
And then the final thing I just
wanted to mention, um, on this
slide, you know, many of these
projects, uh, come to fruition
because of the 9% low income
housing tax credit as well as
the 4% and it's really, um, I
wanted you to know that in our
qualified allocation plan, uh,
that we do update yearly, um,
you do get extra points um in
your application if there is a
donation and that's kind of what
is referred to there is that.
Additional soft source. It's a
donation the project does not
have to pay that back, um, and
so we do, you know, want to
encourage those kind of
partnerships to take place and
recognize that for the um
Tax credit rounds.
And with that, I'm
Uh, happy to answer any
questions. Hope that was fast
enough. Thank you, Julie. Yes,
great job. Thank you very much.
All right, we have one person
here, one senator, Senator
Gonzalez here. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Julie. I,
I just have, well, on page 3.
Yes. Oh,
so do you have that many school
districts?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, um, thank you for that
question. I think we actually
have in probably the last 2
years, um, Santaan in particular
comes to mind, uh, but we have
been approached by other, I want
to say Santa Rosa was another
one,
So yes, we are starting to get
um more school districts coming
and interested to see how we
might all partner together not
only MFA, the school district,
but also their local county or
municipality and how it works
under the Act is there's a
provision where um in the act
that the school district can
kind of execute a memorandum of
understanding or contract with
the county and municipality if
there's a donation so they can
kind of reserve or set aside.
So many units uh for their
employees of their school
district.
Uh
And what about universities?
Um, there is a provision that
would allow universities as well
to kind of enter into that
arrangement. We have not.
I
To my knowledge, um, unless he
knows differently, we have not
had a university approaches
recently, uh, inquiring about
that. Oh, that's interesting,
but uh going back to the school
districts because they have the
authority for teacher each.
That's already in place to have,
you know, for
being able for their own policy.
Maybe I might give you a call
and a little bit more about
this. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I, yes,
I have one more here.
Representative Garcia, real
quick, Madam Chair, this
affordable housing.
Where's all this money at more
in Albuquerque or anywhere in
the state in particular, and
I've asked that question about
everything that's happening
because it seems to me that it
doesn't have results.
If you could answer that
briefly, Madam Chair,
Senator Representative Garcia,
um, so the money is through the
whole variety of our programs. I
mean, the donation would come
from the county or municipality,
and it can be, you know, one of
those four things, and then
depending on who they partner
with as the developer or
whatnot.
Um, they would decide together
what funding they're gonna apply
for or if they're gonna have to
take out a loan. So it just, it,
it, it's all over. It depends on
who applies, but primarily, um,
it will be applications for the
9% or 4% low income housing tax
credit.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and what
really happens is the uh the
lack of communication, people
don't know what's available, so
they just don't apply for it and
you know that we should uh work
on something that everybody is
aware of what's happening cause
you don't ruin in Mexico is a
little bit different than
anything else. Thanks, uh, thank
you, Madam.
Thank you, Representative, and,
um, I, oh, I do have one more
person on the list just came up,
um, Representative Roybel
Caballero. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for your
presentation. We very quickly on
page, um.
So on page 7, I noticed that uh
the city of Grants in the county
of Sibila were not on here. Is
that because they did not submit
a plan and do you know, do you
have any idea why that would be?
Uh,
madam chair and Representative
Caballero,
um, Sibala is a county that we
are actively working with and I
know so what if it is a county,
um, a lot of times they decide
to work with the municipalities
within their county and kind of
work jointly together and have
the county uh work on the plan
and then they would individually
adopt the ordinance. So Sibula
County is one that we are
actively working with. Their
staff has been great and we hope
within the next few months.
that they'll hopefully finalize
things. So, but I do know
they've actively been working
with the municipalities in their
county.
Thank you, and they do have the
city of Grants Housing
Authority, um, so
I don't think Milan or any of
the other entities have, do
they, or is it just the city of
grants, um.
Madam Chair and representatives,
excuse me, sorry, um, they have
been working with Milan and Gran
as well, so yeah, and I believe
also even um.
Working with their school
district in there. OK, that's
good. Thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative. That's all I
have on this one, but I just
want to make a point real quick,
um, that you, I'm sure you are
aware that this last session
when we were talking about the,
the donations and the Affordable
Housing Act and the main crux of
it is for is to really uh to
exclude or to, how can I put it,
uh, the, um, to make counties,
cities, municipalities, and so
on exempt from the anti-dation
clauses really in a nutshell,
that's what it does. The, the
point that I'm trying to make
is that last session, um, I
amended, we, the legislature
were helping me with a bill
that, um, had to do through the
NMFA
that is, is the, it's called the
local government planning grant
fund, and this is all for grants
and in there I put housing in
there, which was not there
before, so they would not
qualify for grants for for
housing plans and and all these
other things, but now that is
available there.
It doesn't even have to be
alone. It actually is a grant.
So I just wanted to let you know
in case so we can kind of put
things together as we can
leverage all that we can to help
with housing, Madam Chair, thank
you for that because it has been
a game changer and we have been
trying to talk about it and make
the communities aware that
that's out there now thanks to
the legislature. Thank you and
thank you, Julie, for your work.
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
thank Julie for all that she's
done today is actually I was
looking and I think.
is the 3rd anniversary here at
MFA uh.
But unfortunately she's going to
be leaving us. I think this is
the last LLC meeting that she'll
have to go.
Wow.
Thank you Julian the short time
you've been here, you have done
amazing work. We appreciate you.
We wish you well. OK. All righty
then we're gonna go back to
Donna and uh.
John Garcia, and we're going to
zoom through this.
Uh,
OK, so I will quickly give you a
summary of um MFA's regional
housing oversight or annual
report, um, so page one, we're
required to provide limited
oversight for the regional
housing authorities and report
to this committee, uh, every
year. Next slide.
Our responsibilities include
review of their budgets. Um, HUD
actually provides their funding
and approves their budgets, so
we just review it.
Again, um, approval of new board
members, approval of a new
executive directors. Um, we
review reports of creation and
disillusion of nonprofit
entities um that are formed by
the regional housing
authorities. Um, next slide,
page 3.
Um, approval of contracts over
100,000, which includes real and
personal property and, um,
provide annual reports to DFA,
LFC, and to this committee. Next
slide.
Um, housing New Mexico MFA
provides the limited oversight
of the Northern Regional Housing
Authority, Eastern Regional
Housing Authority and Western
Regional Housing Authority.
Uh, next slide, please.
Um, so this page shows the units
and the section 8 tenant-based,
uh, vouchers for each of the
regional housing authorities and
it also shows their rating with
HUD and I'll just um let's see
that so I'll note that there are
a total of 1,199 rental units
within all those regional
housing authorities?
And a total of 35,060.
Uh, vouchers, Section 8
vouchers, and um just to note
that Northern Regional Housing
Authority is in troubled status
with HUD. So just wanted to note
that from this page, um, next
slide.
Um, so this page shows the
location of each of those units
and the vouchers.
Uh, next slide, which is page 7,
This shows the location of the
units and the vouchers that are
um specific to Western regional
Housing Authority.
Next slide.
And these are the location of
the units and the vouchers for
Northern Regional Housing
Authority. It says Western on
the top of the page, but that,
um, was a mistake that should be
Northern.
Next slide.
Um,
HUD funds all of the regional
housing authorities and approves
their operations and they
conduct the monitoring. So we
have a very limited oversight
and it's an unfunded mandate as
well, and since we don't have,
we don't have any teeth, so um.
So let's, um, let's just move to
page 11.
And, um, I'll just give you a
quick update of Northern
Regional Housing Authority with
regards to their late audit and
troubled status, um,
So they have, they have not um
turned in their fiscal year
ending 6:30 22 audits, so they
are far behind. Um, they've had
difficulties contracting an
audit firm and have since
procured a new audit form so uh
firm, so we're hoping that'll um
get them caught up. Um, they
have obtained an extension from
HUD for their audits that are
currently in process.
Um,
The, let's see there
procurement, um.
Yeah, I, I just already
mentioned the new auditor and
they just to note, they cannot
be removed from troubled status
with HUD until the next
monitoring, which is in 2025. So
even if their audits come in
within the next few months,
they'll just remain in that
status till HUD goes and
monitors them.
And uh next slide, uh, John and
I will stand for any questions.
He actually kind of manages this
this oversight.
Sorry, I didn't put my button
in. Did you want to say anything
on this or just stand for
questions? Madam Chair.
Uh, senators and representatives
of the committee, I do have a
more recent update for Northern.
OK, they currently are
recruiting for an executive
director. Uh, there's an interim
director now, uh, they're
recruiting for an executive
director and a finance position.
Um, there are 22 audit, they,
they did as as uh.
Donna mentioned hire a new firm
and they're 22, 2022 audit is
expected to be complete by the
end of this month. So we're
happy to hear that and then
they've set a schedule for the
2023 audit to be
Uh, completed in 90 days after
that, so, uh, I think that's a
little ambitious, but, uh, well,
hopefully they'll they'll be
able to do that and um they will
present a restoration plan to
our board on this September
board meeting with uh an outline
of, of how they're going to get
themselves out of the troubled
status.
Good.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
So along with all of the
oversight and the approval of
the commissioner's approval of
the ED and all that kind of
stuff. Is, does that come along
with training also? I mean,
because it seems to me like the
12 years I've been on this
committee, seems like we kind of
bump into these challenges with
the Northern is facing right
now. Is there also training that
goes along with Senator Padilla,
yes, we are offering, we have
done training with them and we
are continuing to do training,
especially board training, and
when they have their new board
members.
Um, they said they would take us
up on our offer to have some
specific training. And so, Madam
Chair, I guess where I'm going
with that is just, you know,
maybe a more proactive approach
like, you know, the school
boards come together once a year
and they do sort of catch up
training for the school board
members. Uh, they do catch up
training for, you know, like
various things. I was just
wondering if maybe uh an set
time once a year to have a.
Kunta, come on in, let's get all
on the same page and make sure
everybody's doing the same
thing, um, that we need them to
do is that uh something you do
now, Madam Chair, Senator, that
is a great idea and that is
something that we can schedule
on an annual basis, definitely.
I think it would be helpful in
that way you can cut this stuff
off before it turns into issues
for one of these. Thank you.
Yes, thank you very much for
that good request, Senator. All
right, we're going to go on to
Serra Gonzalez. You're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So with the Northern Regional
Housing Authority, the the
office is square now.
Madam Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
the um
The offices in Taos for northern
region.
But uh, Madam chair, it seems
like all the correspondence and
everything has to go to subcor.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, um, he's the section
8,
vouchers for Northern are being
um.
Managed by El Camino Real.
Uh, housing authority, which is,
which is based in Socorro.
Or my mentor, so that will
change once though.
Those positions are filled and.
You had mentioned that I was uh.
Advertising for a director and a
financial person and also the
audits being incomplete.
So, so, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, um, I don't believe
that that is going to change. I
believe that's, that was
established, uh.
Some years ago, I'm not sure
what the history is, but.
Those those section 8 vouchers
are being managed.
And I just um.
Somewhere down the line, I, I
thought.
The area that's being served
versus and I'll just give you an
example, a family, uh, in Taos
at all.
A lady passed away.
And I know myself because I
tried myself.
It took us like 3 months for and
things like that, you know, uh,
just a cautious because here we
are finishing an audit,
you know, where they're supposed
to be.
Yeah, yeah, Madam Chair,
Senator, yeah, I think Northern
has had some issues and
definitely we are offering
training and doing whatever we
can to help them get out of the
status and to better their
operations.
Thank you very much and before I
move on to Representative Kate's
we're on this topic. I don't
want to forget, so with the
limited authority that the MFA
has with these regionals. Uh,
we, you have, we kind of
supposedly it's oversight. It's
called oversight, but yet we
don't have a whole lot of
authority to do oversight. Do
you have any kind of even
minute, any kind of oversight
authority over the audits for
them whatsoever where you can
get in and get them to.
Cooperate and work together as
Senator Gonzalez indicated here
for communication or not, is it
all done by HUD, Madam Chair,
most everything is done by HUD.
HUD funds them and monitors them
and oversees their operations.
What we do is we certainly reach
out to them when their audits
are late. We send multiple
emails. We make multiple phone
calls, um, ask them what's going
on, ask them how we could
support them, um, but we don't
have any um any sort of teeth.
There's nothing we can withhold
from them because we do not fund
them. So basically they are
completely under the auspices of
HUD.
And not MFA or the state in this
case. So yeah, we have a legal,
legally we have a limited
oversight, but again no real way
to enforce that. Yeah, yeah, so
in your oversight, what, what is
it that you do oversight for if
we can't do, uh, I know it's not
fair to MFA to be vested with a
responsibility to do oversight
when you have no authority
otherwise to do much with it
because it's under hot, so I
guess I just wanted to, to know.
that, um, but you know what, for
the sake of time, we can move on
and um and I'm happy to hear
from John that they're moving
ahead with their audit. They
were late and they're moving
ahead and it should be completed
by the end of and I think you
said if I wrote it down
correctly this month,
um, yes, madam, that is correct.
That is the, the information I
received from the interim, uh.
Executive director. I see. So
then they hopefully will be in
compliance and, and, and again,
that's up to her, I guess, to
determine whether that's
complete and in compliance.
Thank you very much. All right,
then we're gonna move on to
Representative Kates. I thank
you, Madam Chair. I will ask my
question offline, but thank you
very much and the interest of
time. Sure, thank you,
Representative Representative
Roba Caballero, you're the last
one here. Thank you, thank you,
Madam chair and just real
quickly, I'm not quite sure if I
heard this yet, um.
How did the and this is
reference to Northern also, uh,
have there been any suspension
of services or has it affected
their service delivery services
or operations in any manner is
that cause, uh, is there cause
there to um to worry about that
Senator and representative, um,
not that we're aware of. There's
still, they still have their
staff and um they're still fully
functioning, it's just they're
behind
Of their financial,
Madam Chair, Representative
Robo, uh Caviero, I, I did
receive information from the
interim executive director that
they're, their occupancy rate is
like at 98%, so there they are
serving their, their
constituents out there.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
I think we are done. I don't
have anyone else on my list, so
I want to thank the staff and of
course um Izzy for your
leadership, you and your great
staff and the membership here.
Thanks so much for all your work
and uh yes, did I have did I
miss something? May we say
goodbye to this.
No, because I'm gonna come here
next time. I'm just we're so
attached to it. This is our last
meeting right here. That's true.
Good point.
That
Madam Chair and Representative
Kate, we will figure out a way
to honor Senator Rodriguez
because she's been our housing
hero, so she'll definitely be
honored to be there. I don't
need to be old.
Thank you, that's way too much,
