Why does your number one i'd
like to tell think all the
veterans from being here today
and the respouses and people are
I like to thank the people that
invite us to the beautiful place
you know I drove my bike up here
yesterday niche raid you know
it's going to be a nice day or
will them start with
introductions I run and just
recognize the the secretary
mister here does your and has
deputy
bitters benefit dead managers
are here uh first of all the
general what I would like to do
is introduce the committee and
we will start with you for
members
good morning my name is andrea
revenue the representative for
district sixty four which is
curry roosevelt and chavis
county which close for tallest
raspal area
thank you good morning everyone
is pleasure be heard beautiful
center as I just love center
I am art delay cruze I represent
district twelve which is alberto
giba to sought the heart of the
cell valley so if you picture
albert self site is as my area
and I always tell everyone that
I represent the middle of that.
Wonderful district thank you
chain
thank you mr chairman it's great
to be in san rose my name is
debby saraniana overpresent
house district twenty one and
bernard county
northeast question about tricky
umm and I was there for federal
and I my parents were raise a
borner raised here so it's
always it's always feels like I
mean home when I come here thank
you.
The.
Thank you mister chair
I have representative and you
see only on the corner
representative six was despite a
similar machine county
vietnam veteran and getting
older every day I wouldn't think
I got drafted into the army and
june of sixty nine in a escaped
from them and february seventy
one so I had a good short
fifteen one to monday day of
active service and do it is
there paying good today thank
you very such
thank you miss my name is alan
martinez I represent house
district twenty three which is a
northern part of reorential and
the western edge of the town of
burning
and I was telling former
representative george godgets
like coming home to this
building cause we when I did a
lot of work in establishing this
this building
it was reclaimed
by the better into san arose and
i've.
Being a looks beautiful.
Thank you mister chairman
committee when was yes santa
rosa so please meet you on
lister russia's
state representative for
district thirty nine in southern
city room
and
so sitting in a mexico a
district is basically all great
county portion of catering and a
portion of of he that will
county so basically supplies to
mexico uh it's a pleasure to be
here my daughter is currently
serving active duty she's in
okay howard
is a dental tech so if i'm gonna
have beautiful death when I get
older
I know that and then my father
was a three uh uh he did three
tours of vietnam grandfathers
purple heart and will work to
all of my families and in the
military it's a big part of her
family so it's a pleasure to be
here thank you for having us.
Good morning one c senator
herald pope junior district
twenty three northwest albucker
keep urgently on county happy to
be here apologize running a
little bit late.
Good morning I read them for
them to staff person for the
military barons affairs
committee I work for the
legislative council service and
with me is dominican at all
she's near the committee she can
be fantastic thanks for having
us
thank you for the introduction
of my name is harry garcia I
represent horses to sixty nine
with course parcels have one
mechanism really what is chance
of oral countries
I was not drafted into anything
are going to ring or in nineteen
sixty eight the last the may
ninety sixty eight and I was in
vietnam in december of ninety
sixty eight at eighteen year
long
you know my whole family I have
four brothers and there will be
a mom to are a one army to our
force.
My was a marine corps my
daughters and world war in the
navy somebody had to be in the
navy had
but anyway you know i've been
sharing this committee in two
thousand and sixteen and is you
know I will not be back next
year but I hope somebody stands
up and takes over the rains and
keep time helping our veterans
because that's the most
important thing we have veterans
you know I didn't allow the
committees in the standing
mexico but the most important
one is this one right here and
you know if it wasn't for better
than gentlemen we will not be
here today but i'm gonna do real
briefly.
I'm let everybody introduce
themselves to you secretary.
My but another question ma'am
you know we represent everybody
you know it's not just a
discrete in my eyes if union
help with anything to do with
veterans your free reach out to
myself really member of this
committee because it is you know
different members
given reps for senators have
different committees yet they
are there are signed to you're
not assigned to all of them so
that's probably where he's not
on this one thank you ma'am.
Here today I represent house
district fifty one it's almost
gordo so it's a military
community we have home and air
for a space with blast to have
that so thank you mister
chairman precedent but thank you
both before going to schedule
i'd like to have mister andrew
francis come up to the volume
here to see a few words please.
Good morning mister chairman in
community members or a committee
members
I want to thank you guys for
coming out
today.
When they first asked about the
meaning I said bring him on it's
bring over here.
It's let him enjoy animals and
and
are wonderful community in in
the people here and if you've
ever been here but.
We have a beautiful
center here.
And we want a shortcase it as
much as we can.
And right next to it is a
wonderful park leak with a whip
it in it's it's beautiful here
but I just want to I want to go
for a few things with you guys
and uh
tell you little bit about the
the the veteran center
and
when I first got here so been
about two years.
Two years ago david jave david
floris was our our first
director.
And he was a vietnam veteran
door gunner.
And I spoke to him little bit
about the job and stuff like
that but his really really nice
guy and and well known in and
you know
big family and he said andrew he
know what if you ever get a
chance as a job to take is a
really good job and are you a
lot of pride in this and he
called it a secret secret place
for the veterans.
And done you know I looked at
mister and why do we to make
sure he got sick and he passed
away.
The age and orange
and
so they weren't had a named
center after him and we had a
big big ceremonial for him and
it was really nice but this
veteran center here in san rose
service all veterans have
guarded the county by assisting
with funding resources provided
by the federal government as
well as assistance was simple
applications for services such
as property tax exemption
hunting fishing license
employment assistance assistance
and more element remind you that
the we're just a resource were a
county and disor we op as many
veterans as we can
technical support with laptops
is available for these veterans
use
the the department of veterans
affairs.
The via so organization mental
health providers are available
on sight every third wednesday
of the month.
So from las vegas and I was
talking to edward there they're
here every third wednesday and
these service are veterans here
and we usually get about ten
death to twelve veterans and
some days may maybe two and
three but it's very vital for
those
those veterans
you know we have women coming in
too is not just men.
So it's it's it's men and women
anyway
they're here from tended ten to
two
to assist with the uh the
veterans with their needs.
And we all know that veterans
are very important.
To us today it's very very
important but up
we are the representative for
the national cemetery affairs is
that the center every three
months now we haven't had him
here because I know they had
issues but it he was here and
assisting and up the veteran
center house is a museum
and if you've seen our museum in
here is beautiful.
It's beautiful it's small but we
take pride in it
we take pride in it in in if you
get a chance get in their walk
around and look at some of the
year the veterans in there in
the room there are things
community center also this place
provides a community it's for a
community also nudges veterans.
So yeah community is very big
and also the chapel and I spoke
with with mister dela cruise
here and you know it's beautiful
is beautiful and deborah was in
there also and I know I I
guys are as veterans that have
come through that door you'd be
surprised and and not just from
urban from out of state that
have gone in there and event.
The.
With their.
Their life
and they go through a lot
believe me and every morning we
come in here we meet with our
our local veterans.
And I can sit here and I can
tell you I can tell you I can
promise you that some of these
veterans tell me some serious
stories.
And it it's very touching to me
cause i'm a veteran myself with
united states army.
And it's very touching to me and
I take pride in it.
In an
anybody that comes to that door
as not just veterans but we
treat him all the same.
But those veterans eat
some you are a veterans here and
you know how it is with other
veterans that have been through
the very.
I've still get obstacles in
their life but yeah the the we
have coffee water it's on site
daily for the patrons
we have organized trips
that as a matter of factor going
to the state fair here september
tenth.
For a military appreciation so
we are taking a bus slower I
don't know if it's a go yet but
we're still going to go to that
and i'd take them because it's
nice to get him out they get to
get out of their homes and stuff
like that.
And I was telling them mister
dela cruise and endeavor you
know you're guys were trying to
get these younger the younger
generation to come over here
and end because we're not going
to be here forever you know
whether it's passway
you know we were tire but we
need to get those younger
veterans.
Involved in it it's hard because
I know they're not disabled they
are not retired because they
have families and understand
them but like all the older
returns you know most of them
they come here in their pretty
are pretty valuable here but
limit let me give you one more
thing here
or a couple of things.
So
it also serves as a beacon of
hope designed to address
challenges and create a lasting
positive image.
The center so my vision is to
make sure every veteran feels
supported understood and valued
and has a place where they can
find the resources they need to
thrive after serving our
country.
Now my mission is to provide a
safe heaven where veterans can
rest access essential services
connect with their peers and re
integrate into civilian life
with dignity and respect.
So by supporting this veteran
center we are building a future
or no veteran is left behind
so
there's a few things so keep us
in mind as far as
for money
I know I know yeah but guys I
want to pay the parking lot you
know as veterans we we need a
parking lot I want to get a huge
helicopter I want to provide a
really not their so we can told
her certain moneys up there
a new van you know there's
there's several things that I
mean needs a wants uh
new message bored outside back
to back and not only that that
is a safety.
For a community also that
involves community members.
But
that's all I got I just want to
thank you for coming out today
and up for your time as
supporting your commitment.
Thank you all of you what you do
and and you veterans have a
challenge going for you before
you leave today I want to give
you a challenge coin if you are
a veteran.
Okay and that's from the county.
But I want to thank you for it
for coming out it is it's nice
to have you here in hopefully we
can do it again we can do it
again and one more thing we will
be feeding you guys so don't go
anywhere stayput
at noon and also if you can sign
in there is a sign in log.
And if I can get a card from any
of you before you leave today I
would appreciate that very much
but.
Yes if you can really really
help out our veteran center I
would really appreciate it and I
probably will be there for the
legislative session
so I can.
Speak again but I thank you very
much thank you
thank you mister
next I would like to have
sergeant major billing gray go
come up
going sir.
You know what touch measure we
go to go ahead right away that
that work.
Okay now okay all right good
morning my name is **** gregor I
don't know it's going to come up
here say a few words about.
But anyway hey again I want to
thank you for all attending or
holding your meeting here and
south or source all just like
monk or andrew centres of
director here stated is that.
You know I live here center also
been retired five years old I
tried to get involved with a
veteran center here and and
other entities that I work keep
pretty busy at here but.
Just understood that he
mentioned here is that
you know I remember when they
opened this place up their
veteran center with el martinez
when he was a deputy but I was
still in formations and uniform
at that time but you know I came
through the grand opening and
stuff like that so I I just want
to ask you all their I know the
heart the work that you do to
help and you know the
legislative the initiative stuff
that you do for our veterans
here not just in guatemala
because anybody new mexico but
uh
I just asked maybe
you know either with the
department of iterate services
or with the state so how that we
can get a lot of recording with
maybe would day and the county
manager what we can do here as a
municipality or local you know
to enhance the veteran center
here you know it's getting small
we're ring out of room and stuff
like that so some to make it
work we can show you know the
the the honor that we give our
veterans that you know passed
and present and stuff like that
so appreciate any kind of
service or representative that
can contact either and what the
county or us as the advisory
committee here with what a loopy
county and a to enhance this
place here because it's a lot of
you probably in all this places
here my correct I mean I know a
few you do and you know I know a
lot of the veterans here I mean
I know a lot of these are their
personal stories how they feel
the prior that they have you
know with the service that they
did in this and that
and I just ask you i've
attendance of your meetings i've
seen during the sessions whether
it be audio visual or this
netbed I just want to challenge
all of you here because I know
some of you are veterans and I
thank you for your service like
we all did here but
I just want to change
representatives here is I know
you got a busy time up there at
the state capital but as the
veterans affairs committee here
is that hey take time to know
your local veteran organizations
in these role areas uh and I
guess that i've been coming here
five years
and very really see any
representatives at your all
level.
That unless we invite them and
sometimes it comes sometimes
they don't or they have local
ties here they might show up and
I just challenge you in the
future is that take some time
sit down talk to your local
veterans come to god lupie
county spent a half a day with
us see what we're all about and
maybe you can provide it with
some good information how we can
do to develop this veteran
center here and and not all the
here just with guatemala be
county but better ways that we
can do the improve the messages
to get out to help our veterans
who need help out here in our in
our countries and stuff like
that so in again like I want to
think and you sanchez want you
dan the county matters all the
county worker they do a great
job here every day to help us
this is our venting area you'll
see a lot of the older betters
are not here right now here but
you know I know their personal
stories you know from every area
and stuff like that so we need
places like this and we need to
help and I just ask you just hey
see what you can do for us or
get us information how we can
work it and will provide a help
you on that way so thank you and
again hope you enjoy guatelup
account the city center also.
Okay thanks
thank you trading major griggle
and next i'm going to bring up
for mostly representative
georgia dollars junior
and die if you think i'm kind of
messed up I am when I first came
in to those sixty hundred moment
or
not but that it's all good.
Back when I was and it was just
a little box like this with two
buttons and now you got all of
this but thank you very much
mister chairman members of the
committee thank you for being
here and I know me gordon's a
long drive you know what
albuquerque silver cities a long
drive so we appreciate you folks
being here or albuquerque is
just a hop skip in a jump so but
we appreciate everybody being
here.
Uhm
couple of things wrote quick and
I know I know.
Um mr sanchez covered a lot so
did mr gregor so i'll just be
brief
this place here are veteran
center here was the hospital.
It was our original hospital
here and it was built in the
nineteen fifties
for late forties early fifties
okay
as time went on and and and
everything was happening and and
and uh lives much one it became
very updated okay so back in
twenty fifteen twenty sixteen
i'm not sure when they built a
brand new hospital out here.
On fifty four so this late this
was empty and it was a county
building it state as a county
building because the county of
add on this and since its
inception okay so you know what
the county commission being what
it is at the time I was the
county manager here
we we we decided that maybe we
should do something with this
building to help our veterans to
work with our veterans this was
a two story building at one time
and you see the elevator shaft
out here ok that that covered
our second story.
I mean it so we we weren't from
the process we got approval to
the commission and everybody
else and we went through the cd
process and it took us a while
because the first time we went
for funding to we did not get it
we were not awarded the funny
second time we were very
successful.
Okay so they they are came
through it was seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars we had
some legislative appropriations
away and and and some funny from
the county and we got this whole
thing done I can't believe I
can't remember the exact figure
but it was somewhere on one
point two million dollars to do
this okay so it was it was very
very involved and and one of the
people that helped us the most
and and he was a big part of
this is a representative allen
martinez when he was a deputy
secretary you know we really
appreciate that at and and he
was here for a grand opening.
And and said some really kind
words for us and and to us and
and it was a.
Publicly I want to thank you for
the help that you gave us the
guide is that you gave us on
some of this and and and we're
really appreciated that.
Where it was it was it was long
process but what you're sitting
in now okay if I remember
correctly and and our county
manager dianes back there down
or bond she may remember more
than I do but this was these
were the officers part of this
was the kitchen okay up on the
second floor right above us were
all the patient rooms and then
up there were our viewing
platform is that was our that
was a operating room and that's
where a lot of babies here in
one of the county were born i'm
great so
diana i'm i'm hoping i'm correct
yes we had dental office of
clinic and everything else so
you know what you're sitting in
a in a place here where many
people or many people used to
traverse and it was it was a
real year it was a really
good place to be especially a
small community where there are
no hospitals but anyway.
Mister sanchez covered this and
and you know what please go in
there and and and now and now.
Check out our oral or a little
museum in there and the wall of
honor you know what we've got
fifty blacks up there.
On on gentleman from while of
the county that dare
lost the lives.
And and it was the ultimate
sacrifice so you know what they
they're they're talking about
bringing in funding and
everything else would one of the
major things been discussing
this and this has been on for
close to ten years now is the
viewing platform up on top.
Okay we have we have the symbol
of all fiber i'll find branches
of service and at that time back
when when we are building this
thing that was supposed to be
ear.
A view platform and you can
remember that representative
martinis and.
Oh it just never came
defiritation but who were
working on it we're working all
these things and and will love.
We'll see you open to anything
okay mister chairman and members
of the committee generally I
stand for questions if you have
any questions.
Any questions from any committee
member
states
mr dodge so you were the chairs
meant tours for your the one to
blame I need to talk to you
after mr
old
mr chairman representative
martin is let me tell you
something
it yes I was mental
sick speaker egoph said you know
what does you've been here while
and I have a very special
project for you okay and it's
going to be a tough one and from
the very first day the very
first day in what we we we
clicked we connected and
everything else but the one
thing that I told him I told
representative of garcia and I
told everybody else's watch out
for this guy because he has no
filter.
Okay no filter whatsoever he
says what's on his mind and then
you know what that that makes
them a great representative and
we appreciate you very much
thank you for that
george repair martinez thanks
for what you did for this
particular place and you are no
you did a lot for a not just
this place to leave that would
you couple years and you did
well.
All through it not been a better
your hearts in it and to do
things for veteran if it's done
your heart it already ever works
and you were a good mentor
georgia when we sat back in that
corner he told me harry the only
problem you have you do not have
a filter
I told him what do you mean he
said what's on your mind you're
going to see it if you have been
somebody fine and if it doesn't
find it but don't change who you
are because that's what it's all
about your thank you for being
here thank you but in this
building right now for being a
year and would have been said
georgia can get back to your
navy seat okay
they could jump up there we're
going to go to item number one
which is very service department
update and we'll have a
signature
and not believe that i'm sorry
it would come on up.
It'll be before we get started
the secretary you know we're
we're not running short and time
by any means but you know
for you folks do your
presentation and for people to
have questions you know keep
them assured by the brief as
possible could you not believe
you track on people and people
fall speak and stuff if we get
to the to the
whole we're supposed to be doing
will be just fine thank you.
Good morning mr chair and a
military veterans advisory
council and thank you for the
invite and again thank you to
santa rosa for hosting this this
is a beautiful facility got here
early this morning so I had an
opportunity just to
eh really embrace this and and
what they're doing to honor our
veterans here in that would be
counting is is is huge and of
the the biggest thing is as you
as you know a lot of these
members i've served with
throughout my career so I know
where their hearts at and and
for the coming from so I truly
appreciate the opportunity so
what I prepared to do today for
mr chair and then the committee
is mister brief update on what
we've been doing a little over
the last year my sat in front of
you but at the same time last
year is having just been
appointed as an acting secretary
and I I would like to kind of
give a the committee and update
I wanted to start with our
cemetery updates currently we
still have our three state
cemeteries that are that are are
are fully active in the state or
fourth that we head lobby for we
are still waiting on word back
from the uh nca at an at the
national level if we are going
to get a va grant to open our
fourth cemetery in carl's bad
area that that is still pending
and down should we receive word
i'll i'll make sure you update
the the the committee but the
three cemeteries we do have have
been very active over the of the
past year in one just
maintenance and upkeep we've
been upgrading a lot of our
safety areas to ensure that that
it's a a safe experience for the
families and everybody else and
that it's a quality experience
for the veteran given they're
their less rates.
Uhm and that's an extension of
their families couple of the
areas that we've that we were
assisted with with your support
last year and some of our
upgrades
we are leaning forward trying to
get a committee shelter and
angel fire cause right now we do
services in obviously angel
fires not conducive to an out
and outdoor ceremony in the
middle of the winter but we
can't.
We we don't get a vote when
somebody is called up by the
lord so we will make insurance
that's going one of our
priorities along with that we've
had a couple of setbacks in
gallop in angel fire in the work
that was done in the past it was
not done to standard and we're
having to go back and actually
redo some of those areas in
gallop and an angel fire we're
talking about paiding as fault
the curbing and some of the
column bearings where they were
set are not set priority so
they're going to have to be
reset this will not interrupt.
Any
any of the internal mains or the
remains that are their present
but it it's gonna we're going to
be a couple constructions on for
for a bit trying to get that
warranty work done we are
working with gsd they're going
after the vendors but we can't
wait for that to be settled to
accomplish her so we've we've
shifted some funds or within dvs
that we had intended for their
purposes to encompass that
immediately written to ensure
that the families and.
Are or taken care of
in personnel we've obtained what
you've would you've asked me to
do seriously the we've asked for
visos to be upgraded in the less
year are vsos were identified as
eligibility interviewers which
obviously you all have worked
with vso's and you know that
they're essentially case
managers there case workers and
I took that to heart and I
worked with our team and we went
to spot and have already placed
our vehicles into a social work
job classification got him
removed from the eligibility
benefits interviewer and there
are paying them equivalent or
better than our federal v s r's
now so I was training everybody
so they could get poached by the
va and that's going to stop here
for pretty quickly because we
are able to bring them in and do
a retention piece as well as
build from within we were we we
were not set up in in in a
fashion that was conducive to
retention so as we bring people
on in our vso positions they're
getting trained they may be a a
attempt they'll come into our
vso two positions with getting
more experience and then they're
eligible to apply for those
supervisory positions are
appeals position and are quality
analysis position that we're
that we're opening up.
So we can really start looking
at the metrics and how we give
provide the best service to our
veterans so this was a a huge
deal that we undertook less last
year this was going on during
the legislative session I
alluded to it briefly we were
successful at the end of april
and it was a retroactive to that
time so I I really think we have
a way forward for a vso's and
the additional visas that you
will help me to get the five vso
positions will be hired at that
new rate so we've already
implemented that and they're
being built in in that fashion
so I I really believe we have a
way forward to get the highest
quality personnel to start with
and the retention piece we also
upgraded our cemetery positions.
We were
at AP band forty and forty five
in those cemeteries when they
opened them um
and
angel fire I mean you can't even
buy a hamburger on a on a pay
band forty
up in angel fire the cost of
living there is extremely low so
we were successful as well as re
classifying an upgrading those
positions we went from a forty
pay band forty two of p band
fifty
band forty five to a fifty five
and a sixty two of sixty five
for their supervisors so
where you are now as when we do
have turn over there that were
able to accomplish the much
better recruitment and the
number of people that are
applying for those jobs or are
willing to move to to to travel
there to work so I think
investing in our own people
within d v s and keeping the
people that want to be there and
paying a little rate that
they're able to make a decision
to stay will a certainly extend
our services to our veterans
because they really want to be
there but you know all the good
will in the world doesn't pay p
n m at the end of the month and
I really think that we had I had
to focus inward a little bit on
that to ensure that we have good
recruitment and the ability to
retain our our people so those
are some good news stories from
our our personnel and I
appreciate your support
as we go forward in the next
year because there was AAA
pretty large increase in and
though salaries that was nap
projected in for for long term
budgets so I I i'm gonna be
asking for a additional money in
the general fund obviously to
continue to to maintain this or
number to be forthcoming as as
we're working for for through
that
the uh
this year was a tough year
obviously with some of our
natural disasters throughout the
state that impacted some of our
vendors read also southern the
mexico some of our vendors were
unable to provide services when
they were
under the gun and not able to
accomplish the services.
So some of those funds had to be
transferred or reverted because
they were service is not
rendered in some of those areas.
The plus there is we have done a
great job over the last year in
taking away the stove pipes of
well I served this part of the
area I served for this part of
the area we've really started
the process of getting all of
her veteran service
organizations together working
with each other four veterans
regardless of what membership or
what uniform were all wearing
and that has been very helpful
because some of the vendors
picked up some of the areas that
were unable to be accomplished
by vendors that were displaced
and we had also raswell we still
were able to have transportation
services because other vendors
were able to pick up the the
slack there and continue to have
to provide services we had
minimal disruptions to people's
appointments so having those
conversations and the
willingness of our
are veteran suppliers and the
vso's
is certainly moving the ball in
the right direction.
Are
transportation grant it's the
highly rural transportation
grant I told you last year that
we were fighting the definition
of a highly rural transportation
area.
So they've identified a seven
veterans and in in a square mile
I mean my family and I can break
that through any county for and
I mean i've got twelve veterans
in my family alone.
So
that would break that definition
for the va there is some
traction at the national level
there revaluating that i've
talked to or code el to
reemphasize it and we were just
out talking to the v a under
secretaries a couple weeks ago
and they are very understanding
and know that it needs to be
changed how that's going to go
and how fast that goes will
matter and the reason I bring
that up is because our grant
that we get last year we got two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
is we executed every last penny
of that under the va grant for
highly rural transportation
areas that's seventeen counties
and five travel areas that it
was identified under each
article that at least eighteen
counties out in in new mexico in
on municipalities and some of
the outlang areas because we
cross some borders.
And.
We're not getting have traction
without this year but because of
her execution rate last year and
our aggressive nature we've got
we did find some new
transportation vendors not as
many as we need but we are
continually working to find new
transportation vendors to help
our veterans get to those
appointments.
And that has been extremely
helpful and the va silent what
we were trying to do and they've
increased our grant this year we
just received our reward letter
to five hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.
I'm restricted to using that in
the seventeen counties and five
tribal areas so again the
execution is going to be
of a creative and financial
endeavor.
To accomplish that within the
seventeen areas.
But you all helped us last year
was state funding for the first
time for state transportation in
the other areas of the hundred
and seventy five thousand
dollars has already been letting
contracts and we are starting
services and some of the other
underserved areas that are not
covered under h r t g.
So trying to spread
as much as we can and get to
those areas and we're hearing
the the the the reasoning about
this.
The way we're trying to get some
of these information and we've
been successful as we've been
holds hosting town halls we've
been in town halls and clovis
farmington shiprock roswell um.
Lost cruises
include everywhere else it would
that that we have been and
soliciting vendors to come in in
fact we're also actually trying
to capitalize on our veterans
business outreach
capability that we have were one
of the only states that has that
tucked under department of
veteran services and that is to
assist veterans who want to have
or already have a business to
run it more efficiently to start
a new business and to receive
grants through the SB a and
other entities to allow veterans
to to be successful and be their
own boss and start their own
small businesses in and work
that way we've had some really
good success stories
come about in the last five
years there's several veteran
businesses that are being
allowed it not only at the state
level but at this at the
national level is veteran
businesses of the year.
And it's because they've just
that that can do attitude that
are military veterans have is
just being put to help
themselves and there's a lot of
resources there to available and
we've used the v box to try to
help stand up some more
transportation vendors inventors
that want to do that and get
them started in in a small
business for transportation
our military funeral honors
training we just finished our
second one on april on august
twenty third and that is done by
annually and we train all of our
our military funeral honors
teams were currently we have
thirty two this year for that
for this upcoming f wife so
we've increased by I want to say
three to four over the last year
and there's we're generating
more interest we still don't
have enough throughout the state
to accomplish it so there are
some legion posts and our.
Are marine corleague down in los
crucials at our carriers and
very big work loads to
accomplish this so we are
continuing to solicit other
veteran service organizations to
to get involved in to ensure
that that we're leaning forward
to accomplish that as well as
that everybody gets trained
properly because the training
does change
I mean even within six months to
to ensure that that we're giving
that the the last full honor and
is done properly in respectfully
and at all of our cemeteries as
we we solicit them.
The gold star mothers we've been
working very closely with our
gold star mothers in our
obviously the blue star mothers
is you know more the active
component as people are deployed
but our gold sir mothers in the
state in the mexico is really
getting some initiative.
And we've assisted with them
we dedicated a few of the
replaced error currently going
to be installing five place
route the state I think from the
clovers has has one in the city
center we just put when an
albuquerque at the veterans
memorial.
On september twenty third
we will also be dedicating a new
one at the angel fire memorial
that'll be done on on september
twenty third one o'clock is will
be assisting the gulf are
mothers to do that we think it's
an important message and I say
golds are mothers I should be
single star families because
it's it's much more than just
the mothers and and i'm glad
that they've brought in their
their definition of that
because the more that we find
out especially as remains are
identified there are many more
gold star families and we
probably ever thought we would
be understanding so that's
that's been a great opportunity
to help get their message out
a women veterans obviously we
have a very successful woman's
veterans conference in in june I
think we had
two hundred and fifty better and
show up which I think is the
largest that we've had up to
this point and we still need to
grow or women veterans are still
not coming force and we're doing
our best to make sure that
everybody understands it if you
served in the military
regardless if you were in combat
or not or we i've heard
definitions from women veterans
it or I was
it was a soft enlistment it was
if you raised your right hand
your veteran period and we've
got to get that mentality
changed very quickly you know I
come back patches is is part of
uniform it's not who you are and
and I really want to insure it
that all of our veterans
understand it so we're really
getting that out or women's
veterans coordinator left in in
may after federal employment and
down we are we will have our new
one is been selected and will be
on on staff at the end of this
month.
Of
an air force veteran for a most
security forces very highly
qualified young lady and I think
she's going to do some great
things
but nonetheless
she's here for the right reasons
and she she wants to serve our
veterans.
Our pre registrations we talked
about the nca coming out here in
visiting and I was glad to hear
that from from from the council
here.
We need to start emphasising and
this is part of our new intake
at our state benefits and our
federal benefits.
Okay i'm gonna ask everybody to
raise your hand if as a veteran
if you've already precertified
and you've got a place to be
buried in the national or state
cemetery yet.
The.
I can't even say that.
And that's a problem so there
might be one good okay so
there's one the precertification
process will help a lot of what
we end up on the backside again
like to set earlier we don't
have a vote when mother nature
or the lord wants to to take us
to our or place.
The.
Your family needs to know
everything about what's
happening and if you're pre
registered.
The fat funeral home will
already have that information is
provided and we're not russian.
To get somebody's d two
fourteen.
Hours before they're supposed to
be buried and setting things
because the the flexibility of
our national cemetery.
Getting precertified as a
veteran for your place to be
buried you make that selection
they at least have the paperwork
on hand in everybody knows that
and it's much easier on the
families again i'm trying to
focus on survivors now as well
not just a veteran but in making
sure veterans understand this to
execute.
And lastly september tenth the
state fairer military veterans
day is is going to be celebrated
at the state fair there is going
to be under the big top than a
mexican national guard d v s and
state for our
co hosting that
I know I believe there's some
other activities happening that
day and in state government but
if you are able to get there
that I think it'll be a great
program and there will be
displaced up and down main
street there with the army the
air national guard the navy the
marine corps there's going to be
static displays and and
basically just a celebration of
our or are people who are
currently serving our veterans
as well as the services that are
available to everybody so they
again just get in that
visibility.
Also you should have received
last week and invitation in your
official emails for september
nineteenth are forgotten heroes
ceremony that will be happening
we have forty two
uhm unclaimed veterans that we
work statewide with the with
bernaldio county to be
identified as military we will
be doing their services that
morning in albuquerque will
start with a uh a memorial
in the morning in albuquerque
and they will be then taken from
albuquerque um
with honors all the way to santa
fe and entered at eleven o'clock
in santa fe national.
So i've i've invited all of you
all out to if you're able to
make it and I think it's an
important piece of that the.
All right so we all we say that
veterans matter veterans matter.
Where the we're gonna be their
family that day
so brothers and sisters and arms
and I think it's so important
that what we do there is to give
them that that last honor as as
as their interest and and honor
for their families
and lastly.
Mr centers if you see me after
this
we have a I can get you in touch
with the new mexico national
guard they will get you in touch
to the military heritage
foundation and you can make a
request for a youi to be brought
here.
So it's not a fiscal thing for
you if there is one that take
the inventory that is available
they can bring it here you will
just have to as a county sign up
that member of agreement to
maintain it and to display it
was honored integrity as I know
you will but that through the
military heritage foundation and
that can be accomplished and I
can get your phone number to
help they'll help you to at
least work through the process
but then it becomes a
partnership between you in the
military heritage foundation
from the county to their okay so
we can work that peace
and without mister chair and
committee I stand for questions.
Thank you mister chairman in
secretary of
light of good information of a
couple of questions for you
at one time they're a senate
rosaler was a transportation hub
to the v a medical centers that
still happening the va weird dbs
have entered into a partnership
with a va hospital and they were
sending vans out here I think
once your twice a week is that
no longer in effect.
The.
I don't believe that it in
effect any longer for the simple
fact that I think the v a was
using d av vans and the dav I
know has has modified their
transportation agreement with
the va here in in in new mexico
at least from ribbon g murphy
so III have to look into that to
find out what historically was
happening in in why I changed
but since i've been on site
we've not had that service
available if we if we have a
requirement here for
transportation services and and
there's a unavailable vendor we
can make sure that that gets
taken care of we have a there's
a couple people out of
albuquerque that actually will
get here to to do appointments
and and take people there
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary of the other
question I have
a missed conversation about the
state cemeteries
the next one to come online as
correspond I believe is that
still in process
mr chair in a reputative
martinez yes so we are waiting
on on nca they are doing their
their their grant awards of
right now and
we are we were towards the top
of the list but again because of
the federal drawbacks and the
cutbacks on funding some of the
priorities keep shifting based
on where we're going to stand
there so we're just waiting to
see if that grant is going to be
awarded for the grants to get
initiated
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretarian or their plans
for additional cemeteries once
carlsbad comes online
mr chair representative martinez
none of this time for the simple
fact that the the
and how they arranged the
cemeteries in the
basically their concentric
circles of coverage any seventy
five miles it covers it
regardless of across the state
lines is is how they basically
let him all out so if you put of
our state cemeteries with
federal cemeteries in their
satellites.
And along the border if it
intersects seventy five miles
that's how the ve indicates if
they will have a va grant funded
cemetery now if any community
chooses to have a a cemetery and
wants to quality better and
cementary we could assist them
with the proper qualifications
for for for barrel and determine
how they set it up but it would
not be a grant funded or a state
funded cemetery.
You must chairman thank you
secretary
representative on
any given terminal let's see on
the cemetery business I am I
understand that especially the
area the licer service another
whole nation get is elder mode
to somehow another opportunity
for funding to have a.
A cemetery on.
Underland is that that is that
true or how do we find get this
information.
I miss you chair representative
I believe I believe that is as a
correct statement they would
have worked directly with the
nca.
And and the va to request that
because there are a sovereign
and another federal entity that
they could request federal to
federal assistance and depending
where they would put it if it is
specific to the available nation
and they were going to make it a
a traditional burial cemetery it
would be managed by the naval
nation for the never nationwide
to the best of my understanding
but we can get you more details
on that and and and find out
the other thing the course is
i'm going back to my main issue
how far
how much work have you done on
the constitutional amendments
that are on the ballot now
november
mr chair representative all corn
i've done a lot of work all
those town holes you've heard
about I have been out stumping
and talking to everybody about
those amendments in fact that
severally even the
cabinets in the community we
have have pushed that peace
forward as well as i've worked
with tax in rev.
For the simple fact that making
sure that the languages are
combined and concerts and I have
also briefly counting assessors
association and state in the
mexico to ensure that they are
aware of what's going on and how
we're going to implement it
should they be voted in then tax
and revolut have to write the
rules for that this next
legislative session for
implementation probably begin
the next fiscal year for the
state so i've been doing quite a
lot of work to ensure that one
we know what we're doing talking
to the veterans about
getting out to vote obviously I
can tell them how to vote but
just tell them that they're
there and to please vote.
I will tell you that the
governor went the next step
forward and she said no you
should vote and you should vote
for it
you know but that was
on her own saying that because
she feels strongly about that
but i've done quite a lot of
work doing that and I intend to
put together some press releases
now because if you tell people
too soon they forget
if we get closer and we keep
building the momentum they will
take that an issue to forward
and they'll execute that and
that's why I plan on using some
of our media let's to to
announce that those will be on
the ballot to ensure that
everybody's aware.
So it's gonna happen which
secretary.
Is we will have to do a
neighbouring legislation.
If we get the mote
on our side.
And then from there we we go
forward but everything but it's
got to be done at our side
first.
And then hopefully we can get
the
get it in early we would you
call that
the well good prefile it writes.
Mister freewood we will prefire
just
yes.
Okay we will give that done okay
and then a course if we get the
the right about the votes we can
go ahead and have it.
Uh have it going to affect the
data go under signs that.
So that would be the fact but
i'm just curious there's a bunch
of veterans here I wonder if you
turn around and ask them what
they know about these
considering how many of them
know about this constitutional
amendment.
Thank you is to do that's all I
have
uh thank you thank you
you know because of secretaries
important that everybody knows
that what they are could a lot
time when you have a
constitutional amendment people
just don't want running because
it says we're going to read the
taxes.
You know then in north rather
people are don't know in here no
no raise any taxes that anybody
is going to help the veterans
lower their taxes thanks that I
will go to represent us
thank you mister chair thank you
secretary for bringing that
the pre orange of your burial or
replied the summit the national
cemetery uhm
there is to eligibility is
taking a lot longer than normal
as a fuel director I don't know
people know that i'm actual
female drexer and on the
mortgage reason and southwest
and mexico
I don't look like when they have
been told that before two that's
kind of good i'd not great
colder than whatever but
I think it's it's it's a good
thing to prefile it's also good
to make prerains when with your
local puneral what what I would
suggest to not just better but
everyone is to get a folder.
And what I have as I have a
three ring binder in it in that
binder I have all of the things
that aren't necessary that
people need to know right and I
think everyone should have that
binder not in a safe national
safety possible but you might
have it in the kitchen cabinet
where your family can literally
pull that out a copy of the dd
to fourteen some other wishes
that you may have um maybe
insurance and stuff so forth in
in one box so that not only for
yourself maybe your spouse your
children whatever but
eligibility is taking a lot
longer were seen more of them
falling into the category of
meeting eligibility even with
with that whereas before I have
seen it to skip before I used to
just call for bliss we have the
national cemetery that and over
city in the county area and we
used to be able to call get it
taken care of with a phone call
probably a twenty minute phone
call ten fifteen phone call go
through all the series of
questions and then it went then
we went to the national data
base or we call their and then
it it was doing okay it's you
know they still have to send a
message to
to the mean office and then from
there it goes one more step
another person in in in between
there are but now it's all over
soon I think we're
baby bombers are passing away
we've seen a big a big swing and
they're getting bogged down so
if I i'm glad you brought that
up I just wanted to kind of uh
bring that up we did have one
about a week ago when we did
actually have the elder billy
the pre eligibility form we sent
it in and a lady would not look
at it just as it's an
eligibility we had it like can
you just look at the people who
have answers you you'll get
having a few operators of
sometimes
read they just in other
discontinued emotions but I
think it's important for you to
do that because
you know if you want to have
funeral raise when standing
reasonable time that.
Definitely hope thank you mister
chair.
Thank you
never got a vice pope thank you
mister chair and and thank you
secretary of the work that
you've been doing with the vso's
and they were coming in and.
In twenty one that's been an
issue that would be working on
so now we've worked on the pay
looked on a lot work on a lot of
the retention and and that the
hope with the recruitment as
well.
Do you think where do you think
we are right now as far as the
numbers do you still think were
at the numbers we should be in
that and that's separate from I
don't know if you have any bill
that's available but
used to think that there needs
to be increase of yourselves on
the statement i'm sure sure
senator problem i'm sorry excuse
me
absolutely I think we're still
short
probably at least five three to
five is where I see was is
probably as a safe bet
but again the getting them in
place and the and the overhead
expenses and those other things
on on top of that I don't want
to focus so much more on that
about how we use the ones and
then we do have in place and
arrange them much more
efficiently to accomplish that
my my my concern is the the one
person shops where we have to
shut down a shop to go out and
do community outreach
within a community or a county
you know right now we still have
that in gallop you know we have
one person shop they got a shut
down whenever we
push amount if we have two
people in that shot people could
still have their appointments in
get the benefits that they
require as we're still doing
outreach so trying to understand
that in i'm looking at some
other states models of how they
do this that are also desperate
i'm talking like why are wyoming
in south dakota much seemed
demographic geographically
dispersed how they are arranged
and seeing if there's a model
that may be a reorganized what I
do have to ensure that we get
the best service as possible
because throwing people had a
problem is not always the answer
and I fully understand that
because you know the management
the resources the infrastructure
so it's about getting the
services to the veterans and
that is really going to help
this year and again the mobile
unit that you all assisted with
last year we should have that if
everything goes well through
production we will have that on
the road I am predicting about
the beginning to the middle of
may we will have that
physically.
Finished and being able to be
executed in the state of new
mexico so again taking services
to to veterans that will help in
some of those areas where we
have some of the lack of
coverage.
Thank you mister secretary and
are talking about.
You know getting out there
spreading the message I i've
seen you on video talking about
representative of accounts
legislation the constitutional
amendments but also talking
about.
I believe protecting our
veterans from folks who were
trying to force them to pay to
get services i'm a life member
of bfw when I went to n c s they
were having their convention out
there in louisville at the end
and I caught that and talked at
some of the representatives
there is that something there
pushing as well I think i've
seen you on video talking about
pushing legislation to make sure
that we're protecting veteran
petrols from folks that would be
exploited
mr chair of a center to pope
absolutely so
i'm asking our codel to get
after there's been a couple
bills that were in energy
congress at the at the national
level that would take away the
ability for some of these legal
firms or people who are getting
minimally certified to assist
veterans currently they can they
can charge up to twelve thousand
five hundred dollars to a
veteran because a veteran is
willing to give them the power
of attorney to submit a claim on
their behalf.
Twelve thousand five hundred
dollars and somebody's back pay.
And I don't know what other
terms are written in those
contracts i've not seen one of
the contracts myself but.
We're calling at claim sharking
and if they are legally able to
do it because there are a
business and there is
protections for them congress is
failed to act for two years.
And I am asking at the state
level that I think that we I
think the ball is probably going
to have to be put in our court
to do some type of limitations
within the state of new mexico
that this is not okay because.
I've better and having to pay
for a free service to get some
benefits if they've earned his
ludicrous and the bottom line is
these lawyers are saying while
get it done for you faster.
They may be able to do the claim
faster.
And what they're doing is
providing the veteran a claim in
the veteran is signing it
because they're not certified.
To submit that claim on their we
have they don't have access and
then they might have a doctor or
somebody in their pocket to do a
nexus letter to say yes this is
a valid claim and this which
you.
That's the only part they can do
faster because once it gets into
the
it goes just as slow as
everybody else's but the
differences is elderly veterans
are going to get every penny
that they were that their own
instead of having a pay for a
service it should be free so
that is my biggest thing i've
keep trying to tell veterans
don't pay for a free service.
You know don't get to the point
of frustration that you've are
willing to give that much
informed for it might mean a
week of somebody's time
so i'm looking at that as well
and I think a lot of it's like
you said I think they're looking
at certain caps but also that
disclosure that this is a
service that could get somewhere
else or folks don't get caught
up in that thank you again for
doing that.
Um and i'm taking a lot of time
quickly I have just gotten a few
calls could you tell me the
difference between a service
member I I guess who has access
to a state.
Their transcementary vs a
national s.
The situation center to pope
everybody any
anybody who is identified as a
veteran.
Has access to cemetery there are
many veterans it
will come back veterans and have
access to arlington.
Should they choose if they want
to be buried there they can
choose to be buried in santa fe
national informed bared or they
can choose state cemetery so if
there are better and they have
act they they get to choose
where they're where they're
where they're buried and.
Now for guardsmen now some
people who don't have the two
fourteen that gives them their
ninety days that certifies them
to be buried in the national
cemetery those are the those of
the individuals that we can bury
interstate cemeteries so there
are and some of the some
guardsmen reservice will meet
that most reservice won't
because reserves get a two
fourteen because they're
basically the the the the jv for
the for the army so they get the
same discharge document the the
national guard gets to be formed
twenty two and if that doesn't
rate at the love over two
fourteen for over ninety days of
active duty then they were at in
the in this in the same scope
and depending who you talk to
training time doesn't.
Doesn't qualify them for with
veteran
even though they were unactive
duty for ninety days for basic
and their advance individual
training so definitions matter
and who's interpreting that but
our state cemeteries and what
you all did for us last year the
guard equity act is there for
our guards when to be very in
our state cemeteries and the
state will find the plot
allowance and the headstone just
like they get in the federal
cemeteries on federal for a
federal bureau thank you I have
gotten some questions from
people members of the guard
vietnam error guards men that
did a few years and just these
questions and try to figure what
that figure that out so i'll
probably follow you specifically
on a couple of these members but
I just want to folks the kind of
the differences there and i'll
just close and say thank you
again uh the work the regard
heroes really making sure that
they're not forgotten I want to
commend
representative delay cruise from
the work he did on this when his
own account commission and
burned leo county thanks for
inviting us for those who
haven't been there please go to
its are very solemn event
and in a real important event
and I will see you again there
they thank you mister chair
thanks
for your name
thank you mister chairman I
think as in a report said most
what I was going to see
but he didn't see thank you for
coasting those town holes
getting out there and being
present in our in our state is
really important so thank you
for that and and the women's
veterans conference going to get
more women out there but it was
good seeing you there and and
being there and and hearing just
being around women in who served
so and if you need help on that
let me know and i'd love to help
on that um
in live sea the state assessor
was in front of us about the
constitutional amendments and he
was not real.
I mean they're it sounded like
he was not exactly for it or not
a pusher of it so I think when
you go out say they're not every
for this so we need to make sure
we vote because I took away from
their meeting that he was kind
of pushing back so we have to
make sure we know how important
it is for veterans and then make
sure they understand that you
know it's not a done deal we
have to push we have to make
sure we vote
I miss chair represent serrants
or you know thank you and again
thank you for your attendance at
the woman's veterans conference
and that's the reason why I
started engaging the assessors
association because they're the
ones they go to the the county
managers and everybody because
that is an income for for them
that it it's not you know sanity
county you know depending on
who's doing their math are going
to say they're going to lose
millions of dollars on on on
that being signed.
And like I told the assessor and
everybody in that room I said
well you're welcome for being
able to
have the ability to earn
millions of dollars in the
counties that are still free and
you get to have these
conversations and the people who
gave it to you with a veterans
and though numbers are not that
large that it's going to impact
them the way they're saying so I
know that fiscally that some of
these people are seeing it is a
downfall but it it is absolutely
a benefit to our our veterans
and there and the survivors most
importantly because of how
that's written are the survivors
also be able to undertake the
those are the savings so thank
you
unless think mr chairman are
anything you sent out if there's
something we can put on our
websites or I can i'd like to
spread whatever you're putting
out could you send it us.
If you would thank you thank you
mister.
Thank you
questions the committee
I have one question
then I would be better for you
mister we're
we're talking about the people
out there trying to give
benefits who get benefits for
veteran I have one here to
dictor medical have you heard
about them
to dread
pronounced trajector medical as
the company there these people
are reached not veterans and
asking him for a number one to
sort security number the great
fourteen number and I don't even
know if these people are legit
and I told this particular
general network had called you
for earlier and I told this
particular gentleman don't go
out for screen number whatever
you don't do it
and any so while they're
promising me that i'm on our
give my benefits and this guy is
suffering from sleep gap now
then and he's a beer number
better and arabitter and he
would never served in vietnam
but that next question I had are
the people covered for this and
how do you stop these people
from be predators on veterans
mister chair a members of the
committee like the secretary had
mentioned we are working with
the n m DO j to identify these
bad actors
absolutely if you can give me
that information i'll make sure
we funnel that uh back to them
and have them what they're doing
is they're vetting them and
they're finding out if they are
in fact legitimate or not
legitimate so I would like to
secretary had mentioned again
you know we've been working with
the doj new mexico deojet to
find out exactly who these bad
actors are
thank you for that good you know
it's awful important because one
once people get yourself school
number then you're using your
bashing you can bring back and
i'm glad that this came up
senator gaza disquestion had
been asked on on people seen
while you know we will guarantee
your benefits.
But we need to start with this
and hit another day charge apple
what you're going to get
imagined so but anyway I don't
more question the committee
thank you secretary it would
thank you very much for being
here today to port to keep on
working with folks and I will
get you that information okay
will have been said thank you
very much
thank you mister chair if I
could take one other minute
you you have identify that
you're you're not going to
be this be the the chair passed
this serve this this we have one
more maybe.
Yeah i'm gonna be chair until
they are baby
chair until when they throw me
out
well I I want to take the
opportunity because
when I got a point it is an
acting secretary.
You took the time we give me a
call
and provide vendorship.
Several of you on this
committee.
And the biggest thing that I
saw.
Was your heart.
You don't want me to fail now
because of of me but because of
our routers.
And i'd like to give you
something who could.
I'm not really going anywhere
they just put me on time out for
a couple years
but anyway thank you general
secretary for round will be
secretary thank you we're being
sit will go to item number two
uh mix develop council but think
I will.
If you wouldn't want to self as
you would tell you what you're
doing going to down and put up
with our mike
we need you on my case with.
Mr chair
gore termination
victor my name is martin I guess
I introduced myself I will go
into the.
Into the formalities i'd like to
thank the committee for aligning
me to testify before you today
general
my former employer case you
didn't know he was my g four for
many years so but and talking on
behalf of general everyone here
if there is one man who's
committed to the job it's a
general that i've known him ever
since he came in to the garden
so we had some history and if
there's one thing he did and he
allowed me as a listed man was
to let me do my job.
Which i'm sure and but there's
an expectation of course and
that expectation is to do your
job and do well so.
General pleasure to work with
you
one of the things i'd like to
see about bringing forth is
we it's an initiative that are
listed association and other
better and organizations are
working out at the national
level but for some reason it
seems to be
not gaining the traction it
should and it's to assist and
help employers of who either
employ national large members
especially during deployment to
sell I get in the intent is the
it's called the recruit act and
if I may go ahead and read it
out here the recruit act
provides copies okay recruit.
Even though makes cart army
national works digital
diligently to show support to
employers of the army and
international guard service
members.
Through in a large program also
by allowing to visit new mexico
facilities guard members who
demonstrate the military skills
since we need to begin providing
relief to those employee
employers whom support the
national guard by employing
these professionals by providing
a tax incentive that a forge the
employer relief by receiving a
tax credit for the time the
guard members are deployed or
called the state active duty for
statement emergencies.
Ah I have a sample of what the
legislation looks at.
At the national level and I can
provide it here for you at sure
lease her and the interest is
number one any time there is an
empty that's impacted anytime
the national guard gets to point
are the employers and
unfortunately they bear the full
brunt of either having to hire
somebody else train that
individual up and these these
deployments can be assured it's
two weeks.
Earn in my case two years.
So in that time the employers
totally stuck to bear the burden
of having to.
Come up with some financial
method of maintaining solvency
for their own companies or their
own business while the
servicemen are deployed now the
intentions to go ahead and try
and make a scalable tax system
for these employers.
In order for them to go ahead
and either receive a tax credit
in order to keep themselves
solid or to go ahead and see
what they can do to hire another
individual in their place that
means the qualifications of
these individuals have.
Now like I said it's called a
recruit at at the national level
it is one of the initiatives
that are national association
the officers association reserve
officers association ndc has
been pushing for probably about
the last five years.
And every time it gets we do
have sponsors at the national
level but for some reason it's
one of those things that never
really.
When it actually comes for
congress to act we know how
congress acts and they don't.
So my intend to see what I can
do to work with.
The committee.
And work with
your other members of the
legislature to see what we can
do to afford some relief for
some of these members because
number one up temple hasn't
stopped.
The airguard deploys on a
regular basis there are several
units throughout the state
they're always deploying two
areas throughout the world all
depending on threatening
whatever the cases but at the
end of the day the ones that
suffered the runt of the
deployment aside from the
families are these employers so
the intention to see what we can
do to bring this to your
attention to see what it is.
The committee can go ahead and
afford to see what we can do to
bring relief to these employers.
That's first like I said I can
provide you copies of this you
guys can look all written let me
know what questions you would
have that I can either get
answers for yes and you have
copies of that we can pass more
to the committee yes I can hold
out some of the
okay one is a white people
this is the white paper which
has been
drafted by our
by our national association and
this is the actual legislation
I hope I have enough company so
I don't I apologize.
Yeah.
No well while the young lady is
going to head and provide in the
scuppies i'm kind of like want
to go into the second part of
what it is I wanted to just
because this are issues that was
addressed to me by some of the
service members were to
currently serve and it has to do
with actually serious state
active duty and I think it had
some unit unattended
consequences in regards to how
some of these people are brought
on to state actually and what's
happening is there being brought
on as a w nine independent
contractor and these service
members such as pilots and other
high level officers people the
ones that actually get paid a
lot more than the lower listen
stuff those people don't seem to
be suffering in the issue but.
A
the officers like the pilots
which are a very valuable
commodity especially when it
comes to uh having them go out
and work with the fires are
going out a night rescues and
they also have to do training
flights and other things but
there's suffering a twenty four
percent tax rate for being
because they're actually
classifying him as an
independent contract and some of
these.
Service members are incurring a
debt of almost up to eighteen to
twenty thousand dollars while
working or being on a state
actually for about twenty five
thirty days so the intention to
see what we can do with this
committee and if anyone can
actually work with the
department of military affairs
and actually find out what it is
we can do to correct so that way
they're taxed at a rate that
they should be taxed out then
rather that is an independent
contractor when they're not
they're actually.
In an employer the state
technically.
So they should be taxed at that
particular rate as an employed
for what they're doing in
regards to these for point
they're actually called to these
state emergencies so I I told
these service members the
opposite association the
enlisted association I would go
ahead and bring that to your
attention and see what it is we
could do.
Ah to talk to either tax and rob
department military affairs to
see what we can do to fix what
they see is as the efficiency.
And hopefully it's simple I
don't know specifically because.
When you start talking tax its
way out of my wheel house.
And it i'd actually like to
reach our automotive general
relative that's fine but.
We I had spoken myself to some
of the recruiters and we know
that are our natural guards
probably behind the curve in
regards to the numbers that
they're being able to get into.
The uh in into the uniform one
of the one of the big.
Or how would you say the
elephant in the room the comma
and it was kind of like I think
was an unattending common
consequence in regards to one of
the governor's initiatives was
to go ahead and afford everybody
that that is intending on going
to college or secondary
education was to go ahead and
afford the tuition full tuition
by understand that correctly now
what ended up happening now
you're direct in direct
competition with.
The national guard in regards to
one of their primary
recruiting tools was an
educational benefit now that
would be afforded to pretty much
all the recruits but what ended
up happening now that the
governor has that in place
why do I want to go to the
military to get my education
paid for where the only thing we
actually have now to bank on our
investment bonuses m certain
qualifications for instance
where they're push mosses like
if somebody wants to be coming
in tell specialists or something
like that or a drawn pilot those
types of things but those owner
for even in listening bonus is
it's just a matter of we got a
job read you want to apply for
it for as before the month
government she I bill or the gi
bill along with uh
the educational benefits of that
would be afforded the service
member wanting to enter
service now isn't even a factor
or something that they they're
even considering cause they get
that benefit right out high
school.
And i'm doing that on behalf of
the recruiting and because like
I said they raise our handset
can you go ahead and bring this
forward so up to this point
does the.
Council have any questions of
myself if any if I can work to
provide you any information if
there's anything on that
particular recruit act that you
guys would like to.
Discussed if not.
Oh.
Up to this point I would
consider myself in but if I
would be allowed a little bit a
lattitude up to this point and
it has to do with the actually
several members in in regards to
myself and in regards to their
service the fact that there's
actually I probably a little bit
less than six degrees of
separation with myself one I
would like to bring attention to
is to turn diagonal sitting
there in the back of the room
whom I served with when we were
deployed to iraq.
He was one of the first members
who was actually.
Uh how would you say injured by
an id.
When we were deployed and it was
very uncertain whether or not we
renew he was a life.
Are and i'd also like to that
piece of board up there one says
that one seven twenty that's
actually moment modern.
And the other person is general
also former member and vietnam
bet.
From the seven twenty
transportation and.
One of the.
And
we were that that you don't
received the outstanding
unicitation for the most mood
and theater but that's because
we were heavy transportation you
know we move the one rooms to
the front lines on the iraqi
saudi arabian water back in the
march.
Actually earlier in that.
And also with charlie who was a
truck driver at the time plus he
was also security that's why he
got indeed because he was
security.
For these uh convoice seven
twenty a transportation unit.
Conducted one point seven
million combat miles from arab
journal and kuwait all the way
to the sunny train.
In iraq.
The seven twentieth
transportation.
Incurred fourteen purple hearts
zero doubts.
And that's testimony to the
professional sum.
And there tenacity.
For being soldiers and people
who care for the commerce
and another how do you say last
minute trivia has over twenty
the transportation took the
highest density of native
americans into theater.
All of third platoon was almost
native americans for the
exception of maybe two
lieutenant and the political
sergeant.
And they were from the task that
have a whole nation.
Uh someone.
Sunny at once
on the mingle.
The sunfilling bit all of them
along the I twenty five cordor
all the way to high forty.
And those guys deserve uh the
appropriate recognition what
they did for their country.
Connect that's all I got I
appreciate your time if there is
any questions.
Yeah I think i've heard a little
bit and thank you for presenting
I heard a little bit of issue
folks talking about that w nine
issue with folks working.
And i'm hearing a lot of the big
issue is because they're coming
on his contractor and and it's
not excusing the issue what they
deal with but in some cases
they're not understanding that
they're going to have to pay
those taxes later so I think in
the short term rate I mean that
that's what I hear as well is.
You spend it not realizing that
you're going to have to pay your
own taxes because you are an
independent contractor so
I think in the short term we
need to have that conversation
and that education needs to
happen as well.
I would tell you make that
change but that's that's what
i've heard i'm probably we can
probably recharge to the
department to your first because
anything happened to do state
duty actually goes through dma
they're the ones who uh and now
that the tag house is false
times
full time
active stayed active duty it
could be probably an issue that
they might want to be addressed
and see if there could be some.
Changes to the statute perhaps I
can reach out to the ticket
what it is
they suggest and maybe we can
bring it back to the committee
see what.
What it is and and I understand
what you're saying in regards to
their signing on his independent
contractor so how would you say
self inflicted.
Yeah i'm not blaming them is
just the education and I even
heard from somebody and listed
fox the issue as well and I
mister frank it allowed the
secretary if you want to come up
I think you wanted to comment if
that's okay.
I mean and center pope so
from from my other perspective
is is a as the lank upon a
commander when we do state
active duty all these service
members are brought in and there
in processing their identified
wonder w nine is just taking
care of because they do become
vendors in share not so much a
contractor but they're not state
employees and their only covered
under workman's compensation and
what you all did two years ago
when I was both general guilt
and I love it for the life
insurance protection that you
there was passed made that
equitable for all the other
state agencies and it also
equated to these the amount of r
s jli or service group life and
servicemen's group life
insurance so you all are
addressing that and I believe
that d m a is the best place to
address this and I believe
general you lied into me are
working on some incentives here.
For those individuals that are
on state activity the people who
are on full time state active
duty are essentially state
employees and they're getting a
different set of benefits in the
park time that are that may have
served on the rados of fires so
is well known and we do brief
the the those individuals and we
make sure we tell them to
withhold their taxes and put him
away for that way that they're
that they're basically tax and
themselves at a percentage based
on their their current tax rate
so there are some briefings and
some notifications made to the
service member so it's not a
complete surprise come january
that you know the text mangator
uh but that we are training
forward there.
Then and thank you and that's I
guess what I want to kind of
explain because I know people
that work in that work in their
situations rating.
I I was always confused and all
I would get a put all this money
away and I have to deal with
this later not understanding
that so I think I just want to
make sure folks are educated and
I think from a legislature maybe
we look and see uhm what's
happening with that with that
process you know what the states
getting what they're getting and
is is if some fairs in
economical but I think you
pointed out right there that
we've done some things on the
state active due to especially
with the
unfortunate there's a death rate
there's that benefit there that
we've been done some action
there as well then I think it's
helpful
I think lastly
talking about recruitment I
think that's been an issue I
think talking with the secretary
previously about some of these
issues.
You know folks just look at
options in.
Yet I understand now we're
giving free education you know
bachelor's degree
some folks going to military to
serve some go without the
education without gibil.
Some folks go in and they're
going to go in after they get
the free education new mexico
because they want to go to grad
school you know cause we're not
covering that right now either
so I think we just got to find
innovative ways and also having
conversations about service just
what you laid out you know what
we do and for example for me I
didn't have any attempt i'm
going to college but now I have
three batch through master's
degrees right but I had to go
win and that's what helped me
get to where I am so I think
just talking with folks about
the opportunities.
The skills the trouble.
That life experience in which
you can bring back home.
Just like us being harrisoner
rate with.
Veterans have brought to this
community rate and so I think we
just have to continue to tell
the story there's always going
to be reasons why not to join.
Or what benefits and i'm sure we
can do more and I think
i'm willing to work with you and
I think members on this
committee as well to see what
other incentives are but I think
it's just at the end of the day
it's quality of life for the
members that serve and their
families and I think we can
always do better and I think
that'll help them recruitment
and retention especially for a
guard.
That's all I have mister thank
you I represent the dozens for a
quick much thank you mister
on that point that we were
talking about it with taxes when
they're getting when they're
gain at ten ninety nine like
that
there then responsible for not
only federal state taxes but
they have their self employment
texas yeah and I think that's
the killer causes fifteen
percent right after top and then
on top of that depending on what
bracket you fall into then it's
additional on that and
it's if you're already working
then you're picky back in that
one top of that so I think
that's that's the big thing is I
think the self employment taxes
are the ones that shock them as
it's fifteen percent of what
they made during that time it's
all I want to say mister chair
thank you.
Thank you
any further questions from the
committee members
should.
See nothing for your
presentation
that right now we don't have
anything until one thirty one
understanding this understand
which one fifteen or so
first all I guess lunch is
summer and figure out
