Good morning everybody. Day two
of our New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight committee is
beginning, uh, to begin with,
you probably noticed there was
quite a breakfast spread over
there with my including my
favorite doughnuts. Uh, we have
Amigos del Rancholo Suerros to
thank for that. And when you
came in, you probably saw Kathy
McLaren, one of the Amigos, uh,
giving you brochures for $25.
you too can become an amigo and
Randy was out there, uh, do we
have other amigos here in the
room?
They're outside, but they, you
know, one thing I love about the
New Mexico Finance Authority is
they have a really good board
system functioning boards that
do their job, but also you can
see that Los Amigos, uh, de
rancholo Suerros.
are also dedicated people to
making this place really shine
and really supporting the
Department of Cultural Affairs
and the staff here. Also, Mr.
Bustos, one of the amigos,
provided fresh, uh, blackberries
from his field for us all. Uh, I
don't think he's here, but um,
you know, it's that small touch
that shows you this is one
serious board because none of us
are gonna forget the
blueberries. I mean the
blackberries and um so really
thank you, thank you to them and
thank you to the staff of the
Department of Cultural Affairs
and thank you to all the staff
of Los Luceros. Uh, we're just
really blessed to be here, um, I
don't know about anybody else.
I'm looking forward to the tour.
OK, and with that, we'll start
with our first presentation
uh, Marquita Russell, the CEO of
the Finance Authority is going
to report on the small business
recovery and stimulus Act and
you have a handout that you just
received. So thank you,
Marquita.
Thank you Madam Chair and good
morning members. Um
I, I'm going to talk to you
today first about the small
business recovery loan fund. We
are, uh, required under law to
provide you reports. I think
this is the last report.
that we are required to give.
Um, so, but I, I highly expect
that we'll continue to report
regardless of the requirement.
Um, so I'm starting on page 2
and I'm gonna just remind
several, several of you that the
small business recovery Act,
which was enacted in 2020, June
of 2020, uh, during the first
special legislative session was
put in place because of, uh, the
lack of, uh, well, the, uh,
paycheck protection program.
There was, that was a federal
program that was designed to get
money into businesses that have
been closed down by the pandemic
and the federal dollars, uh the
through the SBA, um,
dried up very quickly. They
ultimately renewed that program
a couple of times, but a lot of
small businesses in New Mexico
were unable to access the
program. So that one of the
several legislators got together
and proposed a state version of
that and worked really hard
during that first special
session to put together
something that could help be a
lifeline to those small
businesses that frankly weren't
able to get the funding from the
federal government.
So the act provides very
flexible, low-interest loans to
small businesses that experience
significant drops in revenue in
those first several months of
the pandemic. Um, and, uh, the
eligibility, the structure, the
terms of all the loans were set
out in statute. Finance
authority's job was it, was to
process the loan applications
under the terms provided in
statute. So we really were
processing applications more
than making applications. Um,
and the, the, the, uh, criteria
that was set out in statute was
really intended to be very
generous. It was not quite clear
how long the pandemic was going
to go on or what the impacts
truly were going to be. So it
really did have uh a lot of very
flexible terms that you won't
find again anyplace else. Um,
the program was funded from an
investment of the state's
severance tax permanent fund.
The statute basically directed
this SIC to make this investment
into the program. And so every
$1 we receive back from that
program goes back to the
severance, uh, to the state
investment council's severance
tax permanent fund.
Um, and we accepted applications
from that initial June period
and we actually opened our first
application in or made our first
loan in August of 2020. Um, and
we accepted applications through
December 31st of 2020. That's a,
that's the statute provided. Um,
but of course, the pandemic
continued and the need for
businesses continued. The
legislature in 2021, you all
passed a what I'll call
broadened, deepened, and
extended program. So we
increased the number of
businesses
that were able to access the
fund. We deepened the kind of
funding that was available. We
increased the money from $75,000
to $150,000. Um, and we allowed
a broader group of, uh,
businesses to, um, participate.
Um
the law specifically allowed for
uh the, those folks that in that
participated in the first
program to refinance their loans
into the second program because
there were more flexible terms
that were offered as part of the
second program and there was an
increased dollar amount as well.
So if you came in and you were
capped under the program at
$75,000 and had ultimately a
six-year term on that loan from
the original legislation when
you came back in and the law
changed immediately to
a 10-year loan to $150,000. Um,
you all were, I think,
concerned, rightly so, that a
lot of the early businesses were
somehow going to be
disadvantaged by that. So we
were allowed to refinance the
loans, and I would note about
half of the businesses did
refinance them.
Um, and we were able to accept
applications in that broader
program, what we call the sort
of 2.0 program until through
December 31st of 2022.
So the loan terms on page 3 just
outline again, they were very
low barrier terms. We wanted as
many, uh, businesses that needed
the funding to be able to access
the funding. So they were
unsecured loans, collateral was
not required as part of the loan
package. The amounts were up to
3 months of ordinary operational
expenses, and there was a very
specific calculation that was
put out there. Um, and up to
$150,000. So for,
um,
a lot of businesses,
particularly in the um
restaurant industry, hospitality
industry were able to qualify
into the 2nd program when they
were not on the first, and many
of those took out that $150,000
loan.
Uh, there were no personal
guarantees on the 1st $75,000.
We did implement a personal
guarantee on the 2nd, $75,000.
So if you took out $150,000
loan, you'd be uh responsible
for personally guaranteeing
75,000.
Um, and then creditworthiness
was defined very broadly, and it
was basically, um, based upon
what we call reported credit on
the utilities. That's what we
choose to use where they were
the most consistent. They are
the most consistent of the
reporting entities and so your
cellphone, your, uh, power, your
lights, that sort of thing, are
what we based our, um
our creditworthiness on, um, and
then you could also have no
existing bankruptcy, so you
couldn't be in the process of um
submitting a bankruptcy. You
could have a prior bankruptcy,
but not being in the pending
process of a bankruptcy action.
And then lastly, you could not
have any delinquent taxes prior
to the pandemic. So I think the
legislature understood, you all
understood that there was, um,
likely going to be
uh communi businesses needing
help making their tax payments.
And so you could, in the middle
of it become um delinquent, but
if you were delinquent before
the pandemic started, you were
not eligible for the program.
Uh, they were very flexible loan
terms. So in both programs,
there was no principle due in
the 1st 3 years, none. In the
second program, there was
actually not even interest
accruing in that first year. So
in the first loan program, SB,
the, the 1.0 interest was due at
the end of the 1st year, the 2nd
year, and the 3rd year, with the
2.0, no interest accrued in the
first year. In the second year,
it accrued but was paid at the
end, and then one more interest
payment was made right at the
end. So there were two
interest payments made in the
2nd period, and then you were
able to go to principal and
interest.
The interest rate was fixed at
50% of prime rate. I'll remind
you that when we started that in
20
20 prime at that point was at,
um
3.25%.
So half of that was 1.625. That
was the interest rate we had in
place for about 15 months. Um,
it wasn't until 2022 that we
started seeing increases in
prime, that prime was raised 7
times in that year and so
interest rates for these loans
ultimately moved from about 1.
67% to 3.5%.
Um,
or 3.75%, I apologize. So those
were the loan terms incredibly
generous loan terms, um.
I would note that they were
great for the borrowers, not so
great for the lenders, because
when you get annual payments, it
gets very hard to keep the
attention of your underlying
businesses and many of them had
some revisionist history
memories. Um, on page 4, I'll
just give you the summary, the
high-level summary between those
time periods of that 1.0 and
2.0. We funded 200, I'm sorry,
2,552 businesses in 32 counties,
um, and
they, they ultimately
represented 21 economic sectors.
The average loan size was
67,000. Um, the first one we did
880 during that 1.0 period, um,
totaling about $40 million. As I
said earlier, about half of
them, a little over 5,
refinanced as part of the 2.0,
so the 464 loans from 1.0 became
2.0, and then we made
additionally about 1,672 no
loans in that in that
20 program
So the infrequency is uh, uh, I
just gonna be a recurring theme
and I'll turn you to page 5 with
the pie charts on that, so you
can get a chance to see kind of
what that looks like in the
combined portfolio, you can see
on the left-hand side of that
chart, um, the first interest
payment, the vast majority of
interest payments began in 2024.
More than 50% of the first
interest period was sometime in
2024. And more than 25% of them,
um, were in 2025.
So it takes a long time because
of the 2.0 timing before they
actually have to make a payment
of any sort. So there's a little
bit at the front end, you'll see
some of those folks that made
those, um, they took out the
loan in the first, from the
first program, and ultimately
didn't end up um refinancing it.
So you see some early interest
payments, but predominantly,
you'll see most of that stuff
coming in in 24 and 25. Uh,
similarly on principal payments,
our first principal payment,
you'll see on the right-hand
side of that chart
is in 2023.
More than 50% comes in 2024 as
the first payment. And again
nearly 30% in 2025. So
it just, uh, between when we
made the loans in 2020 through
the end of 202, it could be
several years before we had to
receive a payment from them and
maintaining their interest in
keeping their interest in that
time period was very difficult
Um
I would just, uh, one final
comment here, which is that if
you were part of the 1.0 program
and did not refinance. Your
ultimately, you'll complete
payments on that loan between
August of 26th and March of 27.
If you were part of the 2.0
program, whether you refinanced
or straight up, uh, borrowed the
first time under the 2.0
program, you will complete your
payments under that between
March of 31 and February of 33.
So it's a long-term prospect.
Um, on page 6, we're required to
report to you on bankruptcies
that have been declared.
Um, I will note that first, the
good news, 265 borrowers, um,
have paid their loan in full.
Um, so that's the good news.
We've had 23 cumulative, uh,
write-offs, and that's either
they were discharged debt
through bankruptcy action or
the, uh, we had received
verification that the owners had
died.
There are 11 borrowers currently
have reported bankruptcy
proceedings. That was 11
borrowers, their outstanding
principal amount is about
700,000.
Um, we do monitor the bankruptcy
proceedings. So we are, they're
required to report to us, but
unfortunately, we have to also
rely on external, uh, reporting
services to let us know exactly
what's going on. Um, so we do,
we look at the bankruptcy
proceedings. We, uh, will file
with the courts to make sure
that we maintain whatever claim
and right we have. So we'll
file, uh, immediately, um, but
we can't really collect while
they're in bankruptcy. We cannot
under law.
collect while they are seeking
bankruptcy protection.
We saw between 23 and 24, a
7-fold increase in bankruptcies,
uh, and bankruptcy actions under
this program, mostly because
there weren't that many in 23.
There was a slight amount, but
they started to really kick in
in in 2024.
Um, so converting those borrower
payments from the annual
payments to the monthly payments
is where we're hitting the
hardest period. So we have about
half of them, which have either
paid in full as we mentioned
earlier, or our current on all
loan payments, just 5%. We have
another about 10% of our loans
that are more than 15 days past
due, but not quite 180 days.
That's that 6 month period. And
then about 40% of the loans are
more than 180 days past due. So
again, we
have annual payments. It can
take a while for them to get
converted into a monthly payment
where we really had their
interest. We worked with them,
but, um, more than, um, just
under half are really in a
position of being past due.
Um, of the total outstanding
principle as of June 30th is,
uh, $146 million. Those 40%
loans, 50% loans, uh, that are
past due equal principal
outstanding of 76.1 million, and
of the loans that are current,
that's about $70 million. So it
looks like the smaller payments,
smaller borrowers are the ones
that are maintaining their
payment history.
All right. So let me tell you
where we are currently with this
program. I think I reported to
you last year that we saw this
big tsunami of payments coming
and the work it takes to convert
folks from, uh, the annual
payment cycle to a monthly
payment cycle and put out for
bid a loan servicing and client
support RFP. Uh, we selected a
contractor named Lendistry and
we completed the transfer of
that portfolio and fiscal year
25. So that took a lot of
additional sort of
reconciliation between two
different databases. They've
begun their onboarding. They are
now doing the full loan
servicing under the program. Uh,
Lendistry itself is a CDFI at
Community Development Financial
Institutions. That's a federal
designation that, uh, that you
can either be a nonprofit or a
for-profit CDFI, but you have to
dedicate more than 50% of your
activities to low-income persons
and low-income communities. So
it is that a lot of uh credit
unions, banks may have CDFIs.
uh, uh, lendistry is an unusual
one because they are a tech
centered, they use technology
platform to make loans to
clients who have historically
lacked uh financing on a
reasonable and responsible term.
So they, they use technology
quite a bit to make that happen.
We were very attracted to that
program and for, um, into that
process. And I would note they
were the only ones who included
technical assistants as part of
their collect
ion efforts. So when someone is
not paying, you either send
them, you know, you work with
them until they stop
communicating with you and then
you have to send them to
collections ultimately. They had
one intervening step, which was
to send them for technical
assistance. They have a
nonprofit arm called the Center
for Lendistry that really was a
central part of why we chose
this group over the others that
were that um uh
submitted bids
And I have, they, they have an
online portfolio called
Initiate, and you can access on
your own time, uh, videos,
webinars, templates. They have a
variety of um activities that
are there for you, free to the
NMFA portfolio. Um, and I would
just note, let me see on page
78, sorry, I couldn't even count
my pages.
Um.
I would go to page 9
just to give you some sense of
what's available to them.
Um, technical assistance
includes uh
the full I apologize, the full
portfolio includes access to,
uh, their demand learning
platform that initiate that
covers money, management,
budgeting, um, and that's
available in both English and
Spanish. They have weekly
programspecific office hours, so
you can sign up on a first come,
first serve basis. They have
about 17 advisors that you sign
up for for one on one
counseling. Um, they have
enhanced business planning and
financial forecasting through AI
and then they have some monthly
training
sessions that you can also sign
up for. So that is available to
everyone within the finance
authority's
For that, um, they get, there's
an intakes process that they
utilize in order to see where
their deficiencies are. They
work to see if they loan
payments need to be modified,
but they start with technical
assistance and understanding
what it is the business knows
about its own performance and
where it is in, in the course of
its path. And then that
information goes back to the
industry team to see if there's
additional work that needs to be
done to modify that loan.
Um, so those are the tho those
are our updates for that
program, um, the technical
assistance is starting in
earnest, um, in September. The,
they are still on boarding the
clients, talking to them, um,
developing their relationships,
which includes phoning each of
the borrowers emailing each of
the borrowers and sending
letters to each of those
borrowers. So it's a lengthy
process for clients to recognize
that someone else is servicing
the portfolio. They're taking,
uh, great care to establish
those relationships.
If they are late, they will
receive pay, they will receive
calls right away. The sooner you
contact a borrower about a late
payment, particularly a small
business borrower, the greater
the opportunity for that to be
turned into a performing loan.
So they're working off that with
their, um, with their surfacing
center. They have a large call
group that works on those, uh,
calls and makes, uh, has been
doing those calls for now a
month or two. and with that,
Madam Chair, I'm happy to answer
questions.
Thank you. That's fascinating to
hear about that agency. Uh,
Representative Kates
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much
for your presentation. Thank
you. Um, uh,
so I'm just trying to get some
clarification on the report. So
let's say the small businesses
that are reaching out for the do
they have to be in a certain
sector or serve a public purpose
as well as a private sector.
What is, besides their financial
qualifications. Is there any
other, um, sector or type that
you, that this is uh available
for in small business. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So relative to
the
lo an program, it was in the
pandemic and based solely on,
uh, their annual revenues and
how much revenue decline they
saw in those first two months
and then ultimately, as it was,
uh, repositioned, their decline
year over year from pre-pandemic
to, to pandemic conditions. So
it was based solely on the
decrease of revenues in uh
experienced by the businesses.
We tracked their, um, sectors so
that we'd have a sense of what
kinds of individuals and what
kinds of businesses were um
taking advantage of the funding.
um, but we, that they were not
limited to any particular
economic sector and underwriting
creditworthiness was really more
of just uh pulling the credit
report and ensuring that they
either did not have collections
or had collections, and that
was, so there was not an
underwriting of these loans. It
was a processing.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your answer. So,
um, so this is a program just
for businesses who were existing
during the pandemic. Obviously,
uh, it'll still be operational
as they go through the life of
the loan. There's no new
businesses that qualify for this
program, correct, a business
that's starting right now.
That's correct? That's correct.
So the last time that you could
apply for this program was
December 31st of 22. OK.
I, I thank you, ma'am Sharon,
thank you for it. So let's, uh,
go to, um
uh, did, did, did you find even
the, the because I know you
didn't put it in here, but you
said you did track the type of
businesses.
Did you get any information if
there was a sector of business
that were more likely to be
either in bankruptcy or uh in
jeopardy than another type of
business.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, I don't
have the information relative to
bankruptcy. I can tell you the
vast majority of the businesses
were in the hospitality
industry. Um, they particularly
restaurants got hit very hard.
Um, I would note that also the
businesses are going out of
business without declaring
bankruptcy. And so part of the
difficulty here is trying to
understand of those, half of
those loans that are currently
past due, how many businesses
are still actually operating.
Um, you know, we do have the
personal guarantee
They're unsecured, so there's
not a lot of leverage for us,
uh, but we don't have that data
because we only have the data
that's reported either through
deaths or through the bankruptcy
court is verifiable. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. I know I
was very active at that time. I
was not a legislator during the
beginning of the pandemic, but I
was very active in, uh, trying
to keep those hospitality, those
restaurants.
alive in my community, I know,
and that, uh, it was a hit or
miss. We lost some, uh, the ones
that actually not just survived
but thrived were the ones that
leaned into the DoorDash
delivery system and that kind of
like they change their business
model.
Um, on on slide 6, uh, 23
cumulative write-offs totaling.
So that bullet point, are you
saying those are individuals,
those are the, uh, companies.
that, uh,
that
NMFA received a portion or all
of what they loaned.
through a negotiation or
bankruptcy process.
What does, what does the bullet,
the second bullet mean? The
second bullet, Madam Chair, just
means that there was, um, the,
the debt was discharged by the
bank. So the, I mean, by the
courts. So the courts basically
said as part of the bankruptcy
action, you no longer owe this
money. So those are loans that
we can't carry on our books
because the courts have said
that debt does no long it no
longer exists. They nullified
the loan agreement pretty much.
And then similarly, on the
verified deaths, that's when the
business owner, there was just
the one business owner. They're
no longer
an operating company and there's
no, there's nobody to go after
from the business owner
perspective. OK, thank you for
that clarification. So the first
bullet, you, you, we've had 265
loans paid in full, 23 that have
been written off that we are not
going to be able to collect on
what an 11 you're currently in,
in the process of, of the
bankruptcy report. So, um, this
is an exceptional program during
an unprecedented time in our
history. I'm
very grateful to the legislators
before me.
who understood, um
what, how we needed to support
New Mexico, um, through this
program.
Do we have any comparative data
of similar programs, whether
they're federal or from other
states to see whether our um
success rate, um, uh, is, uh,
comparable.
Madam Chair, I'd have to come
back with you for some hard
answers, but I can tell you our
first glimpse into the, to
comparing us to particularly to,
um, the idle loans. Those were
the disaster relief loans
offered by the SBA, the PPP
program, which was, this was
intended to model. Actually,
you, if you hire the folks, you
don't pay back the loan. So we
don't happen to know from their
reported data, which businesses
didn't make it or anything else
because you only had to uh
verify it over an eight-week
period. Um, but
the idle loan was intended to be
repaid. It was flexible and long
term, very much like this
program and what we found there
and what we're finding here is
that businesses did not recover
quite as quickly or as expected.
So the program was designed with
the expectation that there would
be more normalcy back into their
business model, faster than
we've seen it happen. So the
difficulty that the businesses
had hiring after the pandemic,
um, was not, I think,
anticipated either by this
program or by the idle program.
In fact, our concern from the
beginning is keeping those folks
employed because there wouldn't
be jobs afterwards. But in fact,
the reverse happened in
businesses weren't able to
operate at the levels they were
before. So the idle program is
seeing very similar kinds of
responses, which is that, you
know, there was a short period
of time. It was a lot of money.
The lifelines were pretty big,
relative to their ability to, to
start repaying that debt as
quickly as it was, um, scheduled
to be re
pa id So we don't see this as an
anomaly, but I, I have to get
you hard data.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your answer and
thank you, um, for this very
supportive program. Thank you.
Representative Lujan
uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
oh, sure, uh, Representative
Lawn House District 48 in, uh,
Santa Fe. Thank you.
Very happy to be here today. Um,
just, I think you cleared up
some of my questions, uh,
through, um, some of the rep
Kates's questioning, but
uh, my questions, uh, we'll
start page 7 in regards to uh
the lend industry, um.
you said that there was an RF
RFP that went out to them, so
they are managing now the
portfolios for the small
businesses and, um
and they are, are they also
managing um
the loans that
Can you, can you just clarify
that for me, Madam Chair, yes,
we transferred the management of
the portfolio through contract
over to Lendustry. So they send
out the invoices, they collect
the payments, they apply the
payments to the loan. They deal
with the clients, um, if there
are collection efforts, so if
someone is late, they're the
ones calling them. They're the
first person to answer the call
from the clients when they want
to know how to proceed with
prepayment or if they need their
loan modified because something
has happened. So they are
dealing directly with the
clients.
Um, we had a team, uh, when we
operated this program, a team of
5 permanent employees and many
temporary employees, um, and the
loans themselves that TEMAFour,
given the growth of our other
programs, we're better utilized
in some of the other new
programs that we offered. So we
were either going to have to
hire up extensively to meet the
demand of this loan servicing or
figure out a different, um,
approach. And we think by
choosing someone that's really
got a lot more experience than
NMFA does in dealing with these
very small kind of microlo
an s that we chose the right
course, that they have the right
technical assistance. They
understand these businesses and
they have the systems and people
in place to respond more quickly
and, um, more appropriately to
the borrowers in need. No, thank
you. I think that's appropriate.
Um, we, I, we have the same set
up that, uh, state economic
development, uh, they use, they
use these for these other, um,
federal loans and, and, and
managing them and getting them
out so I just like to see more
as time goes on, the
ef fi ci ency and sounds like I
just wanted clarification on
that that it's both portfolio
and Matt like the full, um
effect of what they're doing,
um, and the other question I
have is in rela uh
relative to page, um, 6 in the
bankruptcy.
uh,
so there is just not enough
information to for us today that
you have that, that would tell
us that those outstanding
borrowers of those loans.
we don't know whether they're
going to, uh, file for
bankruptcy, which then in turn
would, what happens, you know,
you're not able to collect or
the state is not able to collect
on those uh borrowers' loans,
but we don't know. I mean,
what's preventing them from at
this point filing bankruptcy. I
think this is one of the things
we asked early on in 2020,
right? Um, and there's a risk
that we were taking.
Can you expand? Thank you.
Madam I'm sure, yes, so, it's
not clear to us how many more
businesses will ultimately file
formal bankruptcy action. Um,
it's, it's more likely that
several of these small
businesses will just stop
operating. Um, these are
unsecured loans, and if the
loans are under $75,000 there's
no personal guarantee required.
So the concept of a bankruptcy
is more likely to happen when
there are larger business and
they have assets that they want
to, um, reorganize, and they
want to keep going, but a lot of
these small businesses
may just stop operating, and we
can go after and collect them,
but the cost to collect on these
loans may be greater is more
likely to be greater than the
actual amount that we received
back. So, again, our, our idea
was rather than
you know, we'll know after Linda
Street reports back after their
comprehensive review and the
contact with all the clients,
how many loans they think are
still ongoing loans, um, because
they have the staff to dedicate
to those folks and do, you know,
the technology to do some skip
tracing and other things, but we
don't have those tools and so
we're, we're gonna wait to see
what they, uh, bring back to us
and we'll report back as we know
more. Thank you. Thank you, Man.
I think this is really
responsible and this is a really
effective way of getting that
information. Thank you.
Representative Ferrera
She disappeared.
Oh, there she is. Have you met
Representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
thank you, Marquita, um, I
remember this bill and uh
I thought it was going to be
desperately needed and, and it
was, and I had town hall
meetings, uh, with restaurant
owners and small businesses in
Chama and Espanola and Taos just
to explain how this bill would
work and, and to kind of get
them prepared for the
application process, yada yada
yada. So, um, and I remember one
restaurant owner saying, well, I
don't need a loan, I need a
grant. I said, well, you know, 1
8 is probably as good as you're
gonna get on a, on a, on a loan
and I said, I, and I mean,
people were just angry, you
know, I get it. I, you know, it,
they were just angry. They're
losing their businesses and it's
really the small startups and
I'm, I'm just curious if you
know this. I may have asked this
before. Um
I, I'm curious about the
restaurant industry because that
was the hardest hit. Uh, it's
interesting in trauma
what happened is they all turned
into a takeout places and trauma
for whatever reason became the
stopping point for gas on the
way to Colorado, and many
families were just moving with
relatives, and they would drive
and stop in Chama, get gas and
get food, so it's interesting
their gross receipts tax went up
during COVID. It's, it's
interesting. The, the community,
I was the most worried about,
did the best during COVID. Taus
really struggled, as did
Espinola. I'
m just curious as far as the
restaurant industry where
where they're more um they have
a lot of, you know, as an
industry they have a lot of um
failed restaurants. I mean, you
know, it's a startup business, a
lot of mom and pop stuff. They
have a lot of they don't really
have, they may be good cooks,
but they don't know how to run a
business, so they have a high,
uh, what do I wanna say, uh,
failure rate anyhow. I think
it's like 50%. I don't know. I'm
just curious, did you look at
those numbers? Were you able to
tell
how many restaurants closed. I
know the ones that stayed open
were usually the ones that had
been in business for a long,
many, many years, had a good
customer base and it came back,
but the ones that failed were
probably startups, um, probably
newer entities. Do have you,
were you able to look at any of
that?
Madam Chair, that's an excellent
question. We have not looked at
that and once we get the data
back from Lendistry about their
assessment of the, um, ongoing
businesses that are, that exist
within the portfolio, we'll be
able to tell you that because we
do have a cross reference to
their, um, their sector code.
Um, so we'll be able to give you
more data once we receive
reports back from Lendustry on
their overall assessment of the,
of the loans. Um, and I would
just note that first comment you
made about businesses wanting
grants,
Um, a lot of states were able to
make grants to small businesses
during that time period. Some
have less restrictive
anti-donation, um, laws. Others
used more of their federal
dollars for small business
relief. Um, so this was the
first of the programs that we
offered. We then processed in
December of 2020, a $100 million
grant program using the state's,
the federal stimulus money.
and we've received 15,000
applications for that program we
were able to fund just half of
those. Um, so you could see that
the demand for grants was great.
Um, and most of those, the
preponderance of those were also
in the, uh
hospitality industry, yeah,
including hotels and motels as
well. Um, and then last we had
that LEDA grant program, which
was state-funded. That was a
much more difficult program and
was really tailor-made for just
a couple of kinds of businesses.
Um, that was less successful, I
think overall because it was
just too hard to do the
reporting on. Um, but we did see
there were grant programs out
there that we were able to offer
on behalf of. We saw a similar
mix in our loan programs in
terms of sector and size of
business as we did in
the grant program. So there was
virtually no difference whether
it was a loan or a grant as to
who accessed it. Uh, but your
point about businesses
restaurant industry in
particular being a difficult
thing for a failure rates,
largely because they have a hard
time accessing credit generally.
You have to be a really well
established business, uh,
hospital, uh, sorry, restaurant.
Yesterday was months. Today's
nouns, I've just noun impaired.
Um, you have to be a
well-established restaurant to
get good
lines of credits and things from
banks, right? So they are
undercapitalized from the sense
that they have less lifeline to
start with. Other businesses
that have different industry
traits may have greater access
to, uh, conventional credit and
so they are able to stay afloat
a little longer when these kinds
of disruptions happen, but we'll
get you that data as soon as we
know it again, since there was a
similar mix across all three
portfolios. We can then sort of,
um, get you some imputed data as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Marquitta. I'll be really
interested in that because it's
just a matter of time before
another pandemic comes. I mean,
this will not be our first one,
guys. It's, it's, uh, things are
changing the world's big climate
changes impacting all of this
and, uh, you know, people in
this field.
predict that another pandemic
will come. It will be different.
We won't know what it'll look
like, but it will come. And, uh,
for, for us to have this kind of
information will be, I think,
crucial, uh, to make further
decisions what worked, what
didn't work, when should we come
in, you know, and, and, you
know, we learned a lot of
things, um, in this pandemic
too. And what, what you don't
know on day one, you know, when
you're looking at a New York
model versus what you know.
you know, 5 years later, and you
know, it's easy to make
decisions, uh, uh, when you
when you, I mean, it's hard to
make decisions when you see
what's happening and you're
basing it on what's what was
going on in New York and that's
what we were doing when, you
know, they were putting bodies
in, you know, cold storage
because they couldn't even bury
them fast enough, so, so it's,
it's, I think, been a real
lesson for the whole country as
well as our state so I, I'm, um,
thankful that you are looking at
this data and that you will have
it for us because, um, you know,
hopefully not my time again, but
I
think it will come again and as
a state we'll have to be
prepared for that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Barrego
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Marquita, for this
information. Uh, I, um, I
wondered when you talk about
small businesses, what do you
mean exactly? Uh, what size are
we talking about?
Madam Chair, in the initial loan
program, it was, um
businesses with gross revenues
of less than $5 million and then
the expanded program it was net
revenues of less than $5
million. So it was a revenue cap
that we were looking at for
determining small businesses.
Um, did you have any data
regarding how many employees. We
collected data, um, at the time
of application for where they
were, um, pre-pandemic in terms
of employment where they were at
the time of application and
where they anticipated being
a year from the pandemic. So we
had them estimate those. The
unfortunate part is that we
couldn't get a very good
response on the follow-up to see
where they actually were. So you
have any sort of mean or
median
like 5, 10.
20
Man on the first program, they
were obviously much smaller
because the, the gross revenues
were less than 5 million. So
they were less than 10, um, but
on the net revenues, they were
much larger entities, and they
were going, you know, into the
20 and 25. But I, I'll get that
data and, and send it over to
you. We've reported on that
before. I apologize, I didn't
have it today. No worries. Um,
do you have any idea how many
New Mexic small businesses in
that category are exist in New
Mexico.
as of like
2022, 23.
Madam Chair, we do have some of
that like a comparative we can
cross reference that for you.
Yes, we do have that
information. Can you get me that
information, please. Um, also,
uh, Madam Chair, thank you. um
so
tell me again, and I was trying
to calculate the number of
businesses that have not paid
back yet, and I came up with
like 1,249 on page 6, where you
have 261 loans are past due,
988, and I just added up those
two numbers. Is that about right
Madam Chair, only 265 have fully
repaid their loans.
So only, only 265 for fully
repaid, and we expect the loan
payments if they go their normal
course, uh, to go from August of
26 being the earliest that loans
will be fully repaid the state
would get their money back to
February of 2033. And just for
transparency, I'm a small
business owner. I don't employ
anyone except myself. um, but I
just wanted
to.
get some comparative analysis
here. Uh, when I served as
council president in
Albuquerque, um, in 2022, we
were handing out small, uh,
American rescue funds in the
form of grants and we were
handing those out like M&M's lit
literally, I mean, it was just
crazy, um
but I just wanted to mention
that because the city of
Albuquerque and it's a separate
program, did a very good job and
that's a whole another
geographical group of small
businesses, um.
in addition to this, correct?
And I think the county also had
a separate program as well.
Mm
So this really doesn't give the
whole analysis of the impact on
small businesses. Madam Chair,
it gives a very small sliver of
pictures. So the, the CARES
grant, which, um,
was available to, um,
non-employer-based businesses,
which is the vast majority of
businesses in New Mexico. Uh, we
had so much demand in our CARES
program for those funding we had
to cut them off at 2000
borrowers. Um, but it was the
vast majority of those 15,000
were non-owner o non-employee,
uh, businesses. Um, Madam Chair,
I, uh, uh, my last question is
um
do you share this information
with any of the New Mexi like
the New Mexico chamber or any of
the chambers.
Madam Chair, we would make these
reports to legislators. They're
available on our website, but we
don't do any special reporting
to any other trade groups. OK,
so this information is available
on your website. Um, Madam
Chair, I just wanted to mention
that I'm pretty proud to say
that my bill as city councilor
expanded restaurants into
parking lots and then, and you
saw the tents. That was my bill.
So I was very proud of that and
I appreciate, I'd like to have
some more
conversation with you about
this, if I could, um, offline.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I will get
the data that we've previously
reported out with the additional
cross-referenced information out
to Sabina so that she can
deliver it to the group.
Thank you. Um, and I just want
to mention to people, these are
the average failure rates of
businesses in the United States
in the first year, 20% fail. In
New Mexico, 25.7 fail in the
first five years, 50% of small
business in the United States
failed, and 51.9 fail in New
Mexico. That's not broken up.
I'm sure the restaurant rates
are much higher, but it, it
wasn't just about COVID. There's
the act
ual attrition rate that happens
in as a failed small business
owner. It's like, um, I'm
disappointed that some of our
small business things like West
aren't going to get the funding
that helps small business
owners. My only question is, you
mentioned that by legislation,
you're not required to report
about this
in the future manager, that's
correct. So we're required to
make annual reports to this
body, uh, through this year, but
obviously, we'll continue to
report as this program continues
as we get more information, we
really do want to share those
responses with you. Um, and I
think you're, the segue about,
um,
bail business failureship really
deals a lot with capitalization.
There are so few businesses that
are fully served from a capital
perspective in New Mexico
because our average business
sizes are so small and their
needs are, they're usually too
small for most of our commercial
banks, and we don't have enough
of those CDFIs to meet the
demand of the business community
that we have here. And with
that, that would be a great
segue for John Brooks and his
information on the economic
development revolving fund. So
Yes, and thank you and, and we
will continue to report since
all this stuff is gonna go to
2033.
Anyway, and with that, thank you
for the segue information. We're
gonna go to the report on the
economic development revolving
fund with Fernando Martinez,
deputy director, and John
Brooks, the chief of programs.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, thank you for
having us to this beautiful
location. We really appreciate
that. Um, we are gonna cover
several different programs this
morning. The lion's share of the
presentation's gonna be
conducted here by Mr. John
Brooks, our chief of programs,
and then I'm gonna, uh, do the
last part of the presentation.
So with that I'll I'll turn it
over to Mr. Brooks and committee
members, the handout that
they're going to be following is
on its way to you now.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is John Brooks.
I'm the chief of programs at the
Finance Authority.
And today we're going to talk
about the economic development
revolving fund report that we
have provided to this body on a,
I guess, twice, twice during
the, the, uh, committees, uh,
interim period.
And so as Fernando talked about,
we'll go through, uh, each one
of the programs. They talk about
the status of each program, and
then I'll turn it back over to
Fernando to to wrap it up.
So just by way of, of
information, the statewide econo
uh economic development finance
Act, which we call SSEFFA, was
established in 2003. Uh, for the
purpose to help stimulate the
economy in New Mexico,
particularly in the rural and
under uh underserved areas in
the state, uh,
one thing about this particular
tool was it allowed us to be on
par with our local and and
neighbors and and
the states that that are
surround us by giving us the
ability to do uh loans, uh, to
small businesses and also to
provide additional tools such as
vulgarities and things of that
nature, uh, that will, uh, put
us on par with Colorado, Texas,
and Arizona. Uh, one thing
about, uh, the statewide
economic development finance
Act, it's the first day we
started with was the ability to
make loans through the program
called Smart Money.
Uh, we made participations and
purchased, uh, loans from banks
uh throughout the state.
Uh, prior to 2011, um, the, the
sweater required a legislative
authorization. So each year we
would create a bill, you know, a
laundry list of, of, of projects
that would come before uh the
body and in order for uh
legislative authorization. And
then, uh, in around 2000 that
was prior to 2011. And then in
2011, we passed a legislation
that
uh suspended that, but allow us
to report to this committee
twice, uh, twice during the
interim period about the the
successes of the program and
where we were heading with each
particular program.
Um, what we, you know, the
reason that was necessary
because banks and businesses did
not feel at the time smart smart
money was a business-friendly,
uh, program because we had uh
often wait 6 months to get the
authorization and small business
owners, uh, do, do not like to
wait. Banks do not like to wait
and they, they often left left
this out uh transactions and
moved on.
Uh, currently, the provision,
uh, sunsets and uh June of 2026.
And so what you'll see, uh, this
upcoming legislative session is
a request from the NMFA to
extend uh the, this, the way
that we're authorized in
operating at this point in time.
So, um
um, we'll continue, we
hopefully, we will continue with
the two reports and continue to
provide the information you need
to show this assessors of the
program.
On page 3 of the handouts, uh,
goes in a little bit more uh
detail about the economic
development uh revolving fund
specifically into the six
subscounts that we have created
within the program.
As you can see, we uh we have
smart money, which is a state
funded participation program,
Essential services, which is a a
direct working capital loan as a
result of, of COVID and that was
funded by the uh finance
Authority and some of our
capital funding that we had
available. Next, the cannabis,
microbusiness Program, which is
a startup, uh, um, program for
licensed cannabis
microbusinesses that was also
funded by the NM
F A
um
collateral support,
participation, which was a
federally funded program that
started uh with the uh funds
from the state small business uh
Act of 2009 or 2010 at uh when
uh the economy was suffering at
that point in time
Um, the next program is the loan
participation program, which is
the uh the reauthorization of
the state Small Business Credit
initiative will what we call as
SSBCI 2.0. And then from that
particular funding, we created
the Capital Access program, uh,
which is a federally funded uh
pool guarantee program. And then
lastly, uh, from federal
program, the energy efficiency
revolving loan Fund
and so we will cover all these
particular funds in uh the
presentation today. And I
promise you we won't last till
lunchtime.
Um, starting with, uh, Smart
money.
Uh, this is a state, uh, funded
program, which we did
participations with banks in
order to uh finance uh projects
for small businesses throughout
the state of New Mexico. Our
interest rates were based off
the US Treasury, plus some type
of markup for, uh, risks,
typically, um, between 1.5 to
2%, and our loans in in this
particular program were up to $2
million or 49% of the
participation.
Um, the, there were 7 loans that
were made in this particular
program. And as you can see in
the the table below, the total
financing, um, project on was
$32 million of that $7.6 million
was authorized by the New Mexico
Finance Authority for uh funding
with the average participation
of 32%. Um, currently, out of
the 7 loans, we have, uh, we
have made only one loan
is still active for $1 million
which they currently uh created
24 jobs. As you can see, the 7
loans created a total of 237
jobs over that period.
These programs, uh, this
particular program, we had a
couple that have settled and
foreclosed, but most of them
paid in full and as agreed.
On the next slide
on the Essential Services
working capital.
as I mentioned before, it was
established during COVID in
April 2020 for emergency funding
to help out with the essential
service providers during that
period.
Uh, what we did was made a
direct, uh, working capital
loans up to $1 million for
operational expenses such as
payroll, utilities, supplies,
uh, help out with rent and uh
mortgage payments and also uh uh
there was some building
expansions as required for uh
COVID for some, uh, the
childcare operators that needed
to have the space, um, and also,
uh, uh, purchase, uh, um, PP um
protection,
uh,
gloves and masks and stuff like
that, so they were able to stay
operational.
Um
some of the entities that were
eligible under this program were
for-profit and nonprofit
essential service providers. And
as you look at the list, you'll
see there were rural hospitals,
dental offices, childcare
operators, um, walk-in
healthcare facilities,
pharmacies, uh, medical supply
equipment, manufacture and
research facilities.
We did uh the way that we
structured those loans, we uh
made a line of credit for one
year and then converted it to a,
a term loan up to 5 years. And
so as you, you'll see some of
these businesses are starting to
pay off and and complete their
uh five-year term. Um, most of
these businesses were secured
with business assets. It did
require personal guarantees for
those owners, uh, with the
ownership of greater than 20%.
Uh,
interest rates were at 1% and no
application fee, no closing fee,
and no prepayment penalties. So
it was a, a program that was uh
really great at the time and it
helped out a lot of businesses
to to stay open. And as you can
see on page 6, there are 17
loans that we made, uh, during
that period. Some of the
successes that you can see is uh
such as build with robots, which
was the company that uh manu
manufactured the
ro bo t s that sprayed the sun
port, um, and, and disaffected
uh that area. Ring IR was a
company that um was making uh
early detection of COVID, uh,
screening process. Then we had
uh schools like Covenant
schools, um
Children's Choice and other, uh,
childcare facilities that needed
this funding to stay open and,
and provide childcare services
during this time frame. And then
a lot of medical uh companies
that uh use the, the money to be
able to uh stay operational, and
then, um, and so that's most of
those uh projects that you see
here, the total project amount
or total project that we funded
was 5.5 million.
Uh, right now we have 3 loans
that are currently outstanding
of totaling of 162 million. And
as you see, most of the loans
were paid in full. We did have
one that was uh wrote off uh
because uh they lost the
contract with UNM.
The, the, the remaining uh uh
projects like Reliance Medical,
they, they just currently made
their uh payments so their
current ponderosa Monte
Montessori, uh, they're current
in Santa Fe
Recovery Center is current, but
at all the others have either
paid early or um they made their
payments as agreed.
On the next page, on the
cannabis microbusiness program.
This was a pilot program that we
created uh to prove the success
for the cannabis industry. So,
you know, when the cannabis uh
uh bill was passed in the state.
We thought this was an
opportunity to help out, uh,
with a uh emerging business and
provide a capital. Uh, the, what
we did was did working capital
loans, license to
microbusinesses up to 250,000.
The interest rates were 2 to 3%
in the terms were 3 to 5 years.
Uh, currently, we're not taking
any applications under this
program because there's a couple
of things that we, we recognize.
Number one, there were
challenges with the borrowers as
they, they were still trying to
figure out their own businesses.
They were changing their
business plan or, or had, uh,
you know, uh, ideas that were
not yet working or uh getting
through uh regulations. Also
they there was issues with
collateral requirements. And
then lastly,
uh the industry was quite
frankly very volatile as you
guys uh probably know, and
there's, uh, there's such a high
competitive, uh, uh, the, the,
the industry is very
competitive. Let me say it that
way. And you know, what we saw
is some businesses would have um
um other cannabis shops, located
right next to them when they
were opening up and so it made
it, it made it down near
possible for uh
for them to be successful. And
so what you see is um below is
the, the loans that we made, uh,
Carver Family Farm, Urban oasis,
Rhino Springs, Gray Moon, the
memo and hi there. They all took
advantages of the maximum amount
that was possible. We had one
that, uh, we had to settle out
of court, uh, uh, Carver farmer,
family farm is current. The
other loans we are
restructuring. What we noticed
uh during
that time frame that uh 33 to 5
year loan term was very um a
restrictive to the capital that
they needed in terms of
operating capital. So we're
working with them to expand
expand their uh their terms, and
we got the first part approved
with the economic development
department to, uh, to extend the
collateral for them, and now
we're going back and and and
changing all the long term, so
we'll give an update, um
as we restructure all those
loans.
The next program, the state
Small Business Credit Initiative
1.0.
So as I mentioned, this was
established um through the small
uh business Jobs Act of 2010.
and there was about $1.5 billion
that was made available
throughout the country for small
business financing in 2011. Uh,
the economic development
department was the state's
recipient of those funds, and we
entered it to a MOU, uh, with
the Economic Development
department for to operate about
a $13 million program at that
time, uh, that $13 million
program is overseen by Treasury,
so we had
to often make reports back to
Treasury. One of the, the thing,
uh one of the key aspects that
Treasury wanted to see was a
leverage of 10 to 1. So for
every $1 public money that was
involved, there had to be $10 of
private money uh involved in the
transaction. Um, in the fir one
of the programs that we created
was the loan Participation
Program, which we called
collateral Support Program at
that particular time.
Um, it facilitated about $10
million worth of projects and
16 uh different economic
development projects that we
have financed through that, uh,
program. Three projects were
located in rural communities
that average the total project
size of $3.2 million.
Enemae, um, purchased
subordinated interest with loans
on an average of 16% of the
project costs.
Um, all loans made under the
program have performed and
inspected and we didn't have any
uh defaults in this particular
program, and some, uh, projects
even uh prepaid, uh, before, um,
before the, the long term, so
that we saw a tremendous amount
of success, uh, with this
particular program.
Additionally, the SIC uh
redeployed $5 million of
subordinated trunks to catalyze
a $15 million investment, um,
into 8 venture capital capital
funds invested in uh local
startups. Um, that was monies
that we, uh, uh, from
uh the remaining money of the
tranche 3 and plus principal
payments that we have received.
They took that money and and
invested it to uh that catalyst
fund.
Um, SSBCI, it was a great
program. It gave us a lot of
flexibility at that time that
was needed, and it gave us the
ability to meet that market
conditions. And one of the
important things I want to
reiterate, uh, why that program
was successful because we didn't
have, you know, no knock on the
legislative process, but we
didn't have to go through that
process to meet the demand at
that time and we were able to
meet uh a lot of demands that
at, you know, 2011 as the
economy
was in a recovery mode and help
out small businesses through
that time frame.
On page 9, is that the list of
the 16 loans we made during that
time frame using that uh uh you
know, approximately $10 million.
And as you can see, the total
portfolio, if you're looking at
the, the bottom, uh, the bottom
row, and there was $34.4 million
of, of total project financing
that we participated in $8
million which came from the
NMFA's participation
Our average participation was
26%. And as you can see, there's
no, no loan balances. All the
loans were paid in full and we
helped create 215 jobs, uh, in,
in the state of New Mexico. And
as you can see, there's a list
of uh various projects that that
we, uh, we funded, and one of
the, the great collaborations
that we had during that time
frame was working with SBA, uh,
no, not SBA.
Yeah, SBA on their uh 504
program in which uh we would do
the construction loan in a 504
would take us out and then we
could relend that money. So it
was, it was a very successful,
uh, uh, venture with the SBA
program. The next program, um,
the state Small Business Credit
Initiative 2.0. Uh, this is a
program that's recently has been
reauthorized, uh, by Congress
and it provides
$10 billion to state, uh, to the
states and the, the program is
again to support small
businesses and entrepreneurial,
uh, spirit with the focus on a
couple of items. One, socially
and economic disadvantaged
individuals.
Um, which, you know, that's the
DEI portion of it. And then two,
the very small businesses. So
those are uh businesses that are
uh fewer than 10 employees. Uh,
so the Department of Treasury
again, um, is overseeing this
particular program and, and
making sure that we comply with
all the requirements underneath
uh the program.
Uh, in the fall, uh, 2022, the
Economic Development department
received up to $74 million and
that $74 million is disposed in
three different tranches. So you
need to hit up to 80% of tranche
1 before they release, uh, the
monies forranche 2 when she hit
80%, then we get to tranche 3
and then the money stays with
the state. We do not have to
revert it back to the feds. Um,
as of right now
we are into ran to the money.
Uh, thanks to, uh, a couple
things. Number one, the venture
capital program that is operated
by uh NMFA and 2, the collateral
cystis program that's operated
by, uh, the Economic Development
Department. We now have the
program up and running for, uh,
the, the two remaining programs
in the, the series of programs
that we will operate the loan
participation program and the
Capital Access program.
These two programs will
hopefully kick in and allow us
to get to the 3rd tranche, and
then we, we, the state will be
able to keep uh the $74 million.
Of the $74 million I, I, I,
I've, it will be, um, uh,
oversight if I did talk about
the $6 million which is going to
the economic development
department for the SETI
incentive and also for uh small
business, SETI deployment. So
we, we have to, um, um, comply
with that that portion of the
funding.
On page 11.
It outlines the, the, the
various programs that we have
put together, uh, for this
partic uh for this funding. So
number one, the venture capital
program, um, that's under the
orange uh column is a program
that is up and running and, and
as you can see, the target uh
providers or vi uh viture
private equity funds, Early
early, I can't speak. Early
stage businesses between
1 to 5 employees, um,
transaction sizes between
$50,000 to $2 million
participation percentage up to
60%. Uh, the product types or
equity and debt investments,
then our terms are up to 12
years, and the use of proceeds
are for startup and uh expansion
and business development. So
that, that program is up and
running and that program helped
us to get to tranche 2, in which
tranche 2 will be um
using uh the two next programs
that are in the blue columns,
which is the SSBCI Capital
Access, and the loan
participation.
Uh, the Capital Access program,
the participants will be CDFIs,
credit unions, and banks, along
with the participation, the same
thing uh uh there, but the
difference in the participation,
we will do direct co landing
with CDFIs instead of
participating in their
financing, um, and a
participating model.
The target employee size, uh,
it's for, uh, for-profit and
nonprofit businesses, less than
100 employees for the Capital
Access program and for this
participation it's the same
thing, but uh less than 500
employees.
The transaction size under Cara
Axis um what we're hoping
between 10,000 to 1.5 and then
on the participation side, uh
$7.5 million.
Our participation percentage
will be 7% under Capital A
access and then under the loan
participation between 10 to 40%
The product types who are, are
the same. We will both, we would
do line of credits and also term
loans. The terms for the capital
access is shorter, uh, 1 to 70
years in the loan participation
is up to 25 years.
And then the use of proceeds
are, are both similar for uh
purchasing of buildings,
construction, renovation,
equipment, and working capital.
On
as of right now, under the 2.0
loan participant program. Uh, we
have 14 loans that are in the
works. So we have not closed on
them. We are having
conversations with the banks,
and we're working with those
banks, uh, to move forward, um,
through the MOU with uh the
Economic Development Department.
There's 27 million, that's going
to be allocated to this uh
program which the NMFA will, uh,
um, underwrite and then make
clones
uh, and hopefully to reduce the
risk to the bank, but also uh
reduce borrowing costs to
businesses. So we hope that our
interest rates will be lower
than the banks and then have a
blended interest rate that is
lower that will help um banks to
move money and also to get the
borrowers a lower uh interest
rate and cost of funds. As you
can see, we're working with uh
these banks, Western Commerce
Bank, uh, US Bank, Washington
Fed, Enterprise.
uh first uh New Mexico Bank of
Demming.
uh, Enterprise Baer Trust, Nina,
Bank of Clovis. So we're, we're
expanding the uh the whole state
to try to get um uh
participations out there to get
these dollars out there and
hopefully, when we report back,
we'll have several, uh,
businesses that we have closed
transactions with or have been
board approved by the Finance
Aity. Unslide 13
um, the SSBCI Capital Access
Program. Um, this slide
demonstrates how this particular
program was, is going to work.
It's a little different than a
uh participation. I, I, I would
say this is more of a, a
guarantee pull program.
So think of it this way, the
finance Authority will provide
uh a 7% match for each loan
that's enrolled into the program
that match is contributed or a
match with the bank's
participation up to 3.5% and
then the borrowers participation
up to 3.5%. All those funds are
gonna be held at a an account
that is located at the bank.
As
excuse me, as it, as the bank um
originates new loans, they
enroll it into this program and
therefore, um, we would match
and then the borrower and the
bank match and hopefully
the whole idea is that this,
this fund will increase for the
purpose of, of um
providing a, you know, insurance
if a loan, uh, were to fail or
to uh go through some type of uh
uh a loss, uh, a loss um
scenario. This program is not
their uh lost leader. So the
bank has to go through all their
processes in order to recover
their losses and then the, the
balance would come from this
particular fund.
So it, it, I hopefully
my simplified and and elementary
way of thinking of about this
particular slide helped out. But
as you can see, the as
as the bake rolls the loan, the,
the pool will get bigger and
bigger. So it's just like an
insurance pool. And the more uh
laws that participate, the
bigger bank, the bank will get
out of this particular pool.
So with that, I'll turn it over
to Fernando for the energy
efficiency revolving loan fund.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Brooks. Madam Chair, committee
members, um, the one I have to
present is relatively
straightforward. It's the energy
efficiency revolving loan fund.
Uh, this comes from a Department
of Energy Formula grant, um.
it was announced in 2022 and the
energy, minerals and natural
resources departments, energy
conservation management
division.
applied for the funds in 2023
and were awarded $5 million in
2024
and they
Energy, minerals and Natural
resources formed a partnership
with the New Mexico Finance
Authority, um, where the energy
conservation management division
is going to be providing the
technical assistance and
connecting interested um
entities and, and in this case
it's for profit or and
nonprofit, um, commercial
building owners that have a
public benefit so that it can be
educational, recreational,
cultural resources, something
like that, they have to
demonstrate that 50
% of their revenue is in state
and that 50% of the services
they provide are also in state.
Um, those are the main
requirements, but, uh, what they
have to do under this program is
get in touch with an energy
service company and and perform
an energy audit and
the whole idea behind this is
just to reduce overall energy
consumption in in these
commercial buildings.
um, really straightforward. This
has done all the time, but in
the long run, it will reduce
operating costs and, and
maintenance uh for these
facilities, um, and, um, they'll
be able to do energy retrofits.
There's, there's not a
possibility where you can just
do a renewable energy project as
a standalone project, but if you
want to include solar panels as
part of the energy efficiency.
um
project, then, then you can do
it that way. The, the loans can
range in size from $250,000 to a
million dollars. Like I said,
there's $5 million available for
this, uh, revolving loan fund.
So once the energy conservation
and management division, um,
gets them through this process
and they apply, they'll give a
loan application to the New
Mexico Finance Authority will be
underwriting the loans, um, the
rate on these loans is gonna be
2%.
Uh, the term of the loans cannot
exceed the life of the project
or 15 years. So that's
essentially it. It's, it's a a
very simple, straightforward
program. Uh, there's not too
much more to say on it, um,
hopefully we'll get a lot of
participation. We did launch
this program and
uh May of this year and uh I
think we have yet to receive
our, our first loan application,
but we are marketing this, uh,
in conjunction with the energy
conservation and Management
division.
So that's all I have for that,
Madam Chair committee members.
I have nothing else, so we stand
for questions.
Thank you. Um, I have
Representative Block and then
Representative Lu Han, uh, boy,
we're really adding up
and I would just ask, we are
running about a half hour behind
which means please edit
yourself, OK, just
ask what you need to ask.
and, you know, so we won't be
here till 4 o'clock. OK.
So Representative Block and
Representative Luhan O'Malley
and Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, John. Thank you,
Fernando. Appreciate you guys
for the presentation. Uh, quick
questions just regarding the
microbusiness, cannabis
microbusiness.
Number one, was it, how, how was
it created? Was it an in-house
NMFA initiative because I've
been trying to find like
bills and things we've chaptered
and I haven't found them, but
they may be buried somewhere in
the budget, so that could be
something. So that's number one,
and then number 2, how is
microbusiness defined?
So to answer question number
one, the, the monies came from
NMFA, so there wasn't a bill. So
we had excess funds remaining
from the uh $10 million that we
originally were going to use for
the essential services. So we
diverted that money into uh the
microbusiness uh program.
Um, the second question, uh,
microbusinesses were anything
that has under, I believe, is it
250
plants or or um.
yeah, yeah, about 200 plants, so
that uh that's the fun that was
defined by uh ROD.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, John. So, then
I guess I'm, I've just been
reading about
all these presentations
regarding small businesses, and
I know that they are defined any
which way. I think the federal
government, SBA is like 500
employees and it doesn't have a
cap for a specific gross
receipts, for example. So I'm
just trying to figure out
because this is just from a very
personal, like legislating
perspective. How do you guys
traditionally define a small
business at NMFA because like if
I was on the floor and I wanted
to bring forward an amendment
I wouldn't want some other
legislator who I'm trying to
amend their bill, being like,
oh, well, you're trying to give
tax breaks to billionaires or
whatever the heck they would
say. So I just want to make sure
if, if I'm going to use
something, I would love to use
something credible like NMFA to
define that. So could you just
tell me in general, the NMFA
specific state funds, not
federally funded funds, but
state funds through NMFA
traditionally, how do you guys
define SBA or I'm sorry, uh,
define small
businesses, pardon me.
Ma Chair Representative. I, I
would say from our perspective,
any, any small businesses to
find any any company under 100
employees.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, John. So then, what about
uh cap on specific gross
receipts, like 5, 10 million, do
you add that? or is it just
specifically on employees alone?
We look at employees alone, I,
we typically don't look at the
GRT caps. Um, so we just look at
the, the employee size of our
operation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, John. So then in
the future, I will, I will just
say per NMFA's guidelines
This is how I got this figure
representative so and so from
Los Alamos. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I don't know if that's a great
idea, but,
but you can go with it.
I will, I'll try
OK, Representative Lou Hannan
and Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um
so I'm gonna, uh, focus on page
7 on the
cannabis microbusinesses for
this first question, uh,
so on 0.3 you no longer
accepting applications due to
high underwriting costs, borrow
borrower challenges meeting
collateral requirements,
industry volatility.
I'd like for you to expand on
that just a little bit with the
volatility aspect of, of what is
it, you know
what are the benefits or, you
know, the downturn, I guess, of
what you're saying here is why
we're not
seeing an investment, but more
of a risk and, and continuing
this program.
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
so what we saw in the industry
when we initially started in
underwriting these loans. A lot
of the businesses did not have
the ad adequate collateral that
we would like uh toutwrite. So
they, the the, you know, what we
saw was equipment, which, which
the equipment, you know, if you
go try to sell it in the in the
marketplaces, you'll get, uh,
pennies on a dollar for.
Um, also, if they own the
building, then that was, you
know, collateral, uh, that was
good collateral, but what we saw
was a lot of the businesses were
leasing uh spaces, so they did
not own the buildings
themselves. And so what we had
were loans or potential loans
were there were uh speaking the,
uh, uh, poor in terms of
collateral, uh, not because of
the, the cash value or the, the
business, but they did just not
have sufficient assets, uh, to,
to underwrite. So that, that was
11 issue or one challenge that
we have with this. Number 2,
we had no control over the
amount of licenses that RLD was
issuing.
and, and so what you would have,
for example, um, you know
urban oasis, they will open up
their shop and then a month
later, there were 5 other shops
that were opening up around
them, and therefore, the, the
competitive advantage that they
originally thought they had, uh,
disappeared within months. And
so that was uh uh trying in, in
terms of uh this particular
industry. So that's where the
industry volatility, uh, stems
from and
Appreciate that, Madam Chair,
and that just goes to the,
that's not
on you. It's on us as
legislators. We're not
legislating.
more efficiently or effectively,
I, I would say, um, and I just,
I just wanted to hear that
portion because that's the
report we're getting and we're
seeing all over our state of
just that overabundance of this
industry and it
counterproductive of why we even
had this program set up was to
help those, those that, that
really wanted to get a, a leg up
in this industry and are you
seeing more clo uh, are there
more closures, are there more,
uh, for
from the perspective of, of, of
this program, you know, that
those that are
possible applicants, not, not,
um
not able to launch their
businesses because they don't
have the capital to do that.
Madam Chair
I, I, I, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I think
that's a tricky question because
a lot of the cannabis businesses
that are startups.
to your point, they do not have
the adequate capital that is
necessary to, to one, to have a,
a functioning grow season in the
uh with their plants, uh, and
then number 2, once the, the,
they've completed their grow,
how do they market the, the,
the, the end product into the
market, which was already
saturated. And, and then what we
saw was a uh pressure
on pricing, and so the, the
prices of the cannabis with,
they were expecting at the time
they did a business plan, um, we
saw some of it, uh, decrease by
20%. So it was, it, it's a a
tricky industry to, uh, to work
within.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that report. Uh, it's,
it's the, it's what was
predicted and not, um, paid
attention to. Madam Chair, I
just like to say that because
the the big, the big, uh,
industries are those that are
profitable now in our small
uh, businesses are suffering or
have suffered, and on your chart
here,
the, the, are these the number
of, of applicants that, uh, were
successful, or there, or is that
what it's not a comprehensible
list here
or.
a full list, if you will. Sure,
Madam Chair Representative,
these are the loans that we were
able to successfully to make a
loan with. Um, if, if you, if
you're asking what our total uh
it it was much larger than this.
But, but these are the laws we
were successful with. Um, I,
I'll give you an example. Um,
gray moon that's in uh Lee
County in and that particular
operation, when they started,
they were a stellar company that
was uh
producing at a, at one of the
highest levels in the state. And
then, um, in that particular
area, she is now reported that
there are 4 other cannabis shops
that have opened up which has um
reduced her operations, uh, her
revenues, and, and she's still,
you know, the main, uh, cannabis
business in um that particular
county. However, uh, it, the
revenues have
dropped and the pricing for her
product is dropped, and she is
also uh expanding her business
to do uh more wholesale stuff in
order to keep the, the business
functioning.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. I think that's, that's
just, thank you. The highlights
and was those are the concerns I
had as, as I had, um, presented
legislation at the time and it's
all, um
factual now. Um, Madam Chair, I
just, I think in the sake of
time, I will wait for my other
questions and talk to you
offline. And thank you for the
time.
OK, um, Senator O'Malley, uh,
Representative Sanchez and
Representative Kates and again,
um
I try to be concise.
Uh, thank you, Ma
d am Chair. um
try to be as brief as possible
So I have a question, uh, just
to clarification on the
temporary provision, the sunset
on June 30th. What does that
mean? Does that mean that the
app, that you will take
applications to a certain level
unless this is
renewed this program or what
does that mean?
Um
Meadow chair, senator. So what
that means is
if we do not um
pass legislation in this
upcoming session in order to uh
provide the mechanism that we're
working with without legislative
authorization. We would have to
go back to a model of
collecting all
all the projects that are
interested in the program and
then we wait till the upcoming,
the next session, and then we
need to get the that bill
authorized by you folks in at
the state state level, and then
we can then make loans to those
businesses with the debates.
That model this just does not
work, to be honest.
OK, so that's, that's, that's
helpful. I just want to say that
this was also, it's very helpful
to me for my district because I
have an area that, um
I mean, you could argue that
it's been underserved for many
years. These are older areas in
Albuquerque, older historic
neighborhoods, and they're doing
a lot of work for and, and, uh,
I would call it redevelopment
and revitalization. Anything
from affordable housing to
um, commercial kitchens to
really trying to turn sort of
different areas or nodes along
major corridors, turn them
around and so that, you know,
there's reinvestment and that
sort of thing, so it looks to me
like this is a program
that would benefit some of these
organizations. Most of them are
nonprofits.
OK
Uh, so I think that's really
important. I, uh
in the previous, uh,
presentation, there was, I
understanding that you had a
product
where you could loan to private,
uh, developers for doing
housing. Is that, and I was
trying to navigate your website
to figure out where that was and
who the banks were participating
in that, and I couldn't do it. I
couldn't find it. So, um
to say that's needs probably
needs some improvement, but I
can also just
talk offline and find out what
we're talking about in terms of
of that.
Yeah, we will be happy to talk
to you, Senator, offline and and
talk about the opportunity
enterprise housing, um.
uh program
OK, that's terrific. Thank you,
Madam Chair
OK, in our last question comes
from Representative Kates.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
will make it brief. On the, on
the energy efficiency revolving
fund, is there a personal
guarantee required there?
OK.
And thank you. And so just to
cut all my questions off and get
to, uh, yesterday we had a, um,
a presentation from the New
Mexico Bioscience, uh,
Authority, and they're looking,
um, to build labs, possibly
they're, they're actually,
they're putting forth a, uh, uh,
an authority-owned incubator
with a lab that they'll ask for
capital outlay on it. But
they're also, we're talking
about building commercial space
labs and speculation. Is there a
loan here that they could
qualify for that was presented
now or, or do I wait for the
access to capital venture.
uh, presentation
Um
Madam Chair representative, so
it depends on, I mean, that's a
tricky question. So it depends
on the project and how they want
to go by, uh, their financing.
If there's a bank involved in a
transaction, then yes, we could
use the SSBCI loan participation
program that would be that, that
is the best program that they
could use for uh, you know, uh,
a, a capital stack that involves
the bank, private financing in
the
authority. That, that's probably
the best program. Um, if, if
they, there are other programs
that the authority that's not in
this package that we could talk
about and we could talk offline.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for your
indulgence. Thank you.
Thank you so much and that
segues into, in case nobody
noticed, our theme for the day
carefully created by Marquita
Sabin and myself is access to
capital and so our next two
presentations, uh, first
Marquita and Ryan Marie are
going to report on the venture
capital fund and then a couple
of months ago I heard uh John
Chavez and Mia Patterson talk
about venture capital and
they're going to show you where,
uh, the NMFA
venture capital fits into a
greater picture and related to
the bioscience Authority, um
you know, that was about
authority. So we're gonna kind
of get venture capital 101 and
102.
Uh, so listen carefully so that
if your questions are answered,
you won't have to ask them.
OK
very exciting. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So I will, uh, start by
introducing this. My name is on
the presentation because I
wasn't entirely certain whether
Ryan was going to be able to
join us today. I have to, um,
uh, announce that she's left
NMFA, um, so after creating this
fabulous program and, uh,
stewarding at the, uh,
stewarding it very
professionally. She's gone on to
join a larger organization that
does mission-driven impacts and
investing. So we
miss her quite a bit, but, uh,
she was able to join us today in
her role as a consultant to
Nikita, um, and so I think, uh,
the smartest thing for me to do
is to just turn it over to her
and let you know that, um, we
are required under the venture
Capital Program Act law to
produce an annual report that's
based on our calendar year
activities. So by July 1st, we
have to, um, report on the
activities as of December 31st,
so you've been given both that
report and then we put a little
more information into this
presentation itself
but it's largely the same
information because it's a
relatively small program. So
with that, I'll wait for her to
start drinking and then turn it
over to immediately. Good
timing, huh? Sorry.
Water, water
you gotta.
Thanks, Marquita. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. So, um, yeah, as
Marquita said, there's a, a
presentation and also the full
copy of the annual report that
NMFA submitted to the
legislature to serve as the
annual 2024 calendar year report
for the program. So the content
is, is very similar across the
two. I'll just start with, um,
the overview as, um, most of you
know the, the program was
created in 2022, um, with the
venture capital at the
passage of the venture capital
Program Act, uh, that authorized
NMFA to make investments in
defined venture, private equity
funds, and also New Mexico
businesses, um, uh, for the
purposes of enhancing, uh,
economic development objectives
within the state.
Um, and in terms of
capitalization, so NMFA received
3522 and 1523. So, um, started
off with 150, 50 million in
total state appropriation
funding, um, added, uh, 15
million, um, uh, from the
statesall Business Credit
initiative that John was just
talking about, that portion that
came from, uh, economic
development department, so
federal money.
And then also last year, NMFA um
entered into a partnership with
the Energy Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, um, to
facilitate the investment of a
special appropriation of $10
million. Um, so in total the
capitalization of the fund, um,
was roughly, uh, uh, is roughly
$75 million.
Uh, going ahead to the next
slide, so this, um, covers the
mission and diversification
objectives of the program, the
way the NMFA operates the
program. They hired an
institutional investment
consultant, um, Nikita
Investment Group, um, the, uh,
staff works with the investment
consultant NMFA established a
specialized venture capital
investment committee that, um,
really oversees the more regular
activities of the program. That
committee then reports the
economic development Committee,
the subcommittee
of the MMFA board, and then the
NMFA board of directors are
responsible for approving
investments and also the
governance framework, so the
rules and the policy, um, that
govern the implementation of the
program. So the NMFA board
approved, um, uh, uh, a set of
rules and then also investment
policy that, um, outlines 5
different mission objectives for
the program, and these fall
under the, you know, the
economic development, um, uh,
banner, uh, for the program
overall. So
creating, uh, and investing in
new early stage and expanding
New Mexico businesses, creating
and retaining quality jobs for
New Mexicans, increasing
investment in diverse sectors of
the state's economy, increasing
access to capital for businesses
owned by entrepreneurs from or
benefiting underserved
communities. And lastly, um,
attracting additional private
sector investment into early
stage and emerging businesses.
So each potential investment is
evaluated, um, for its
potential, uh, impact in each of
these
5 different, um, areas.
I'll go ahead and turn to the
next slide. So this covers
some additional, um, policy
parameters that govern the
implementation of the program.
So here's a list for venture
private equity funds that apply
to the program, the
qualifications that staff and
the investment consultant are
looking to verify through the
diligence process, um, that the
manager has adequate investment
expertise and capacity with
professional staff qualified to
execute on investments, a
capacity to meet best practice
operational reporting and
compliance standards, um,
sustainability as
evidenced by an operating, uh,
budget and a future projected
sustainable operating budget.
effective mitigation of key man
risk and succession planning,
um, adherence to conflict of
interest policies and adequate
alignment with the funds under
management that they're
stewarding.
The policy also contains, um,
uh, various investment and
concentration limits. So the,
the funds sought to invest in a
portfolio of 5 to 10 to 5 to 10
funds with commitments ranging
between, uh, 2 and $10 million.
Um, and a single portfolio
cannot exceed 10% at the time
of, uh, investment. So that's
actually a statutory, uh,
requirement in the venture
capital Program Act.
Um, funds are expected to seek
minority non-controlling
interests, so, um, which is
typical for a venture capital
funds, um, and fund investments
in any one New Mexico business
shall not exceed 50%. So, um,
that, that, that seeks to invest
in funds that are diversifying
their underlying exposures.
Um, uh, managers are also
expected to, um, uh, comply with
industry best standards around,
uh, fund alignment, um, that
they also invest in the funds
that they're investing on behalf
of their investors, and ILPA
standard terms, that's the
institutional limited partner,
um, association. So, um, there
are industry association that do
help define best practices also
for reporting. So we expect all
the fund managers in the
portfolio to, um, adhere to
those best, um, uh, best
practices for the industry. Um,
and last but not least, those
fund managers that have, um, uh,
taken SSBCI, the federal, um,
funding that we're that NMFA is
administering, um, there are
certain federal requirements
that they're also required, um,
to fulfill on the reporting and
compliance side.
Um, the next slide illustrates,
um, the, the commitments through
the end of 2024, last calendar
year, so 8 in total across the
different, um, mission and
diversification objectives, um,
outlined earlier, you can also
see some strategy descriptions
here, um, for the, the, the
different funds in the
portfolio.
Um
I'll highlight, so two of the
largest and on the next slide
you can see the um the amounts
that were invested in each fund.
So looking on slide 5, the two
largest allocations of $10
million each were to first, um,
advance New Mexico, um.
so describe to invest gap
filling growth capital or
flexible debt. This was
actually, uh, a fund that NMFA
anchored, um, and it's really
targeting, uh, small businesses
with flexible debt, um, uh, it's
lending smaller amounts than
local banks are typically
lending, and it's really seeking
to offer debt in an affordable
interest rate as affordable as
possible for, for borrowers.
The second, um, kind of larger
allocation within the portfolio
at 10 million is on the bottom
there, perennial Fund 2. So
that's actually also a debt, um,
a debt vehicle and, and that
manager is investing or, or
lending to, uh, farmers that are
transitioning to organic and
regenerative, um, uh, practices.
Um,
so those are the two largest
allocations, the 2 2nd largest
allocations at 7.5 million Raven
indigenous Impact Fund, and
Vamos Ventures Fund. Those two
are targeting, um, so they're,
they're more traditional venture
capital strategies. They're
investing equity in early stage
companies as early as a seed
stage. Seed is often a, a
company is not even profitable
yet or, uh, earning revenue yet.
um, up through early growth
stages, um, but the unique thing
about these two
funds is that they're really
focused on diverse founders. So
in the case of, uh, Raven, it's
indigenous founders, um, and
Bomos Ventures is, um, really
diverse founders, um
focused on Latino and, and
Hispanic, um, uh, populations.
um, the second, uh, then we have
$5 million allocations to
Tiverton. That's the 2nd
allocation to agricultural
production within the portfolio.
So a diversifying sector, um,
theme, and then also dangerous
Ventures, uh, which is a, a
local, uh, emerging manager
focused on, uh, climate tech,
um, and, and early stage, uh,
renewable, uh, companies.
Um, and then we have tramway
Ventures, which is a local
manager focused on bioscience
and biotech companies.
And last but not least, rethink
impact that's the smallest
allocation, um, that's also a
manager that focuses on diverse
founders and in this case
focuses on women-led businesses.
Um, and on the right, you can
see how those GPs scored across
the 5 different mission
diversification objectives. I'll
highlight that in terms of, um,
creating and retaining quality
local jobs. You see that all of
them scored, you know, the 2nd
lowest score, medium, and that's
really because all these funds
are really investing in
early-stage businesses. And at
that time, you know, those
businesses might be employing
12, maybe 3 people. So in terms
of employment, um
you know, it's relatively low on
an absolute basis. Um, I'd also
just like to highlight on
increasing, uh, investment in
diverse sectors, so you can see
that Raven Advanced New Mexico,
Vamos, Rethink, and Perennial.
Those all, uh, received very
strong scores. And the way that
NMFA was looking at investment
in diverse sectors, um, was not
just diversifying sectors of the
economy, but also looking at
where the State Investment
council is not
focusing with, with their local
venture capital program because
I'm sure as you all know, they
have a very significant, uh,
local venture capital program as
well that they've managed for,
um, decades now, uh, deployed
over a billion dollars in
capital to try and support the
local VC in ecosystem.
and a lot of their focus has
been on, um, uh, tech, and
that's, um, because of the
statute governing their, their
program is focused on the
commercialization of, of local
science and, and research
assets. And so seeing that, uh,
NMFA really sought to, when they
think about diverse sectors
really also think about sectors
that SIC is not focusing on, uh,
when they're deploying their
capital. So agriculture, for
example, is a good, uh, good
example of that. And a lot of
the managers in this portfolio,
um, there may be a tech-drive
n aspect to a lot of the
companies that they're investing
in, um, but their themes are,
are, are really very different.
They're not really, uh, research
and development tech-focused
funds.
Um,
investing in underserved
communities, um, so you can see
where a handful of them Tiverton
and Perennial, those are the two
agriculture, um, focused funds,
so those are gonna hit rural
business owners, um, also
rethink Impact Vamos, and Raven,
um,
for their focus on diverse
founders, um, received high
scores there.
And last but not least, a trick
uh attracting additional private
sector investment, um, and
that's where, um, that's, that's
a big reason why a good handful
of the managers in the portfolio
are actually not based here in
New Mexico and only investing in
New Mexico, um, but we are also
working with National Venture
capital funds that have
demonstrated that they can also
raise, they can raise capital
from additional investors, and
they deploy that capital then
into local New Mexico
businesses, so it increases the,
the diversific
ation of the investor base, um,
of, uh, investors investing in
local companies.
The next slide on slide 6
uh, so this just shows the
amounts that I, I just described
that we're, uh, committed to
each of the funds through the
end of, um, last calendar year.
And, uh, the columns on the two
right, uh, I'll just explain
what these mean. So dollars
invested in 2025. Um, that's
actually how much the, the funds
called in the last calendar
year. So NMFA committed a total
amount. Um, that amount sits at
NMFA. They don't
fund the full commitment from
day one.
The manager calls the Capitol
when they have investments to
make. So they call it down over
time. So you can see in total at
the end of 2024, NMFA had
committed 50.5 million, but by
the end of the calendar year,
only 5.4 million of that had
actually been called by the
funds to make investments and
also to cover their expenses.
And that's in line with what we
would expect because most of
those funds were just in there
and, and a good handful of them
are still raising their fund and
not deploying capital
yet. Um, so you'll see that
amount come up over time as the
funds deploy the capital. And
most of these funds have an
investment period of, of up to 5
years. So they have 5 years to
deploy the capital.
And then the last column on the
end, aggregate dollars invested,
um, so this is the total that
NMFA has committed to that
particular fund, um, as of the
end of last year, this column is
largely similar to the previous
one, with the exception of
tramway because that fund
commitment actually closed in
2023. Um, so that, that last
column there represents the
total the NMFA has funded to
each of the underlying funds in
its portfolio.
Um, and on the last slide here,
you'll just see, uh, kind of a
forward-looking outlook, um, so
in total at the end of 2024,
NMFA had committed 50.5 million
to 8 different funds, um, NMFA
also, as I mentioned, worked
with MNnerd on the on the
facilitation of a special
appropriation that was a direct
investment in a local New Mexico
business. It's a nonprofit
called the New Mexico Climate
Investment Center. um, and
so total, uh, commitments are
roughly 60.5 million, um, and
NMFA is estimated roughly 5
million in, in administrative
costs over the life of the
program. So that takes, um,
total available for investment
as of the end of last year,
roughly 9.5 million. Um, to date
thus far this year in 2025, NMFA
has made two additional
commitments, um, $3 million to
another fund inurance 28, um,
that focuses on, on seed, um,
seed stage
was a really early stage VC
investing and that manager is
committed to deploying the full
$3 million commitment here in
New Mexico. And then MFA has
also made another commitment of
SSBCI funds to a local venture
studio called, uh, and their
fund Roadrunner, uh, Fund one.
Um, so if you add those two
commitments that have already
been made to date, um, the
program is approximately 95%,
um, committed, um, in terms of,
of capital deployed.
Um, in terms of reporting, um,
so the venture capital
Investment Committee reviews a
quarterly performance report and
then on an an and also an annual
report on an annual basis and
starting, um, next year, so you
all will will receive an, an
impact report on the program
that will look at the economic
development metrics, um, uh,
and, and track the different
fund performance along those
metrics as well. So that's not
available yet just due to the,
um, kind of
early stage of the program, but
that'll be available next year.
Um, I will comment that the
portfolio today though, um, has
roughly, uh, uh, 15 local
businesses that are invested in
by the program.
Um, and in terms of Outlook, um,
so, um, we are seeing plenty of
opportunities for additional
investment. Uh, some of the, the
themes, um, we've been looking
at, uh, funds that focus on
catalyzing employee ownership,
um, so investing in ESOPs, um,
also other, uh, uh, sectors that
could be interesting, for
example, infrastructure, uh,
affordable housing funds, um,
we've also looked at a few, uh,
best in class incubator and
accelerator programs. Um,
there actually aren't, uh, ABQID
was a really great active, um,
uh, accelerator program in
Albuquerque, but that program's
no longer active. So we do have
a lot of kind of spaces in the
state, but we don't have too
many actual incubation,
acceleration programs themselves
that are, that are operating.
So, um, we think particularly
for, um, kind of diverse
owned and led businesses, um,
that's a space that that could
potentially use some, some
support. Um, and of course, um,
uh, it's always challenging to
reach reach rural communities
and rural businesses. Um, but
that, that's also an area the
program could continue to focus
on. So, um
in terms of, um, funding what,
what the, we also found in
administering the program, and
you'll see that the program is
largely focused on emerging fund
managers and making allocations
like $10 million with an
emerging manager, enabled NMFA
to negotiate things like you
have to come to New Mexico, a
certain number of times a year,
if it's an out of state manager
and work with local businesses
and provide office hours or in
some cases, you have to deploy
our dollars into the state.
Um, so that's, uh, I, I would
just say that, um, you know,
fund managers have a lot of
different investors and, um, a
small program doesn't typically
have a lot of leverage to try
and negotiate favorable terms
like that, particularly to focus
on a local ecosystem. So, um,
that's one way the, the program
kind of accomplished that was
through some of those more
sizable allocations than the
funds can be a little bit more
tailored or or focused on, on
something in New Mexico.
um, with that, that's all I had
prepared. I don't know Marquita,
if you have any other.
things to add
Um, Madam Chair, the only other
thing I would add is that this
program really is ripe for
additional investment. The
things that Ryan has talked
about, follow on investments. We
didn't really talk about, but if
any one of those New Mexico
companies starts to hit it, they
may need additional capital, and
that's really, uh, important for
these companies to thrive. So
we'd be looking in, in very
receptive to additional funding
in this program. Despite Ryan's
departure. This program is still
well managed at NMFA. We have
someone currently op
er ating it who ran a private
equity, uh, his own private
equity company for years that's
currently, um, standing in the
place of Ryan. So we do have a
really talented team that's much
deeper than one person, and we,
of course, have talented, uh,
consultants that are helping us
along the way. So please don't
let her departure be a reason
that we could not, uh, continue
to invest and expand upon the
program that she established.
And with that, we're happy to
answer questions.
Uh, Representative Lujan.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
who sits on the venture capital
program committee for NMFA.
Madam Chair, do we, Madam Chair,
that is an internal committee,
and it's, it's, uh, the Chief
credit officer, um, there's a,
one of our attorneys, uh, CEO
chairs it, um, then we have our
investment manager, the deputy,
and our chief of programs.
Thank you. Yeah, that's just a
question I had because you, you
it's just in reference to you,
um
um
talking about conflict of
interest and that's how you
manage not having conflicts of
interest. I, I assume.
I, um, next question in regard
to how you of
contracted an RFP for a, a CDFI
for the
are you looking to do that
possibly with this program?
Andre? So, Madam Chair, we, uh,
facilitated the investment of a
$10 million appropriation that
the legislature made to ENED to
help capitalize, uh, the, the
climate Investment Center is
Ryan mentioned, and that's a
startup CDFI, um, and the way
that we did that was through
what's called an equity
equivalent, um, investment. So
there are nonprofit CDFI and we,
it's basically low-cost, very
long, uh, long-term subordinated
debt. So it has the attributes
of equity, but will be repaid
over time. This is the way that
a lot of CDFIs get funded. And
so it was an unusual step for
us. I mean, we took on this
particular vehicle just to
accommodate the appropriation,
but we do think that our
experience with this indicates
that there's a lot of room for
additional investment in CDFIs
in New Mexico. We didn't get to
the discussion today, but a
large part of the reason
businesses are undercapitalized
is we don't have the mechanisms
to fit the size of business.
that we have in New Mexico.
They're just so many very small
businesses and we don't have
enough CDFIs to service them.
Thank you. And that's why, uh,
you, you kind of just, uh,
emphasized that we had a, a
presentation yesterday, uh, in
economic development regarding
that, that exact same thing. So
thank you for, for expanding on
that conversation. And if we
can, I think that, you know,
these are the, what you're doing
here in the expansion at NMFA is
really where it's appropriate to
look at those, um,
yeah, those, those, those the
management of those portfolio
portfolios as they're growing.
So thank you.
Representative Barrego
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
keep my comment very quick. Um,
so, uh, now that, uh,
Representative Lujan asked about
CDFI. I just wondered, do you
guys, um, loan to
um businesses that are, uh,
non-citizens.
and do you have a program for
that?
like um small businesses that
are startup that are
immigrants or have, you know.
don't have uh
citizenship
Madam Chair, we don't have a
specific program for any of
that. The programs that we just
talked about before, um, the,
through the economic development
revolving fund would be the only
programs that would be
available, and they have to be
New Mexico businesses. We don't
get any further than they have
to be New Mexico businesses.
OK, because I know, uh, Madam
Chair, a lot of, uh, uh, credit
unions, um
do loan to uh small businesses
that are startup businesses for
uh people that are
newly arrivals, I guess you
could say, or, or maybe they
have a different certification,
I think, and I can't remember
what the certification is
called, but they have a, a
particular, uh, certification
that allows them to, to request
small business loans.
OK
With that, we'll go to, 00, I'm
sorry, Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both for this presentation.
I, I just want to compliment you
on this work. I, years ago when
I ran the Lano Foundation, uh,
UC handled our portfolio, our
endowment, and I went to them
and I said
you know, you're like the, I
think at the time it was either
the 2nd largest or largest
portfolio in the country. I
said, could you please come to
New Mexico and invest in
something in some of our
companies and, uh
they came out here. They, they
did a look, they said, you know,
everything you have is too
small.
We would, we wouldn't invest in
any company, no matter how large
it is in New Mexico. I, I think
they said PNM was the only
company that would even
consider. So, so I just want the
committee to know this, this was
a really important endeavor
that, that you were able, are
able to pull off, and it's very
important and I, I just want to
say that because I had tried to
get investments here and
couldn't do it because we didn't
have anything big enough. So
this is
the way to do it. Just want to
compliment the staff and all
your work. That's all I have to
say, Madam Chair.
OK, um, now we're going to
advance to our final, um
presentation which will be
weaving together some of what
you heard over the just now from
Marquita and Ryan, um
and so I'd like to call up John
Chavez from the New Mexico
startup factory. Some of you may
recognize him.
Like many of our esteemed
people, he has a long history in
New Mexico and Mia Peterson,
executive director.
um
uh, and Mia Peterson, who's from
the New Mexico Technology
Council, you've probably
received emails from her. I
suggest that you do respond to
them. You'll learn a lot. So
without further ado, um, please
start.
Good morning, madam
Excuse me
microphone. Is that one on too
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for having us today.
We're pleased to be here and
share some information.
Um, I'm Mia Peterson, executive
director and CEO of the New
Mexico Technology Council. Um,
and the New Mexico Technology
Council is the state's premier
technology association. We are a
501C6, um, and really our
superpower is that we are able
to convene public, private, and
educational organizations, um,
to advance the state's tech
economy.
Our mission is to increase the
impact of technology in New
Mexico and our vision is really
to create a brighter future for
our state through technology.
Um, I want to tell you a little
bit about our numbers. We have
over 140 member organizations
and underneath that are about
5000 unique representatives. So
we have just about every shape
and size organization, um, from
individual sole proprietorships
to startups to enterprise,
mid-size, local, national, um,
it's a very broad reach and
that's intentionally so, so that
we can really convene a
diverse group of stakeholders
for critical conversations.
We provide 4 main services as an
association. Those are
networking, so bringing together
tech professionals from across
those diverse verticals and
sectors.
Thought leadership and
education. With technology, it's
very important that we all stay
ahead of the curve and we
understand the trends and so
that's a key one, key service
offering that we provide.
Um, we also are very interested
in advocacy. So we really want
to partner, um, with public
offices, um, and be a good
steward of sharing information,
um, and also representing our
member needs.
And lastly, we provide influence
and recognition. Um, a great
example of that is our annual
New Mexico Women in Tech Awards,
which we've been running for 18
years. Um, that's one of my
favorite parts of my job, um,
and also just recognizing the
great companies here in New
Mexico that are making an
impact.
so why is the New Mexico
Technology Council here today to
talk about venture capital. We
believe that this is an
essential piece of creating a
robust tech economy in New
Mexico.
so
part of our mission and part of
our deep philosophy as an
organization is that technology
will provide a great future for
our state. It's one of our
fastest growing and strongest
industries up there and maybe
the top 3 or 4
And that with targeted
investment collaboration, and
vision, New Mexico can emerge as
a national, if not global
leader, um, and that with a
tech-driven economy.
But we need venture capital for
businesses to be able to start
up, stay, and be successful
here.
Um
and as we look ahead, the tech
council has some really big
plans this year and as we move
into 2026.
One of those is our annual tech
summit that we've hosted for
about 10 years. I will be
sending each of you an email
with complimentary passes, um,
to the tech summit. I encourage
you to come. We have some great
thought leadership around AI
emerging technologies, um, and a
track on startups and venture
capital.
Uh, we're also getting more and
more involved in advocacy. So in
2026, we'll host two events.
Again, I'll be happy to provide
you with invitations. One of
those will be a tech day at the
Roundhouse where we gather our
members for critical
conversation about how important
this industry is
And that second one will be a
legislative reception. We're
partnering with Meta, um, to
host this, uh, sort of mid to
late session. So more details to
follow there.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and
members of the committee. I'll
pass it over to John.
Thank you all. Uh, good morning,
Chairman, Committee. Um, my name
is John Chavis.
Um
I have a company called the New
Mexico Startup Factor and our
goal, we have 3 goals. This one
is to create investable
companies over the last 12 years
we've created 20, 9 are still
going.
We're, uh, starting one as we
speak, uh, in addition, uh, we
do education, so we have an NIH
grant where we go to 11
institutions in 7 states and
help them with their technology
transfer process. And the third
thing is they, um, we do
connections, we connect people
by coming to meetings like this.
We go to all the
try to go to all the
entrepreneurial meetings in New
Mexico and we do put on some
events. In addition, um, I
previously was the president of
the New Mexico Angels. I started
two venture capital funds. Both
are still going. One was a
private fund that was started in
2011. We have one asset in the
portfolio.
and then one was a catalyst
fund. Uh, we raised $4.6
million. All of that is deployed
and we're currently harvesting,
uh, and assisting those
companies as they grow. Lastly,
I do have some government
experience. I was in state
government for 6 years, and then
I ran a, uh, local Pueblo
government for 10.
So what we want to do today, and
we do have a presentation that
you'll be sent is really talk to
you about the basic
understanding about venture
capital and then talk a little
bit about the funding structure
for the SIC and the New Mexico
venture capital programs. We did
have an analyst from our office
go through and look at the
portfolio, and we have provided
that to you all.
So really, some definitions
about venture capital. One is
venture capitalist
professionally managed risk.
You have limited partners and
those are the investors in the
venture fund. You have a
management fee, which is charged
on the committed cap.
So typically it's 2%, uh,
subject to negotiation with the,
uh, investor.
and then a carry fee is a share
of the investing profits. So not
only do the investor venture
capitalists get a management fee
if they're successful, they get
a percentage on top of whatever
they manage fee. A committed
capital like they discussed
previously is just we're gonna
give you $5 million for 5 years
and you call that as you need
it.
and then pacing, pacing for a
venture fund is 5 years in, 5
years out, and typically it
lasts a lot longer than that
because you can't time when
you're gonna be selling, uh, a
company. And that's really the
standard venture capital model.
So when you talk about access to
capital, whether it be debt or
small company, big company,
whatever, there are 3 ways to
get capital
One is you sell a product or
service and people pay you for
that.
The second is you incur debt,
and third, you receive an equity
investment.
So when we talk to businesses,
both internally as, as one of
our, uh, portfolio or when we,
uh, work with outsiders on
trying to finance their
business. We always say, what
are the needs of my company?
As a business owner, as an
entrepreneur, that's the first
thing you have to think about.
The second thing is, what are
the risks of taking on debt.
because if you take on debt,
you've got to pay it back.
And the third thing is, what are
the risks of taking on investors
because investors can be good,
they can be bad, and they can be
ugly.
and I've been involved in all
three of those. And so you
always want to make sure that
you have the right investors
that are doing in uh your
company. And when you look at
the landscape of in capital
sources, it typically starts
with friends and family, so you
go out and say I want to start a
biotech company and I'll talk to
my friends and say I need to
raise $10,000 to start the
company, build the
infrastructure, build the
website.
And then typically you go out to
angel Investors and go out to
the federal government for SBIR
or STTRs, and then as you grow
the company, you look at venture
capital, you look at strategic
partners and as you get
successful, banks will come in
only when you have revenues.
OK, so banks typically don't do
startups because there's no way
of paying back that money.
So what typical companies get
venture capital. One, they have
products with dynamic growth.
They have founders who want to
sell out after a defined period
of time.
Um, they have large markets, so
you're not gonna be doing a
company that has a small market.
You always want to look at how
big is that market and a lot of
the venture folks want billions
and billions of dollars. They
have to have a leading technical
edge, uh, differentiation, so
intellectual property or secret
sauce, and they want hands-on
involved investors and there's
VCs for all sorts of stages. You
have idea stage, early stage
expansion stage, and later
stage. And typically
the check size is what the stage
is. Idea half a million dollars,
up to $2 million early stage 3
to 5 expansion, 10 to 20, later
stage, you know, 50 to $100
million.
And what do venture capitalists
do. One is they have to raise
funds like everybody else.
you have financial reporting,
accounting, and providing
information to your limited
partners. They have to have that
transparency of what they're
doing.
They have to source the deals
which means they have to go out
and go to events. They need to
shake hands, kiss babies, let
the people know that they have
capital that is out there that
they want to deploy
Um
and that's really important
because that's how you make that
connection with the venture
community.
And then once they decide on a
deal, they have to do the due
diligence. They have to look at
the IP, look at the management
team, look at the financing,
look at the company creation and
then they make a decisions to
invest in a particular small
company.
and then once they make an
investment, then you become
involved with the company as a
board position, a board
advisory, you do business
consulting and you make
connections to other venture
capitalists.
So a little bit of perspective
about venture capital.
They are accountable on how they
invest the money.
and they have to raise funds
just like entrepreneurs.
And so when you look at the
venture capital, uh, landscape,
you have your investors at the
top.
You have your venture fund at
the middle and you have all the
companies that you invest in, so
the venture capital fund is sort
of in media on the money that's
coming in from the investors.
They make the decisions, they do
the due diligence, and then they
do the reporting out to the
investors.
How do investors make monies,
uh, typically, uh, a fund size,
um,
a fund size will be, let's,
let's do a fun size of $60
million.
one or two of the companies that
they invest in will make the
majority of their money back.
So for a 12, um
uh
fun
company deal, one or two will
make all that money back. You'll
have 6 that will not make any
money back, maybe 2 or 3 will
make one timeex their money
back, but it's always the one or
two that make the majority of
the the money. And how do the
VCs make their money? Typically
they get the 2% uh management
fee, and then they get a carry
fee of 20% over a percentage of
what they're promising to their
attorneys. So sometimes
I mean to their investors, so
sometimes when you go to the
Forbes billionaire list.
A number of venture capitalists
are on there because they're
very successful and they get
paid when they have success in
their companies.
So, uh, just a little bit about
the New Mexico State Investment
Council. Um, they have a lot of
money that's been deployed into
venture capital.
Um, the idea behind what they're
doing is to create this
ecosystem. The goals of their
program is to increase the
number of active companies in
their portfolio, increase the
number of managers, help foster
a more robust VC community and
earn positive returns. And I
think that's really important is
what is the goal of, of an
investment program. And is it
return? Is it economic
development? Is it
both? And I think, uh, that's
gonna be a conversation that has
to be had on deploying capital.
So
is the current SIC, um, meeting
the, uh, the goals of the
program, I think you see an
awareness that's happening with
the New Mexico startups. There
is access to certain VCs but by
local entrepreneurs. There's
been a ton of education on
venture capital. We've been a
big part of that and has that
earned a positive return. Um,
it's still, still to be
determined because
what you're investing in today
you won't see a return for 6 to
10 years.
which is pretty, uh, that's just
the nature of the venture
business.
so
is the, uh, SIC meeting the
current programs. First of all,
venture capitalists that get SIC
money have no obligation to
invest in New Mexico.
Um,
most VCs don't have a local
member, so they're not going out
and meeting entrepreneurs at
these events, seeing people like
that
um
New Mexico startups have to
compete with every other venture
capital, uh, company in the
United States to be in their
portfolio.
And we talk about product market
fit, OK? And product market fit
is essentially a very big VC
firm that does my company have a
product that works in the
market.
And so I want to use a
definition of product work at
FI. OK, you would never start a
clothing store in a nudist
colony.
because
because the product doesn't fit
the market.
OK? And when you see some of
these venture capitalists from
Silicon Valley and Boston and
Austin.
are they
is that a good fit for the New
Mexico market and so once again
you're looking at are they
deploying capital to New Mexico
companies.
for the product market fit.
So, once again, they've created
a really interesting eco
ecosystem where they have
venture studios, accelerator
programs, uh, traditional and,
and, uh, seed investors post
accelerator and traditional
mortgage, uh, multi-stage
investors. The question is, are
they investing in New Mexico and
right now the answer is, um,
we're not sure yet.
OK. In the interim a FA program,
you know, you have $50 million
from the legislature, you have
15 from the SSBCI program, uh,
from the audit the audit
statements in 2023. Uh, there's
not been a lot of, of
of capital that's been deployed
and then, um, what we did for
this presentation is we went and
looked at the individual
portfolio managers that, uh, had
received money for, from the
NMFA and to see if they were
investing in New Mexico because
once again you have to look at
the goals of the program.
and, you know, you, you have
both debt and the adventure and
then you have a ton of people
from outside New Mexico that are
have received funds
that arguably are not deploying
capital in New Mexico, so the
question becomes is, is your
Boston-based
financial advisor
I don't think they're here. Have
they been to New Mexico to
understand what the market is.
And so what I'd like to do is
just go through the document
that we passed out. And, um,
just really some quick comments.
Dangerous ventures, they're
deploying capital in New Mexico.
It's um, it's really exciting to
work with them and they're
really tough to work with, but
they are deploying capital in
New Mexico
Endurance 28, we cannot find any
evidence even though it's, it's
just early in their stage that
they've made investments in New
Mexico.
Mad Capital, which is a, uh,
organic lo
uh, we can't find any evidence
that they're making investments
in New Mexico. They probably
are, but the, the tracking of
those through crunchbase or
pitchbook isn't, isn't, uh,
available. Mission-driven
finance, which is a, a debt
company. We had a conversation
with them when we presented in,
in April, and they haven't made
any deals in New Mexico for two
years.
Raven Capital Partners, they
have a 7.5 million commitment.
They have not made any deals in
New Mexico.
rethink Impact, which is the $2
million.01. We actually pitched
them on a deal, and they only
focus on digital health by women
founders.
And once again, product market
fit, there are no digital health
companies with women founders in
New Mexico. We reached out to a
number of people, so that money
will probably not be coming back
to New Mexico.
Uh, Roadrunner Fund, the Road
Runner Fund received a $50
million commitment from the SIC,
um, and then 8 million from the
NMFA. They've made one
investment in the last 2.5
years.
Uh, Triton, um, they're an
agricultural company. Uh, it
looks like you're in a big
lender, so you go on their
website, their deals are in the
50 to $100 million range, and
they're private equity investor.
Tramway Ventures
is deploying capital
and have made a number of deals
in New Mexico and I think you
see sort of the.
the, the New Mexico venture
funds are deploying capital, the
people outside New Mexico, uh,
are not. Famos Ventures, you
know, they've gotten 4 million
in April and 7.5 million in
September. They have not made
any investments. And the New
Mexico climate Investment Center
is just a brand new one.
So, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'll be happy to
answer any questions. We have
sent the presentation and they
will be forwarding it to you.
Yes, ma'am.
OK
questions
OK, uh, Representative Lou
Hannan, and Representative
Kates.
Thank you, Manager. Um
so thank you for having like
this I was questioning this like
these are all uh VCs, correct?
Um, those are all that have
received commitments from the
New Mexico Finance.
Great. Thank you. Thank you for
that clarification because
there's, there's so many, and
we're getting, we're getting
presentations
all over the place. Like I, I, I
referenced being an economic
development committee yesterday,
and we had
uh, we had a number of, uh,
M.
X s Mex's center, and all these
different
groups that are coming to us. So
what we really need to be
focused on is where are we
getting that return on value,
right? So who's doing the work
and I, I really like the way you
delineate. I like more
information on
on that point that you did make
during your presentation on, on
where are those goals for New
Mexico and really for us it's
that return on value, uh, so
we're putting out this money,
we're getting this, we're
getting, um
the return on value whether it's
economic development, whether
it's, you know, uh, with the SIC
and the way that they're doing
things differently, right? So
have you looked at that and is,
did I miss any of that in your
presentation? Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Lujan Doe. So I
think the challenge for the
entrepreneurial community is you
have the narrative that all of
this money is available for
entrepreneurs to start companies
and grow companies, right?
That's the narrative. The
challenge is if you look at the
funds that are out there, um,
they're not deploying capital in
New Mexico.
and
I think that's something that
needs to be addressed by the SIC
because you have a charm
campaign going on right now with
the venture capital community,
saying, come to us, we got all
this money, but when you talk to
them, once again, product market
fit.
OK? So
you know, right now, AI is all
the rage in Silicon Valley. You
can start an AI company today
and get $20 million in seed
funding, right?
New Mexico does not have any AI
companies. We have some really
good companies that were created
from technology from Sandia and
Los Amos, UNM, New Mexico State,
but the growth pattern does not
fit the venture capital model
out of Silicon Valley.
And so you get commitments for
$50 million for XYZ venture
fund, they're not going to
appoint New Mexico
just because it doesn't fit
their model
So what, what is the, the
routing of that in, in, in
in this whole field of
investment, right? What, what
are we missing, I guess, that
we, you know, that, that is
huge, right?
But
I really appreciate that you
have a focus on what is, what is
benefiting New Mexico or what is
being kept in New Mexico. Please
expand, and then that's all I
have.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair.
um, Representative, you know,
the other challenge with this is
that the, we are continuing to
pay management fees to these
firms. So these firms are, are
essentially still getting paid,
um, to the tune of about $26
million a year collectively
without a local investment. And
so, um, to John's point, you
know, one of the challenges we
do have in our market is early
funding, um, and, and if we had
more local
representation from these firms
in our market who understood the
ecosystem and who are involved
and could identify those
potential startups. Um, we could
get to a point in our ecosystem
where we could have a, a rich
um, ecosystem for venture
capital, right? Now, we never
really want to be like Silicon
Valley. We love New Mexico and
we love our state for how it is,
but we could advance our economy
quite a bit just with some local
representation and really having
boots on the ground who
understand what's happening and
understand those opportunities.
And so who
who do we put those, who's
holding those basket the basket
where we put those eggs into
number one, and I understand
there are so many menus here,
but we have made huge
investments through our budget
process for quantum for for all
these technological
advancements. And we've had, um,
you know, that these are high
profile, um.
tech and energy types of of
technologies that are, uh, you
know, in advancement and in the
process of being developed, are
we, so in the big scheme of
things that I don't expect you
to answer this, are we making
the right investments or what
more we can do and we can have
that off off
off uh off uh the time that we
we're allocated today, but these
are really big important
questions, and I really
appreciate this presentation.
Thank you.
Thank you. Representative Kates
Thank you, Madam Chair
Um, so you're saying 3 out of
the 11 venture capitalist groups
are investing
their capital in the state of
New Mexico. Is that correct?
That's what I hear. Yes, Mr.
Madam Chairman, Representative
Kate, yes.
Um
and I know that this isn't the
point of your presentation, but
your rethink impact.
not fully understanding what
women founded digital healthcare
companies are
but I know X-ray Association was
founded by a group of doctors,
mostly female, and they do
a great deal of digital
healthcare.
So you're saying that rethink
Impact can't find female owned
digital.
So, Mr. Chairman, representates,
um, so X-ray Association
probably doesn't need capital.
So
what you're looking for in, in
digital health
companies, at least what they're
looking for because we have a
Alzheimer's biomarker company
that was founded by a woman
scientist from UNF, right? And
she pitched them and what she
got back was, we only, um
fund women-based digital health
companies that need capital.
OK, and then, so what we did is
we went and we, we have an email
service. We went out and reached
out to a number of investors
saying, are there any women on
digital health companies in New
Mexico that need capital, and
the answer was no. So once again
that product market fit. So I
hate to go back, but this and I
go back to only, uh, only
companies that don't need
capital qualify for getting
capital. I mean, that is like
the HR, uh, uh, uh,
argument. Is it not from
lenders, um, and so, um, so
what, what would you want from
this legislation? What do you
um, I, I understand the NMFA,
they are looking at criteria
that meets the lender. And are
you looking for um
piece of legislation that would
require $1 or an employment
number, amount of investment in
New Mexico
What are you asking from this uh
legislation. So, so, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Chairman,
represent Gates. We ask of
really two things
It's for the funding entities,
the SIC and NFFA to believe in
New Mexicans.
and one of the things you see is
Mercer is the finance advisor
for the New Mexico State
Investment Council Fund.
They're out of
Boston, Austin, Silicon Valley.
Um.
InF phase is out of Boston.
and so
they don't know the local
landscape.
Having
someone that knows what's going
on in New Mexico is
key to being able to develop an
investment
criteria and policy that is
successful for New Mexico.
That's the first. The second
thing is to be able to hold
accountable those venture
capitalists that are getting
funds from the New Mexico,
whether it be the NMFA or the
SIC because what you see is you
see these venture capitalists
getting $50 million and none of
that money is coming back to New
Mexico. So thank you very much,
Madam Chair. I'm sorry, let me
rephrase my question. I
understand your
argument. I'm asking you, what
do you want the legislature to
do about it?
Might I add, Madam Chair,
Representative, this is a really
great question. I think one of
those, um, pieces of legislation
that the New Mexico Technology
Council would love to see is a
program, um, that helps, helps
startups get to a point where
then they're ready for a
venture. And so that is a
program that, you know, that New
Mexico Technology Council would
be willing to work with. We are
seeing something similar at the
NM nexus Center, right? And that
is a program where they're,
they're basically
a staging ground for companies
who are working on an
international level.
They can come, kind of build
their bridge to the domestic
market through New Mexico, which
is, is fabulous. If we had
or an incubator. If we could
figure out a way to direct funds
in a very intentional manner,
uh, where people can take their
ideas. Um, there's a ton of IP
transfer from the labs and take
those out of ideation into
precede stage. We need funding
for that. We need a vehicle for
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So it's
not
and, and you please, I am, I, I,
I, I want you to correct me so
that I understand, um
so CNM's ingenuity program
is, is that only the fraction
that you need. You need a wider
scope, but that is basically
what you're needing, but you
need that on a larger and a
bigger fishing net. Is that, uh,
that is, uh, that is my, uh,
fine arts vocabulary for, for
this investment conversation,
but I wanna make sure that I
understand. Is that, is that
clear? Madam Chair
Representative, that is a
component of it. And I am the
world's biggest fan
of CNM ingenuity. My previous
role, I was able to hire about
30 of their graduates from their
deep dive program. That is the
Workforce component that is
critical to us building the
industry. The other piece of,
the other piece that we need,
um, is, is, is funding of an
incubator where founders can get
together and they can share
ideas and they can have a little
bit of money to get it going.
Um, and then they get to a point
where they hire, you know, CNM
Ingenuity and graduate
Associate of ingenuity or to
build out that training program.
John, thank you, thank you,
Madam Kate Cor and Januti
should be
part of the portfolio for New
Mexico Finance Authority or the
state Investment council, but
they're not
For whatever reason they have
been stiff armed by both
entities. They have a venture
fund, um.
I don't know why
but we know that they've tried
to get investment from both the
SIC and NMFA, and they haven't
received it.
OK, thank you. Thank you very
much for your presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chavez, for
everything you've done for our
state. Thank you.
and
Marquita, would you like to make
any comments? And I do want to
say two things in our earlier
presentation today, Marquita
and, uh, Ryan mentioned that
emerging managers must come to
New Mexico and have real office
hours and see the situation and
they have to deploy many
in New Mexico, but um I'd like
to have Marquita discuss some of
the things we just heard.
Thank you, Miss, uh, Madam
Chair. So I would just note a
couple of things. One is that,
um, one of the things you can't
gather when you're looking at
just basic data on the website
is other terms and conditions
that we might have in what we
call the side agreement. So if
we are a big enough investor, we
can negotiate terms that are
different or more favorable, and
those would appear in a side
letter. So for instance, we
require a New Mexico-based
person for half the time or full
time or a certain amount of
office hours.
we would put all of that in a
side agreement. That wouldn't
necessarily show up when you're
kind of just perusing the
sources and finding out what
they do. Um, we source Ryan in
particular, was our primary
sourcing agent for all of the
investments. And then we worked
with our company that is
located, I think throughout, we
have people are, are, uh, Mikita
investing his people in
Albuquerque, um, our primary
team is in Denver and also in
Portland. So they have 3
different
groups or offices that work with
us, but they do the due
diligence on projects we have
sourced and selected for due
diligence. So that does happen
at the local level. That was,
and that's gonna continue under
our program with, um, Rick, uh,
Herman, who's running our
program currently. So there are
things you can't necessarily see
in that, and I think there's
some assumptions being made
that, um, it's a new program. We
haven't seen yet how much is
going to end up in New Mexico,
uh, but one of the things that
we were looking at initially
is if you're going to have, um,
economic development returns
that are different than, for
instance, what the State
Investment council is, then
you're going to have to get
different investors interested
in New Mexico. So it's important
to both grow New Mexico
investors, uh, uh, private
equity venture funds, and it's
important to bring outside
funding in with outside
expertise in. And so we think
we've done that, the two
agricultural, um, uh, funds that
we have once we're part of a
debt fund and part of an equity
fund, you know, if we want to be
in rural New Mexico, you have
to, you have to kind of grow the
businesses that are there. If
we'd worked with just New
Mexico-based companies, we would
uh firms, we wouldn't have been
able to make those investments.
So we look for strong alignment
with New Mexico needs. We look
for strong deal sourcing and
evidence that they've been in
this community. So if it's a new
fund, you might not see that
they've through their other fund
did a similar kind of
transaction in New Mexico. So
it's, it's much harder to gain
the
data that, that's being
presented and there's more
nuance than I think, um, you're
able to find just by going
through the website. So, uh,
this is all really, um, the
points that are being made are
excellent points that we do need
more, um, accelerators. Those
are, I think that's something
that Ryan hit on earlier, um, in
order to get companies to
appoint to professionalize them
in order to get capital and make
sure that that capital is well
placed in those communi in those
businesses, um, or
entrepreneurs, um, we need more
professionalized
uh, investors. We have a lot of
small private equity funds in
New Mexico and with a lot of um
key man concentration risk where
it's just one or two people. Um,
so, you know, we're looking for
longevity of those funds over
time and some of this is more of
an art, we'll know in a couple
of years whether or not we made
the right decision, uh, but our
goal was to get the attention of
major investors who should be in
New Mexico and that may not be
and will be making calls to
them, we're looking them in the
eye, we're asking for things in
our side agreements, but for
instance, rethinks $2 million
that we can't get much
of their attention, but they
have committed to office hours
to work with entrepreneurs to
give them some advice on how to
move forward. Um, but with a $10
million commitment, a $5 million
commitment, you can start to get
more favorable terms written in
them. So we're somewhat limited
by our dollar size, um, and just
the fact that we wanted to do 8
to 10, uh, diversified
investments. So thank you for
the opportunity to comment and,
and I appreciate the, uh, work
that's being done.
And then I want to add the other
thing that the bioscience
Authority mentioned yesterday is
that our bioscience, our
quantum, our students that are
doing this work, they have to be
exposed to this, so the
bioscience Authority was saying,
if you recall that those
students need to be paired with
a business person, so even as
they do their scientific
development, they're getting
that venture capital business
thing which often people don't
have.
and um that's really vital and
for example, have the quantum
researchers around the world
came through UNM.
and let's bring them back and
have them get the venture
capital and do it here.
are there any more questions?
Yeah
Senator Padilla, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you to
the three of you, all 3 of you,
for all the wonderful work that
you've been doing for many, many
years, and, um, you know, we
were just chatting over here
about the new Neximexis, uh,
facility at, at, that's in my
building. It's in my district. I
was there to kick it off that
day. It's a really wonderful
thing. I thought that we had
more incubators around the
state. I, I'm, I'm wrong. Are
there others that we can point
to that we've successful,
successfully utilized? Yes, Mr.
Chairman, you have
worse.
Chart, but they created.
it now.
that your guys who go
on.
you pitched one of the venture
guys, uh,
and see sustain that we got that
was.
we
and
in 5 years
By the way
yeah
And so how many billion dollar
companies you work in Silicon
Valley saying.
So we have to. And thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and I
appreciate that description.
I'll tell you when I was, uh,
started my business, just over
25 years ago, nobody would lend
me a penny at all. And it was
when we were before the internet
came along to manage call volume
and data and all that. We were
doing it a whole other way
through telephone lines. And
actually, thankfully they didn't
cause I've never carried debt,
thankfully.
you know, so that actually
worked out really great. I'm
glad they didn't give me any,
um, but, but I guess, you know,
my, is it, is it a is it a
marketing problem also? I mean,
is there a a a state agency that
should probably be sort of like
the center of gravity to to make
New Mexi make this happen for
New Mexico because I worry that
we have, you know, as an example
today while I was sitting and
listening to to Marquita's
organ, massive organization, you
know, and listening to John
present, I immediately got on
the, and I said, hey, by the
way, Sunland Park, this business
owner
I'm like, you really need to
learn about this program. They
were struggling, and this is
gonna probably do a really great
wonderful thing for them because
I'm sitting in, but how do we
get that word about all of this
kind of like.
packaged up with a nice bow
here, this is everything that's
available to you. Now, if you're
a business owner, they should be
finding that out themselves. I
get that, you know, and that's,
that's a real business there,
someone who's gonna themselves
go out and find out how to make
it work for them, but is there
something we should be doing
from a, I mean, through all this
money, we all these funds, all
these things that we try to
build and support. What, what do
you suggest?
I think it's a really exciting
time in New Mexico. We have so
much going on, right? Um, and HB
20 is incredi, it's a precedent,
and we're gonna see some great
results from that. Um, so I
would say I think New Mexico EDD
is doing a wonderful job there,
and I think that there's a lot
of entities who are doing the
work, but what's probably a
critical piece is that
public-private partnership,
right? And selfishly I'm very
interested in that as the CEO of
the New Mexico Technology
Council cause this is really
where the power of associations
can
come in, in terms of connecting
those dots, but it's about
everybody, you know, it's again,
this is not a critical
conversation as much as it's a
conversation about how do we all
come together and focus on the
problems to solve them. Um, and
that, that takes that public
private educational. It's that
triangle of support, I think, in
order to really get the word
out, solve the right problems,
you know, we can't always be
exactly aligned, but getting as
closely as possible, and Mr.
Chairman, Senator
Pa.
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I know you all
are trying really hard to, to,
to communicate this to the
wider, you know, group of
entrepreneurs and folks that
are, are innovators and risk
takers and all that kind of
stuff. I encourage you to keep
doing it, uh, because it just
seems to me like I'll, I'll,
I'll hear about something and
I'm like, I'm in the middle of
all this. I chair this committee
every other year now, and I
didn't even know if some of
these things that we talked
about today. I'm like, wow, I
feel bad that I don't even know
about some of them, but, but
it's all good, you're doing a
wonderful job. Thank you.
Representative case for
a 2nd time. I'm so sorry. I just
said, uh, ma'am, I, I feel like
we need uh this table discussion
and have, uh, Rob Black sitting
at the table as well to talk
about how can we present that
marketing with, you know, what,
what new line item
do we need in the marketing that
private, uh, public sector, uh,
opportunities.
And I would, I would just
briefly add we need the um
director SIC as well, sitting at
this table. Thank you.
And you know
Marquita, the NMFA just sent out
a newsletter to everybody and so
when you get those newsletters,
send them out to your
constituents.
and make sure your constituents
know about access. I mean, to me
that's, that's one reason we
exist is to communicate because
everybody can't communicate to
everybody and, and it's a
a job it's ongoing. I know the
Department of Economic
Development now has their
Department of, I don't know what
it's called now, innovation,
technology, accelerators, um, we
have to keep working and one
reason we wanted to invite you
here is because you add a
different, uh, another
perspective to the comprehensive
picture of venture capital and
what we need to do. Anybody else
need to say anything.
OK, and do, um, John, do send
out the stuff, uh, the
communications of and Marquita
also if your staff can give
Marquista the not Marquita.
Savina, um, just a list of like
John Brooks and and Fernando and
everybody's emails and phone
numbers, so, so they can do
follow up, that would be
helpful.
And thank you for coming, um
I really appreciate it. We
really do appreciate it. Yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
your time today. It was a
pleasure.
And with that
uh, we have public comment.
We have nobody
signed up.
darn
We don't have anybody. Is there
anybody in the audience, uh, who
has, uh, public comment.
I want to again acknowledge um
our Los Amigos, uh, de Rancholos
Suerros, can you just raise your
hands if you're from
and there's a few outside.
Yeah.
Thanks again. Please tell Mr.
Bustos we were grateful for the
um
blackberries, and I was very
grateful for my favorite
doughnuts also.
I will say, and thank you to the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
We really appreciate, um,
everybody, yes, Anna's here.
Jessica's here and people are
out are outside and thank you to
our staff of the committee for
doing a how do you say it?
Herculean work
Thank you. Our next meeting is
in Demming, and we will also be
visiting Columbus, uh, so we
hope to see you there. That is
in September, and it's not at
the end of September, so that
means if our governor does call
in into the September meeting,
it will not interfere with us.
We hope,
OK.
Uh, we're meeting in Demming.
Oh,
OK, Romina, do we have time to
take our stuff to our cars just
so
