Um, we do have breakfast being
provided by UNM Gallup
Chancellor Sabrina Ezell and
staff.
Lunch will be hosted at about 12
10-ish, somewhere in there. Um,
we'll break when we can and
that'll be hosted by the greater
Gallup Economic Development
Corporation. Thank you very
much. We do have an afternoon
snack. If you hadn't had enough
to eat and haven't aren't ready
to take a nap yet. Thank you,
Representative Lundstrom. Um,
we're gonna, uh, have, uh, and
we are broadcasting, is that
right? OK, thank you. I wanna
thank Represent Lundstrom again,
but, uh, greater greater
Gallupomic Development
Corporation. Thank you so much.
And if you're so inclined.
Still hanging around and there's
Representative Thompson come on
up. We have plenty of room on
this side, representative, if
you're interested. I mean, yeah,
um, and, uh, dinner at 6 p.m. at
Rocket Cafe at 1717 South Second
Street, Gallup, New Mexico by
Mayor Vagure and staff uh
committee and guest only, and
then Tuesday, we are going to
have a breakfast and by the way,
the breakfast burritos were very
good this morning. Thank you.
uh, bless you, representative
Garcia, uh, breakfast from
McKinley County.
County manager Anthony Dimas
Junior and staff, and so you
have a little note, I believe in
front of you so you kind of have
the, uh, you know, kind of
social calendar of things that
we're going to be doing here,
um.
Behind, uh, Representative Loch
and behind Representative
Lundstrom, you can see the Wi Fi
code if you're, if you need
that, that's right there behind
you, and I must have been here
recently enough because it was
still on my phone and still on
my computer representative
Lendstrom. Thank you for not
having them change that. Um, OK,
so let's do some introductions
before we jump in. We'll start
over with Representative
Bundstrom and also if you want
to talk a little bit about, you
know, why we're here and why you
wanted us here this time.
Well, thank you and good morning
everyone, and, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Vice Chair. I
appreciate that you, uh,
allowing the committee to come
to Gallup.
Um,
I've, uh
We were hoping and I know that
it'll be rescheduled, but we
were going to have a very robust
discussion around P3s. That's
been a bill of the uh, chair and
I and the vice chair have been
very interested in for many
years and we're hoping that we
can pick that effort up again,
uh, for the next 60-day session.
But I think it's also important
to know that we've had lots of
projects out here in the Gallup
area through the New Mexico
Finance Authority, primarily and
probably the most important one
has been the Navajo Gallup water
supply project.
years and years that project has
been underway. It's under
construction now and with the
help of the finance authority
through the Water Trust, uh,
fund and board. We've been able
to get the money it needs to do
the build out.
And I appreciate you coming, all
of you coming out, Gal loves
hosting committees. It's just a
great opportunity and.
Um, certainly, um, welcome to
House District 9. That's my, my
district. I was just telling
some of the members out in the
front that this whole downtown
area falls into my house
district and then then it goes
out to the Arizona line, so it
is um it's not as big as it used
to be before redistricting, but
it's still a city slash very
rural district and.
Appreciate it. Appreciate you
all coming out.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Vice Chair, uh, ladies and
gentlemen, members of the
committee. My name is Harry
Garcia. I represent House
District 69 which covers parts
of San Juan McKinboda Bernolio
Valencia Socorro Counties, uh,
back to what uh.
Represented I said, you know,
it's nice to have uh these
meetings out here because you
know I represent a piece of this
district and it's really nice to
be out here so we can address
all the issues that people
really need out here like those
water projects are huge, you
know, when you're out here and
people don't have running water,
it makes for a long day and you
know now these things happening
at the end of the day, uh.
It'll get taken care of. It's
gonna be a while. We all know
that, but you know, in my
district a bunch of people don't
have running water and these
things are gonna help these
people. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Vice
Chair, everybody in attendance,
it's always a pleasure to come
to HD 9, beautiful gallop and
always I've got to share that
the hospitality here is always
second to none. Thank you so
much. Uh, I'm Art De la Cruz. I
represent represent House
District 12, which in
Albuquerque is roughly the heart
of the South Valley, right about
in the middle. I share that uh
district with Senator Padilla.
And so looking forward to
today's meeting. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair. Thanks
everyone for being here today.
Uh, it's great to be in Gallup
again. I'm John Block House
District 51, and it's a bit of a
drive, but I was here last week
actually for Indian Affairs
Committee. So, uh, I pumped a
lot of money into your guys's
economy, uh, representative, and
I, I look forward to doing that
again. So thank you all so much.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and good
morning everyone. Uh, I'm State
Senator Ron Griggs. I'm from
Alamogordo just like John, uh,
so it's a little bit of a trip
up here came up yesterday, had
the opportunity to have have
dinner last night at the El
Rancho, uh, enjoy coming to
Gallup. It's a little bit of a
hole, but it's always fun to be
up here and you have to go
through a little bit of rain and
you know, Alan McGordo hadn't
had much, but everybody want all
of you to remember them.
Folks in Riodosa who are, who
are struggling with the fact
that uh uh the fires were
devastating, but then the rain
and the floodges had followed
after that have been
extraordinarily hurtful and so
as, as you guys address stuff
next year, remember what is,
what has occurred in, in the
communities like that, uh, I'm,
I've got about 4 more months, 5
more months, uh, in the
legislature, uh, so I'm.
Just delighted to get to come up
and participate in some of these
and uh look forward to uh seeing
the opportunities we have to
help the the citizens of New
Mexico. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam
Vice Chair, I'm Representative
Liz Thompson from the near
Northeast heights of
Albuquerque, but I'm a Crown
Point girl by um by upbringing
and so driving by through and
looking at the red rocks was
just like coming home and I feel
so lucky to have grown up there,
so I love I'm inviting my sister
for lunch who lives here, so,
um.
This is, this was the big town
where we came to the restaurants
and the movie, so this was kind
of the, the fun place when I was
growing up. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thanks for
hosting us. Um, I'm Joy Garrett.
I'm the state representative
from District 29. If you take
I-40, 100 miles east, uh, you
get to the Route 66 pit stop,
and that's where my district
starts. Uh, just thrilled to be
here and Representative
Lundstrom, I want at some point
hear about the intermodal
transport update and, um,
international port, you can tell
us later. Thank you.
All right, thank you, Madam Vice
Chair. I'll ask Ms. Gaynor, the
committee director, to introduce
herself and the other staff folk
that are here. And I will ask
the presenters on item number
one to go and come on up to the
presentation table. The
wonderful super sensation
Marquita Russell, and, uh, Chip
Pierce.
I'm Sabina Gaynor. I work at the
Legislative Council Service, and
I'm assisted by Erica Vance and
Clinton Turner.
All right, thank you very much
and the gentleman in the back,
would you please introduce
yourself as well? You take such
good care of us.
census.
All right, thank you very much.
Um, Senator, uh, Michael
Padilla, I've been chairing this
committee for a couple of, uh, I
guess or so years now and I've
been on the committee as a
voting member the whole time in
the 12 years I've been here in
the legislature represent the
Southwest Coldwell, the southern
portion of Bern County. I have
to get used to saying that, um,
and I do share that area with
Representative Art de la Cruz,
and we do work very well hand in
hand there. I, I will let you
know that I spent some of my
childhood about a year and a
half in ZUNY, New Mexico, and uh
I was living in a foster home
there and it was just one of the
best.
Experiences of my life. I'm
still, you know, engaged with
the community and the friends I
made there, and we would come to
Gallup and that was the big city
to come to gallop, you know, and
we would go to the Rio West
Mall. Is that even still here?
It is? OK. We go to that Rio
West Mall and we would do what
my grandpa said, just sit here
and, and we'll do people
watching. And that was really a
lot of fun. So thank you. And
thanks for having us again. Um,
all right, so we're just gonna I
need anything else, I think
we're all good. OK, we're going
to jump right into item number
one. Thank you.
for the overview of the public
project revolving fund in public
securities report for fiscal
year 2024. It's one of our
responsibilities here, uh,
Marquita Russell, chief
executive officer in New Mexico
Finance Authority, Chip Pierce,
chief financial strategist, New
Mexico Finance Authority, take
it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, good
morning, members. Um, I'm gonna
have to make sure I get.
The crowd over on this right
hand side. Um, thank you for,
uh, inviting us here today, um,
to talk about the public project
revolving fund, which is, as you
know, our flagship program. Um,
you know me, but I don't know
that you know my colleague Chip
Pierce, uh, took the position of
our chief financial strategist
upon the resignation or
retirement of Michael Z Abell a
couple of years ago. He, after
12 years, decided his third
retirement was going to stick
and he moved out of state, um,
and he
us in the very capable hands of
Chip Pierce. Uh, so Chip's been
with us a couple of years as an
employee, but I would note that
he's been with the finance
authority for more than 30
years. He actually helped our
first board hire our first
executive director and was the
architect of the, uh, public
project revolving fund as a
financial advisor to us way back
when. So Chip really understands
a lot about this program and I'm
happy to have him present, uh,
co-present with me today. Um,
Mr. Chairman, I, I am going to
speak from a presentation that,
um, I think you are used to our
template, um, uh,
And I'll just, I'll dive right
in. I'm not looking and seeing
any really new faces here, so
I'm not sure I need to explain
too much about the finance
authority. I'll leave it where
it is on page 2. we don't have
any new board members to
mention, uh, since we last, uh,
met. Um, no new program since we
last met, so I will frankly,
skip past this long list on page
3, but I'll note, as always,
despite the growth in the last
several years, all the new
programs from the recovery fund
Opportunity Enterprise.
venture capital, charter school,
PPRF remains the bread and
butter of the finance authority,
and it is, you know, we are the
house that GGRT built.
Um, so let me just start on page
4. For those of you that are
less familiar with the PPRF as
I'll call it. Um, PPRF makes
low-cost loans to your
governmental entities. That
includes tribes, it includes
counties, special purpose
districts, um, your soil and
water conservation districts,
cities and counties. The program
itself, uh, is a bonding program
and we have a trip, we enjoy a
AAA from, uh, S&P and we take
the interest rates that
We receive on our highly rated
bonds and pass them through to
your borrowers, regardless of
their credit, regardless of
their size. So every borrower
that comes to the PPRF, gets the
same interest rates we would get
on the day that we priced our
bonds. Um, and that is a
significant statement since so
many of our small communities
not only don't enjoy access to
the public markets. They
obviously could not get them at
the AAA interest rates, the
natural AAA interest rates, uh,
that we get with the PPRF.
Um, as part of our underwriting,
um, which is going to be really,
uh, we'll talk about a little
bit here, but we'll be more of a
conversation and future
meetings, um,
One of the structuring
parameters for us is that we
provided the time that we
approve our loan and what we'll
call a 90 day interest rate cap.
So we take today's interest
rates or what we would get if we
went into the market today, or
at least a, a reasonable
proximity, and we'll add, um, 75
basis points to that. So that's
3/4 of 1%, and that's the
maximum that the borrower will
actually be charged and we, we
calculate our coverage and
everything else based on that
maximum interest rate.
If over the next 90 days, um,
interest rates don't go up too
much or go down too much,
they'll end up with the lowest
rate amongst all those three. So
if interest rates go up past the
90, our, our cap.
They're going to get what we
took it to the board. So that
interest rate that we fixed at
the board will be there. If
interest rates are still low
though, at the time that we
closed their loan, they'll get
the lowest of those. So that
costs nothing, uh, for our
borrowers, and I would just note
that typically in, you know,
some steady interest rate
environments, it doesn't really
mean very much to folks, um, but
as you've seen the markets are
much rockier than they used to
be and a lot more unpredictable
than they used to be, and that
interest rate cap has really
come into, um,
Uh, favor for a number of
communities as, in fact, last
year, we did a teacherage loan
for the Gallup-McKinley School
District. That interest rate cap
when they came to the board with
that 75 basis points ended up
saving them $1 million in debt
service.
So it's a significant benefit
that again, most people don't
even note until the interest
rates are kind of rocky and
interest rates skyrocketed. And
so for years, we've provided
this with virtually no benefit
to the client because interest
rates have been relatively
stable, but the last couple of
years, there has been some
significant benefit going to
your, uh, communities as a
result.
I'll highlight that we, uh, we
have no fees. We took those fees
away, all fees that were charged
on this program were eliminated
in January of 2020, we absorb
whatever underwriting costs, uh,
when we go to the bond market,
all those costs are borne by the
PPRF.
Um, we accept our applications
monthly as long as the project
itself, which, uh, needs
legislative authorization is
duly authorized by the
legislature, um, then we are
able to accept the application
at the time that they need, uh,
the financing.
Um, and then I'll just note
significantly since our next
item is the approval of new
rules,
um, one of the things that most
recently happened, uh, Senate
Bill 216, which was sponsored by
Senator Rodriguez and
Representative Cates, um, added
housing as an explicit, uh,
project under the PPRF. So up
until now, housing has not been
an explicit use of the fund,
um, teachers, in fact, were done
as buildings. Um, but also that
we added nonprofit housing
developers
As an eligible entity to borrow
from the PPRF.
So, uh, those infrastructure
projects to support nonprofit,
uh, housing developers can be
now funded from the PPRF and in
fact, if they needed a loan for
the vertical construction, that
could also happen.
In addition to those low AAA
interest rates. Um, the program
provides that, uh, we will
Provide disadvantaged entity
funding, uh, that's subsidized
interest rates if the borrower's
median household income is less
than the state's median
household income. So if it's 80%
to 100% of the state's median
household income, uh, then
they'll get a 2% interest rate
and if it's, uh, less than 80%,
they'll get a 0% interest rate.
Um, sometimes that's for the
whole loan depending on the size
of the project, um, and the kind
of project, but typically it
buys down the interest rate
fairly significantly.
on those smaller projects. We do
cap those, uh, in those
disadvantaged entity funding
loans, uh, for equipment at
$150,000 per year. Uh, I, yes,
per year, per project, um, and
then infrastructure and building
loans, we cap it at 10% of
their total project amount up to
$500,000. So if a project's got
a, you know, $200 million
project, we're going to provide
very little if we at, at.
$200,000. So we do a 10% up to
500,000. Um, we do limit that to
$500,000 of disadvantaged funds
per year, and um, we don't
provide it on projects greater
than 5 million because as I
noted before, it doesn't really
move the needle very much, uh,
for those larger projects.
Um, on page 5, I will, um,
Just start off and then Chip
will go through the mechanics of
the program a little bit, but
one of the strengths of the
PPRF.
Comes from the diversity of our
borrowers, not just the
locations of their borrowers
across New Mexico, um, the kinds
of borrowers, school districts,
tribes, special purpose
districts, cities, counties, um,
but also, uh, the kinds of
different pledges, so everything
from general obligation to net
system revenue to fire
protection fund. Um, so there's
11 different pledges that, uh,
our portfolio is made up of. Um,
our ratings
significantly enhanced by the
governmental gross receipts tax,
which by statute, um,
75% of it comes over to the
finance authority's PPRF
monthly. So it doesn't come to
us and into our coffers. It goes
to the trustee where it's held
until bond payments are made,
and then we're able to use it
after bond payments are made in
order to provide that
disadvantaged entity funding,
the interest rate cap, all those
benefits you just heard about
come from, uh, the, the
governmental gross receipts tax
after it has, uh, not been used
by bondholders. And just as a
reminder,
Governmental gross receipts tax
is a 5% tax that's levied on
local government, uh, goods and
services, primarily that comes
from cities and counties through
the sale of water. That's,
that's the largest, um, source
of funding.
Um, in fiscal year 24, the year
we just ended, we received for
the first time an amount greater
than 38 million, we had received
something close to that, but
that was an anomaly, uh, because
there had been some sort of
delayed tax payment. There was a
realignment of from GRT to GGRT
and so we received a big bump
one year, but this is from Pure
growth of governmental gross
receipts tax.
And then I'll remind you, um,
that governmental gross receipts
tax when not used to, to pay
bondholders is then often
transferred out for other uses
that $50 for the Department of
Cultural Affairs for their
cultural infrastructure,
cultural affairs, infrastructure
fund, uh, for the state match
for the, um, NEDs, clean water,
uh, federal program for NMFA's
drinking water, uh, state match.
That's the federal program, and
then often for the, uh,
financial.
Authorities, local government
planning fund.
Um, so that's what, that's a let
Chip go through the graphs on
the on the GGRT but I just
wanted to mention, despite
having very strong revenue
pledges, diverse revenue
pledges, all those great
mechanisms in place.
Governmental gross receipts tax
is what got us to the AAA.
There's absolutely no way we
would maintain those kinds of
ratings without that enhancement
in place. Um, so we really can't
underscore the importance or
understate the importance of
that governmental gross receipts
tax.
OK.
money that I should turn the
charts with the pretty colors
over to the color blind
gentleman to my left.
Yeah, well, no, you don't, it's
a, it's, it's a cross that I
have to bear.
Yeah, uh, Marquita mentioned
that, uh, Michael had his
successfully had his 3rd
retirement. Why, unsuccessfully
had my first retirement when,
uh, Marquita offered me this
position, which, uh, for which I
am very grateful, so it's fun to
be back. Um,
So the, the graph on, on page 6
just shows you when we started,
uh, the BPRF program back in
really in '94, uh, the GGRT was
about $9 million. So it has
consistently grown,
uh, about 2 to 3% a year for the
past 30 years now, and as
Marquita said, the
Uh, the 2022 is sort of an
anomaly because we were coming
out of the pandemics of the,
the, uh, flow of revenues was
sort of higher than expected. We
anticipated the drop in 23, but
if you look at, look at from 23,
sorry, 21 through, uh, this past
fiscal year, it's sort of what
we would consider more typical
sort of growth rate, and yeah,
38 million is it was sort of,
uh, when we were, we were
waiting to see that.
Last month's collection and when
it, uh, topped the 38 million,
the champagne corks were, uh,
heard throughout Santa Fe, or
maybe that was just me.
The, uh, so we had a, we had a
very strong growth, uh, in, in
24 and we expect, I think in the
first month of 25, we were also
ahead of, uh, 24, so we're
expecting to see that growth
continue. But as Marquita said,
the, the fundamental pledge of
the GGRT to the PPRF program
cannot be overstated. It's,
it's, uh, what, what got us to
the ratings that we have.
On page 7, you see the, this is
just basically showing month to
month, what, what does the GGRT
look like? And so you see this
sort of increasing up through
the peak summer months and it
declines back and obviously
that's just people using water.
That's, as Marquita said, that's
sort of the most fundamental
part of the GGRT is, uh, the
revenues that we collect from
water usage and consequently,
uh, wastewater usage.
Water you use, the more waste
water you tend to use. So, um,
there's some distributions
throughout those months, but
those are typically just
outliers of communities that may
have, um,
You know, made up, uh, for past
delinquency or something like
that, but basically you see that
the, the, the summer months are,
are big months.
The, uh, on page 88, just some
highlights the as Marquita said,
we're AAA with S&P when we
started this program in 9 for
the
I think initially we were
non-investment grade with S&P,
which is below 3 B minus. It was
a, a, a long slog with them and
once there was some change in
personnel at S&P. We, uh, we got
some people who had got their
minds right and saw the value of
the of the PPRF and, um, over
the years we have seen the, the
program, you know, consistently
improve its ratings. We're still
working on, on Moody's. We'd
like to get them into the AAA
category.
as well, but you know we're,
we're very close. We're as close
as you can get. We have 44 bonds
outstanding of about $1.4
billion. Those are split between
the senior lane and the
subordinate lane, about
two-thirds senior, about a third
subordinate.
Against about 1.8 billion of
loans and
We basically
The GGRT since we don't,
Have to use it, uh, we're,
we're, we're not using it to pay
debt service, but it's pledged
to bondholders, so it comes
through the program and as it
flows out of uh the the trust
indenture, it's now available to
make direct loans and so that's
what where the GGRT is
beneficial, not just in terms of
the tax that we collect during
the fiscal year. It's also
beneficial in the fact that we
make direct loans that further
enhance.
The coverage that we, that we
get on the overall program. So
it's really a double, double
importance both the first year
and then all subsequent years.
And so our, our coverage is
about 1.4.
4 times overall on the senior
lien, it's about 1.4 on the
subordinate lien.
Uh, it's actually higher. It's
about 2 times at, at, at a
minimum.
All of our bonds are fixed rate.
We generally have 10 year call
options on our bonds, and we do.
Historically, we've been pretty
aggressive in, uh, calling debt
as it becomes, uh, available to
be called. So, uh, in 2023, we
called, I think, about $200
million of bonds that, uh,
actually had maturities going
out to 2033, but we called the
bonds because it made economic
sense. Right now, uh, we had
about I think $27 million of
bonds that were callable in
June, we opted not to call
those.
Because we're actually earning
more, keeping that, keeping
those bonds outstanding and
keeping the money, uh, invested
in short-term interest because
the inverted yield curve. So
Mark Vlato, the treasurer of the
NMFA has been, we've been making
more money keeping those bonds
outstanding than we would have
if we called them as the
As the yield curve returns to a
more normal sort of upward
sloping pattern, we would expect
to return to the process of, of
calling debt, but for right now
it makes sense to keep that debt
outstanding.
Um, talked about the, the equity
loans that is the sort of the
post flow through, uh, out of
the, uh, out of the senior and
subordinate indenture and then
it goes to work as far as making
more loans.
Uh, we do have two reserve funds
at the senior and the
subordinately in the common debt
service deserve at the senior
lane, which is
Traditionally been sized.
According to this sort of
complicated Michael Zelian, uh,
formula. Um, I, I had something
to do with it, but, uh, mostly
it was Michael. and then the,
the, the, uh, supplemental
credit reserve, which is that
the subordinate lien, which is
Uh, size to equal the senior
liens. So they're both right now
at about $400 million and
they're both earning about $2
million a year just again
through, uh, the high short-term
interest rates. So, um, those
are additional credit
enhancements and then we also
have a, a, uh,
$100 million line of credit with
Wells Fargo, which we
implemented, uh, years ago when
We actually did get to a point
where the PPRF, that is the fund
that we make the loans out of,
had dipped down to like, I think
it was less than $500,000 and we
realized that we can't just tell
people we're not in the lending
business because we don't have
any money in the PPRF. So we, we
set up the, the Wells Fargo line
of credit just to anticipate
that that if we had, for
example, um, a large borrower
that had an emergency and we had
to make a loan.
The, the Wells Fargo line allows
us to do that. We have not been
utilizing it a lot lately
because the, the magnitude of
the, what, what's in the PPRF,
uh, operating fund is allowed us
not to have to hit it, but it's
there as a kind of a, a belt and
suspender.
And Mr. Chairman, before Chip
goes on to talk about the
diversity of the borrowers that
we have, I just want to mention
that those direct loans, while
they really help our bond
coverage, they are in place
primarily because they help our
clients. So those small loans
typically less than $500,000
don't have to have a 10 year
call. So with most bonds, when
you go out, bondholders want to
know that you're not gonna, they
put a lot of work into
underwriting it and and making
that investment. They want to
know what's going to be there
for at least 10 years. Um, so
that's.
With that 10 year call is. So
our loans typically, they match
our bond, uh, the bonds that are
going to reimburse them. So if
there's a 10 year call on the
bonds, there's a 10 year call on
those loans for very small
borrowers, that is sometimes
really problematic because if
they have the extra cash, it's
often in their best interest to
pay off that loan as quickly as
they can because they're not
always in the money. And so, um,
having those small loans be able
to be prepaid after one year at
any time, you know, then.
That's a significant benefit to
them, so it has a double edge
here. It's really good for our,
for our borrowers, and it's
really good for our bonds. So I
just wanted to mention out that
that this some of these things
that are here for purposes of
bondholder strength are also
really benefits for our clients
as well. Conservative
underwriting practices are good
for our bonds. They're really
good for our clients because
they don't end up getting in
over their heads and so just
wanted to kind of say that
there's some parody between
those two structures.
We frequently focus on the bond
side because, you know, we are
proud of the AAA that we've
gained, but that is not to say
that there's um not significant
benefit coming down as a result
of some of those same features
going right down to the clients.
Great. Um, so on P 9 we have a
list of of the all the counties
through 33 counties. I think the
most important number on this
page is the one in the.
The lower right corner which is
um the average loan that the
BPRF has made is about $1.6
million which, you know, that's
a fairly modest sized loan and
that, I mean, as opposed to, for
example, the loan we made in the
2023B, uh, bond issue to the
Albuquerque Bernollio County
Water Utility Authority for 116
million so you kind of take that
outlier out and it's even a
smaller number, so I think that
really underscores.
the importance of the NMFA to
um,
you know, broad scope of New
Mexico communities.
The lists on page 10 just sort
of demonstrates the um the types
of credits that we're lending
to.
The largest group at this point
are municipalities in terms of,
uh, total dollar volume, largest
number by
loan count our our school
districts, um, between those
two, those account for, uh, you
know, probably 60% of the total
PPRF program and then you have
counties higher ed, uh, tribal,
and then, uh, other smaller
special assessments and state
appropriation type stuff.
The uh
Next table just shows the, the
types of pledges that we have
and again about 40% are
schooled, I'm sorry, general
obligation and about, uh, 22%
are the gross receipts tax, so
those two, again, account for
about 70% of our
Maybe 65 of total loans, um,
this is and that that lower
table is is FY 24 revenues, but
that's pretty relevant I think
for the overall program.
See, our largest borrowers as I
mentioned on page 11.
The Bernna Lee Albuquerque
Berlio Candy Water Utility
Authority, um,
Their loan that we just closed
last year that is, is the
largest that that we have
outstanding, um.
And which, given the fact that
they are the largest.
Provider of GGRT in the state,
we make a, make an effort to be
accommodating to them to the
extent that we can help them out
and I think in the, in the case
of this loan, we made some
structural modifications that
were helpful to uh, to the
authority. So we we try to, we
try to be attentive to our
largest GGRT payers whenever we
can be.
And then when he see the the the
balance of the loans or, you
know, larger loans to sort of
larger credits no surprise
there. And then we also list by
um entity, not just by pledge
because we have several, several
communities that give us a GO, a
GRT, a net system revenue, and
that is what we're capturing in
that lower table is anything
like, for example, in the city
of Farmington we have a number
of different types of, of
pledges from them. The
Uh
Quick overview on page 12 of the
borrowing the bonding activity
that we had in fiscal 24.
Again mentioning the the large
issue that we did in the 2023B
senior lien issue. It was 168.5
million largest borrower was,
uh, was the, the ABC.
WUA.
And
Um, we also reimbursed about 51
million, so that the
have to get too deep in the
weeds, but the, the two ways
that we issue.
Loans are um.
If, if your loan is less than
$10,000 we can make that out of
PPRF revenue. So we've got the
PPR for operating fund, borrower
comes in, they need $500. We
will go through the process and
close that loan outside of the
context of a bond issue. If it's
a larger than $10 million loan,
we will
tie the timing of that loan to a
bond issue and the whole reason
for that is we don't want to
bear the interest rate risk of,
for example, making a $500
million loan in one interest
rate environment.
And then finding out that
interest rates shoot up 50 or
100 basis points between when we
made that loan and when we sell
the bonds, that would be very
expensive to the PPRF. So for
the smaller loans we're willing
to take that risk for the larger
loans we
I guess share that risk with the
with the underlying community so
that um, you know, basically
they will get their money when
we close our bond issue, their
rates will match the bond issue
rate, so we don't bear any of
that interest rate risk. Um, so
for example, the ABC loan that
we did in uh in 2023 was
definitely a simultaneous what
we call a simultaneous loan. The
24A was purely.
A reimbursement issue. We did
not have any, um, any
underlying, um,
Simultaneous borrowers and the,
uh, we reimbursed 18 different
underlying loans in that case.
Mr. Chairman, I'll just point
out here on page 12, um, you'll
see that we had different lead
managers and different
co-managers in those two bond
issues, we maintain through an
RFP process a pool of
underwriters, and we, we rotate
through them. So if you were a
senior on one, then you won't be
a lead on the next and it so it
just, it, there's a rotating
door now, and it's about a 2
year RFP process we used to do
it annually, but because we
don't issue bonds quite as
frequently.
As we did before, we've moved it
to a 2-year rotation so that
everyone that RFPs and is
selected.
we had 6 in our underwriting
list and we and so and they all
participated in some way or the
other over the past year. Um,
there are times, of course, when
you'll have an underwriter that
has
a conflict because they served
as financial advisor to one of
the clients in the transaction
and so they have to be
conflicted out and so we'll have
someone else step in. I just
wanted to mention that that's
one of the processes we use for
transparency purposes is that
our
process.
And on page 13, we um just list
the issue that we are currently
involved in is the 2024 B bonds.
It'll be a senior lien issue.
And again, it's, it's a pure
reimbursement issue. There are
no simultaneous borrowers in
this, and they range from
Albuquerque at about 9 million,
so they're just under that
simultaneous issue threshold,
um, down to I think $374
million.
$1000 loan to Mountain Air
Public School District.
And Mr. Chairman, I think you
can see that this just one list
of bond reimbursement shows the
diversity across the state,
um, we have a lot of folks
tucked away in all corners of
the state borrowing from the
PPRF.
On page 14 we list the bond
issuance activity.
Uh, over the past 20 or 30
years, um,
And 2024, it looks like it's it.
I, I think 23 was a little bit
of an outlier just because of
that very large Albuquerque, G
Bernalio County Water Utility
Authority financing 24 is kind
of, uh, in the range, um, of
where we would expect to be
maybe, maybe a little lower than
we might expect. It's
interesting back in the turn of
the century, there was a time
when we thought we were going to
be out of the bonding business
because the demand, as you can
see in 95 through 2000.
To really the amount of lending
we were getting, the demand for
loans was
Almost able to be matched by the
resources of the GGRT, the PPRF,
and so there was this sort of
notion that, you know, we may
not be issuing bonds and you can
see that that uh, we were
disabused of that, uh, theory
pretty quickly as we as we
started issuing some large loans
and I think the 2004 was
actually also a water utility
authority loan that we did for
150 million or 27.
So that uh that's what things
look like over the last several
years, um, just to underscore, I
think we, we feel
Strongly that the the PPRF is in
really good shape. The lending
standards that we.
I have implemented have resulted
in no defaults, which really is
kind of a remarkable that that
over the 30 years that we've
been running this program, we
have not had borrowers that just
couldn't pay us. I mean, we've
got in the PPRF we've got, uh,
uh, really an unbroken track
record of, of credits that due
to I think the, the, uh,
excellent work that the lending
staff do and the credit folks,
um.
We, we make loans with the
intention that they will be paid
back and so far we've been
batting 1000 on that, um.
As we beat this horse to death,
but the GGRT is fundamentally
important to the, to the credit
strength of the, of the PPRF and
to kind of how the rating
agencies received the program.
Um, we've managed to through
Both the bond issues, the way
we've done bond redemptions,
managed to keep the coverage in,
in the realm that we like to,
and that's kind of north of 130
at the senior lean and 2 times
at the subordinate lien and
we've been able to to manage
that, uh.
In various levels of of program
demand.
We don't, uh,
Get into exotic, uh, structures
because for a couple of reasons.
One,
Um, our underlying borrowers
don't demand it. They don't,
they're not looking for us to
get involved in swaps or
derivatives, um, and it's also,
it, it's kind of not within, I
think our culture. There's not a
lot of gain to be achieved by
doing more exotic types of
financing our borrowers like
fixed rate, we like fixed rate,
and again it's just the the the
upside of getting involved in
variable rate or
transactions, uh, is not.
This does not rise to the level
of making an attractive option.
Um, there were times, there
were, there were years when we
did consider it the sort of the
swap frenzy of the of the teens,
um, we, we managed to, uh,
Uh, kind of avoid the
temptations there.
Um, one thing that
We were tasked with uh a year,
year and a half ago was to come
up with a a structure for the
PPRF program that will allow a
broader constituency of credits
that we have not typically lent
to these include charter
schools, uh, various districts,
special assessment districts,
tax tax increment districts, um,
Uh, you know, maybe healthcare
credits, maybe higher education
credits that have been sort of
challenged lately. And so the,
the idea was to try to develop a
new element of the PPRF program
that could, uh, could address
some of the need in those areas,
so we have been working on the
junior lean and
If you look at page 16, it gives
you a sense of, of kind of how,
how this program will be
structured.
The top
3 of the boxes are senior lean,
the senior lien program and just
to give you a sense, this is
somewhat dated this, this, uh.
Schematic because it doesn't
reflect the actual GGRT of the
38 million, but
You see that, you know, if I'm a
senior lean bondholder, what,
what am I being pledged? You're
being pledged the governmental
grocery seats tax and the loan
payments from senior lien
borrowers.
They're also reserve levels at
the borrower level. We've also
got the common debt Service
Reserve Fund, and so we've got.
All this money coming into the
senior lean. We've got debt
service in, in this case 136
million. OK, so.
That flows out, so we pay our,
we pay our bondholders and we've
got this flow through in sort of
the middle left box that shaded
of about 550.
That becomes available to
subordinate lien borrowers,
subordinate lean borrowers,
ulcers sport and bondholders.
The subordinate lien borrowers
also pay their loan, their loans
back, so we've got about $110
million coming in to pay $51
million dollars of debt service
on the subordinate lien.
Which means that we've got flow
through again of about 50 to $60
million. That's what we're
pledging to the junior lean. So
the junior lien will be, um,
A pledge of the flow through as
well as the loan revenues from
junior lean borrowers from the
the charter schools, the special
assessment districts, um, that,
that, uh, we will be, I think, a
little bit more aggressive in
making loans to
Those types of credits, the
ratings on the junior lien we've
gotten indications won't be as
high as the senior in
sportingle, but they're still
expect we expect them to be very
solid investment grade credits.
So,
I think the intention is to, to,
um,
You know, the AAA and the AA1
ratings are terrific. They give
us the opportunity to give loan
rates to borrowers that they
could not achieve.
Uh, somewhat lower ratings based
on the fact that these are not
going to be as strong a credits
as we see in the senior and
subordinate lien, they're still
gonna get rates that are.
Very, very good relative to what
they're what the alternative
options are out there for a, you
know, bank loan or something
like that. So, um, we are well
on the way toward having this.
We've gotten the indenture.
Drafted, it's ready to be
implemented and now we're just
in the process of developing the
application, uh, applications
for these different types of
credits, and I would expect that
we're looking at a junior lien
issue sometime in the first half
of 2025. So we're excited about
that. It'll be, uh, it'll be fun
to, to dust that uh.
Mechanism of.
Um, that's all we have. I'd be
happy to.
questions.
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to
make one more comment, which is
to say that in our typical bond
program, we are definitely
lowering the interest rate and
the costs associated with
borrowing for your basic
infrastructure projects. So
cities and counties, of course,
depending on their size, can
benefit either somewhat or quite
a bit from the benefits of the
PPRF for this junior lien and
the clients that are again
already qualified entities,
we're not adding anyone new to
the mix that isn't that wasn't
already.
In statute.
They don't have access not only
to the PPRF but to really
traditional sources of funding,
so nonprofit housing developers,
charter schools, there's a
scarcity of funding for these
kinds of projects, many of which
get stopped in their tracks
because they don't have funding
and so being able to use the
resources and the robustness,
liquidity of the PPRF to to
benefit those public projects
that the legislature for in some
instances, many years, has said
they should
Have access to the program to
finally be able to provide that
access is a long time coming,
and we're really very happy to
make that program available to
those kinds of projects. That
was really all I wanted to
mention.
OK, thank you very much. I think
we do have some questions, but
before we do that, I just wanted
to ask Representatives Johnson
and Sorato to please introduce
yourselves.
Come to you in a moment,
Representative.
Thank you chair and vice chair
and colleagues this morning and
guests in the audience and
presenters and Representative
Johnson and welcome to Gallup,
my hometown. I represent East
Gallup in about 15 Navajo
chapters. Thank you,
thank you for being such a great
host every time we're in town
here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, everyone here. I'm
Representative Linda Serrato and
I represent the South side of
Santa Fe and House District 45.
Thank you for being here,
Representative, and I just want
to ask the committee, uh, just
before we move on, um, to please
start reviewing the minutes that
are in your packet because we're
going to come to those at any
moment, the moment we hit a, uh,
quorum and we're waiting for one
senator to get that done. And I
do have your representative, uh,
and also, um, I have moved while
we're at it. I've moved dinner
up to 5:15. I know that's the
early bird special. However,
however, I think we're going to
finish pretty darn early today,
so I don't want to hold
everybody up this.
Evening and stuff, so 5:15, it's
on the sheet that's in your
packet. Just want to let
everybody know that. We'll start
with Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's
true that will be the blue plate
special. You see that at
Denny's, you know, for, for some
of us. Anyway, I did have a just
a very brief question, Mr.
Chairman,
um, but we're looking at as an
example, the uh water system,
gross receipts tax level, who
sets that tax rate?
Mr. Chairman, on the net system
revenues for water project,
those are set by the by the
entity themselves. Um, so we
look at their rate structure and
their historical capacity to
make debt service using those
rates we, we on time we'll look
at the projected revenues, um.
But often we just rely on their
historic revenues.
So let me ask you, Mr. Chairman
Marquita.
What is Burnlio County's.
Gross receipts tax.
Uh, at this time on their water
system, the Burnley water
system, Mr. Chairman, we believe
that Albuquerque Bernallio
contributes about 25% of the
governmental gross receipts tax,
um, and so, oh, math out loud,
um,
do you know what it's a, it's
the 5% rate so they they charge
governmental gross receipts tax
because they're a public entity.
Um, so 38 million is three
quarters and they provide a
3-quarter of all the
governmental grocery receipts
tax that's collected. So that's
what that $38 million
represents, so they provide
somewhere, you know, in the 912
to 13 million. All right, I was
gonna say 10. OK, do you
anticipate this system or any of
the other systems in light of
our reduction of grocery seats
tax across the state to reduce
that level.
Mr. Chairman, governmental gross
receipts tax is set in statute,
so the 5% is a statutory
assessment, so they cannot
change the the the that rate
only the legislature can do
that.
Mr. Chairman, it just seems so
that since we allowed for a
reduction in government in gross
receipts tax across the board.
It doesn't make sense to me that
we would see some potentially
legislation come forth, uh, from
these systems or their
representatives that that
represent these systems to ask
for some consideration or at
least some flexibility in this,
um.
I'm not either, but I'm, I, I
just think that what's fair is
fair if we're going to reduce
for some.
Groups, why wouldn't we for
others or allow for that. Have
you heard anything, Marquita,
along that line?
Mr. Chairman, I haven't. Um,
that 5% tax has been there boy
in the whole 20 something years
I've been at the finance
authority. So I think since its
inception, governmental gross
receipts tax has been set at a
5% level. What has happened over
time is there have been some
small governmental gross
receipts tax payers like
university bookstores and um
those sorts of very small payers
that have been exempted from it,
but I've not heard any
conversation about reducing the
governmental.
Receipts tax.
I want to bring it up, Mr.
Chairman, because ultimately,
who pays it, Mr. Chairman, the,
the ratepayers, correct. So
ultimately it's the ratepayers
that pay it and it's in statute.
I'm just surprised that that
hasn't been brought forth,
especially for, um,
You know, larger systems and.
Um,
Possible complaints by
ratepayers that maybe we need
some relief.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you Representative. We
should all keep an eye on that.
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, Marquita, just
offhand, I think I heard you say
that uh.
You average a certain amount of
of requests for.
Loans per month. What, what is
the average per month?
So, Mr. Chairman, that will vary
based on the time of year. So
our largest loans typically come
in the spring because they're
getting ready for construction
and the fewest loans come at the
end of the year, so we don't see
very many applications in that
last calendar quarter and we see
most of our applications in that
2nd calendar quarter, March,
April March through about July,
um, and we're already starting
to see it slow down again, so
it's
really um typically will.
Match the construction season.
What we will see outside of the
construction season are um uh a
lot of fire truck loans. They
represent very little in terms
of the actual revenues coming
into the PPRF, but they are a
significant portion. At one time
they were 1/3 of our of our
loans made, um, but they, they
will buy fire trucks all year
round and then school bonds, um,
we tend to see a lot of those in
the 2nd quarter and 3rd quarter.
So, um, we
Don't make loans to the schools.
What we do is we use the PPRF to
buy the bonds they've already
issued and give them the
benefits of the PPRF as other
qualified entities receive.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Albuquerque Ble County Water
Utility Authority pays.
Approximately 25% of the grocery
seats tax that you all take in.
Mr. Chairman, they get, they,
um, 25% of all governmental
gross receipts tax received. So
do you have any idea what that
amount would be for the water
authority, Albuquerque, Berna
County. I think somebody
estimated about $110 total
collections in.
24 were about 50 51 million, so
if it's a quarter of that, it's
12 to 13 million.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
uh,
One of the things that I that I
find interesting actually
pretty, pretty neat actually, is
that the water authority also is
able to.
To borrow for some of their
projects. Do you, do you know
offhand what that total amount
is that they are indebted at
this point?
Mr. Chairman, they had recently
paid down most of their all of
their um PPRF debt. And so I
think this 121 represents the
totality of their existing PPRF.
Yeah, so they 10 years comes
due, they will typically pay
that down by refinancing their
bonds or something else in this
particular instance, I think
they came to us because interest
rates were so um volatile.
Investors were a little finicky
and because our PPRF represents
so many different borrowers and
different kinds of pledges, we
level out a lot of risk for
investors, um, where they might
take more risk if they're just
got one borrower with one type
of revenue plus
They've got a concentrated risk.
So our bonds may fare better in
certain situations than they
might otherwise get. And then
also we pay for their cost of
issuance so I think those were
the two reasons that they came
forward because they often will
go to the market on their own.
Thank you, Marquita. Mr.
Chairman, just a bit of
commentary. One of the I
personally feel that one of the
best things that the legislature
did was to create the
Albuquerque Berneliou County
Water Utility Authority.
In so doing, it, it, it took the
Albuquerque Water Department,
who was not only serving the
citizenry of the city of
Albuquerque, but also
unincorporated areas, a greater
voice and to allow it to invest
in itself for the benefit of the
citizens. So it's a bit of
commentary. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
All right, thank you, uh,
Representative, um, tend to
agree with all your comments
there, uh, Vice Chair Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I just a question for you on the
junior lean and all those
borrowers are part of, they have
to be approved. We passed
legislation.
Correct.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
OK, thank you. And Mrs. just one
minor question. um, we have you
have 100 million line of credit
with Wells Fargo. Is that ever
revisited like why Wells Fargo
versus Bank of America? Is that
something you revisit, Mr.
Chairman? We do. We look at that
certainly every 2 to 3 years
when that, when that, uh,
Line of credit often renews.
We'll look at existing rates
that they'll charge us typically
we go to Wells Fargo because
they're providing it in an
accommodation, so the interest
rate they're charging us is less
than they would typically charge
others because we have so much
of our they handle our wire
accounts so so much money goes
in and out of that account. Um,
so they, they are, uh, we're a
good client to the Wells Fargo
and so the interest rates are
typically much lower than we
would find with any other local
provider and national.
provider. Thank you.
OK, thank you very much. Any
other comments? Oh sorry,
Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you guys for the presentation.
Does the, um,
There's a state provide any
revenue to the PPRF?
Mr. Chairman, the General
Services Department, as you'll
see on page.
Um, I think they are page 11.
is our largest borrower by
entity, and so, um, our largest
borrower is uh GSD uh through
typically, um, state GRT that
that they've used to back loans,
but also some cigarette tax
bonds, so they provide it, but
they provide it as part of a
loan payment to us.
And, and Mr. Chairman Marquita,
that's kind of where I was
getting most everybody else in
this in in this deal, uh, pays
you a share of government
grosserce tax, uh, it seems
like, and it's just, I don't
remember if we
have loaned to the uh to the
state ever since the program
started. I, I don't, I don't
remember because it seems like
there was some time where we
were discussing whether or not
the state should be a borrower
under the finance authority, and
I don't remember if, if that's
right or not, but what what
obviously that does when you
look at page 11.
There's a substantial amount of
revenue that the or.
money that the state is is
accessing which then would in
theory, keep that from local
communities accessing uh for
their projects and that, that
all kind of goes to how do you
guys manage the, uh, the
program, but when you look at at
page 11.
You see that GSD is the largest
borrower by entity and they're
the, if you take the water
authority out, they're the
largest borrower by dollars. So
it's uh it's the state of New
Mexico utilizing the program
versus the city of Alamogordo,
the city of Clovis, uh, Steve of
Albuquerque, even, I mean,
that's.
So I think, I think that is a
that is a kind of a concern to
me in that we've got all this
other revenue coming into the
state, maybe the state ought to
be, you know, taking care of
some of this instead of
borrowing it or or using this.
Means to provide revenue for
state projects, but uh
I think that, I think that was
something we discussed years ago
on whether or not we were going
to let the state kind of in and
obviously we let the state in at
a pretty big, big level. So, Mr.
Chair, I think that's stuff to
pay attention to as you go on
and Marquita.
To let everybody know, is there
an issue with the ability to
fund other projects because
we're funding so much state
projects and I'd, I'd be remiss.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna digress
just a minute, uh, y'all and get
away from something.
It's pretty, it's pretty
important to me, but it's not
necessarily all that important
to you, but about 6 years ago,
we were here in Gallup 6 or 8
years ago in Gallup on this same
date, which is August 12th, and
in August on August 12th, 1978,
Joan and I got married. And so
this is our, our anniversary and
it's the 2nd time we get to
celebrate it here in Gallup at
committee,
so.
Thank you.
Thank for sure.
Mr. Chairman, um, if I just
could, so Senator Griggs brings
up a couple of really
interesting points. One is that
the current list of qualified
borrowers or entities that can
access the PPRF contain a number
of clients that don't pay
governmental gross receipts tax.
Tribal entities, school
districts, the state, so it is
not, the state is not alone in
being a non-GGRT payer to access
the program. And for years, um,
very early on in the program, we
Limited the PPRF to those only
those GGRT payers. And we had
fewer borrower types. We had
fewer revenue pledges and we had
a lower rating, the nice part
about GGRT and the way the
program works is that it
doesn't, there is no scarcity
involved in the GGRT because
it's being used to enhance the
bonds and the strength of the
program we can go out to the
bond market and
the funds. So the state coming
forward with 100 or $100 million
of funding doesn't impact the
city of Al Mo Gordo's ability to
access the PPRF. Now if they
were doing millions and millions
of dollars each year, hundreds
of millions of dollars each
year. I think we'd have a
different story, but because
it's periodic and it's typically
through something like the state
building Bond Act or some other
standalone program, it's, it's
not that they come to us for
their day to day borrowings.
There's a specific.
legislatively authorized program
that allows us to issue those
bonds,
so just two points which and
they're really good points
because people get, um, it's not
like a cash funded program.
There's, if we lend to one that
doesn't mean we won't be able to
lend to another, and because
we've been able to open up the
program to more types of
borrowers than those provided by
GGRT payers we have now the 11
revenue pledges and the various
kinds of borrowers.
Which is enhance the diversity
and frankly made the program
stronger. It took a while for us
to get there, but, but we have
found that more diversity is
better because again, um, it, it
lessens the risk overall for
bondholders.
All right, thank you very much,
Senator, and thank you for the
full disclosure on your wedding
anniversary today.
Um, I will say that just as a
brief note, I came into the
Senate the same year, the same
day, almost the same day that
Senator Griggs did and uh 12
years ago, and uh for Joan to
stick around for uh
anniversaries on the road, I
think is you should just worship
the ground she walks up and I
want the committee to know that,
uh, for the 15th time, I was
told today that, um, Senator
Griggs walked away from his
vehicle with it on with the keys
in his pocket while she was
trying to get out of here and go
do something else during the
day, so.
You've got quite the prize
you've got quite the prize there
and we're very proud and thank
you very much for spending the
time with us. Uh, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I got
the same concern as Senator
Griggs got, you know,
On the general services it's 115
million.
How much is that taken away from
other people that need to borrow
money or do cause I you imagine
you have a cap on what you can
lend out much.
Mr. Chairman, the cap on our
lending, um, you know, we can't
issue 200 to $300 million of
bonds each year without really
impacting our capacity because
as you saw earlier, there's a
lot of liquidity in that
program, um, so you know, for
the
You know, with the exception of
a few major outliers like the
$121 million ABC loan, we
typically don't see loans that
are largely, you know, more than
$10,000. There may be 10% of our
loan base. Most of our loans
come under that $10 million cap.
So it's, we don't really see
them the the those like state
borrowings or school district
borrowings impacting in any way
our ability to meet the needs.
Of the city of Grants or the
city of Gallup,
they've to date we've not had a
problem meeting the demand for
all of the borrowers that want
to access the PPRF if they can
repay the loan, we won't have
any difficulty with, um, with
capacity.
Thank you, Mr. Can maybe ask the
question the wrong way and that
115 million.
Are you, are people being left
out that you don't have enough
money to put out I guess that
would be the question Mr.
Chairman, we don't because once
we run low on cash, we go to the
bond market and reimburse the
program so that we always have
enough money to lend to the
borrowers that want to access
the program.
I came,
um, if you bond is the is the
interest rate go up if you do
bond, if you have to go that
route.
Mr. Chairman, because of the way
we price those bonds, um, I
would say generally no, because
we give the uh at the time we
closed the loan, we give them
what our interest rate would be
at the time we made the, the
time that that loan closes, so
we look at the markets and say
this is typically what we would
see us getting for the bond, and
that's what we will price the
loan at again with that base
with that cap in place, um, and
we go out to bond fairly often,
um, 2 to 3 times a year
And you know typically see too
much volatility between that. So
the loan interest rates come
pretty close to matching our
bond interest rates, um, uh,
throughout time.
Uh,
one last thing,
Mr. Chairman Merquito, you know,
it's kind of.
That a government entity a state
entity is borrowing money, and
we have so much access and
money.
For the state right now. I, I
think we're like $3 billion over
what they're expected to be. And
yet for the state to have to be
borrowing money from the state.
It's just not right. It doesn't
seem right, and I don't know
what the why they're doing it if
the state does have so much
money, but I'm just within her
greatest same question, you
know, why, why are we borrowing?
Why is identity borrowing from
the state.
have been so much money in the
state right now. Anyway, that
just a thought also. Thank you,
Mr. Sherman.
OK, thank you, Representative. I
don't think any others. I just
had a few wrap ups here. Thank
you very much. Excellent
presentation. Um, on page 8, you
talked about not calling on is
it bonds, loans, both, are they
the same? what were you
referring to there? And, and
what, what is your autonomy to
determine that you're able to
just make that determination?
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chairman, the, um,
what I was referring to was
calling bond. So all of our
bonds have a 10 year call
option, which just means that
after 10 years we can pay those
bonds off if
The interest rates are favorable
or if we've got relatively low
demand and we've got, you know,
which has been the case, I think
in the last couple of years is
we had this flow through the
amount of bonds that we could
call was relatively modest, so.
At that point, we are able in a
maybe a 3% earnings environment
we were able to call 5% bonds,
so economically that made more
sense, um,
we,
Once we with the bonds, having
that call option, it's up to us.
Do we exercise it or not, um, as
I said, the, uh, the decision we
made this year was let's not
exercise it and the bondholders
are perfectly happy to not have
their bonds called, um.
And, and we're perfectly happy
to have Mark Lovato continue to
earn 5% when the bonds that we'd
be paying off or maybe uh 3%. So
it just, it's very much and
we're, we actually have
implemented sort of more.
Rigorous thought processes to
that whole.
issue of when do we call bonds
because to this point it's been
um.
Maybe uh up to a couple of
people at the NMFA, and what
we're trying to do is make more
of those decisions broader to a
broader
Group of staff to talk about it,
to think about it, what, what
makes sense and we have some
pretty lively discussions about
it. There's some folks at the
NMFA who are, you know, inclined
not to.
Call that others are more
inclined, so we're trying to
sort of institutionalize that,
that healthy debate about what
what makes most sense and I
think we'll be doing that pretty
much every year now is the call
dates. They're all of our bonds
mature, the senior lean June
1st, the subordinately in June
15th. And so this issue comes up
every uh early late spring every
year.
And Mr. Chairman, I would just
say one thing which is when we
call the, when we decide to use
cash in the program to pay down
those bonds. We redeem the bonds
at the 10 year, you know,
payment date, um, those loans
that were, were, um, that we
reimbursed are typically still
outstanding, so we're still
getting those revenues in and
what that allows us to do is to
have a liquidity in the program
so that when clients might
encounter some difficulty
Um, because though we've had no
defaults, that doesn't mean we
haven't had troubled loans. Um,
we had hospital loans recently
in particular that were quite
troubled the Metro transaction,
there were other transactions
that have been on a serious
watch list for us, but we had
enough liquidity in the PPRF
that we were able to do some
restructuring and to allow those
loans to never default, and
that's really a strength of this
program, so it's not that we
just make loans that are good
and they never go bad. We're not
that naive.
Uh, the, the, the liquidity in
the program because the loans
are still being repaid that we
don't have any debt to pay on
those bonds. That gives us a lot
of capability and strength that
again benefits our borrowers. So
if we have to do a
restructuring, we have to figure
out some way to maybe give them,
you know, a 2 year moratorium on
payment or six month moratorium
on payment. We have the
capability to do that because
the cash flows are strong
enough, so there is benefit
there for the clients.
Come as a result of those
decisions. OK, wonderful. And I
might just add the the the other
factor that we're all we
weighing is debt service
coverage on our bonds, and so
obviously if we call bonds, but
as Marquia says, if the loan
revenues are going to continue,
but we've just eliminated the
future debt service that boosts
are covered, so that's always
been a factor too. We're we're
always sort of moving dials to
try to make sure that we
maintain the coverage that keeps
us at the AAA. That's what he's
always thinking about. I'm
always thinking about our client
It's just to be very clear. It's
a, it's a great natural tension.
That's as a result, is there
oversight to you making the
decision not to call the buns?
Is that a board of some kind
that steps in that Senator
Griggs is going to serve on
eventually, Mr. Chair, we report
the activities of our bond
issuance to our finance and
disclosure committee which meets
monthly. So they're one of the 5
committees, and we have, as Chip
mentioned recently strengthened
our bond policy.
to provide for more rigorous and
regular reports on things like
these decisions, because again,
a bond issuing agency needs to
have a broader awareness of the
things that might impact our
bond ratings, so we have
broadened that we've
strengthened our debt management
committee, which is a staff
committee, and it's reports to
the board.
Um, on page 10, you just, you
know, got sort of jogged my
memory a little bit on, you
know, we talked about the
diversity of, of, um, or you
mentioned the diversity of of
this across the state where
these loans are happening or not
happening or whatever, um, is,
is there a annual event of any
kind or a bring in all of the
municipalities, counties,
whatever, just say, hey, do you
know this is available to you?
Mr. Chairman, we actively
participate in the annual
infrastructure conference in the
municipal leagues conferences in
the New Mexico Counties
conferences in the school boards
conferences we go to, uh, the
fire, um, fighters' annual
conference, um.
OK.
Lots of those kind of segments
are are uh accessed different
ways.
I'm really glad that you're
doing that because I think
that's going to help to spread
this across the state where it's
always badly needed in the
smaller communities. Um, and
then, uh, last question I had is
really on page 14, we saw this,
uh, you know, 2004 really to to
today, uh, we had a.
A bell curve there from really
02 to 12 and then again from 12
over to 24, uh, is this the cost
of, of, of projects are going
up? Is that what this is or what
why is, uh, why these increases
like this, Mr. Chairman,
I think, um,
Part of it was just the way in
which we were out in the
communities and getting those
deals done. Those were lower
interest rate environments
certainly in 2007, 2008, 2009,
the markets start to rise and it
became more expensive for many
of those borrowers to access the
bond markets on their own
because they don't enjoy the
same ratings as the PPRF. So
often when the bond markets are
a little unpredictable, they'll
see more demand for the PPRF.
Recently, federal dollars have
impacted.
Our demand. So one of the
reasons we have fewer loans
being made in 2024 and frankly,
if you took out ABC's $121
million loan, you're seeing
fewer projects being done
because there's so much capital
outlay, federal dollars, so
people are able to either access
federal grants or state grants
and not need to borrow from the
PPRF. So, um, those are
typically the things that will,
um.
Impact our demand.
OK, great. Thank you so much.
Excellent presentation. Uh, we
are now going to go committee on
to item 2.
And that is um.
Approval of amended and restated
rules governing the
administration of the public
project revolving fund that will
be Dan Opperman. Am I saying
that right? Opperman, OK, Chief
legal officer in New Mexico
Finance Authority. Chip Pierce,
chief financial strategist in
Mexico Finance Authority.
And you're having these are
being handed out to you right
now?
And if you'll go ahead and just
help us walk through these. And
we also have Marquista
presenting here as well. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members
of the committee as
Uh, I mentioned my name is Dan
Opperman. I've been with the
finance authority going on 14
years, and before you, I think
that was a perfect segue of what
was just presented with the
overview of Senate Bill 216, the
changes and the overview of our
PPRF program and to come to you
essentially with some, some
somewhat outdated and uh rules
that have not been
reviewed, you know, essentially
before you since 2015, so they
don't actually capture the
current legislative changes.
They don't capture.
Current practices at the finance
authority, you will see the red
line in your materials.
Apologies for the red.
Unfortunately, that's the best
color for you all to see. Uh,
but a lot of the changes you
will see are going to be
conforming technical changes
very what I would consider
non-material technical changes
such as the acronyms for the
NMFA or references to the act,
things of that nature. And so,
as I think you all know, your
role is to statute by statute.
is to approve the rules. This is
essentially the 2nd phase of
this presentation, we presented
to our board, uh, last month, I
gave them a copy of these rules.
We did not have any comments to
them. We bring them for you
today for your approval with
that approval, we will go back
to the finance authority board
at our August meeting at the end
of the month for final approval
and adoption.
The key points if we want to
start walking through them, I
will, I also provided a bit of a
cheat sheet on the key points. I
will hit those, um, where needed
on a higher level and when
necessary, a little more detail
and obviously Chip and Marquita
are here to uh to help answer
any questions.
Sections 1 and 2, really, uh,
not many changes there are
conforming changes, as I
mentioned, clean up to make sure
that the
You know that it works and reads
correctly. There are no
significant changes. The one
change you'll see is the removal
of the word regulations, rules
and regulations, the statutory
definition of rule includes the
regulation, so it's a
redundancy. We removed it.
Section 3 gets into the
definitions again conforming
statutory changes. It does
include
uh as referenced earlier and
mentioned by Marquita and Chip,
the definition of applicant now
includes, um, a little bit of a
cleanup with the charter school,
but really that's in the
qualified entity where we also
added the nonprofit housing
developer.
And at the end of the qualified
entity definition, you'll see
that we removed a bit of, uh,
some language which clarified
qualified entity. Again, that's
duplicative of what is contained
in the definition of applicant,
it's already there. We try to
avoid some confusion. The other
reason is one of the things that
we did is we're moving some of
the terms into our loan
management policies which you
will see also references to
throughout. Again, the rules
will refer to the
Policies, the policies are what
allow the finance authority that
flexibility to make changes when
needed as we're preparing and
making loans in the PPRF.
Section 4 is a, uh, a bit of an
outdated practice that was, that
has been updated as I think
Marquita can best describe and
John Brooks is here and his
team, you know, the outreach
program that we provide each
year where we're out in the
community and it was just
referenced here notifying
borrowers and potential
applicants of the PPRF, uh, how
to get on the annual list that's
prepared and presented to the
legislature each year.
And how they can go about that,
that process.
If you move into section 5. This
is the application procedures.
Again, uh, updated to capture
the appropriate policy
reference. So again, the red
line seems a bit much, uh, most
of it is, uh, again,
non-material. It does include
the, uh, in section 5, you'll
see, uh, again, references, like
I said to the loan management
policies we updated the
committee references again, a
current
referencing the appropriate
committee so folks understand,
uh, which committees, uh, are,
are doing the work for the
finance authority.
On on section 6, again, you'll
see minor changes, uh,
pertaining to the evaluations
conforming to current practice.
Section 7.
Uh, eligible projects and costs.
Uh, we removed some outdated
provisions of layer of law there
regarding the redirection of
funds Section 8, I think the
most significant change in
Section 8 regarding the
financing was to remove the
reference to in.
Section.
you'll see a complete strip out
of loan guarantees. The loan
guarantees were specific
legislation that were authorized
and applied only to the
Metropolitan court bonds that we
have, and there was a I guess a
credit enhancement fund that was
created for that, for those
particular bonds, it does not
apply to any other aspect of
finance authority financing and
is not contained as one of the
allowable things that we're
allowed to do, so we stripped
that out as it did seemed.
Be a little, a little confusing
for folks.
Um,
It also revised the GGRT
distribution in section B2, um,
I think Chip is.
Probably best able to answer any
questions as they come through
there. It's, I think it was a
bit wordy. It became confusing.
We try to get to the point again
to try to make these more
readable, less legalese for our
borrowers and for our staff for
that matter.
Section 9.
is the financing approval
requirements removed items that
are captured in our policies to
avoid redundancies. Again,
primarily you'll see the tribal
projects in Section E, uh, and
section F for the charter
schools, those provisions are
now going to be contained, bless
you, those are going to be
contained in, in policy.
Uh
Section 10.
Simply is an update to our
appeals process, the appeal
previously had it going through
the committee level. Applicants
can now appeal directly to the
CEO, uh, then, then, uh, then
moves through the system, um,
that should they decide that
that an appeal is appropriate,
that will end up, uh,
If it's timely filed, that
decision, if, if move forward
would then go through into the
appropriate, uh, uh, they can
appeal that decision to the
board. So it's, uh, again, it
was an outdated.
process that has now been
captured correctly.
And Sections 11 through 13
financial assistance agreement,
administrative fees, and the
amendment to the rules, there
are no significant changes.
Again, you'll see those acronyms
and, and various, uh, changes
there, uh, substantively, I
don't think there are too many
significant changes to these
rules.
The information that Chip and
Marquita provided earlier really
were honestly a very, a very
good segue of why we made these
changes to incorporate the
junior lien to capture the
current practices that we follow
and having been 9 years since
they've been before you for any
changes, uh, they were just
overdue.
With that, it would stand, uh,
any comments or questions from
Marquier Chip and entertaining
questions from the committee,
Mr. Chairman, I would just say
that these were provided to you
10 days ago or so, and they are
unchanged from what was sent to
you then, um, again, these were
last changed in 2015. The only
thing that we did in 2015 was go
in and really lower the interest
rate and the from 3% to 2% for
disadvantaged funding and
provided greater access to that.
Disadvantaged funding, so we
changed, uh, more bor more
entities could access those
dollars. Um, so that MHI level
changed at that time, we
probably should have gone in and
done some of these cleanup
items. I think we got a little
lazy back in 2015. Um, so this
process required a more rigorous
review. We found, for instance,
that we had that uh errant
definition for loan guarantees
and the provision for loan
guarantees when it's not
provided by law outside of
The Metropolitan court. We have
two options there. If you think
that's going to change, we could
say to the extent provided by
law and keep in those
definitions. If you don't think
that we'll be providing loan
guarantees, then, then we could
excise that out, which is
currently where we started, um,
and then I would just note that,
um, most of this, some of the
language that got moved out, for
instance, for charter schools
and tribal entities is being
moved from rule to policy to
allow
Um,
those particular credits to have
more flexibility instructuring
before there wasn't a lot. We'd
only done one charter school
ever.
One charter school and as a
result of this new junior lien,
we expect to have more over
time, and we want more
flexibility to be able to change
the parameters of our
underwriting or the structures
to move with the markets as they
may be. So when we were only
ever going to do one, it was
fine to have them and rule now
that we have the junior lean and
expect to see more of those. We
think it's important that they
that the terms and parameters
for underwriting really reside
in the loan management policies
where all the other ones do.
Similarly with tri tribal
entities. When we first started,
we wanted to make sure there was
virtually no flexibility. We've
now been lending to tribal
entities for 20 years and are
one of the nation's largest
tribal lenders, um, and we think
that it's more appropriate to
have the underwriting terms
again in the loan management
policies alongside all the
other, uh, structuring terms. So
those are the biggest changes
Dan went through them. There's a
lot of red but not a lot of
substance. Um, just a lot of
cleanup that we probably should
have done a while ago, but I
wanted to
Just hit the very high notes of
what you have before you.
Wonderful. Well, thank you very
much. Um, can you, I don't see
anybody with any questions. Oh,
I'm sorry, I didn't see that.
Representative Lindstrom.
Mr. Chairman and um.
I, I, I apologize. I did not see
this. It must have gone to my
legislative email account versus
others. I, I'm not sure where
this you said it was sent out,
Mr. Chairman, and I will say
that it came to you on August
5th. OK, thank you.
Um, the question I have goes to
Section 4 requests for
legislative authorization.
What's really happening here?
Mr. Chairman, that is a really
to conform to existing practice,
which is that we do an annual,
um, outreach, um, the original
language came from a time when
we used to present approve all
loans prior to, um, gaining
legislative authorization. We
modified it a little bit, um,
but generally speaking, it was
when we were actually getting
applications in, taking them to
the oversight committee, um, for
legislative authorization
We have been doing for the last,
um, several years is getting um
a brief description from our
clients and um.
A sense that they have a revenue
stream to repay those loans, but
that's becoming when we don't
have complete information, it
slows them up from getting
legislative authorization, so
this concept of them just
applying for the kinds of
projects that they'd like to,
um, that they submit to us a
letter of, of interest or a
notice of interest for the kinds
of projects they'd like to be
able to borrow for. That's the
current process we have. It's
provided the greatest amount of,
um,
Uh
Coverage, if you will, for
clients to be able to access
that program.
I don't know if I actually
answered your question.
Mr. Chairman, does it still
allow for uh an an active
project of 3 years, Mr.
Chairman, yes. So the projects
are on there for 3 years. Mr.
Chairman, does it still allow
for the New Mexico legislature
to approve a bill for every
project that's listed. Mr.
Chairman, all projects that are
1000 or greater are required
under law to be legislatively
authorized. So that does not
change the legislative
authorization process. It
doesn't
Change, um, the terms of when
legislation is needed. It
changes the way in which we
collect the names to put on the
authorization bill to present to
you.
And the timing of that. That's
good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
really absolutely feel that that
needs to have legislative
oversight, the program, the
other question that I had had
marked, Mr. Chairman, was
Getting back to the comments
regarding.
Tribes.
And that's on page.
12 item E.
Can you provide, Mr. Chairman
Marquita, what are
Um, examples.
Of repayment.
Uh, where it says determination
that repayment is adequately
secured.
What would, could you give some
examples, Mr. Chairman, of what
that is.
Mr. Chairman, our current
policies mirror this exact
language, and so we have seen um
uh utility revenues, repay those
loans we've seen special taxes,
repay those loans we've seen,
um,
Uh, enterprise revenues that are
not utility-based, uh, repay
those loans we've seen
marketable securities be
pledged, so we've seen all of
them again, we're not changing,
we're not expecting to change
the, the mark, the parameters we
would like to have them in
policy though, rather than in
rules so that we have more
flexibility should market
conditions warrant a change.
We'd like to be able to do that.
Again, we came last.
9 years ago, um, and, you know,
so we're limited in the times in
which we can bring rules to you,
and we think that having those
underwriting parameters for just
2 clients, tribes and charter
schools, to be a little
misplaced. We'd like them all to
reside in the policies so that
they can be treated alongside
all other qualified entities. So
Mr. Chairman, how many tribes
have you, have you, I, I can't,
I don't remember what all is in
that bill, but.
Have you done any out here, Mr.
Chairman? Mr. Chairman, I can
tell you that we have tried, um,
John Brooks in particular has
tried many times to, uh,
To do loans with the Navajo, um,
nation. The problem we run into
is that there is a conflict in
their laws and our statute,
which require the court of
jurisdiction to be in each of
our own respective
jurisdictions. So we're required
to have all things litigated at
the first judicial court, and
they're required to have it at
their Navajo Nation court. And
so while we've been able to
structure almost everything
else, those two provisions have
kept
At loggerheads, and we've been
unable to make loans to the
Navajo Nation as a result, um,
outside of that, we've done
ZUNI, um, I don't believe Aama
uh Hema as we've done, um, Santo
Domingo, uh, Islata.
Uh, Santa Ana, Hicaria, um, we
have done more than half. I'm
looking now at John who's
counting them in his head as we
speak, but more than half of the
Tribes and pueblos have access
to the mescalletos, um.
I, I, I think I'm coming up to
probably 2-3s, Mr. Chairman. The
reason I raised this issue is
the largest uh tribal entity in
the state of New Mexico's
Navajo. It is in 3 counties.
This county, San Juan and
Cibola, prominently, um.
There are 2 enterprises, the two
casinos, one here, one in San
Juan County.
That could easily be a repayment
process for loans, and I know
they are continually asking for
road improvements in front of
the casinos, uh, utility
extensions, things like that.
Is this, is this something that
and unfortunately our Indian
Affairs Committee chair just
stepped out for a minute. I'm
wondering if that couldn't be a
piece of legislation to change
that so they can have access to
this fund.
They are the largest tribal
entity in in the country.
And that means that that entire
population is being denied
access to these kinds of funds.
So I when um.
Representative Johnson comes
back, Mr. Chairman, maybe that's
a conversation that committee
could carry a bill that for this
particular purpose, it would be
in the state of New Mexico
courts as opposed to out in
Window Rock. I imagine that's
where they're thinking about.
But we've worked through this
with many other initiatives when
we were doing 491.
That entire uh initiative with
the New Mexico DOT was in the in
a New Mexico court. They have
the ability to sign off on that.
I just think there needs to be
more work because there's a ton
of projects that these tribes
have out here. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you, Representative,
and I don't always do on that
point, but on that point I
couldn't agree more. I mean, you
know, the monies that could come
in on the New Mexico side could
be held until the other side has
their, there's a number of ways
to do it. Um, OK, so I'm happy
to help with that whenever
you're ready to go down that
road. Representative Block.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, guys,
appreciate it. I read the all
the rules online, but I kind of
found some new ones that I had
questions about. So just a few
questions, Mr. Chairman, uh,
folks, so page 5, I guess it's
now page something else. I'm not
sure. Section 4,
it's where we were with
Representative Lundstrom talking
about uh the first one on a
section 4A. Did we change the
time interval when we're going
to have the
meetings, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, that original
language, um, by January, that's
when our, it used to be that the
last NMFA oversight committee
met in January, and that has
obviously changed over time.
This year it was almost going to
be October, but now we're in
November. So what we tried to do
is just change it to match your
committee schedule as opposed to
a fixed time since that may vary
over um the life of these rules.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Marquita. So then on
that same.
Place, I think it's now.
3
Section 4A3, we stripped a bunch
of language talking about I see
this, it says Cabinet Secretary,
legislator, or financial
advisor. So are all of those
different individuals covered
under your rules or your
policies.
If we strip this, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I believe that
what we tried to do is to
replace all of those with
representative. So instead of
having it just be an authorized
officer of the qualified entity
and authorized representative so
that they have, um, basically
given that authority to someone
to make the request to us, and
it's typically the financial
advisor. I think it's been years
since a cabinet secretary, um.
has requested, uh, legislative
authorization, I think more than
10. So that's really what that
does is try to get one group.
11 catch all, but I should
actually Dan drafted it. Well,
it goes back to the, to the
definition of authorized
representative, so it pulls it
in and it does exactly what
Marquita just said. Great, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all. Couple quick ones, uh,
let's see.
I know I had one.
Mm
So I think probably going down
to page.
13, which was stricken, so I
don't know what page it is, but.
13 under section.
10 appeals.
So from my understanding, this
takes it away from a committee
and gives it to.
The CEO, so that'll be you.
And so I guess this is meant to
be streamlining the process is
that kind of my understanding
behind that change, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, member block,
yeah, that is, that is
essentially what it what it is,
it, it allows, uh, borrowers to
gain actually quicker access to
the finance authority for an
appeal by reaching out to the
CEO and then should it have, uh,
you know, then the CEO will make
that determination of, you know,
was it timely filed work with
NMFA staff to see what that was
and then should they disagree
with that decision, then they
can up the up the appeal to the
board level. So it, it, it does
elim
some of the, the, the timing in
between and lets them just gain
access and have their, um, have
their grievances heard quicker.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's, that's awesome. I like
to hear that. And then timely
filed on page 14, do we have
something in policy that says
what timely is or is it that 10
days that's listed above in that
section, Mr. Chairman.
member block they an appeal has
to be a written appeal has to be
filed within 30 days following
following the receipt, uh, of
when they were notified that
they, that they weren't moving
forward.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And then just one thing, not
even about the policy, but I'm
going back to page 6. It says on
section 5. I see language that
says that changes shall to must,
and I was just wondering why
that is because I know when
we're writing legislation I've
always been told you can't have
must you have shall. So what
does that mean? And that's my
last question, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, member block, I, I
think it should be read exactly
as it as it stands considering
this is not legislation. These
are the rules adopted by the
finance authority with this, uh,
with this committee's approval.
Uh, but as a matter of practice,
what we have found out that we
do actually require at a
minimum, the things that are
listed in these rules, so they
do have to contain what is
listed here.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
OK, thank you, uh,
Representative.
No, OK. And so I'd had just a
couple of quick, very quick
follow ups. So on page, um,
well.
I think it's uh 9 or 10, uh
section 8 subpart or or part
Section 8, part A, subpart two.
I think
I see, oh, I'm sorry, subpart uh
or part B subpar 2B.
Not to be, um.
I guess I'm not following why
that change needed to be made
from up to 20%, but then it's
his less than 35%. Why the 15%,
uh, I guess reduction in the up
to was there a.
Is that a trend or what's going
on, Mr. Chairman, that language
um that relates to the
appropriations that get made out
of the PPRF, um, as you may
recall, up to 66 funds may
receive an appropriation with
your approval may receive an
appropriation from the PPRF, um,
and they're limited to 35%. So
what this does is it tries to
just take that out of the
equation. So some years we'll do
all 35% some years, nothing will
happen.
It's harder to track. So what
we're saying is just 20% of last
year's GGRT and, and, uh, not
even consider how much may or
may not be going out as a result
of those appropriations out of
the PPRF.
And so that's not gonna affect
anything that you're doing or,
or slow anything down or uh
preclude anybody from being able
to participate, Mr. Chairman, it
actually broadens the amount
available, um, because again, if
we're getting, you know, 10
million in and 35% of that has
to be reduced, and we're, we now
have a larger number to start
with, um, and governmental gross
receipts taxes we've mentioned
is higher than it used to be and
it's coming in fairly
consistently at a high level, so
we thought providing that extra
benefit to our.
made sense. And I guess the only
other thing is, are we we're not
doing anything to ourselves now
that should revenues or or money
coming in decline, don't cause
a.
An issue either
Mr. Chairman, I don't, I don't
think so. I think that, um, you
know, this is not a mandatory
that we distribute it. It just
allows for up to 20% of last
year's GGRT to be distributed
for disadvantaged entity
funding.
OK, thank you, and uh I don't
know who wants to take this one,
but you know, in, in my
business, uh, with my business
hat on, we call it a flow down.
And so on the flow down, what
happens after you want us to
take action today because we've
had it ahead of time we're
looking at, we had an
opportunity to ask you some
questions. Is this the
legislative action and then it
We're done from the legislatures
standpoint and then then it goes
over to the NMFA, uh, board
itself. Mr. Chairman, yes, so
what we do is we provide an
in-depth briefing, we get their
comments, incorporate them,
bring them to you, um, and then
take them back to the board for
final approval. Again, that
allows us, if you make any
changes, then they don't have to
take action twice, so they, we,
we do it in a two-step process
for them and a one-step process
for you, with you.
But this is the end of the
legislature's ability to do
anything to this. Mr. Chairman,
we can come back and revisit it
monthly, but yes, if you take
action today and approve it, we
won't bother you with this
again, probably 9 years. OK,
well, I appreciate that, um, so
I will, we don't have a quorum
yet, so I think we're gonna need
to wait on this. Uh, we're just
waiting for a Democratic
senator, I think is what the,
the holdup is, uh, to make a
quorum. So if, uh, he wouldn't
mind hanging around for as long
as you are.
Or can we just take action when
you're not here, Mr. Chairman,
we're here all day. I'm, I'm
here tomorrow. We're here all
week. Try the roast beef. Yeah,
try the roast beef performing
live downtown Gallup. OK. Um,
all right, thank you all very
much. Thanks for the, the good
questions. Um, we do have lunch
showing up here in a little bit,
uh, everyone, you know, join in.
Uh, I'm gonna ask everyone to
come back at 1:15, so we will
recess just for about an hour
and whatever number of minutes.
