12th year in the legislature
also serve as the Senate
Majority Whip.
gonna ask Sabina to introduce
herself and her staff.
to be a gainer. I'm a staff
attorney at the legislative. is
exactly right on time. Thank you
everybody, everybody, uh, John
Brooks, chief of programs.
Good morning,
Mr. Chair and committee members.
this is the uh semi.
Oh yeah, semi annual report on
the economic development
revolving fund that we present
to the oversight each year.
This is, this will, uh, this
presentation is gonna update uh
this committee on the acting.
Authority
Um, for those, um,
That haven't seen this report or
need a refresher the statewide
economic divide development
finance Act.
Or Swefa was established in
2003.
Um, and what the purpose of.
stimulated the the economy,
particularly in rural and
underserved areas by creating uh
financing tools for New Mexico
to keep intact and in par with
our neighboring states.
Uh, the, the sweFA requirement
provides, as I mentioned, two
reports to the oversight
committee and this is the 2nd
report.
Um, the economic development
revolving fund consists of a
number of different programs or
funds within the programs, uh,
there are 4 subaccounts and soon
to be a 5th subaccount, and
today I'm uh walk you through
each one of uh the sub accounts
that.
That currently are active within
the economic, as you can see on
page 3, there's uh this uh smart
money program, collateral, the
essential services working
capital program, the cannabis
microbusiness and uh the SSBCI
Capital Access program.
On slide 4, starting with the
smart money program. This is a
program that MMFA partners with
a credit unions and banks uh to
provide low cost of borrowing or
shared risk with um our partner
banks.
Our interest rates are based off
the US Treasury rates, um, and
usually adjusted for risk uh up
to 2%, but typically around 1.5%
on top of the uh the Treasury
rate.
The loan amounts are up to $20
or 49% of the financing.
And what you see on the table on
On the bottom of a page 4 are
the projects that we have
entered into through the smart
money program.
The one that's highlighted in
yellow is one that we just
recently made uh for 2810
Carston, uh, with the Baker of
Albuquerque with the board
approval that was done in
September 26th, uh, the, the
total project is for $4.5
million and we're putting in
$100 from the smart money
program and it uh it is
estimated it's gonna create 20
jobs.
This particular project is going
to finance multiple things in
terms of uh manufacturing, um,
Manufacturing
Uh
Uh, a distillery and other items
that's going to take place at at
this location in Albuquerque.
On the next slide is the update
on SSBC.
Congress
Uh, recently reauthorized the
SSPCI program or the State Small
Business Credit Initiative.
Up to $10 billion and.
And throughout the, the nation
and the, the state of New
Mexico, we are allocated $74
million.
One of the things uh with the
SSBCI program, they've made a
couple tweaks, uh, first tweak,
um, there was a focus on
socially and economic
disadvantaged individuals, which
we call SETI.
Or a a very small businesses or
VSBs.
Um, sets are located in
distressed communities and very
small businesses are defined as
businesses less than 10
employees.
In the fall of 2022, the
economic development department
received the award for $74
million to be dispersed over 3
tranches of $22 million over 10
years.
Uh, the initial award and how
the economic development
department set it up with $99
million into a collateral
support program, which is
administered by the economic
development department, which is
a CD that they provide as
collateral.
And then $65 million went to an
equity and venture capital
program that was administered by
the Fiance Authority.
Um,
Of our award.
The way that it is broken up
$600 have to go into um SETI
instead of uh businesses and
also deploy 57% into
Um,
said he ownsmo in August, the
Treasury approved the NMFA to
help administer uh the program
and the economic development
department prepared an
allocation application to
reallocate the portion of the VC
funding.
Uh, we are in the process of
working with Treasury on to
reallocate the funds into a a
cap the capital access program
and also a loan participation
program.
Those that their approval is uh
imminent.
And we, we expect that there
will be a reallocation of funds
and so what that would look like
uh for future references is the
long participation will have
receive.
Approximately $27 million.
Uh
The CA program will receive
approximately $5000 and then the
the the CD program that the
economic development department
will receive approximately $9000
to a venture capital program, so
we're reallocating those
particular funds.
Um, as we are working uh with uh
Treasury and the Economic
Development department, uh,
with, with those changes, uh, we
have, um,
begun um make changes to both
the policies, um, for the long
participation and also the
capital access program which you
guys have uh seen.
On page 7.
7 outlines sort of in is a chart
that you all have seen before
this chart outlines the various
business stages, um, and, and
life cycles of those business
stages, also the characteristics
and they, the areas that we've
felt that is missing in as a
result of this uh state small
business credit uh credit
initiative.
Which, what you see at the
bottom is the venture capital
covers uh the idea ideal and
stage seed financing to a growth
stage, the SSBCI Capital Access
Program helps out with some of
the same areas and then the
small, uh, the loan
participation program helps out
with the maturity stage. So the
way that we have uh reorganized
to reallocate the funds
will now cover um funding for
IEA and see.
Stage all the way into the
maturity stage.
On the next page on on slide
number 8 on covers SSBC SSBCI
1.0 and that is the original
collaboration on this particular
program, 100% of the
participation have been paid as
agreed, and these are the
fundings that came from the
first SSBCI in the Jobs Act of
2010.
Uh, in MFA partner with 10
different banks leveraging $34
million from their banks
creating 272 jobs. As you can
see in the table below.
All the, all, all the loans have
been paid as agreed and and the
great thing about this
particular SSBCI one, we were
not only successful and uh
helping uh expand certain
businesses, but there are a lot
of businesses that were um
startup businesses that that
needed uh this particular
capital.
Just to point out a few like
Hacienda is a Grace village and
Donanda County also start up
here in Santa Fe County for
Stark tonics, um.
Projects as a startup project in
a Gallup McKinley County, uh,
and also, um, expansion of
Bugman here in Albuquerque and,
and also Dawan Auto business, so
there was a wide variety of
businesses that we impacted,
created jobs, helped expand,
started new businesses, and also
uh help so this will be the last
time that we will be reporting
on the 1.0 because this program.
On page 9, the essential
services working capital, uh,
was established during COVID.
Um, basically it was to provide
bridge capital uh for businesses
that were impacted, um.
Eligible entities are rural
hospitals, behavior health care,
and substance abuse providers
providers, uh, Dennis Ho,
childcare operators, walking,
um, uh, research facilities and
so anything that was sort of an
essential service that needed
assistance, we were able to
provide a $1000 working capital
loan.
Or a line of credit to help out
with uh either payroll utility
supplies, rent and mortgage
payments.
All these loans, the interest
rates were at 1%. There was no
penalties, so we add a few
businesses that have uh paid on
slide 10 is the table of the 17
loans that were underwritten
that um that were essential
services or new startup
businesses.
9 projects have paid off and all
the projects are um.
What we have found that.
Um, based on the loans that we
made a lot of the businesses
were able to stabilize and it
and also to expand during the
the COVID.
On slide 11.
Another use of the, the economic
development revolving fund uh
was the cannabis microbusiness.
Um, the funds that were left
over from the essential services
was used to start up uh the
cannabis microbusiness program.
Um, and this program was
designed to uh help with startup
capital for uh the cannabis
program.
What we thought would help um
with the industry that is that
was in its infancy stage and and
thought that this pilot program
could help out with uh some of
the uh smallest, the smallest
agricultural producers, um, in
the emergency emerging cannabis
industry. Um, it provided um a
couple of different types of
loans and direct working capital
loan.
Uh, up to $250,000 and then also
uh some of that money or um.
For expansion or um.
We are currently no longer
accepting applications due to
high underwriting costs, uh,
borrowed uh collateral
requirements in a
volatile industry.
The loans that we were able to
make and there were 6 loans.
There were
Some of them are in good
standing, and we have one that's
not in good standing or or.
And
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, that is the update on
the economic cases.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
this cannabis, uh.
Money is going out, Mr.
Chairman.
I was getting infected by the
overwhelming.
this, you know, I was in moordo
last week and in one corner.
And how is that affecting?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, uh member
Garcia, Representative Garcia,
the cannabis program as, as I
stated, it, we're not no longer,
uh, but as you indicated it,
what we saw were a lot of
businesses that were propping up
and creating uh a fear some of
the borrowers that, that you see
on this list, uh, one example,
um, you know.
urban oasis, if you, when they
that shop and then you go down
the street, there were 5
additional shops and so, uh, he
made that.
Competition, um, if you didn't
price.
Well thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, well, my concern
is that the people that really
need it.
Or
Oh, no, they, they can't get no
loans, am I correct?
That's correct, Mr. Chairman.
And uh another question.
Did you guys see what was coming
before getting flooded with the?
Dispensers everywhere.
Mr. Chairman, uh, reps to see,
we thought that they were and
and help us navigate through a
very complicated uh industry and
what we found was that the the
industry was a lot overwhelming
for us.
And we made a decision, it
wasn't worth the risk and so.
To camp, I can't state that we,
we saw that this was going, but
as we.
Um, operated in that. Uh, thank
you for that. Now one more less
common, Mr. Chairman, is uh
That you know, to me it seems
like.
The big dogs eating the little
dogs up, and you know, when we
passed this piece of legislation
on cannabis and you was gonna
happen with all the small
producers or sellers are not
gonna survive it. Now we got
these companies that are in here
like Green Tree and big
corporations that are taking and
then what what was intended for
New Mexicans is completely out
of hand right now.
Mirier.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
representative, I, I couldn't,
it's, it's, you know, it's for,
it's very competitive and.
And I'll just leave my comment
Uh, thank you, sir, and thank
you Mister Chair, just a comment
I needed to make. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Representative Kates.
Thank you chair and thank you
for your presentation on slide
8, you did, uh, bring to the
committee's attention.
Um, uh, several of these
including um Hacienda and Grace
village and Cantor, but you
didn't explain why there is no
jobs created is these are
because they're startups, but
even then, why is there no, why
are we funding projects that
don't create jobs. Sure, um.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Kate.
So our new uh Cantor Properties,
that was a real estate holding
company for the the second
electronics and so what happened
is we paid for the renovation of
their building and then they
leased it to Star Cry
Electronics, who used uh their
particular loan for uh equipment
and working capital. So
effectively they did create 5
jobs. Uh, it's just these two
were. And, um, the Grace
village.
I see it as Grace feel the same
thing, Mr. Chairman, and
representative. So Hasi and
Grace Village, they had, um,
they, they built out a brand new
facility and so uh the real
estate company, uh, uh, took on
the loan for $200 and then they
did a line of credit for
$300,000. They created a total
of 4141 jobs at the facility in
So, so I'll I'll walk you
through that. So with Hasse and
his Grace village did was create
a real estate holding company
that built out the facility.
And so, and then they leased it
out to you representative,
Representative Thompson. Thank
you so much. So let's start, uh,
I'm the western woods and the
Plaza Hotel have asterisk next
to them, um, but there's no.
Oh, they asked you through. So
Western woods, uh, we.
We settled uh with uh the
international bank on uh April
29, 2019 for the balance of the
funds and they uh and so that.
That loan has been resolved.
They did create 56 jobs at
In Raton in Mexico.
As a hotel we had it foreclosed
on it with Valley National Bank.
Uh, they were still, uh, making
a payments and and and still the
guarantor is liable for the
risk. And on page 5.
Just the math, it says um.
Dispersed in 3 equal tranches of
22 million, that only adds up to
66 million. Yes,
uh Mr. Chair, I represented some
of the money is going to set
aside or an economic development
department attracting
um SEI um businesses and also do
um.
Uh, some set aside work in terms
of attracting people and and
technical assistance provider,
um, provide technical assistance
to small businesses and SI
businesses to be able to.
Uh, I'm just curious, um.
Oh
Very few of them have paid any
principal and.
Urban oasis is not in good
store.
Sure, on page 11, uh right now,
all these loans are still in a
interest only period.
So the program when it was
designed so they gave to allow
them to be able to stabilize
their business or finish
constructing their business.
After that, they will start
making principal payments, so as
as we start, um, you know,
looking at gray.
As far as urban oasis, does that
mean that they were not making
the interest payments? That is
correct. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK, um, vice chair, Umarston.
Yeah, um,
Mr. Chair, um.
A matter of vice chair, Phil
Carson is a Albuquerque, New
Mexico, um, I, I believe it's
down by uh the sport.
And
Yeah, and so what it's a real
estate, uh, and then they're
going to subdivide the real
estate into a couple businesses.
The first business is going to
be um a manufacturing uh
sanitizer, hand sanitizers, and
the spray sanitizers and and I I
they passed them out at our
board meeting and I forgot to
bring a cop uh develop handset,
hand sanitizer. Another part is
going to be manufacturer, um,
hot.
I don't want to say hi, but
specialty, uh, um.
Alcohol that they will sell out.
And then the third spaces
they're going to attract another
business, so they have.
is
There's a great emphasis
throughouters and so, um,
looking on.
And throughout your guns.
As a whole list.
But are you
Um
Mr. Chair, um, Madam vice chair,
that's a good question. I, I
probably should get back to you
on that, that question because
we.
The one thing that we, we
appreciate is the the ability to
come to you on this uh semi uh
semi, uh.
Over meeting basis or every 2
years or every every twice every
year they talk to you about this
program and that is because we
don't have under the legislative
authorization.
Um, and so without what's unique
about not having a legislative
authorization, we are able to be
more flexible to businesses and
provide them uh with a quicker
response and so that particular
uh mechanism is essential to be
able to do some of the work that
we're doing here and that's what
makes uh the program like the
SSBCI one so successful is
because of the better projects
whereas um smart money, the
initial part of.
The the program as you and also
plaza as we went to a different
transaction.
And so, um, I, I think that
right now is the biggest piece
for us, but we could come back
to, yeah. Yeah. OK, thank you
very much. I just had a couple
of follow-ups, um, and when
Representative Cates was asking
you, you may have done this, I
was doing.
7 things up here all at one
time, um.
On page 8 on the haciendas at
Grace Village, there's two
entries there, there's 2 loans
being made there. What was the
purpose of, of them needing to?
Sure, the first loan was for the
uh the construction of the
building, so they built out a
memory care facility in Las
Cruces in the second loan was a
line of credit so they can
stabilize their um business and
be able to start operating, um,
as far as I know, uh, they,
they, they paid the loan off in
full and thank you. So, you
know, I'm also a business owner,
you know, here in New Mexico and
uh, you know, I look at things
like, you know, throughput,
efficiency, economies of scale.
Um, those, those things. So and
I'm not sure in your role if
you're willing to comment on
this or not, and if you don't
want to have these funds, any of
these, you know.
That we should you believe we
should be, you're the director
of, you know, you're the
executive on programs.
Should we be collapsing any of
these to make for greater
throughput efficiency.
Um,
Scalability, etc.
You know, the reason that we
have some of the programs that
we do is one SSBCI is the
federal funds, the smart money
is state funds, um, and that's
why we have multiple accounts.
Um, the, the essential services
that that with the legislators
to be able to uh provide uh you
know, money at the during that
time, these 5 separate funds
serve up. There's a fund that we
need to collapse, um, I.
You know, I
Come on, let it out.
You see this every day, all day,
so I right now I think we're at.
I'll take your word for it then.
There's nothing you want.
in the mixing bowl together and
see if it comes out with a
bigger back to my office in
peace.
OK. All right, well, I can, I
can respect that and I can
appreciate that. OK, well, thank
you very much for your
presentation. Um, I will ask um.
That uh Ryan Marie Decker come
on up to the presentation table
for item number 2. Thank you,
Mr. Brooks. I do want to ask
representatives Dixon and De la
Cruz to introduce themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry.
Um,
I'm Representative Meredith
Dixon, House District 20 in
southeast Albuquerque. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. Good morning, everyone
in attendance. My name is
Representative De la Cruz and
represent District 112 in the
Art of the South Valley. All
right, so we're gonna keep
moving on to item 2. Thank you.
Um, I do have Ryan Marie Decker
and I have a policy and capital
strategist for New Mexico
Finance store and you have a
sidekick today. He'll introduce
both of yourselves and make sure
it's for the record
appropriately, uh, go ahead and
take it away. OK, Mr. Chairman,
I'm Fernando.
Martinez, I'm the deputy
director of the New Mexico
Finance.
Good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Ryan Decker. I'm the
policy and capital strategist at
NMFA.
Alright, thank you, and you're
gonna walk us through this deck.
Mr. Chairman, I'll make the and
members of the committee I'll
make an introduction and then
I'll turn it over to uh Miss
Decker. Um, just want to start
off with saying I, I do have had
an opportunity to have our kids
and.
Schools, private schools, and
charter schools. In fact, we
had, um, 4 kids in a charter
school at one time.
One graduated from a charter
schools not at New Mexico Tech,
so.
Um,
We've, we've had good
experiences in in private
schools, public schools, and
charter schools. And so anything
we can do to help the charter
schools, I think it's important
to New Mexico. I think there's a
couple good ones here in Santa
Fe, Mandela magnet School, which
we had one kid in and we had 4
kids at the Academy for
Technology and the classics, but
3 meetings going on in this
room.
start, yeah.
OK, Mr. Chair, I'll try and
speak up a bit, um, so excited
today to share uh the progress
we're making with the charter
school facility revolving loan
funds.
This fund was created by the
legislature in 2022, couple
years ago now, um, to finance
facility projects for public
thank you so much for your
Well, they do that, I think we
can keep moving.
There it is right there. Thank
you.
So the charter school facility
revolving loan fund was created
by the legislature in 2022, uh,
to finance facility projects for
public charter schools and
historically this is an area
where NMFA has not been, um,
particularly active, um, doing
large part to credit and
structuring challenges, um, that
I'll go into a little bit today,
uh, historically, um, NMFA has
approved 4 projects, uh, for
charter school facilities.
And the history of the
authority. I'm sorry, can you
all hear me OK? I'm, I'm hearing
feedback.
You can hear me.
OK, thank you. Um.
And so, um, when this fund was
created, uh, we actually took a
step back and also looked at uh
uh our public project revolving
fund, which historically has
always had because charter
schools are public schools, um,
the, um, authority to look at
charter school facility uh
projects. So when I'm gonna be
going through today is really,
um, both how we're hoping to
utilize the funding in this new
fund that was created and also
So, um, some of the developments
that have really expanded our
ability to offer uh PPRF
capacity um to charter schools
for their uh facility projects.
Um, so if you could please turn
to slide 2.
Uh, just an over.
And now we are getting some
feedback.
All right, we're good.
You walked in late, you know,
you're gonna have to come up
with a joke, so representative,
let's hear it.
You know, art's like a, I'm I'm
sorry, Represent de la Cruz is
like a.
Somewhat older brother to me, so
do you have any uh anything to
deliver there?
Brother?
Here we go.
This is gonna be good,
you're giving me weight Jo at
this minute, so it's on Dixon.
Representative Dixon, take it
away. This is gonna be good.
What do you get when you cross a
tortoise and a hedgehog.
I don't know, slowpoke. Does
that have anything to do with
the joke?
Slowpoke, all right.
I think we have another one over
here?
I asked this on the Senate floor
every year and for some reason
my colleagues represents. So I
don't know if she remembers this
joke, but I do it every year.
Why was the duck thrown out of
the restaurant?
Oh, I'm gonna add that to my
repertoire right there. That's
good. He was thrown out of the
restaurant because he couldn't
afford his own.
Bill.
It's always the tap that gets
it. OK, Representative
Chatfield, and then we'll get
started again.
I thought you had a joke.
OK, Representative Thompson.
It's from my 5 year old
granddaughter,
so why does the duck have
feathers?
Why does the duck have feathers?
Cover up his butt quack.
All right, now we're gonna get
started again.
I was wondering what do they do
up there in Santa Fe exactly.
All right. Anyone else? That's
it. All right.
You do?
All right, go.
for it.
What did one stack of pan?
PG related or.
Yeah, OK, all right.
What did one stack of pancakes
pancakes good.
You showed up on the right day,
you two.
All right, let's take it away.
We're gonna start again.
Mm. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So on
slide 2, this just gives you an
overview of House Bill 43 that
was passed in 2022. It was um
sponsored by Representative
Garrett, Represented Dixon here
today also representatives Brown
and Hernandez and Senator Correa
Hemphill, um, that bill made a
number of provisions relating to
charter school facilities, um,
just the ones here on the slide
or what our whole facility
revolving loan fund that was
created, um.
One was created to um in
statute, it's articulated as
make loans to charter schools
for the purchase construction,
expansion or renovation of
facilities, um, or to pay off
lease purchase agreements and
the statute requires that NMFA
adopt rules to govern the
application procedures
requirements for dispersing
loans and determining
eligibility, the statute also um
requires, um.
That lease purchase agreements
be in accordance with the public
school Lease Purchase Act, uh,
that a charter school, uh, an
eligible charter school is one
that has been renewed at least
once, um, and that we are also
reviewing at least uh uh two
recent audits, um, of the
charter school um to this body
on an annual basis.
So on the next slide on this,
uh, touches a little bit on uh
just context of charter school
facility projects in the local
charter sector, they're uh just
about 100 charter schools here
in the state serving over about
30,000 students, the public, um,
charter school of New Mexico,
the statewide association member
network, um, that works with
schools throughout the state.
They have, um, a lot of
information around the charter
school sector, uh, 70% of
charters are located in urban.
Communities centers of
Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and Las
Cruces, and the remainder in
rural communities, um, more than
half of charters are authorized
by the by the public education
commission, and then the rest
are authorized by uh school
districts.
Um, and historically, um, uh,
facility, uh, charter schools
have faced facility challenges
and facility funding challenges,
uh, the public charter schools
of New Mexico administered, um,
a survey uh amongst their
membership, um, uh, around those
challenges and, and, and, and
some of those conclusions, um,
articulated here, uh, schools,
uh, uh, historically have lacked
access to affordable financing
for their facility project.
Um, overall, their budgets are,
are constrained, so they don't
have adequate budget to uh fund
expansion or improvement uh
projects, um, schools located in
rural communities, uh, typically
lack available built facilities
to occupy, um.
And uh schools report, um,
challenges at times accessing um
uh publicly available funds uh
that are available to the
district that where they're
located, um, and schools also
are challenged in um funding
down payments uh if they're
trying to acquire a facility. So
that's an array of the different
challenges that they reported,
um, in this survey, and we know
that also, um, the range of size
of school, um, uh, is, is broad,
uh, the largest charter school
in the.
State is um close to 2000
students and then they're also
charter schools that have, um,
close to 50 students or even a
bit smaller. So it's a broad
range there and also um a broad
range of what um charter schools
are looking to do with their
facility projects.
Uh, the next slide, um, touches
a bit on some of the structural
and challenges related to um
funding charter school
facilities, so.
Because Charter charter schools
are are public schools, um, they
themselves could take out a
loan.
Um, and that's why, uh, charter
school facilities are, are
typically funded um via a lease
purchase agreements, um, where,
um, uh, the school enters into a
long term lease with the option
to then buy the facility, um,
uh, charter schools have also
created affiliated foundations,
um, and those affiliated
foundations, those private
foundations exist to support the
charter school facility and um
many charter school affiliated
foundations are also the.
Ones then that um will try and
access finance to um support
charter school facility
projects. Um, in terms of a
charter school facility project
that's typically, um, uh, first
the lease assistant lease
assistance payment that the
charter outlay Council, um, and
that's um granted on an annual
basis by the PSCOC, um, and
those grant awards are, um, the
amount of that is, is the lower
of either uh uh a mem
Um, so it's a mem calculation,
the student count times a
certain rate that's a
discretionary rate fixed by the
PSCOC every year, um, or it's
the least amount, so it's the
lower of the two.
Um, so that, um, revenue stream
is actually, um, subject to
change every year at the
discretion of the PSCOC, um, and
we know that historically, um,
uh, the perm rate has um been
often lower than the actual
lease payments that charter
schools make, um, such that, uh,
typically the lease assistance
amounts that PSCOC awards are
lower than the actual lease
payments that charter schools,
um, are having to pay, um, with
their lease agreements so that.
result, yeah, unfunded situation
and then charter schools are
drawing on operator for
educational purposes in order to
support their facility needs. In
terms of um from a structuring
perspective, so charter school
contracts are for 5 years, um,
as a lender we're typically
looking at um projects that um
exceed 5 years, and so we're
trying to finance an entity
that, um, uh, technically may
not exist, um, um, so there's
some other um structural
elements related.
To just take these um
challenging credits to
underwrite.
On, on slide 5, these are the,
um.
These are the considerations
that we look at, um, when, when
financing charter school
projects and one of the key
drivers is really enrollment,
um, because enrollment is
directly tied to the amount of
funding that that the charter
school receives, um, whether for
lease assistance or whether um
otherwise for the school, um,
obviously the strength of the
founding team and the
administration, not just in
operating the school, um, well
and effectively, but also in
managing the facility project,
uh, facility projects, um.
Take a lot of expertise and
typically about real estate or
facilities and so if you have a
a school that's looking to
expand, um, you know, do
something significant with its
facility, um, uh, ideally that
that school leader is, uh,
tapping um member or others, um,
that can provide them with that
expertise if they don't have
someone on staff to effectively
manage. So let me go ahead and
turn to slide 6 just to to bring
us to some of the recent
developments, so.
The charter school revolving
loan fund was created in 2022.
We started engaging the public
charter school of New Mexico
around to understand better the
facility needs that the charter
schools were facing in the
state, um, and also last year,
um, we were working to create
what
URF, um, which you approved the
rules, uh, for, um, earlier this
summer, so we finally created
that and these are the types of
credits, one of the types of
credits, um, that, that.
for within the PPRF.
Um, so that's something that's
been kind of we're really
excited about that separate to
the revolving loan support these
projects and as you all know,
PPRF um is a very low cost of
financing, um, so, um, now that
those rules have been approved
and did loan management policies
for the PPRF, um, we're hoping,
um, alongside the charter
school, um, will have
applications open for charter
school facility projects.
Um, and alongside that we're
creating the framework, um, if
you don't mind moving to slide
7, this is currently how we're
looking at it, so the public
project revolving fund, um, can
look at refinancing existing
lease purchase agreements, so
that's really gonna look to just
take out and refinance and lower
the cost of capital for publics,
um, and therefore result in some
cost savings, uh, we see PPRF is
really the source of financing,
um, picking it um new.
Projects that have a
construction or a renovation
component underwriting those in
the charter school facility
revolving fund um during the
construction period, those loans
uh or those um LPAs, those lease
purchase agreements, those
schools can, uh, um, that's,
that's how we see the, the two
funds, um.
Working together and we're
currently working through the
parameters of what um the
specific uh and in the charter
school facility revolving fund,
um, for those projects.
And and slide 8, just in terms
of the impact, so we think
overall, um, a key impact will
just be lowering the cost of
capital, uh, for these projects,
um, and for.
Thereby the, the, the cost of
capital for public um school
facilities, um, in the case of
charter schools that are um
expanding in areas where um
there may not be access to
quality, uh, hopefully this,
this will result too and just uh
improving access to quality
education, um, in some of the
communities throughout the city.
And in terms of next steps, all
rule and policy framework for
the revolving loan fund, um, and
also some of the, um, uh,
collaborations with.
So the PSFA, um, and that's
before the end of this year.
Happy to stand for questions.
Senator Rodriguez.
Yeah, Mr. Chan, thank you for
the question. Yes, and I can
look back specifically at the
statutory language, but.
Our understanding was review at
least the last two audits,
right? That was kind of a
baseline that's, that's how we
understood it, so the
application would request audits
Real estate
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't know, um,
how many charter schools have
affiliated foundations. I know a
lot of them do, um, and I think
most of them that have
undertaken significant facility
projects have used, uh, utilized
affiliated foundations, um, and
I also explored, um, other ways
to not know if you'll be there
in the future and I hope that.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't know if this is a
question for you, but I'm
curious, uh, I see a wider
facilities it looks like some
are just success.
But in any case, they're just
completing a beautiful facility.
Very baseline for the quality of
the.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
um, the public school facility
authority is the one that
oversees standard facilities,
including charter school
facilities.
Success noticed on the chart on
page 8 of that slide deck.
That some money was given, no, I
guess it's paid.
Covenant schools of being that
the essential services are
basically healthcare targeted
about that. So I'm just
wondering if.
Um, yeah, thank you for the
question. Um, so, um, my
understanding is that, um.
Private entities are eligible
for the essential services
program. And so, and the charter
school revolving loan fund is
for public, so it's a different
type of applicant.
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna ask Mr.
Brooks to come up because that's
from um the information that he.
Brooks, so there was, I guess,
an exception made to the usual
medical supply and things like
that,
but for private school. Thank
you very much. Yeah, and Mr.
Chair, just to clarify around,
um, so charter schools are
public schools, and when we
talked a little bit about or I
mentioned and um representative
block mentations the private
foundations for supporting
public charter school
facilities. That's different
than.
Like a private school operator
or a private child, um, and, um,
just to also be clear, NMFA is
looking to, um.
Uh, uh, work directly with
schools and enter into lease
purchase agreements, so perhaps
charter schools historically
have had to go in that direction
because there was not an
affordable source of financing
for lease purchase agreements
were focused on.
Providing that source of
affordable financing in the
lease purchase agreement.
OK, so I do have, I'm not sure
where this falls, it's sort of
along the lines of
representative de la Cruz on,
you know, the.
Buildings themselves and things
of that nature. So I also serve
on the uh.
Of a task force it's quite the
mouthful per square foot for
some of these facilities in 600,
700 is quite shocking, um, how
does that get blended into this
scenario with charter schools. I
mean assuming the dollar per
square foot.
Yeah, thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman, that's a good question
and it's also something that
I've heard also that New Mexico
relative to other states has a
relatively high cost per square
footage for um, uh, school and
educational facility projects,
um, I, um, so PSCOC determines
their discretionary rate that
and um, you know, they can, uh,
take, uh, inflation uh into
account when they set that every
year.
Um, but it's really the PSCOC
that has the discretion to
adjust the amount that charter
schools are getting for, for
example, uh. So, um, I'm just
curious to see if there's any
data that can show us sort of.
Spread on, you know.
Um, yeah, I, I don't have that
here in the, in the slides, um,
we can get that and also PSCOC
has in their meeting materials,
um, some historical information
also where they're discretionary
rate, um, uh, you know, how that
compares to CPI historically.
You know, obviously for the
record, you know, any member I
don't know that it's doubled. I,
I, you know, but it's gone up
significantly. So, and I do
serve on that committee and.
It's.
Um, thank you, Representative.
So on the page 7 schools uh and
some of these folks.
Refinancing what costs have come
down from my refinancing, how
many.
have refinanced, um, are there
any that are notable that have
made a significant.
You know, gain for themselves
and and what
what can we looks aren't open
yet, so, um, we haven't accepted
any, uh, but we do know from the
survey that there is demand out
there or there are many existing
LPAs that given what has
happened with rates and also
just where PPR rates are
relative to.
CDFIs, for example, that might
be lending 10 years ago, um, we
anticipate that there'll be some
demand on um actual demand and
actual cost savings once we've
seen some. We, we love to think
that whoever times that isn't
the case all the time,
financial.
And, you know,
Or these schools, excuse me.
Yes, Mr. Chair, it's actually,
um, this is a really small
universe we're talking about 100
schools, so we've talked
internally that it's actually
gonna be, um, we're excited
because we're gonna be able to
do some very targeted outreach,
um, also around different types
of projects and working with the
public charter schools of New
Mexico is gonna be, they're
gonna be a great partner in
helping us also just just help
schools through the process,
missing funding.
Informative.
OK, committee, we're uh like uh
doing really good on time. We're
about 20 some minutes or 25
minutes ahead of schedule. We do
have some local recipients of
Alright, so, uh.
Um, all right, so.
Representative Dixon, take it
away.
Ouch.
Uh, what?
It's a rabbit.
Favorite form. OK, so we're
gonna invite to the presentation
table, and I know I'm gonna say
this, Philip.
So
This way, OK, oh, I learned a
new one. Thank you. And what
we're hearing from here,
everyone is item number 3. I've
been trying to add these to all
of our meetings or we can learn
from the folks that are
participating and receiving and
and doing these, these types.
So, uh, Phillip.
Yes.
Jess
is the principal and of PE Real
Estate Holdings and the owner at
Midtown Santa Fe Productions.
It's quite the
You're very busy.
I have, all right, so if you
want to just walk us through a
couple of we need to be doing
differently and we want this to
work for you, so.
Take it away. Thank you very
much. I appreciate it. Uh, so I
thought I'd just give you a
little background about my
situation and how I got to Santa
Fe and how I.
I think it was on, maybe it's
not close enough.
OK.
OK.
Yeah.
Uh, so just to give you a little
bit of background, um, I'm a
real estate investor coming to
Santa Fe for many years, um, a
couple years ago, we are a
center here, which was a defunct
bankrupt tennis center.
Um, we had plans to do some uh
residential development there
and in the course of our due
diligence movie studio, we got
to know the people at Garson
studio right next door. Mexico
in general.
So we spent about 6 months and a
couple million dollars
converting that into a full
service, um, be able to recruit
right off the bat, um, both at
my studio. It was an incredible
thing for the city and the state
and for all of us drawing the
movie industry was here.
Um, at the same time shortly
after that, um, Apple Films came
and shot through Mexico, New
Mexico, um, and Santa Fe, um,
that year.
Um, in the middle of all this,
the city um decided as a part of
its redevelopment of the Midtown
campus to sell.
The Garson studios in Midtown
was the former College of Santa
Fe, went bankrupt, city took.
I think bought them that they
could control that piece of land
and essentially bankrupt since
2018.
The city has operated just
Carson's streets to the campus
has essentially gone to pot.
Um, during that time, the city
um created a redevelopment plan
to basically build a new city
center and to increase housing
in the city and to increase
economic activity in the city.
Um, the very first RFP that they
did was to basically sell the
southern or to advertise uh for
proposals to redevelop and sell
the southern portion of the
campus, which is essentially
their film studios.
My film studio is the only
private parcel that's on the
campus, just coincidentally, I
bought the last and only private
parcel that's sort of connected
to that. So it created a
fabulous opportunity for us to,
um, basically bid and be combine
our medium sized studio with
their medium sized studio and
um, the only issue is the
financing for studios is very
difficult to come by.
It's a strong business, but
studios, the nature of those,
um, they do it at the last
minute when they do it for about
8 or 9 months and then.
The lease is over and that's
very hard for conventional
financing to finance. It's also
a unique asset class. It doesn't
exist in.
Peoria or a lot of other cities
and so a lot of banks. So, um,
we have a great business plan.
We have a fabulous business. We
think that there's very little
risk in the business model and
we brought that to NMFA and
said, you know, we need
financing to make this happen.
We've got this fabulous plan.
Um, we've got all of these built
in um stops and MF MFA was um
intrigued.
Um, we had very good
conversations with them. We
actually applied through the
OERF website a couple times we
did the first round, which we
didn't get, and then we, um, did
the second round. And, um, the
process was surprisingly smooth.
The application process through
the website was a little bit
cumbersome and they asked for a
huge amount of information, so
one small critique is that, you
know, for smaller businesses
that need help and they don't
too much that was asked for
upfront, and it was easy for us,
but I think for other businesses
it may not be.
So easy.
Um, but after the initial
application process, it was very
fluid. Um, the team did a great
job of underwriting, um, they
were very thorough in the
questions that they asked
process,
um, site visits and document
collection, conventional banks,
uh, around the country, and this
is an identical process to what
we normally undergo.
So, uh, that was approved um in
the end of August, I think in
the twenty-ninth or um.
An MFA board board session.
And uh we're now in the process
of getting ready to close, and,
and then we'll start our
Somebody who knew about an MFA
suggested that I investigate the
OERF Vigo.
To of using the opportunity
Enterprise Fund.
Um, for project commercial
endeavors that uh meet some of
the conventional loan.
Issues, right? Uh, and you were
talking about um and so.
This may actually be more of a
question, but I'd really like to
understand the process.
For NMF as to loan of last
resort?
You know, uh, when you're making
decisions about.
Which awards to give.
Particularly with the
How do we um evaluate uh to.
See
How they went so.
Question that asked, have you
sought out uh documents that
show that they if they they can
show that support and it allows
them several different criteria.
At some point I'd, I'd like to,
you know, delve into that a
little bit more, but I. Thank
you, uh, representative. Uh on
question that Representative
Kates.
Thank you, chair. Um, so you,
uh, the presenter, um, said
there was a huge amount of info
requested.
Uh, that was shocking to me. As
in what was huge about it, what
was different, different than
you had expected.
Um, huge, but it's not huge
relative to anything else.
Anytime you get approved for a
loan, there's a substantial
amount of due diligence material
that's requested. And I actually
have a question, so please, if
you just stand in place for a
moment, thank you. So members,
if you can pull out, we do have
a quorum at the moment, so I'm
in here and all that.
And so, uh, entertain a motion
to adopt the minutes from the
September 9th through we have a
second?
Seconded by Representative
Block. All those in favor say
aye.
I say no.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Thanks members. OK, so on, uh, I
worked with Representative Dixon
on the Opportunity Enterprise,
uh, stuff, and I know there's a
lot going on with that and we
made changes to it again and we
want to continue to improve this
thing so it works. So you want
to hear as much feedback, I want
to just switch gears a little
bit to a whole, which is the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department.
Have you spent all of, you know,
the various enterprises that
you're operating on that piece
of property and.
Are you getting anything out of
them that's gonna dovetail with
what we're doing for you. Uh.
So I have spent time with them,
I mean, formerly I met with DC
Mark Roper.
Um, and, um, I have been in
touch with county and local um
EDC put in our own cash into
this and then we received a
loan.
Behind that,
And so without the um assistance
further financing assistance of
the EDC.
But we certainly let them know
what with the film offices, the
film offices tend to be the
first stop for businesses as
they come into the state.
And um DC can do to help this
business, um.
Basically more and more films.
The film business this year or
next year and in the future
what's happening in the
streaming industry.
notwithstanding the fact that
it's a hugely important business
for New Mexico. It's gonna be a
business that we all have to
work harder to get in the future
than we did the last.
48 months, um, and that's that I
think is, is good with the film
offices and with the, you know,
smaller EDC offices, and
outreach.
That's uh that's great and I
appreciate hearing that. I just
want to do everything possible
to help on your own, which is
fantastic. You don't always get
that though, you know, with
And I'm assuming that he will
cross that bridge when it's
built exactly.
Have you met him yet? I have
not, and we would love that up.
So, um, you know how to reach me
all of my contact info is on my
websites or whatever, but send
over some information.
Um, I wanna let you know that
our next presenter is a joke
he's been dying to tell us this
whole time.
If anybody in the room wishing
to share something. I know Roy
Soto was back there and you
know.
That guy's just a barrel of
laughs.
So, well, we're gonna just stand
in place for a moment or two
while those guys get here. We
definitely want to hear from
them. It'll be a similar
presentation on um.
If the committee will go ahead
and come back to order, thank
you very much, everybody, and I
want to thank our next presenter
for literally practically flying
over here from what I'm told.
Uh, a couple of drones picked
him up and dropped him off on
the top of the building and we
got all set there. Well, thank
you very much, uh, this is
Lawrence, MBA executive
director, and we'd like to hear
from you, sir, on your
participation in NMFA if you can
give us some feedback on how we
can make Laurence Medina.
I'm with Rio Grande
Alcoholismrofit organization
that started at a Ria Riba count
treatment Center and uh run uh
intensive outpatient.
services and towns in Las Vegas.
Also known as peer support
programs serving El Norte, um,
this uh loan that we uh
collaborated with the New Mexico
Finance Authority to purchase uh
or more of this 4,000+ square
foot building.
As nonprofits, you know, our
mission is to serve our
community and with any margin or
profit is to not shareholders or
sometimes for nonprofits in El
Norte, especially in rural and
French Chailly, especially
trying to survive in the fee for
service environment now, which
is good running a nonprofit just
like a a business, but, uh, but
the home base of uh uh you know,
first of all, we submitted an
application and uh thereafter.
The Human Services department
known as the had to approve so
there was a collabor in New
Mexico Finance Authority.
Humans
and uh and that took place
unique about this loan. It was
like it was.
And I just felt at first I, uh,
some staff assistants and kind
of guiding us in the application
process and then gather their
due diligence and following
state.
a loan
and I just want to thank the
staff of Mr. Brooks and his
staff.
Uh, you know, are very
supportive.
I think the biggest thing that
they wanted to make the loan and
also look at our financial
position and also kind of the uh
contingencies if there's any
problems.
This property that we bought was
Community Services, a mental
health clinic, get this mortgage
to continue the services much
needed services in our own.
Um, so we got the loan for
565565,000% interest rate and a
2 year loan.
It's 20% month discount basis we
get invoices and then also at
the end of the month we get
activity statements up with the
current balance to help us loan
we have increased services from
serving 400 to 500 people to
serving over 1500 people also we
started the two pier brought in
a medication assistant treatment
house, and then now we are
looking crisis response system
to the jail is dealing with
opening up a certified community
bridge with this.
And I think the biggest thing is
contingencies to prevent that
this was a foreclosed property
by a non property.
But they were strict in a way.
We have a large reserve, so we
have that contingency and.
And, and, and just that you know
our payment is 26, especially in
Taos or Santa Fe, 4000 square
foot building a month, so, uh,
all in our ship with the state
of New Mexico that worked with
you, Representative Thompson
we'll start with. This is going
a little bit back in history,
um.
What affects
What
We're still picking, you know,
the casualties of that.
Decision
Um, just started in northern New
Mexico, not only just Taos.
But it impacted us that it
started off with transition and
kind of complications with the
clients or, you know, people
needing services all the way
from adolescent to adults.
And then Tri County started
having problems, so it was like
double trouble when they first
closing in 2018, so you have
these Arizona companies.
Our mental health clinic right
now, as of today is maybe 40% of
what we the services that we
used to have.
So there's been a big 46 years,
you know, we're kind of
concerned about the decision
because once Arizona companies
couldn't make any more money and
now we're picking up the pieces,
our partnership with the New
Mexico Finance Authority with
this building was continue to
build up those services and
respectfully we want to be a
voice that when outsiders come
in that we should have a voice
as well and that for whatever
decisions why that the impact
has been Signerias, you know,
we're happy to see they picked
up 7 of the.
You know, uh, 7 new offices.
Um
And uh so it's just been, you
know, it's something I believe
under this administration
respectfully.
Uh, the behavior health service
division and how they're
focusing on how they could and
improve the systems of care. I
think it's a.
and that's um that's hard you
representative Representative
Garcia. veterans up there.
You know, I know New Mexic
northern New Mexico.
Garcia, thank you, yes sir, we
are in services, you know, from
the federal side, you know, it's
kind of hit and miss. They do
have a.
Veterans for uh for substance
use disorder and man one thing
in recent times start, you know,
it's just a support group and
then also providing case
management so if they need any
other assistance, housing, uh.
Whatever assistance that they
need, we could provide that, you
know, his doors, doors are open
Those services to veterans.
We just brought in a new program
and it's uh we have a part
timer, right, and we have a
couple of veterans see the
Sherman, thank you, uh.
Thank you, Senator, and all the
things about your service. I
didn't realize that. So, one
thing I will say is, uh, you
know.
You have plans for expansion in
other parts of the
health service and rule and
frontier the for-profits that
are there for what, you know, it
seems like you know, no
disrespect, business is
business, money and, and
strategic services are, are
significant in northern New
Mexico and, and I want, you
know, I'm a person in long term,
you know, and because of the
services and I'm a product of
the public system that it
allows. And so there's a lot of
us in recovery working in.
I say that because the passion
of of my second that we run a
business and so that we mitigate
risk. The, the needs, for
example, and um.
And Taos
Las Vegas, and these are areas
that we've serviced that we're
looking is that one of the worst
counties in the state with the
epic trips to the hospital, the
costs.
And now they, you know, the MCO
was reaching out saying they
need, you know, more behavioral
health services there currently.
And we said $250,000 to start
like to go in and provide those
services, but we need startup
money, uh.
Kind of scan the ratone and
there was t make it out there,
you know, but so we did expand,
but we couldn't make it, um.
Morelos, you know, there's a lot
of concern. So we are looking in
our strategic plan crisis
response system, the detox
center, and then in 2 years have
a crisis stable as I think Santa
Fe has one and also, um, uh,
that if we having a like a psych
ward could be significant to the
Taos community in Las Vegas is
the same thing that we're
looking at providing treatment
services through a rice grant in
the jail to communicate with the
behavior health service chips
and good communication with the
in the private sector these
public help to look at
addressing or expanding
services, but as we know, the
substance use is humongous. I
really am optimistic about the
opiate settlement fund, so
diversification of funding not
only from the state at the local
municipalities to wait for the
state and the feds to come and
save us in our rural
communities, but we also need to
work at the local level, have
diverse funding to allows it to
allow us to expand and meet.
Well, thank you very much. I
think uh.
Onward and upward, I hope that
you continue to succeed this way
and continue to have these
services across our session. I'm
not this isn't necessarily for
you was a $22,000 down payment
on a.
I believe you said 500 and I
just want to ensure that we're
treating all entities that seem
like a really low down payment
in my mind, so Doctor Brooks.
That happened
Mr. Chair.
Um, and so in, um, fun and that
it
Requires about a 10% down
payment, says Mr. Medina talked
about the life of the program.
And, and so.
For a uh providing services
throughout the state. It is a
successful and needs for. Thank
you very much and thank you, Mr.
Medina for your presentation.
OK, uh, just want to let the
committee know uh draw your
attention to the agenda real
quickly here, please. I do want
to let everybody know that I'm
gonna make a I made a decision
to move the meeting up 45
minutes. So we're gonna start
back at 12:30.
On item number 4.
1:30 on item number 5.
