yourself earlier, you did.
That's right, yes. That is
correct. All right. Thank you so
much, uh, for the very delicious
lunch. I want it one more time,
thank uh greater Gallup Economic
Development Corporation, and all
of our hosts here in this area
and thank the presenters and
thank everybody. So we're gonna
go ahead and do a couple of
things before we get rolling
here to our next item. If the
presenters want to come up for
item number 3, I would
appreciate that. That's going to
be Marquita Russell, CEO of
NMFA, John Brooks, chief of
program
N MFA and we'll come to you just
momentarily. Come on up to the
presentation table. So everybody
should have some minutes from
the last meeting.
And you would have gotten those.
So we'll take a, I'll entertain
a motion to adopt the minutes.
Uh, so move from Senator
Rodriguez, 2 from Representative
Thompson. All those in favor say
aye? All those opposed?
Motion carries. Minutes are
adopted.
And now we're gonna go to the
rules that we just reviewed in
great detail, Madam Vice Chair.
I move the approval, the amended
and restated rules governing the
administration of the public
project revolving Finn. OK,
thank you for the motion. We
have a second?
Uh, uh, representative, uh,
Thompson Seconds. All those in
favor say aye. All those
opposed? Say no.
All right, the eyes have it.
Motion is adopted.
OK, thank you. We're just gonna
keep rolling here. Thank you for
the patience for the from the
presenters.
OK, we will now go to, um, item
number 3, overview of the
opportunity enterprise and
housing Development Review Board
policies. Exciting, yes, um, on
the review and selection of
projects under the Opportunity
Enterprise revolving fund and
the housing development
revolving fund.
Honored to have done this one,
presenters Marquita Russell,
CEO, chief executive officer in
New Mexico Finance Authority,
John Brooks, chief of programs
and Mexco Finance Authority,
super sensation, Rockstar also
here with us. All right, take it
away.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, um,
this is a little bit of an
add-on from last month. Last
month when we presented on the
progress, we had mentioned that
the policies and rules had gone
out for apologies, Madam CEO, do
we have a handout for the
committee?
OK, it's coming. Please go
ahead.
I'll vamp until already, but
last month we talked about the
proposed rules that were about,
I think, a week later to be
presented to the, uh,
opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Review Board
for its final adoption, as well
as, uh, policies governing both
the opportunity enterprise,
which we call the commercial
fund and the housing Development
Fund. So when I last spoke to
you, you saw an overview of that
which the public had been
commenting on. And so what we
want to do.
With you today is touch base
with you on, um, where those
policies ended up, the rules,
uh, ended up basically as, as
you had seen, um,
But want to make sure that the
policies, um, are, uh,
As they got updated and and
approved are presented to you,
and then this is one of those
programs that we operate with.
These are the
Are you the one from before.
That's right. This is correct.
We just really want to make sure
the committee had this.
Presentation so nice we did it
twice. Um.
Hey, hey there, hey there. Hey,
um, so this program is one that
is operated because it's got a
board that's required to have
its own rules and and and it
operates under policies and then
the
Act also provides that the
authority may establish rules
and policies. So we will operate
with the opportunity Enterprise
Board, uh, the two programs with
3 sets of rules.
And 4 sets of policies and so it
starts to get a little
complicated in the middle of all
this, and I apologize for the
confusion. But what we have
today is a touch base on their
policies as approved and on our
rules.
That we're asking you to approve
today and then ultimately, John
will give you an overview of the
policies that, that, uh, we
expect these programs will be
the loans will be structured
under. So there's a lot going on
here and then we'll, uh, Dan
will step you actually through
the rules themselves. So
there's, there's a, like a 3 for
1 in this, uh, next section of
the, of the meeting. So now that
you all have those, uh,
presentations. I'll take you to
page 2 just to remind you of
who's now on. I call it the OE
board because it's got a lot.
of initials Opportunity
Enterprise and Housing
Development Review Board does
not roll off the tongue. Um, but
it is now, um, 14 member board.
We currently have 2 vacancies
and those folks really represent
commercial development, um, and
they are vacancies that need to
be, um, uh,
The members for those are
Appointed by the legislative
council. So we are awaiting two
new members from legislative
council. Um, but the board
itself is chaired by Joe Farr.
He was elected when the board
first took, um, uh, shape two
years ago and he was re-elected
just recently, um, and he has
both a commercial and a housing
background. Nicole Martinez is a
new board member, was one of the
governor appointees, and she has
a, um, a housing background.
She's a nonprofit developer of
Housing and so she's now the
vice chair and then Mark Roper,
Cabinet Secretary for Economic
Development is the secretary.
These are the other members, I
think we basically went over
them last time, but I just
wanted to highlight for you who
the leadership of that board is,
um, and as I mentioned again
last month, uh, 6 of the members
are appointed by legislative
council. 2 were appointed by the
governor, and those have to be
housing members, and then 6 or
ex officio members.
So, um,
That's page 2, page 3, 195, of
which the chair is quite
familiar, um, which passed the
legislature and became and was
signed into law and became
effective on May 15th, did a
couple of things. One, it made
some changes to the what I'll
call commercial development
fund.
Um, and those two changes were
specifically to, um,
Eliminate the
15 year loan requirement and to
clarify that the housing
development project must be
unrelated to the developer.
Again, this is mostly expected
to be for speculative
development, that is to say,
where you don't necessarily know
who the final occupant is going
to be. The goal was to increase
the stock of, um, commercial
facilities available to be moved
into by businesses. And so when
they are developed and then
occupied by related parties, you
don't really get that
You don't hit that target. Um,
so those were the two biggest
changes to the commercial
development, and then, of
course, House Bill 195 included
the, um, addition of the housing
development revolving fund to
the list of things that the
opportunity and enterprise board
reviews.
Um,
So I think Mr. Chairman, I will
move you to
Page 3 of 4.
And have John go over, um, our
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund activity to date.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
So, on page 4, is the program
activity from the Opportunity
enterprise. I'm, I'm gonna say
the commercial fund because
that's where it will stay less
conflicting and um and
confusing. And so out of the,
the commercial portion of the
program, uh, we have had two
competitive rounds, um, the
first round was, um, limited to
a $17.5 million. The reason we
it to the $17.5 million. We
wanted to make sure that the
policies that we had in place
work for the program as we were
developing that particular
program, and we received 33
applications totaling $136
million. So there was a big
demand for the program and we,
um, and that program, I mean the
demand for the monies and, and
that particular program.
There
when we received the
applications, there is a rank
and process that we go through,
uh, to rank each individual uh
project. The raking process
consists of 3 members from the
NMFA staff and then 3 members
from the economic development um
staff, and they ranked all 33
projects and came up with the
score and that score had to meet
at least a 60 point threshold in
order to be considered a
prioritized to move forward for
underwriting.
Process. Through that um first
round, there were 7 projects
that scored high enough to move
to the financing application
and, and, and to submit the
total entire package for uh for
our underwriting process. And so
through that process and and
what we received. So first, the
7 applications, um, submitted
their application, uh, their
finance application. The number
one project on that list, and
was ultimately bypassed because
it was a better fit to go with
another program at the NMFA, um,
because of the complexity of
that particular project and the
things that are evolve in terms
of tits, pits, and, and things
that are going on in that area.
It was best served to be in that
particular uh in a different
program.
Ultimately, um, after that was
bypassed. Deg took us to another
project which was funded um with
our another program um at the
finance authority. That project
has just opened in downtown
Albuquerque and they and they
had their their soft opening on
Friday and I think believe their
grand opening was Saturday.
Um, and then we had.
Uh one finance application
incomplete and then two others
have withdrew from
consideration. So that was the,
the first round of applications
that we received in the 2nd
round, we received 15
applications of which um
7 or 6 or 7 that was uh approved
for prioritization. Um, excuse
me, and as we went through that
process, um, we, we're working
on uh two applications that will
potentially be moving forward to
the NMFA board. Uh, they have,
they have completed um some of
the underwriting process and,
and hopefully they'll be uh
moving forward for funding, um,
as well. circling back.
To the, the first round, there
were two projects that didn't
meet the underwriting process at
NMFA and so it wasn't that they
were bad projects, but the, the
basically their financing wasn't
uh in place or they didn't have
the sufficient collateral to
meet our policy uh requirements
at at the the finance authority.
So with um House Bill 195 when
that passed. One of the things
that, that changed the in that
particular program was the, the
how we look at owner-occupied
facilities. Uh, so, owner
occupied facilities in round
one, was sort of the dominant um
project type and then and and
then round two as well. So
looking at 195 and and it's
going in and defining owner
occupied
Facilities and not being
accepted, we have, uh, you know,
we will, uh, reorganize the, the
policies and, and that's going
to be talked on the next on on
the next page.
On page 5, as a result of 195.
Um,
One of the things we did was
change some of the policies to
to correlate to that
legislation, but also what we
saw in demand and also in
consultation with the um the the
commercial development committee
and also the OE board. Some of
the things that we have changed
as a result was we um looked at
the community impact area and
it's still up to 35 points, but
what we changed is the
definition of unrelated
Opportunity Enterprise partner
and basically they have to have
a um um.
Uh, they're not owner occupied.
They have to be less than 30%
owner occupy in order to receive
funding. So it's more of a
speculative uh project
on the
Uh, also,
the total square footage of
project that was a new um
addition. And what we did for
that particular item is to use
the total square footage of the
facility as a metric to
determine how much, you know,
jobs that are being created as a
result, so the smaller the
facility, uh, one would think
that there's a smaller job
creation, the larger facility,
there's a larger uh um job
creation aspect. And then we
also uh
Udd a little bit about the
training and apprenticeship and
redevelopment and so that is the
community impact for the 35
points. um build a location and
uh type of the one thing we
continue to look at with the
project location where it's
gonna be located rural urban,
and, and in those particular
areas how they would have an
impact in those communities. Um,
the new thing that we added was
the total investment. So how
are they investing into that
particular area in that
community and then also uh
building uh building and
attended business type and, you
know, is it going to be a
manufacturer building versus an
office or retail space and some
of the things that we received
in terms of comments from local
economic developers and also um
um different businesses,
business owners, they, they felt
like if we uh segregate and
And gave points for those
particular types that would make
the, the funding more
attractive. And then so what has
changed as a result of that is
um some of the things that we
changed in the local and
building type is one preference
to New Mexico developers. We
want to um um.
Incentivize New Mexico
developers to use the the
program so we gave them 5 points
as opposed to outside
developers. We want to make sure
that um we, we give more
preference for them, not that
we're trying to discourage
outside developers, but we want
to give preference to those that
are located in the state. Um,
and, and then also on the next
item the applicant need in
readiness for up to 30 points,
qualify development.
Uh, team leverage of private
capital and project readiness
that all remained the same in
this in the changes from 195 and
the changes in the policies, but
what we did is we moved points
for giving the frontier
communities keeping a priority
for projects in rural
communities. And the reason that
took place is because in the
story between the two agencies,
the NMFA and Economic
Development Department, the
rankers had a hard time defining
What uh uh frontier communities
are and instead of um
segregating frontier communities
out what we thought was the best
way of, of making that um.
More succinct and have um more
consistency with the scores,
which just to have a rule, um,
rule area and rule would be
defined more broadly and given
uh more preference as a result.
The next area project as a
nation, uh, up to 10 points, um,
for that area, we kept in target
industries and economic
diversification, um, but we also
gave additional
Points given for leveraging a
private capital, so that's
capital that's gonna be um in
part of the capital stack that
would be leveraged with uh the
opportunity money and also uh
project readiness, what we have
seen is some of the projects
that we received were not all
the way uh baked, and now what
we are asking for is projects to
be more baked and ready to go as
a as a result of the financing,
um, and then lastly, under,
under Project desk.
Designation, the target
industry, economic
diversification that stayed the
same, um, and then what changed
uh we provided clarification
language on training and
apprenticeship. We thought and,
and based on the conversations
again with um uh the public, we
needed to clarify that
particular language in order to
be able for them to score
better.
On page 6. Some of the key
financing terms in, in the
policies and and also uh in
terms of when we structure the
loans, so again, uh, in loan
structuring fund concentrations,
we left at the same, um, no more
than 25% of the funds could go
to any particular county and no
more than 50% of uh a single
industry defined by a two-digit
next code uh would be.
Uh, receiving the funds. So with
that allows for geographic
dispersion and also diversity
and diversity um in the
industries that we are funding.
Mm
Under statutory requirements
that remain unchanged. So, um,
other, what we look at funding,
we look at to make sure there is
sufficient funding or if they
had uh sort of like the but for
without this financing, you
can't uh get this project to
move forward and this is a way
to provide the gap for that
insufficient funding or
unavailable funds and so what we
want to make sure is that these
funds are the the key piece
Making sure that a project is
moving forward and, and, and
what we are seeing that has
helped out a lot and when we
made some of these, these
changes. The project will create
and expand uh economic
development uh within the state
that that stayed the same. We
didn't change that. What we want
to do is spur economic
development in the state, create
jobs and also
Um, and also be able to expand
on our the the businesses that
we have in the industries that
we have in, in the state in
Mexico.
In terms of the long terms,
there have not changed. The
maximum is still $17.5 million.
The interest rates are going to
be fixed at the 60% of the Wall
Street Journal prime rate, but
no less than 3%. Um, the one
thing we did change as a result
of 195, his loan terms are up to
35 years. This used to be a
minimum of 15 years, to 30
years, and with that change that
gave the staff more flexibility
in our loan structure.
Uh, one of the things that we,
we have um uh problems with is
if we wanted to do a short term
loan, we were unable to do that
with the, the restriction of a
minimum of 15 years and now
we're able to uh do a little uh
be a little bit more creative on
the front end on some of the,
the loan requests that are
coming forward this month.
Um, the collateral requirement
still a minimum loan to value of
80% that hasn't been changed and
also the lone baby subordinated,
so we will be subordinated to
other financial institutions,
um, and, and that's key because
if we're providing gap financing
in, in this particular fund, the
ability that um subordinate to
um the banks are going to be key
in order for for the financing
to move forward.
And then finally, uh, minimal
equity contribution of 10% and
guarantees are required.
On page 7 of the handout, um,
In terms of the key definitions
that um went through some
changes.
If you look at the enterprise
development project,
unrelatedunity enterprise
partner and unrelated percentage
of occupancy, that is that those
definitions change as a result
of the occupancy requirement. So
what we're saying is it cannot
be owner occupied with this
project and we with these
program funds and in the
particular project, so they have
to be unrelated partner. And so
what we did is specifically said
that you can't have more
More than 30% affiliation or 30%
occupancy in that building. And
these definitions help define um
some of the things that we, we
could do in terms as a result of
House Bill 195, um, urban means
that consistently build up area
of a population of 60,000 or
more, so urban areas are can
include one or more
municipalities or designated
census tracks and rural means
that any
Are not considered urban is
rural.
Mr. Chairman, I'll be doing the
housing portion just so when
John's talking, he's talking
about the commercial
development. I'll talk about the
housing development. Um, the
housing development, we talked
about this last time, the
statute for workforce housing,
uh, wasn't clear on what
workforce housing was or what
middle income was, and so that
had to be defined in rule and it
gets picked up in the policies
for the opportunity enterprise
as well as the rules for the
finance authorities. We just
want to just highlight that.
Middle income workers means
families with incomes that fall
between the lesser of a local
jurisdiction's upper limit for
housing assistance by relevant
housing type or by the mortgage
finance authority's upper limit
for housing development
assistance and 300%. So those
local communities often will
provide affordable housing,
funding for affordable housing,
and this the middle income
workers is any, uh, the floor is
what the upper limit of the
Affordable.
Housing is for the jurisdiction
and 300%. It's often going to be
150, it might be slightly less
or slightly more, but uh we
wanted to make sure that there
were no unintended gaps. There's
a minor possibility of some
overlap, but we thought it was
better to have a little bit of
overlap than to have unintended
gaps. So that's one of the key
definitions again, that isn't
provided in statute that the
board worked through with some
uh with some uh diligence, and I
wanted to just remind you that
That is the what ended up in the
rules and therefore it's you see
it through and all the other
policies and rules that come
above urban and rural are the
same as John went over in the
commercial development, and then
all our other definitions in the
opportunity Enterprise Board's
policies really are, um,
definitions that we took from
MFA so that they we can align as
much as possible their terms and
our terms. Um, for the housing
development policy on page 8.
you that the goal was to
prioritize and catalyze below
market housing production across
the state. Um, the, the board
articulated a clear goal to not
be the lender of last resort,
but to be a gap lender and get
good projects over the finish
line, and so you'll see that
throughout the policies, um, the
public review and input was very
limited and really
dealt primarily with definitions
and clarifying language, not a
lot of substantive changes
otherwise. Um, and then lastly,
I would note that the board
considered um
Putting into its policies
prioritization by either the
kind of housing development
project like affordable
infrastructure versus workforce
development, the kind of
housing, multi-family versus
single family type of
development, redevelopment of
greenfield type of borrower
location of project, but
ultimately there wasn't enough
statewide data to really support
that kind of prioritization, so
they couldn't decide where there
were gaps because the data is
inconsistent or in some
instances.
missing. Um, so what they are
prioritizing solely is the
affordable or attainable
housing, either affordable or
workforce, that can be built
quickly and efficiently, so as
little money from the fund that
can support a large number of
housing units to be constructed.
Um, the community needs an
alignment that went from 35
points since you last saw it to
40 points in its final form. The
big change here, um, is that
projects, uh, we get 5 points to
contractors that participate in
approved apprentice and training
programs that is consistent with
the commercial development fund
and was not part of the housing
fund, and so that that's the one
big change from there, otherwise
the policies are
as they were before, on page 9.
We reduced the maximum loan size
from $2000 to 15 million, um,
our board would still like to
see smaller portions of that,
um, the other thing that got
changed was that we included
pre-development costs in the
definition of total project
costs, so pre-development had
been missing before and what we
heard from, um, particularly
nonprofit developers, is that
pre-development costs are quite
expensive and they need a way to
get reimbursed.
But for those so that they can
then put those dollars into new
pre-development projects. So
that got included there, um.
Uh, applicant need and
readiness, um, we clarified that
donated property from or other
local government contribution
will be considered in the
leverage calculation. I'm sorry,
that's still part of fund
efficiency. Um, and we give
preference to New Mexico
developers, um, and that's all
the New Mexico developer was
there before they thought
through that at some level and
and stayed with it. Um, we also
add a prior um we also clarified
that schematic set.
of construction plans are
acceptable in lieu of completed
architect and engineering plant.
So what we heard is they're not
going to get to that level of
design and uh schematics until
they know that they've got
funding. So that's, that was a
change that the um uh.
That the board made. So those
policies are complete. They're
final. You'll find them on our
website, um, and so the
opportunity Enterprise Board has
now finalized its rules and
finalized the policies for both
of those programs, and they are
turning then to NMFA to then
figure out the final terms of
the loans, which is before you
today, and then we'll have
policies that also help guide
that as well, so the loans are
the, the loan rules will give
the sort of parameters and we'll
describe the process.
That the applicants go through
to make sure they know how to
access the funding, um, and then
the policies will be those
things that we might change, you
know, subject to market
conditions. So you might change
the interest rate. You might
change, um, the, uh, interest
only periods, you might change
the debt service calculation
ratios, that sort of thing.
Underwriting a market conditions
really reside in our policies,
and with that I'll have John go
through the proposed loan terms
that are going to be in our
policy.
You won't see them in the rules,
but they're, they are the things
that we're working on and have
vetted through the Opportunity
Enterprise Board, uh, so that,
that's how the loans once
they're prioritized, they
These are the terms that they
would enjoy.
Yeah, so some of the terms that
we went over with the
Opportunity Enterprise Board and
and then also with discussions
with uh MFA their credit staff
and their chief credit officer,
some nonprofit housing groups
and then uh comments that we
received from the public. We
have came came up with some
proposed terms that we think are
are going to make this program
attractive. So first off, number
one.
He pointed out the maximum for
these loans or $15 million. The
interest rate is the same, same
interest rate that we're using
for the commercial side where
it's fixed at 60% of Wall Street
Journal Prime, no less than 3.5
and so we we did bring that up
for a discussion at the OE board
and they felt comfortable with
the with that particular uh rate
and and felt like that, you
know, um, developers could make
projects.
Work at at that rate in terms of
the loan terms, we are up to 40
years loans not to exceed um
with the with the preference not
to exceed 2 years, so we prefer
not to go beyond 20 years, but
we can't go up to 40 years and
that is some of the comments
that we received in extending
those terms and and and making
the debt service more reasonable
for some of the folks that take
on the loans.
And the loans could be paid off
in advance without prepayment
penalty. So um that is uh one
feature that a lot of banks
don't offer where you if you
prepay the loan you pay a
penalty in this case, what we're
saying is if you prepaid the
loan uh there is no penalty and
those monies can be recycled and
relent out and for other
projects the debt service
coverage is at 135 times
coverage, so that means that
they the
Revenues that they they generate
need to be at least 135 times
the, the, the, the debt service
that they, they're making
payments on the minimum loan
value is at 80% loan to value
and again we could be
subordinated to other federally
financial institutions. There is
a requirement of a 10% 10%
equity contribute contribution.
Um, guarantees are required and
and lastly, a little bit of
conversation on fees paid to
developers. What we um what we
saw in the marketplace and what
we wanted to do is make sure
that developers were not taking
advantage of the financing even
though that they're doing great
work and what we said is and in
consultation with the board is
to limit developer fees at 12%
for total project costs, so that
would be something like
construction projects.
Structure projects and things of
that nature whereas a 5% for
acquisition costs. So when
they're purchasing land and the
most that they could purchase uh
uhceiving the developer fee is
5%.
Um, the developer fees will be
dispersed throughout the project
life cycle. So as the project
meets a specific milestones and,
and we're moving forward in our
staff has the ability to review
um compared to the schedule
that's been provided that they
meet a milestone, but then we
would release some of the fees
that the developer, um, would
get, we hope that that would
incentivize the invest the
developer to uh to keep their
project on time and and make
sure.
that the project does get
completed and then also we uh
put limits on uh developers
being reimbursed from loan
proceeds for prior land
acquisitions. So that, that is
not something that they could
do.
On
Application cycles on page 11.
So what we're hoping to do, um,
at the, um, have 3 competitive
cycles we introduced the concept
for 3 competitive cycles at the
OE board at the August 8th board
meeting and they did approve the
schedule and, and the schedule
will start in the fiscal year
2025, starting September 4th
through October 16th, that
allows for 6.
Weeks of the application to be
open. Also this allows for NMFA
staff and to go out and have
outreach webinars and also we're
going to do a big kickoff
webinar on on September 4th to
talk about the the funding we're
going to open up the first round
with $30 million. So hopefully,
you know, we get more than 2
projects completed, but um it
does allow for two projects, uh,
be completed.
There's going at the same time
we're going to open up the
commercial fund and the
commercial fund there will be no
limits on the amount of money
that's going to be available at
that time and so if there's a
you know, multiple projects, and
we use up all 120 in that round,
then that's hopefully that will
take place, but um, you know
what we're hoping is that we,
uh, generate excitement by
having them both open at the
same time after the uh
application closes.
On October 16th, then what we
are going to do is review the
policies, review the
applications and, and prioritize
the project. So the first thing
we're going to do is prioritize
the housing projects and also
prioritize the commercial
projects. And then once we
prioritize those at the board,
we will then take feedback and
take a look at how this result
to the, the policies are and
ensure that the policies.
are meeting the the needs for
this particular um funding and
if there are any tweaks that we
need to make to the policies
that gives us time before we
open up the next cycle on
January 8th, and that second
cycle, January 8th to February
25th. It's going to be 5 weeks
and then we're going to open up
both funds to all the funds that
are available and then do the
same process, prioritize, review
policies, hopefully move.
Projects forward and then again
April 30th through May 28th,
which is four weeks and we were
hoping by then we will have um
um a consistent process and we
have developed the policies in a
way that it works for developers
and those that are applying for
the fund.
So, Mr. Chairman, that really is
the update on the policies both
at the OEB level OE
board level and at the NMFA
level. Um, and again, you won't
see those, but we wanted to make
sure as you, as you, uh,
reviewed the rules that are
actually before you today on the
loans that we will make from
those respective funds that you
understand how that money is
going to get delivered and what
policies are in place. Um, I
think we've gone through the
changes, um, at, at, uh.
fairly in depth on the changes
to the enterprise development
project, you will see throughout
that Dan will walk you through
next, um, that those are red
light throughout those are the
the significant changes and that
the elimination of the 15-year
loan term. All the other changes
conform to the board process and
add clarifying language
throughout. The rules are, uh,
for the housing fund, you'll see
are based on the same template
that we started with for the
commercial.
they um
they
um,
a couple of extra things though,
some added uh portions in the
terms, we require that
applicants evidence that they
have the experience to monitor
affordable housing compliance if
they are doing affordable
housing, um, that housing for
workforce development contain
deed restrictions during the
repayment of that loan and that
that deed restriction be in
place with a minimum duration of
10 years, um.
Uh, housing development loans,
as John mentioned, will include
limits on developer fees and
housing development loans will
limit the reimbursement of
developer loan purchases.
Otherwise, the
The loan terms are very much
those that are provided in the
act and in the board rules that
we've now gone over with you a
couple of times.
Um,
The, I'll just note for you some
high level things, um, on page
13, eligible applicant of the
housing development partner, we
call it um, is basically any
domestic corporation, general
partnership limited liability
company limited partnership
public benefit corporation,
nonprofit entity, or any other
private entity or combination
therein. It really just can't be
a public entity. Um, housing
development projects, as you
know, can be either affordable
housing infrastructure.
Or workforce development housing
and everything else is really
consistent, um,
the things that we've gone
through before.
Um
The rules themselves lay out.
Um, that the board, OE board
will first have to recommend
projects and that we will then
accept information in a
financial application. We are
doing that in one step now so
that there's not a separate
application that's required. Um,
we provide that the, uh, the
application lays out the
application process. So, the
rules lay out the application
process and the necessary
documentation for financial
assistance, um, all of the
funding from this
Program, whether it's the
commercial side of the housing
side, requires approval of the
NMFA Board of Directors, and
none of this can happen at the
staff level. It all happens by
the board in open meetings, um,
and it provides that we may
collect reasonable
administrative fees. We have
that as a standard clause in all
of our rules. We don't charge
fees in any of our programs
except for the new markets tax
credit program. So it's just a
standard thing if market
conditions change or something
else changes, we want to be able
to have that.
There, um, and then lastly, loan
terms, um, so these are the
parameters that are outlined in
your rules. We actually have the
uh the maximum amount is 15
million, so the OERB can change
their amount to be lower and
will be fine. Uh, but if they
change it higher, we have to
come back and get that changed
in rule. Uh, the maximum term is
40 years, and that's as provided
in the act. Um, the interest
rate is a language that we
picked up.
From the act, um,
Which says that it's no less
than 0% and again you'll see
that we are 60% of prime at a
minimum of 3.5, but the law says
that it's no less than 0%, um,
and then as we've been talking,
no.
Penalty for prepayment of the
loans. These loans will all be
fully collateralized. They'll
include any legally available
collateral, including real
estate. Um, the
collateralization will require
that we attain the highest lean
level possible to accomplish the
financing. John mentioned before
that we'll subordinate our
position to a bank. Our policies
do not provide for us to
subordinate to any other lender
except a federally insured
financial institution.
So CDFIs, other kinds of funds,
we can be on a parity position
and share the collateral, uh,
with, with them, but the only
one that we will allow to get
before us is a financial and
federally insured financial
institution. Um, loan to value,
uh, it says 100%. That's what we
have in all of our rules, 80% is
the current um policy limits, so
we can't, you have to have, um,
uh, uh $100 worth of collateral
for $80 of a loan, um.
And you know, again, that may
change in policy as we start to
get real life applications in
front of us. Um, equity
contributions are required under
these rules. The policy
determines how much again John
said 10%. Um, we are requiring
guarantees. This is a state
money, public money, and
guarantees are appropriate, um,
and there's a standard list of
who can guarantee those loans,
uh, which can be a person and or
or affiliated.
entity. Um, and then lastly, the
rules provide for reporting. So
Dan will walk you actually
through those rules. We just
wanted to give you an outline or
a framework of, you know, kind
of what's in them from a high
level, so when you see them, um,
those won't be redlined. The
housing rules are new, so you
will not see any marks on those.
The red lined versions are of
course for the commercial
development program which you
received.
A week or so ago. So, Mr.
Chairman, we're happy to answer
questions on the policies and
then maybe um wait for Dan to go
through the rules portion. Yeah,
we'll do them separately and um
we'll start with Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation. I, I,
I, I just wanted to take a
couple steps back with this
program and I'm talking about
the OERF program in particular.
Um,
Basically, who's the applicant?
I understand the developer.
I understand that the developer
can't own the business or have a
presence of over 30% inside the
business that they're
developing. I understand all the
business around having an equity
position and have guarantees and
and all of that, but my question
to you is, of the 45
applications you got in the in
the in the first couple of
rounds, 7 that actually made it
to try to get money, and now the
two that are actually in the
process, who's the applicant?
Mr. Chair, representative, so
that, so in the first round, all
the applicates that we saw were
owner occupied and most of them,
there was a few that were
unrelated, so they would, they
developer would um would be the
applicant and then the the the
the related party would be um a
party to the application and so
that um so the developer was the
one that was taking the lead on
it and uh make.
The application and this the 2nd
round, um, I believe it is.
It's the same, yeah, the 2nd
round is the same where we saw
um mostly the developer, um,
being the applicant, and then
they had um an identified
business that they would occupy
the facility as well.
OK, so my question, Mr. Chairman
is
We only have 2, at least from
what I'm reading here, they're
actually in process, is that
correct,
Mrs. Mr. Chairman, that's right.
So the first round again, we saw
of the highly, so the policies
themselves are intended to
target, you know, spec
development projects and in that
first round, we saw a lot of
really small um business loans
because they saw themselves,
businesses saw themselves in the
definition of an applicable, uh,
as, as an eligible
Applicant and saw themselves as
the eligible project. The the
definitions were very broad, but
they didn't get highly
prioritized because they didn't
actually fit the target of the
program, which was spec
development. So 7 projects out
of that 45 met that minimum
target of 60, the highest ranked
project, which was for Mesa del
Sol, um, uh, took up their
request was for all $17.5
million ultimately, as John
mentioned, that got bypassed and
it is.
Uh, if it goes forward, it's
part of a public improvement
district and so they'll actually
pursue funding through the PPRF
for that project at the point at
which it's ready to go or when
it's ready to go. Um, so that
was the first applicant. Several
others there, the one that John
mentioned got moved over almost
immediately to another program
was called 701 Central. That was
the that was the applicant and
borrower, and they were doing a
turnkey operation for.
A brewing company.
Um, and so that's that project.
The others ended up being
largely owner-occupied
facilities and they either
withdrew or did not make it
through our underwriting process
because with the speculative
development project, it's hard
to be a cash flow lender. You
have to be very certain of the
project's success. So we do
spend more time on speculative
projects on securing the
collateral should that project
go sideways and a lot of them
simply didn't have the
collateral in the second.
Around still a lot of owner
occupied, um, and that
project we had 7 qualified 12
completed applications, 15
submitted, 12 we deemed
complete. 7 of those went to
underwriting and 2 are emerging.
Those have not yet gone to our
board. We're still working
through our committee process,
but they're expected to be done
by the end of the month. So, Mr.
Chairman, my question is, is
when you're looking at an area
of population definition of
59,000 or less that constitutes
rule and I think about this
town.
that's 22,000 people for Gallup.
So that's, you know, at least
double, right? And that's
constitutes rural and then
you've got these small
communities with 1000 or less,
and we're all glommed in
together in the same market for
this program. So my question is,
is, are your programs inside the
finance authority stackable with
this one. So if someone was to
get this program and some
developer.
Meets all the criteria. They
don't own or occupy it. Are
there other programs that
provide stackability in your
office.
Mr. Chairman, um, most of our
programs for businesses come
from federal funds and most
federally funded programs don't
allow for non-owner occupied
facility. So the state small
business credit initiative,
which is the largest chunk of
dollars that we have available
for lending to private entities,
you can't be an owner-occupied
facility, a non-owner occupied
facility. You have to be on our
occupied they're counter, so
they're counter exactly, so we
can't really stack them there.
You have to you have.
To either qualify under one
program or the other. Um, so
they're not stackable. Our, our
state-funded program has no
money in it. Um, so that's
that's where it could be
stackable if in fact, we, we had
money in that program. So, Mr.
Chairman of the 7 that kind of
cut through the mustard, uh,
were any of them from rural New
Mexico?
Mr. Chair, Representative, there
is.
Um, one there I believe there's
one project that's in Santa
Teresa, um, and that is, I think
that one and I'm trying to there
Mr. Chairman, I'll check my
notes. I believe we sent over
those projects, um, no.
OK, I sent them to somebody.
Yeah, can you answer that? No,
I'm kidding. Um,
OK.
We're talking, Mr. Chairman, are
we talking Santa Teresa, the
industrial park, are we talking
about the community of Santa
Teresa.
Mr. Chair represented the
community of Santa Teresa.
All righty. Um,
So
I was informed that what we
needed to do is just so we could
measure interest in this
program. There's a one page
application on your website that
says, you know, we might be
interested in this. Here's the
kind of project that we'd be
looking at.
So you could demonstrate that
there's interest throughout the
state, so was that a waste of
time or how was that information
used, Mr. Chairman.
So, Mr. Chairman, we um had that
in the first round because the
application opened so quickly
after the rules were approved.
We knew that a lot of projects
weren't going to be in a
position to open up, um, and we
took that information. It was
made available to the
legislature and we talked about
it in terms of additional
funding. Um, that's specifically
where it was used, uh,
Subsequent to that, there was
also the change in law that
provided for them to be
non-owner occupied. So, uh,
several of the projects that
were in there were owner
occupied facilities.
And that's, you know, so we
didn't discount it entirely, but
we focused in, uh, on the
non-owner occupied facilities.
So Mr. Chairman, when this
project was brought to us and we
put this, this money in the
budget several years ago, it was
a bill that was carried by
former Speaker Igov.
About spec building development
and.
So I mean, it, how far away are
we getting from that? I mean,
we're still doing spec
buildings, developers lead the
charge. They can't have 30% of
themselves into that project and
it's for somebody else like
manufacturing, is that correct,
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Chairman, yes.
And the applicant is the
developer.
Mr. Chairman, yes, at this time,
and you have a lot of
definition, Mr. Chairman, as to
who is, who could be a
developer, nonprofit, so forth,
and they have to be able to
demonstrate their ability to
actually manage and put together
a project like this, Mr.
Chairman, yes, and at that
point, the equity position comes
from the developer or who who's,
where does it come from? Mr.
Chairman, um, the policies take
into consideration, um, the.
Private funding that's put in
and the equity is typically
going to be from the developer,
although in some instances it
could be.
donated land or something else.
So how much money when this
opens up again, will you have uh
toward this program.
Um, if the, the two projects
move forward and the two other
that being underwritten, I would
say we would have approximately
700 remaining out of 120.
I can't be.
My simple math is off. How much
are the how much are the two
projects total?
One is 15, 1 is 12, that's 30,
and then we have,
uh, just under 100 million.
And that would be available
starting the application process
is October September 4th through
October 16th. OK, September 4th.
That's all we needed to know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All right, thank you. Any other
questions?
Well, I have quite a few. No,
I'm kidding I have quite a few,
um, I, I do have some
follow-ups, obviously been very
involved in, you know, this.
Whole process here since the get
go of this thing. Um, so on page
4.
The
3rd bullet under the 1st bullet
or the 3rd sub bullet and the
1st bullet, the uh ultimately
the timing of this first project
is that the Maxion project, Mr.
Chairman, yes, Mrs. Das was the
applicant. So, so where, where
will that go now, I guess,
because do they get tore up and
and try for this money again or
are you expecting them to go off
to some other part of NMFA, Mr.
Chairman, they have more
interest in the PPRF. They can
do a larger amount.
With the lower interest rate,
um, likely because they'll be
short term in nature, um, and it
doesn't require personal
guarantee. So those are things
that because it has a public
improvement district attached to
it, it has access to the PPRF,
OK.
Yeah, and, and I just, you know,
want to say for the committee's
sake, I mean, what a great thing
that this got that project. I
mean it's, it got moved to
something that works, so
therefore that money becomes
available again. So what a great
thing to kind of have these
professionals involved here to
help us steer and guide through
these things. That was exactly
what we're hoping to do,
Representative Dixon and I when
we first went through this
process, and then the adding of
the housing piece of it too. Um,
on page 5, bottom right hand
corner that provide clarifying
language for training and
apprenticeship funds.
So, um,
The vice chair here and I and
several others got that
apprenticeship bill done this
year. Is that what you're
referring to there, that those
dollars would then become part
of.
The economic diversification and
the apprenticeship training, Mr.
Chairman, so the, the language
that was in there before, uh, on
the commercial side, it wasn't
clear which of the, of the
entities possible, the
developer, the builder,
contractor, or the future
business occupant could get that
5 points and so we clarified
that it's at the contractor
level is what we're looking for
in terms of approved
apprenticeship programs. So I
don't think it really changes
the intent. It does.
However, make it clearer, so we
just provided that clarifying
language that the apprentice
program really deals with the,
the actual contractor, the
builder of the, the facility we
set that fund up in the
Department of Workforce
Solutions. So I just, just, you
know, handshakes on, on, and I
don't even know that how quickly
that'll get involved here
because it's a fund that has to
grow and there's not a whole lot
of money in it right now, but
it'll start moving in that
direction. Uh, I have a couple
other follow-ups here, um.
So supportive land use, um, how
are you gonna do that? Like,
who, who's gonna say this is a
great supportive land use
project because that seems like
that's gonna have a lot of cooks
in the kitchen trying to figure
that one out, Mr. Chairman, the
policies and ideas to apologies
for. I don't want a detail like
that to hold up a whole, you
know, year of whatever. So, Mr.
Chairman, the law requires that
we give priority that the board
establish rules that give
priority to projects that, uh,
implement.
Zoning reform. I think I'm
telling you something, you know,
um, and what the way we chose to
do it in policy, um, in OE board
policy as part of their
prioritization. There are 4
sections, incentives, zoning,
land use approvals and allowance
for varied housing types, and
there are a list of best
practices under each of those,
and they get 1 point for each of
them that the community's
practices meet. So this is not
what the developer could control
or anyone else. This is at the
community level. So they will
actually check the ones that
they think are correct. Finance
authority staff very early on
though we'll have to know where
those projects are going to be
located and actually do it a
review separate from that. Um,
the only one that change, that's
different than that is the
allowance for varied housing
type. They're the only, there's
4 types if they get any of
those, they get all 5 points.
But you can get up to 5 points
for each of the incentives,
zoning, or land use approvals.
And there's probably 13 options
in one of them, you know, 9
options in another.
So that's the way in which the
board chose to deal with the
supportive land use and, uh,
zoning reform.
OK, thank you. Well, well,
before we move on,
Representative Lundstrom, who
brought these cookies? I'm
trying to lose some weight over
here
just so you didn't make them and
bring them, OK, all right, um,
also on page 9, the clarified
that donated property or other
local government contributions
can be considered in the, um, is
this a slow State land office
could make land available to do
one of these projects. Is that
what that's no, Mr. Chairman,
under the Affordable
Housing Act, um, if a community
has implemented their affordable
Housing Act plan, they can do
things like donate property to
this project for affordable
housing. So it really will only
come and play largely under the
Affordable housing, uh,
development project, but because
there's a leverage, we wanted to
make certain that projects were
getting, um, uh, the benefit of
those donations. OK, yeah,
because there's a governor that
we both know wants to build
housing on public land and this
and that and that's all coming.
By the way, so I think that'll
be very interesting to see where
that goes, but I, I just want to
know if the land office was
working with you on any of that
stuff and then also on page 9, I
thought it was great, it might
be worth mentioning again for
the public record, for the
record on the, uh, the last
bullet there.
I think it's great they don't
have to have the full, fully
engineered architectural
rendering down to the way the
corner of the building is going
to look in order to get
something on for consideration
is that essentially what you're
saying, Mr. Chairman, that's
correct. I mean, here we go,
trying to, you know, reduce
regulation and all this and that
and get projects moving. I think
that's very exciting. Um, let's
see here.
Oh, so on page, uh, well before
we go to page 1 h.
OK, so the, um, on page 10
the the discussion that you are
the you reviewed the interest
rate calculation and this and
that, uh, what, what, in what
scenario would we look
unattractive.
Or would we wind up unattractive
in that.
If rates hit a certain level or
it would just always be capped
at 3.5, even if the rates went
to 8%. Mr. Chairman, that's the
floor. So if, if the rates drop.
Um, to, let's say prime is at 4%
or 3%, then obviously that's
less attractive. Um, so, but if
as as prime rate is relatively
high, um, I think that rate
today would be in the somewhere
in the mid-fives would you have
to come back to your to the
board to get that adjusted if it
became an unattractive scenario,
Mr. Chairman, these are our
proposed policies, so that's one
of the things that we can change
in our policies. So things that
are subject to market
conditions, we
Try to have in our policies so
that we are not left, you know,
maybe for 9 or 10 months with uh
a program that really isn't
meeting the market needs, so
that's what's in policy.
OK. Well, I mean, maybe we need
to think about that and how that
should be addressed so that it
never, uh, you know, handcuffs
us, you know, at one point, Mr.
Chairman, that's the way we've
chosen to do it. So in rule we
just say it has to be greater
than 0, but the actual amount
that we charge is in policy, so
again it can move as the market
conditions move. Great, great,
great. So then on to page 11, I
did have a couple of questions.
Sorry, I'll get through these
quickly. So on page 11, um,
If you didn't get accepted in
the September 4th through the
October 16th, can you reapply to
the other rounds because you got
smarter and got your thing to
your act together, Mr. Chairman,
yes, and what we did in the
first two rounds is that, um,
there were some policy changes,
so we couldn't just take the
application from one round to
the 2nd round, but in those
areas where the application
didn't change, we prepopulated
the second application with that
data. So again, we don't want
to.
Just say we're gonna consider
your first application in the
2nd round because the policy
prioritization may have changed
and so you might not, you know,
get to answer a question, but to
the extent we can, if the
question is the same, will
prepopulate it so they can go in
and not have to fill that out.
They can obviously change it at
any uh until they hit submit
it's open for them to, uh, to to
manipulate.
And then, uh, I don't know if
you're willing to, you know,
like, is this, is this gonna be
a popular program? I'm assuming
it's going to be once it's, once
the rules get out there.
Mr. Chairman, um, based on what
you know, I mean. The, I think
the one section that always gets
a little tricky, um, is the
parts that require personal
guarantees.
That is a lot of developers, and
that's what tripped up the
Maxion project, right, Mr.
Chairman, the timing the timing
was the one that tripped it up
and ultimately that project
needs more than $17.5 million.
And so kind of piecemealing
projects didn't make sense to
the developer at that time. Um,
but, you know, because this
Funding, uh, we do require
personal guarantees on our
programs or corporate guarantees
we, we, we require a guarantee.
We think that's appropriate.
That's the one thing that that
may that stopped a few, um,
commercial development projects
for moving forward because some
developers just want
non-recourse debt and have the
project stand on its own, um,
and, you know, when you have
subsidized funding, finance
authority doesn't think that's
appropriate.
Well I guess where I was going
with that one, this is my last,
uh, maybe last question is, do
you, are you going to come at us
for more money for this uh fund
for in 25, Mr. Chairman, we'll
be happy to provide you with the
data on how popular the program
is and where the funding gaps
are. We prefer not to go after
you all, but come after us, OK,
um, wonderful. Well, I, I just
want to say that this thing is
moving quickly. I, I was really
hoping this thing wouldn't last
2 or 3 years trying to get the
dang rules together. So I'm
really glad. Thank you so much.
This is exactly what
Representative Dickson and I
envisioned when we started
working on this. We had the
experts come in from out of
state to talk to us about this
or that. We talked to local
folk, we talked to developers,
we're on the housing Investment
council. A lot of really good
things moving here. So I'm I'm
very excited, excited about that
on the house on the commercial
side, but obviously on the
housing side too, um, Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank you very much. I was just
thinking sometimes out loud here
as you're talking. Thank you,
Marquita and John for your good
work as always, um, you know,
something that crossed my mind
when, um, you mentioned
Marquita, the affordability,
it's the affordable Housing Act
to the mortgage Finance
Authority that had to do for a
response having to do with your
question, Senator, um, is
something crossed my mind that
we may want to look into. I
won't be here next year to to
look into this, but uh something
maybe.
Be worth doing is looking to see
how this affordable Housing Act
provisions and the main crux of
that housing Act is to exempt in
a nutshell to exempt governments
like municipalities and and
counties and so on, um, exempt
him from the anti-dation clause.
So that they can donate land,
buildings, whatever it is for
affordable housing, and because
that is the crux of that. I'm
wondering if because we changed
the law in a few good ways this
last session, um, that perhaps
we can tie it, uh, tie those
provisions somehow to make it
work even more with other
programs that we have with the
NMFA. For a moment I thought,
well, here's the opportunity
Enterprise board, and here's um
all these other.
The work uh workforce, uh,
housing and stuff that we can
do. I'm wondering if somehow we
can blend it in there to expand.
I don't know, but just something
to think about. Yeah, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
we'll talk to our partners over
it, I think they call themselves
New Mexico housing now, um, and,
uh, just as soon as we put them
in rule, they changed it to New
Mexico housing. Um, uh, but
we'll talk to them about the
ability at all to, um, expand
that uh Afordable Housing Act
plan and
If there are ways to broaden it.
Excellent. Senator, thank you.
No, I don't have any further
comments, but thank you,
Marquita. Maybe maybe we can
work something and if we can't,
at least we looked into it.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Several of us serve on that.
New Mexico housing now we're not
quite sure what the legislative
committee is going to be called
tomorrow on that one. OK, any
other comments, questions,
concerns, feelings, emotions,
um, Representative Garcia,
quick question mark. I maybe I
should have asked a long time
ago, who, who makes up the board
the opportunityity Enterprise
and Housing is on page 2.
And there's 6 members that are
appointed by legislative
council, and those are Joe Farr,
um, Brian Condit, Dominic
Garcia.
Jennifer Garcia Kozlowski, those
are the 4 of the 6 because they
have 2 vacancies. Um, the
governor appoints two of them.
She appointed Nicole Martinez
and Mackenzie Bishop, and then
the rest are ex officio and that
includes the secretary of
Economic Development, General
Services Department, DFA, and
the state treasurer and as well
as a cog. So it's on page 2 in
very small print. I apologize,
but that's the current board.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you, and you know,
Representative Garcia brings up
a really good point asking those
questions. I mean, on the vacant
to commercial development
members, can you do a lot of
nudging because I think they
just have such an important
voice there, Mr. Chairman, we'll
we'll take up nudging again.
There's, there's uh of the six
members, they had, they were
staggered. So the first two
expired on June 30th. Now they
serve until their appoint their
replacement is appointed. But so
we have two that
That need to be either re-upped
or replaced and then we have the
two vacancies. So they have
before them the 4 either
vacancies or pending expiration,
I guess now past expirations. So
only 2 of them currently.
No, yeah, 2 of them currently,
uh, aren't, don't have terms
that are expiring.
Well, I think that's great, um,
but again, just wanna make sure
those positions get filled up.
I'm pretty impressed with this
board. I mean, just in general,
the, the, the, the some of the
folks on it, McKenzie Bishop, I
mean, just a down home New
Mexico person who is gonna be a
huge contributor to that, so,
all right, thank you very much
for that presentation committee.
We're not going to go to item
number 4, and is there a deck on
that one too, or no, Mr.
Chairman Daniel, we just, we, we
tried to cover all of the things
before you on that in one deck.
What you have now are the rules
for the opportunity and
Prise fund and which we
highlighted those changes and
they are in red line form. They
were provided to you, uh,
roughly a week ago, and then
after that will be the housing
rules and Dan will step you
through those as he, uh, does so
well.
Thanks Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. So try to keep
this uh so that you as brain
dead as possible on these.
If you remember, you adopted
rules back in 2022 that applied
only to essentially what is now
the commercial aspect of this uh
opportunity enterprise board.
So the rules that are before you
are red lines of those rules,
and we essentially just made
updates to those rules based on
the statutory changes. They
involve nothing and have nothing
to do with housing. The next set
of rules that are going to be
before you. What I tried to do
is essentially took this set of
rules stripped out the
commercial components and
inserted the housing. So you'll
see a lot of duplication, a lot
of uh redundancies and
consistencies, but they're
specific for
Each particular program. What,
what we didn't want to do is
have borrowers coming to us
confused trying to figure out
which aspect of one set of rules
applied because there are two
separate funds, and that's one
of the things that the statute
did is it created the housing
development fund, which we'll
get to next. So this set of
rules is rather straightforward.
The changes, again, I provided
you a pretty high level cheat
sheet of the key points, uh,
starting with the the section
and the purpose just to make the
change to show that.
These rules were expanded due to
the statutory changes in Section
1, Section 2 is the definitions.
We updated the commercial added
the commercial development
committee with that change, we
created two separate committees
to handle the two separate
components and this, the
commercial development committee
will handle the commercial
program.
We updated the definition for
statute by statute for
enterprise development project
which includes the commercial
real estate development, uh, the
non, uh, owner occupied portion.
We renamed the fund to call it
the Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
You will see a similar
definition for housing, wanted
to make sure there was no
confusion and we didn't want to
use the word fund in each of
them, because then that surely
would. If you get to section uh
section 3, the applications, I
think, uh, so much of that was
discussed with John and Marquis.
There are no changes. There is
no changes in section 3. So what
this, uh, what this committee
approved in 2022 stands with no
changes.
Section 4 is the loan review,
uh, um, simply updates it to
call it enterprise assistance
loans, and the biggest change
there and only change there is
it now identifies the structure
of how they will flow through.
So they will first go, they'll
be reviewed, uh, applications
will be reviewed by the
commercial Development
Committee, those projects will
then get presented to the
opportunity Enterprise Board. If
you remember that their function
is on the project side.
Recommend projects to the
finance authority to handle the
financing component.
Uh, at that point, that board
will recommend those projects to
the finance authority, and
they'll run through the
committee process and eventually
to the NMFA board for final
approval.
Section 5.
Eliminates as Marquita mentioned
earlier and John mentioned it
eliminates that minimum term of
15 years and now gives us that
flexibility so we just have a
maximum term of 30 years allows
us to capture some of those
shorter duration loans that
might be coming before us. And
with that, the only other
changes are in the titles to the
section, uh, section 7 just to
identify that this is enterprise
assistance and not housing, and
uh a small change, conforming
change in Section 10 that the
rules can be, um, amended or
repealed.
At any time with this
committee's approval. So on the
enterprise assistance and the
commercial side, those are your
changes. They are, um, fairly
insignificant but do conform to
the statutory changes that came
with, uh, the past session and I
would stand for any questions.
OK, do we have any questions?
Any questions? But the only
thing I just and I just.
OK, so on section 5, there's
still no prepayment penalty that
remains there, correct? OK. All
right.
I want to make sure. Do a great
job, pay your loan off and then
punch you with it, you know, 15%
penalty. What a crazy thing to
do.
That's, let's, let's really, you
know, hit the reverse button.
Um, OK, so I will entertain him,
do we need to act on this,
right? Yes we do. OK, so I'll
entertain a motion to adopt and
Senator Rodriguez. Yes, I'm an
adoption, please Garrett, all
those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
Motion carries. Rules are
adopted.
Have another set for us?
they're coming
Oh, wait a minute.
While they're, while they're
being handed out, I I'll, uh,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I will explain
exactly the same thing. This now
takes us into the housing rules.
These rules, uh, in many
respects are nearly identical to
the rules you just approved,
with the exception of they
contain nothing to do with
commercial projects and only
deal with housing, so you'll see
some additional definitions that
relate to uh affordable housing
and workforce housing. And so
once I think those are passed
out, I can walk you through
those.
Hopefully, without too many
problems.
Right.
So again, uh, section one, very,
uh very small changes, uh, to
the purpose again, conforming
changes to effectively recite
the correct title of the
statute.
Section 2, you'll see a few
change uh and again, these are
not redlined since you've never
seen them before, that's would
have, I think, been confusing to
you all, but where you will see
changes are in section 2 are in
B definition of affordable
housing. Most of these
definitions were either pulled
in directly from the statute, or
they were pulled in from the
opportunity Enterprise Board's
rules that they adopted, those
are the rules that govern
on their end, they have to run
through.
That long process of running
through the NMA with the public
hearings, which we did, which we
did have and received those
comments, and that's where
those, some of these definitions
come from affordable housing
infrastructure project,
definition on sea, um,
Section K Housing Development
Assistance,
we added in. Now there's a,
there are two committees, as I
mentioned a moment ago, the
housing Development Committee
will be the internal standing
committee that will review
housing, the housing, uh,
components for the housing, uh,
for the housing loans.
Uh housing development partner
is a definition pulled from
statute in subsection N as is
the definition in O for the
housing development project,
which is affordable housing
infrastructure projects or
workforce development housing
projects.
Uh
In subsection R middle income
workers, that is a definition
that we pull directly from, uh,
section 2.931.7. That's from the
NMA rules that the, uh, I felt,
I felt I had to give a good
definition at some point, make
it sound like I was doing
something. Uh, and then the last
three definitions on their
workforce development housing,
housing workforce housing
project, and zoning reform,
zoning reform, the two were
statutory zoning reforms is
another, uh, administrative code
Opportunity Enterprise Board.
rule that is that we pulled
over.
Uh, section 3, very similar
process, nearly identical to the
rules you just adopted on
applications and eligibility,
uh, things that the application
has to have to be considered
complete. So there's, there's
not many changes, uh, if any,
uh, in section 3, that's just
the guide and what the
applicants need to do so uh
allows them to have a separate
place to look.
Section 4 outlines the
application review process, uh,
again from the committee level
to the opportunityity Enterprise
Board, and then over to the NMFA
that I outlined in the other,
uh, in the other set of rules
that process doesn't change
other than the com the
respective initial committee
that it essentially goes to
first.
Section 5.
Outlines the loan terms, a
couple things to point out here,
uh, the loans cannot exceed, as
Marquita pointed out earlier,
$15 million. Um, all legally
acceptable collateral. The loan
shall not exceed 40 years, which
is different from the 30-year
provision in the enterprise and
the commercial side.
Uh, we do have, uh, the deed
restrictions in subsection J,
uh, or, um.
Lost my place here. I'm
subsection I, the deed
restrictions, again, those will
be in place for the life, uh,
uh, for minimum of 10 years or
the life of the loan if those
are longer.
Uh, housing development loans
will also include limits on
developer fees. That's going to
be a limitation, uh, that we're
going to place and those will be
determined in the housing fund
loan policies that, uh, we just
discussed.
If you get to section 6, again.
Identical to the other set of
rules, closing disbursements of
funds, how those will be
determined, uh, you know, the
loans applicant will make a
certification, we'll get those
scheduled and then funds will be
dispersed on forms that the NMFA
provides.
Section 8 monitoring and
reporting, uh, those are, uh,
things that have business
performance reports. They'll
include things such as the
number of affordable housing
units and workforce development
housing units supported under
the assistance provisions,
occupancy data, job creation
metrics, and other
certifications. Uh, those
reports will begin December 1,
2024, and then each December 1st
thereafter.
Section 9 is the administrative
fees. I think Marquita mentioned
that earlier, that gives us the
flexibility. We don't anticipate
at least at this time to charge
any administrative fees should
that change. Uh, we do have that
flexibility and this permits
that.
And then section 10, uh, the
rules will be, uh, can only be
amended or repealed with this
committee's approval. Uh, I'm
sure Marquita or John might have
some things to add, but that,
that is the housing rules for
you to consider and, uh, we
stand for any questions on
those. Committee, and, uh,
Senator Rodriguez, thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thanks again,
um, Marquita, John and Dan. um,
good work on the, on the
explanation and also on the
policies and rules that you're
doing, but I, something just
came to my mind.
I'm happy that you are putting
in a provision. This was smart
and resourceful for the future
too, a provision that you have
in, I think it was number.
Let me see, Mr. Chairman, uh,
it's in Section 9, I think, but
anyway, it's the provision that
allows you to make changes in
the future if you need to.
And and the reason for that is a
good one because um we know that
when we have new programs and
especially something we're just
starting off with like this,
this is something big we're
doing here and there's a lot of
pieces to it, and it's
inevitable that eventually we
will find that something may
have to be changed, tweaked,
amended, whatever you want to
call it, uh, to get it improved
and you know, we have some
unintended consequences
sometimes by virtue of the,
that's how life is, right? We do
our best but sometimes.
We see that. So to see you put
that in there, I thought was
very good, Marquita and and Dan,
and I think that we should look
at doing this maybe for anything
else that you, you propose, um
because um this way you don't
have to be coming to the
legislature every time you, you
need a small change. I mean, I
can see the huge changes or
something like that that need to
have administrative or
legislative approval. But when
you have to tweak something
small just to continue to make
it work, you should not have to
come before the
Legislature and, and wait till
next legislative session, keep
everything on hold just because
the legislature has to approve
it. It doesn't make any sense,
so I think that doing this is
perfect. Thank you for your
foresight.
And that's all I have, Mr.
Chairman.
OK, thank you. Any other
comments, questions?
Um, Senator Griggs.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and just, just real quick on
section.
Section one of the enterprise
loan.
Uh, deals down in where you,
you've created the commercial
development committee.
And you, you call it, you mean
it's a standing committee.
I mean, is there, is there some
term of art for a standing
committee versus a committee and
then, I mean, right below it you
have the credit committee which
is a committee of the staff. So
you differentiate between those
two, but is there a reason for
it to be a
standing committee or just a
committee.
Mr. Chairman, I'll take the stab
at that and turn it to Dan to
actually correct me. Um, so the
bylaws for the opportunity
Enterprise Board called for 2
for 3 actual standing
committees. So they are regular
committees of that board. They
can also have task forces and
temporary committees. So the
standing committee just is one
that's, uh, written into the
bylaws. Um, the finance
authority operates with a credit
committee, which is a staff
committee that's not in any
bylaws, that's part of our
Internal policies and procedures
and isn't part of our, um, any,
uh, bylaw or anything else, Dan?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, that's
exactly correct. So these are,
these are terms of art that come
with the bylaws. So then the
opportunityity Enterprise Board
bylaws, they do call them
standing committees. And as
Marquita alluded to the, the
internal Credit Committee with
staff. That is not a standing
committee. However, we do the
NMFA does have 5 standing
committees. We use the same term
of art across the board because
of the way the bylaws are set
Up, so we have our finance and
disclosure committee, our
economic development committee,
because those are made up of
members of the board, and that's
where you get into, uh, to, to
the kind of the term of art that
you, that we just alluded to
here and you guys, thanks for
that. It's the, it's really kind
of the standing committee part
and not.
As I was chasing around, not
really finding another standing
committee you know work said
whether you needed the, the word
standing as much as anything
else, but then the and then the
second one is a is a committee
of the, of the.
Uh, what do you call it of the
staff, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
that's exactly correct. It's
really a differentiation between
what is a board composed
committee as opposed to a staff
committee. Yes. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK, thank you very much. Um,
just, uh
Two quick follow-ups then from
myself on, um.
Not sure if these are fallen
here exactly, but on page 5,
right in the middle on the
housing development, um.
Side of this the housing
development fund, the, um, the
New Mexico developer or builder,
do they get extra points in the
process?
In the uh approval or the
selection process, Mr. Chairman,
the policies on both the
commercial and housing side give
preference for New Mexico
developers, um, specifically
developers as opposed to
contractors. That's one of the
clarifications that we made in
the policies, and that really is
because the developers are going
to earn profits and redevelop
and and reinvest those profits
in New Mexico and that was
really the differentiation for
the, for the, um, uh,
You know, for the board and in
the way in which the board made
that determination.
OK, and then, um, on page 5 item
B there under, I'm sorry, I
guess it would be.
Section 3B.
How do you walk me through that
scenario of a new business or a
new, um, development project and
how's that going to work for
some.
Enterprising folk out there, Mr.
Chairman, so a lot of these
commercial development projects
and housing development
projects, um, the, the, uh,
developer will create a special
purpose entity, um, for each
project. And so when they do
that, um, like, as we mentioned
earlier, we had provided
financing for, um, an applicant
called 701 Central. That was a
special LLC that was set up for
that specific project, and that
is pretty common in the
development world.
They'll create a special purpose
entity for the development at
hand and have it through common
ownership. Um, so when we have a
special purpose entity as we
expect we'll have quite a bit in
these funds, the obligor will be
that special purpose entity, but
we want to see the financials
and the experience from the
affiliated.
Partner or affiliated, um,
owner. So that's what we're
looking for there that
differentiation is really the
difference between the applicant
slash um obligo, those the the
entity required to repay the
loan versus the really kind of
the sponsor or the um the
experience behind it, which
would be a developer who might
have
5 or 6 of these special purpose
entities underneath their
corporation.
OK, great. I was, I was really
hoping you'd say all that, so
that does make total sense then
uh what about are you familiar
with a group in Albuquerque?
Well, they're really all over
New Mexico now called Yes
Housing.
I'm not familiar, Mr. Brooks,
uh, Mr. Chairman, no,
no, they're, they're, they're a
not for profit developer, you
know, they do large projects.
They did the uh Imperial
building downtown Albuquerque.
They did the um, they're doing
another project on um.
Uh, Representative De la Cruz,
where is that one, the one that,
oh, there's one at Coors and
Central, um, what's that one
called that real, uh, the one
that Chris and his team did.
You remember it? Yeah, so yes,
housing being a not for profit
developer, are they eligible is
really where I'm going for
something,
Mr. Chairman they are they're
eligible under this program and
now under the PPRa if they get
legislative authorization,
they're allowed to apply to the
PPRF. Got it. OK. Beautiful. All
right, good deal. All right, so
we have some rules in front of
us. Uh, I'll entertain a motion
to adopt.
Um
We have a motion from
Representative Thompson to adopt
the rules governing housing
development assistance, and we
have a second by Vice Chair
Garret. All those in favor say
aye? All those opposed say no.
Rules are adopted.
OK.
Thank you, thank you, Marquita.
John and
Dan, OK. All right, so I think
we're good on the agenda for
today, everyone. We do have, I
want to remind everybody we have
a dinner at 5:15 if you're going
to hang around, it seems like
it's gonna be a really good
time. I hear there's going to be
all sorts of entertainment, all
sorts of things, you know, the
flying Wallendas are performing
there from what I was told, um,
it'd be interesting to see. And
then we'll start back up again
at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.
With that, the committee will
stand in recess.
