you started
I
OK, good morning everybody. The
committee will, the committee
will come to order. Uh, we're
going to start here at 9 o'clock
on item number 69 o'clock, 9:12.
Uh, update on the implementation
of House Bill 211, 2024 Water
Trust board technical assistance
program in 2024 cost overrun
funding. Uh, Marquita Russell,
chief executive officer of New
Mexico Finance Authority, Danny
Quintana, project oversight
Manager New Mexico Finance
Authority. Take it away. Thank
you. Good morning, um, members
of the board, Mr. Chairman.
Um, so I'll run through, uh, the
water project fund, you will see
actually the project list at the
meeting in November. Um, we can
give you an update on where we
are in applications, but the
actual projects at the Water
Trust board recommends to the
legislature gets vetted through
this committee, and you will see
that at the November meeting, at
that final meeting. In the
meantime, I wanted to give you
an update on where we were.
There were a lot of changes made
during the last session, and
there was more money added and
we wanted to give you a sense of
where we stood on that. Um, many
of you know the Waters.
is a 16-member board up until
very recently, we really had
just one, function, which was to
recommend to vet projects and
recommend them to the
legislature and to the authority
for funding from the Water
Project fund. The Water Project
fund sits at the NMFA and NMFA
is the administrator of that
fund and we provide staff
support, of course, to the
board. Um, there's also the
Water trust fund this last year
you added $50 million and that's
the second time it's received an
appropriation in the last two
years.
Um, so that is a growing trust
fund and will eventually start
to really, uh, spin off some
money that can be used over
time. Um, but, uh, 3 years ago,
you added 1 additional, um, uh
duty to the water trusts board,
which was to vet projects that
will use the, um, Southwest New
Mexico funding the New Mexico
unit fund, um, that had been
switched from another entity
over to the water trusts board,
uh, 3 years ago.
We are working with the
Interstate stream commission to
get that in place, at least a
pilot program later this, uh,
well, actually in a month. Um,
and then lastly, House Bill 211
did a couple of things. House
Bill 211 was a, a cleanup bill.
It did a lot of technical
changes, updated the, uh, law to
our existing processes and
things like that. It also added
wastewater as an eligible unit
and then allowed for um the
water trust board to, uh, for
the water.
Project fund to use portions of
that for technical assistance.
Um, on, on page 3, you'll see on
the left-hand side, um, our
board members. I would note that
up until very recently, Mike
Hammon, who was the state
engineer, has been our, uh,
chair. He retired in June of 24
and so the board has set a
nominating committee and will be
voting, uh, for another chair in
early October, um, and then the
rest of the members are, um,
really,
Many of them are cabinet
secretaries. Um, there are 4 or
5 members that serve, uh, to as
representatives of various water
users throughout the state. Um,
so I'll leave that not much has
changed on that side. I'll leave
it on the left side.
Um, just take you to page 4 and
remind you of how the Water
Trust board selects projects.
Um, there is, uh, uh, uh, of the
water now 6 types of water
projects. Wastewater is now
considered a water project
under, uh, the Water trust board
laws. Um, but each of those six
water projects will have their
own set of criteria and their
own set of requirements for what
we need to, to look at a
complete application. Um, the
law has 3 requirements that
Uh,
give priority to projects that
have been identified as being
urgent to address public health
and safety issues. That's a new
element prior to House Bill 211,
that dealt with, um, that was
urgent to meet the needs of a
regional water district as part
of a regional water plan
approved by the ISC. That got
stripped out because that's not
actually how those regional
water plans work. They don't
list projects. So it was, um,
kind of a, it was a
well-intended effort, but it
didn't really have the effect it
should have.
So House Bill 211 substituted
that first one with address
public health and safety issues.
Um, the second is matching
contributions from federal and
local sources, and third is the
obtain all requisite state and
federal permits and
authorizations necessary to, uh,
issue the project. So they need
to be something that's going to
really help the community. They
need to have matching funds and
they need to be virtually shovel
ready. In addition, our criteria
at the Water Trust board, um,
uh, look at
Other things, curing health and
safety issues again, that's part
of, we have a revamped all the
water, uh, trust board policies
yet to address the law changes,
so we will have public health
and safety being a priority in
two different areas, um, to
address existing or imminent
urgency, uh, emergency
conditions, um, and that have
been properly planned. So we are
looking for planning documents
with each of these. There's a
six-agency team that reviews
those and makes its
recommendations to the water
trusts board.
Um, over the past couple of
years, we've done more policy
changes to make this program
more accessible to smaller
communities in particular.
One of the things that we did
was to allow for technical
memoranda to be used in place of
a preliminary engineering report
for many of the straightforward
projects. So if you have a water
replacement line or if you are
upgrading your water tank,
something like that, that's a
really straightforward project
and a full-blown preliminary
engineering report is way over.
Bringing that kind of project.
Um, but things like a water
treatment facility, um, that's
something that requires more
thought. It needs, there's more
technical elements to it, so
that still is required, uh, for
those kinds of projects. But the
straightforward projects, a
technical memoranda, uh, which
is far cheaper and much slimmer,
um, is, is, uh, sufficient for
our purposes.
2 years ago we put in place the
um, uh, policy that allows for
design only to be used, so the
first level of projects that
received that was last year. Um,
$500,000 grant only, um, no
match, uh, for design projects
and by design we mean the actual
technical work, the sort of
plans and specs that are
required to, um, to get a bit,
uh, project out and ready to
bid. Um, if the applicant serves
500 connections, they can
qualify for.
That design only. Um, and it
doesn't take the place of a
technical document. So they
still have to have that
technical document as part of
the plan, as part of their
application. We want to know
that they really looked into it
and before they proceed to, uh,
plans and specs, we, um, provide
for, excuse me, we provide, uh,
that they can get those grants.
Um, 12 systems received a 100%
grant and that design only phase
last year. So it had some
significant impact and we had a
lot of communities very
grateful that we made that
change.
The other thing that we did was
to remove the match and
circumstances. So the water
trust board requires that
there's a local match as part of
the project that local match is
determined based on the size of
the application, the median
household income of the
community, um, and the kind of
project they're looking to
undertake, uh, for small
systems, this match became
harder and harder because of
course, we fund full phases of
projects. You've got a big $200
million project that's going to
take you 5 years.
To, uh, implement, you're not
going to get a award from the
Water Trust board for $200
million if it can be broken up
into smaller, more bite-sized
chunks because we want to see
that the first part's done
before you start heading on to
the 2nd phase or the 3rd phase.
Um, and in the Water Trust
board, that meant you needed a
water, you needed a match each
time you came to the water
trusts board. And so that, um,
had become much more difficult
for the smaller communities.
They might be able to make the
first one, but it became harder
and harder to make. So
So, um, as long as the system
has implemented their, um, asset
management plan, which addresses
their current and future
maintenance and repair of the
system, and they serve either
250 connections.
Um, and have had a previously
secured water trust board
project or their consolidating
their systems, um, or they're
upgrading to expand and include
others. Uh, you can get that
waiver match. So that's, there's
3 conditions for that. Um,
You can either serve 250 and
have already secured it, you can
be consolidating with another
system or you can be expanding
your system area and take in
other unserved clients. So you
can reduce your match that way.
There's also a way to reduce the
lung component on the top of
page 6. and that is, again, you
have to have implemented your
water asset management plan,
which is a condition of our
water trust board funding and
either serve 5 fewer than 500
connections, which is what we
typically consider a small
system, um, or it's a project to
consolidate two or more systems.
So you'll see that in a couple
of instances where either
prioritizing very small systems,
500 or fewer, uh,
People served or we're trying to
really incentivize the
consolidation and
regionalization of projects.
Those are the two things that
those policy changes, um,
attacked. So far we've really
only seen them for small
systems, um, but with the
passage of last year's Senate
Bill One, which was that
regional resiliency, um, Bill,
we expect to see more of those
coming on board.
Additional policy changes will
be needed as a result of House
Bill 211. We have no criteria
yet for wastewater projects.
We're going to start that, uh,
water, the rulemaking process,
uh, in October.
We need to go through our
policies and take out that
outdated language that came as a
result of, um, some of the
pieces in legislation now that
those have been cleaned up and
clarified, we can get those
taken out, um, as I mentioned
earlier, one of the new pieces
of, um,
Uh, duties, one of the new
duties you gave to the Water
Trust board about 3 years ago
was to work with the Interstate
Stream Commission to vet
projects that would use that New
Mexico unit fund down in that
southwest part of the state. Um,
we need to put in place an
application process for that.
The ISC has approved some
preliminary guidelines. They're
in listening sessions. As a
matter of fact, today and
tomorrow, um, and we expect to
open a pilot of just planning
only in September for those
projects.
And then the last thing we had
to do was to implement some sort
of technical assistance plan or
program to use that last bit of
money that uh that that last,
uh, new responsibility you gave
the finance authority to be able
to use the water project fund
for technical assistance, Water
trust board obviously is our
partner in that. So while the
finance authority actually
spends the money, we do so with
the full, um, support and input
of the Water Trust board. And
that's mostly what we wanted to
talk to you about today. There
are a couple of other
Things we'll update you on
later, but we wanted to talk.
I'll start on page 7, about that
technical assistance program. So
the actual addition to to our
water project finance Act was
that money in the fund may be
used by the authority to, among
other things, hire contractors
to provide financial and
administrative capacity and
direct technical assistance on
water projects. That's a broad
mandate. Um, it doesn't say how
much we could use, doesn't do,
doesn't really say what we have
to do. So,
The Water Trust board Policy
Committee and Finance Authority
staff headed by my colleague
here, Donnie Quintana, who
joined us in early April. Um,
Uh, we have been working on a
plan that we are, uh, that the
Water trust board approved the
concept of last week and finance
authority is going to go out and
do some RFPs, um, but there's
basically two elements.
One is individual system
planning. What we know from the
Water Trust board is you need,
uh, some sort of planning
document whether it's a PER, a
technical memoranda, whatever it
is. And for very small systems,
in particular, just getting that
document done is as hard as
getting the project constructed.
It takes a lot of, you have to
be able to procure properly, uh,
select engineers, stay on top of
them. There's a lot of work with
engineers, um, the way that most
of these get funded is through
the finance authorities, local
planning fund which we talked
about last meeting. At that
particular fund, uh, finances or
provides the funding after the
project's completed. We don't
want to be spending money on
engineers or or work that never
fully gets completed or frankly,
isn't acceptable. Um, so we wait
for the project to get
completed. We give them under
the local government planning
fund a year to get the project
completed, which should be
plenty of time to procure and
select an engineer, finish it
and get it reviewed.
It's taking 2 to 3 years. These
small systems are having a very
difficult time finding
engineers. Engineers are with
all the federal dollars and
capital outlay out there. It's
very difficult to get an
engineer. The smaller the system
you are, the more remote you
are, the harder it is to get
done. And then we always have
that issue with very small
systems, primarily being led by
volunteer boards. It takes a lot
of continuity to pull a project
to pull a procurement through.
Um, and it's not as exciting as
actually watching the
Groundbreak. Um, so it's very
difficult to get that momentum
and keep that momentum for those
projects. Um, and so the finance
authority spends a lot of money
on our local government planning
fund, not just in the amount we
grant out, but in actually
overseeing those projects,
hiring a contractor to review
the document to make sure it's
actually gonna work for the
community. If they get a
document done and submit it to
USDA or to the Water Trust
board, and it's not worthwhile,
we all will have wasted our time
and money. So we have currently
somebody reviewing those.
Our plan here, um, what we have
proposed is that the finance
authority hire a number of
engineers on larger contracts
that we slim down the size of
the preliminary engineering
report. Right now it's targeted
to the USDA standard, which is
really the gold-plated standard
that very few of these projects
truly need.
Slim them down so they're right
sized and then have the uh
community applied to the water
trusts board.
For the planning document to be
completed. So we will work with
the community. They will take
their time, uh, that we will
have saved them in procuring to
make sure that they've got all
of their board capacity training
done and other things, so
they'll spend their time doing
things that will serve them
better in the long run. We'll
take care of that plan. We'll
work with their board through
our engineer, but then the
finance authority won't have to
oversee it, get another
contractor to oversee the
document. We won't have to, um,
really, uh, baby.
clients all the way through the
process. Um,
It will be far less work for the
finance authority, our
communities will get a document
much faster, and we'll know
it'll be of the kind of quality
necessary to secure funding for
the federal drinking water
program, the Federal Clean Water
program that the Environment
Department runs, the Water Trust
board, the colonists, all of
those. It may not serve for
USDA, um, and that's something
that we just try to address,
but, um,
Frankly, USDA right now is a
very hard piece of money to get
and once you get it, it's
Frankly, quite difficult, uh, to
get any other kind of funding
after that.
So that's the first element. I
want to stop there just to make
sure there are no questions or
let my colleague, um, uh, add
anything more on that first
element.
Great job,
very, very, very well detailed,
but I think the bottom line is
the, the plan is basically
rather than give the loans and
grants to the actual water
service providers, we in house
will manage those on their
behalf because we recognize the
lack of capacity at that level.
Why burden them with the
procurement process and all of
those compliance regulatory.
oddity. So part of the plan, um,
through the guidance and
direction from Ms. Russell was
basically to develop that team
that has accountants and
lawyers, uh, and so forth and,
and that's more on the
regionalization, but uh even
those smaller ones, making sure
that they're in compliance with
the state audit Act is, is part
of it, so, but I, I, I do wanna
say, uh, before I turn it back
over to Ms. Russell, uh, I'd be
remiss if I didn't think this
body for all the work you guys
have done definitely during my
day
as director with DFA, uh, on
water issues. So I really
applaud the leadership and all
the work that you have done to
ensure that all the Mexicans
have access to safe potable
drinking water, most precious
commodity, so thank you.
So Mr. Chairman, again, right
now we do have clients that
through the water trust board
apply for funding for a
preliminary engineering report,
and I'll remind you as I go
through in a couple of minutes
that that process starts in
August.
Go through a vetting process. It
goes through legislative
authorization process. It goes
through a second vetting
process, and then it comes for
before two separate boards
before it gets its award and
then it has to close on it. So
it can be 15 months if they
apply to the Water Trust board
for a preliminary engineering
report. It can be 15 months
before they can actually start
the procurement for their
project.
So this, we hope to get them
done in 3 to 4 months. They will
apply. We still have to figure
out how many
Uh, how we will prioritize those
projects because there is some
scarcity as it as it comes to,
um, actual engineers. So, um,
Donnie's starting a process with
our internal staff to get that
procurement together. We'll know
more after we know how many
engineers are interested in
providing the service, we'll
know how much we can offer and
what kinds of filters we have to
put in place to prioritize that
effort. But our goal is to have
engineers in each of those
regions, um, because we expect
that we'll have actually several
communities come together for
one.
project to be planned, um, and
right now for the Water Trust
board or others, they all have
to come individually and do
their pieces. So if you've got 3
systems trying to do some sort
of regional peace that's going
to cost you more than the
$50,000 that's allowed by one
entity. So right now, what
happens is you have 2 or 3
different entities coming
together, each getting their own
part so that they can get
$100,000 or $2,000,000 plan
done. And that's just not
efficient. That means we're,
we're doing 3 different
Approvals, 3 different closing
documents, 3 different reviews.
It's a lot of work. So we think
this is going to be the simpler
way to do that. So we're excited
about that effort and that's the
first part of the technical
assistance plan.
The second is, uh, this
regionalization effort you see
lots of different entities
addressing regionalization. It
was one of the things that, um,
the Mike Hammon had led this,
uh, technical, uh, water, um,
task force, and one of the
things
That came out of that is that
there's a lack of capacity.
There are too many systems.
There are not enough water
operators and generally
speaking, most of the things
that we saw could be helped by
more regionalization, systems
that have more than 500 people
that aren't considered small
systems have a much greater
likelihood of being able to be
self-sustaining, that they can
get a rate base big enough to
pay for, uh, professional,
either, uh, manager or some sort
of, uh, bookkeeper that they
don't have to do all of the
work.
Themselves as volunteers. So you
need some size in that rate base
in order to hire that staff.
That also would require fewer,
um, system operators right now
that's a very difficult thing to
find. Um, so regionalization has
been the focus and on the tip of
everyone's, um, mind and, and
tongue for a while and we're no
different. We're jumping in with
a with a recommendation to use
some of that water trust board
money, that water project fund
to help with regionalization.
Uh, when we got this
Bill and it had that provision
in it. We went and talked to the
lower Rio Grande Authority down
in Donana County. They are often
looked at as one of the models.
They started out as 5 or 6
entities around a table at an
elementary school, and, uh, then
Governor Richardson had money
that he could put to it. He had
some sort of discretionary fund
and what they did was hire an
attorney to actually help with
the regionalization effort to
blend all of these systems
together to figure out how water
rights were going to work.
Mind you, they did not have
Senate Bill 1 at the time, so
they had to have a single piece
of legislation to allow them to
become an authority. It's
standalone legislation. It took
a while, um, but even with
Senate Bill one, you still have
efforts of trying to combine
everyone's loans that are
outstanding, uh, you have to
figure out how to, you know,
combine all of those individual
bookkeeping systems and
rate-based systems into one
books. So we're recommending
that we use that money to hire a
team, uh, that would include
attorneys.
Accountants, uh, community
facilitators, um, project
managers to get a
regionalization done. So ready
and willing applicants, and
there will be benchmarks for how
willing they are,
um, and how ready they are can
apply and we can then send out
this technical team to help
facilitate a regionalization and
we are really doing this as a
pilot by the time we get our,
all of our, um, contractors in
place, it'll frankly be the
second part of the year or just,
you know, by, by
The time they're actually able
to work, so we'll see how
effective it is and how much
more money we need to put to it.
Uh, but the Water Trust board
approved these two elements.
We'll leave it in Donny
Quintana's fine hands to find
the right contractors and put
together, you know, a good
process for prioritizing some of
these applicants as they come in
because there will be scarcity
in terms of resources. Um, and
the Water Trust board authorized
us to set aside $3.5 million of
this 2024 funding to pay for
that up to that amount of money.
If we don't use it, it goes
over.
Cost overruns because we expect
we'll have those, um, but if we
do need it, then we won't be
holding back clients that could
get access to that money, get a
project plan in place faster and
start accessing there and start
addressing their real, their
real community needs sooner.
Last thing I'll just add to
that, Mr. Chairman, committee
members is, uh, definitely a
holistic approach. We are
partnering with the Environment
Department, RCAC, nonprofit
Thornberg, uh, anybody that's
involved in regionalization or
provide services for technical
assistance. We met last Friday
as a preliminary meeting and
we're all going down the same
direction so that we maximize
resources and more importantly,
we don't duplicate services, but
we really have an opportunity to
partner and learn from one
another.
Um,
Each piece, if you will. Mr.
Chairman of startling statistic
was given to the Water Trust
board last week, which is fewer
than 5% of the water systems
serve 75% of the population.
That's not as scary as 95% of
the of the water systems out
there serve only 25% of New
Mexico's population.
That's a lot of oversight by
your, uh, state partners, that's
a lot of oversight by mostly
volunteer systems because you
know there's only 106
municipalities. There's only so
many of those that are
municipally run. So we're
talking about a significant
number of systems that that are
that are vulnerable. They have
to be able to have
Money to continue to keep their
system, um, operating properly.
Uh, they need to be able to stay
in compliance with a lot of laws
and a lot of regulations, and
most of these volunteer boards,
you know, are having very aging
populations at their volunteer
board level. So we're hopeful
that, that, you know, long term,
all of these regionalization
efforts will start to help and
chip away at some of the
problems that we're seeing. Um,
and I think we know that
regionalization won't work for
everyone. We're not suggesting
it does, which is why we have
the two-pronged.
Approach which individual
planning as well as
regionalization, and I want to
just stop for questions if
there's anything on that.
We'll just OK, we'll keep going.
Construction cost overruns, the
water trust board received, um,
$18 million as part of Senate
Bill 275 to address cost
overruns from fiscal year awards
from 23 and prior.
So we had a couple of, um,
outstanding years, 2021 in
particular still had several
awards, uh, that needed to be
made. Um, finance authority had
put some money aside or the
Water Trust board and the
Finance Authority put some money
aside to address those. So we
were able to address 4 of those
cost overruns, um, but we did
need Senate Bill 275 to address
that last one, and there are
more coming.
Um, we have in the from the 2021
cycle, 11 projects, um, that are
still under construction and
We know 4 of them had a problem
getting going, but we do believe
that there may be 1 or 2 more.
Um, Water trust board's 2022
cycle, um, only 6 of the 15
active are in construction, so
that means we have another 9
that are likely in some phase of
bidding.
Um, and the 2023, which is, uh,
relatively new given that it
takes a while to close on some
of these. They have 31 active
projects, only two of them are
in construction, so we
anticipate that we're going to
see a significant need for that
$18 million that was provided.
We're just now starting to use
it, um, but it is going to be
something that we feel we'll
need, um.
Uh, and then lastly on page 9,
the
Yeah, page 9, we have the 2024
awards. Um, the
Uh, the Water Trust board had
167.5 million available for
those awards. Um, 65 projects
for submitted by 55 applicants,
um, were authorized under House
Bill 148. That was basically all
eligible and qualified
applicants, only one did not
submitted it, um, did not
receive a waiver and able to
move forward. So, uh, we had 66
applications and 65, um, were
authorized. Um.
A lot of the communities on
those bills had difficulty
meeting the readiness. There was
some regulatory issues like they
hadn't met their they still had
to file some reports for, uh,
their drinking water bureau
regulations, um, and some of
those couldn't be done by April.
They might have been done by
July, but it's there's a timing
on some of those um actual
reports and then others, many of
them had difficulty meeting the,
uh, executive order.
2012 executive 13 executive
order, um, and so the lack of
audits made it they couldn't
proceed. So the finance, the
water trust board did, uh, its
awards in two separate sections.
We did that last year as well
for the same reason. 45 projects
were awarded in April, um, and
that's for 136.6 million and
then last week we made the 2nd
round of awards for 10 projects
totaling $30 million. Um, we did
have to downsize several of
Those applications again we had
people asking for $200 million
which would have been a
multi-year project and our
target is 18 to 24 months, um,
to get those projects completed,
um, and so several of them were
downsized, um, and we
We set aside only $790,000 for
cost overruns, which will be
nothing relative to the $167
million target. Um,
of the 55 projects that were
awarded, uh.
Um,
Well, only one was not awarded
and it was very, we didn't have
enough money. It was a very low
ranked project. So rather than
cut into the technical
assistance dollars given where
it was ranked and how low it was
ranked, uh, the Water trust
board just moved forward with
the recommendations at hand. So
55 of the 65 applicants receive
funding. Several of them
couldn't move forward because
they still didn't meet the
executive order, and so that's,
I think that's a win. I would
note that with next year's
award, which I'm about to talk.
Be on page 10, uh, we expect to
hit the $1 billion dollar mark
with the water project fund, so
it will have been in since 2001
we have done $1 billion of
funding.
I think in the last 2 years we
will have done more than we did
in the 1st 10 years in the Water
Project fund. There's just been
such large dollar amounts in the
last couple of years. Um, it
hasn't been that difficult to
actually get to the, the billion
dollar mark. Um, so, uh, just a
preview of what's coming, your
2025 application cycle, um, we
put out for notices of intent
and we get those notices of
intent so that we have some
sense of how much work is
coming.
How much uh the water trust
board, how much time we need to
set aside for project
presentations, um, we need to
get them access to the online
application system. They can't
just go on. They do have to be
vetted before they go in. Uh,
but we received 90 notices of
intent for 30,000 $330 million.
We expect to have 123
Massarmentos available. So yeah,
there's a lot there, um, 66
Those are for what we call water
storage conveyance. Those are
your basic pipe projects, um,
uh, water tank projects, and
that represents the lion's share
of $235 million. 11 are flood
prevention projects. That's
about 28.4 and typically those
are sort of spillway water
products, you know, road kinds
of projects. Um, we have 7 water
conservation recycling treatment
and reuse projects for 62 and
then 6 watersheds for 3.6.
You'll note that we don't have
Wastewater yet. Um, that is
because the, it takes a long
time to get those rules in
place. And so we'll be getting,
um, because we, we still have to
go through the legislation,
legislative authorization
process. They won't be in a
place to uh actually apply for
the money until next August and
get their first funding award in
2026. So we've delayed the rules
only because we had the time to
delay them. Um, uh, we had to,
you know, make some decisions
about how quickly to go on that
and since the August application
was coming to
Quickly, we couldn't do that for
this year. Um, the application
opens this week, August 15th to
September 16th we had a training
that will be held tomorrow, um,
August 14th, if you are
listening and you don't know
about that training and what to
apply, please get on our website
and find out uh about that
webinar. Um, again, all of those
applications have to have a
planning document. We will have
2 days in October 2nd and 3rd
where each of the applicants.
will be invited to make their
presentation directly to the
board, allow the board to ask
questions. We feel like that
gives the um project a three
dimension that sometimes just a
pure paper application won't do.
Um, and at that point there will
be entities that may not have
spent all their money and so
they'll ask for a waiver from
our policy that says a
preliminary target spending
target has to be hit before
you're able to apply. We like to
keep their feet to the fire and
we typically have those,
particularly the
Last couple of years because
it's been so difficult post
COVID to get a lot of those
projects out to bid.
Um, and then after they've, uh,
gone through a vetting process
in at the end of October, the
Water trust board will make take
formal action to recommend a
list to you which you'll then
review in November. So that's
what's coming and um is there
anything else you want to add?
No, I think with that, Mr.
Chairman, we're ready to answer
questions.
Wow, uh, Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks Marquita for the
presentation. Donny, it's good
to see you again. Good to see
you know it really is good to
see you. It's nice to have
somebody you can actually talk
to and and got you the right
ways. I have a question mark on
our Dany on P7. You said the
NMFA will hire engineers, uh,
attorneys, accountants, project
managers, and so forth.
OK, on, on some of these small
water authorities, they're out
of compliance or audits, how,
where do they fit in on this
picture because I know it's
always been an issue, Marquita,
uh, we always come back to the
same thing. They're not, uh,
their audits are wrong, we can't
help them. So where do we, how
does that fit in? Mr. Chairman,
I'm really glad you asked that
question because the finance
authority is spending the money
and not the entity. We're not
making a grant or a loan using
state dollars.
For that entity. We're in fact
using the money at the Water
Trust board at the finance
authority side that executive
order won't get in their way. So
we can, they can work on that at
the same time we're working on
their documents or at the same
time we're doing part of the
regionalization effort, but that
will not stop a project from
moving forward with the
technical assistance program.
Thank you, Martaman, uh, cause
you know, basically what I'm
talking about that uh in my
distri
And they've been struggling for
years and years, and they're not
advancing any they're kind of
still in the same spot. I'm glad
for that, another question, Mr.
Chairman, uh, on P 10, uh,
prevention for 28 million.
How are the floods in in uh Las
Vegas, and Riodoso.
Where are they at on this or are
they getting any funding from
this at all?
Mr. Chairman, I cannot speak to
this year's application
requests. Um, I don't believe
that we see very many flood
mitigation or a kind of
remediation projects through the
Water Trust board. Typically
that money has to come in
sooner. They won't have time to
have planned it, um, and what
they're looking to do, we've
done a couple of them over the
years, but typically they get
the money either directly from
FEMA or there are other ways to
get the money with with.
Less difficult processes in
place.
Uh, thank you, uh, Marquita and
Danny. I don't have any further
questions, but back to Mr.
Quintana, nice to see you back
because you know you're a,
you're a big asset to the, to
the state, I think.
And uh with that being said,
thanks for being here. Thank
you, Mr. Sherman. Thank you,
Representative, and I want to
let Representative De la Cruz
and Senator Griggs know that I'm
trying to get our vice chair on
the road by 10. She has an in
district meeting that she has to
be at, um, so I'm going to go to
her first vice chair, Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
This is really exciting. This is
one of those sexy things that I
never knew about before I was a
legislator. I actually have one
mutual domestic in my district,
um, here, here's my first
question.
So finding operators and the
volunteer boards is huge, so I
toured the Hernandez water
system in Rio Riba. We drove up
a mountain. There's a 1000 tank,
uh, a lovely woman who's going
to age out of her job.
Um, and so is there any kind of
apprenticeship program where we
can get some of the younger
people and younger to me now is
like 15 to 60.
Where we can get people involved
and trained, is there any
apprentice system apprenticeship
program in the state, if I may,
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, this morning,
fortunate enough on the drive up
here. I heard on KUNM that EPA
has just awarded 10 amount of
$1000 to states for such
programs for operators, and it's
my understanding that UNM was
successful in ascertaining
60,000,000 to train operators,
so that's something we just
can look into, but that's
basically, you know, uh, what I
heard this morning on the radio.
And Mr. Chairman, that was one
of the recommendations that came
out of that Mike Hammond, I'll
just call it the Mike Hammon
Task Force, um, that group one
made a recommendation for more
apprenticeship programs, and I
know that there are efforts
underway. I cannot tell you how
many of those efforts have been
successful yet, but it's on the
radar of a lot of agencies, um,
and technical assistance
providers in particular rural
water mentioned that immediately
as one of the big
Problems they, they face. Thank
you,
Senator Pailmi sponsor to Grow
Your Own Teacher. I feel like we
have to have a grow your own
water engineer
and, and so there's a pathway
from apprenticeship,
scholarships, you know, we have
the opportunity scholarship, we
have all these things, but it's
one of those areas that people
don't always, it doesn't occur
to them. So thank you for that.
Um, and then, as you know,
everything in government is
interrelated, so I was meeting
with uh
Representative Laura Cadena and
um because we're trying to work
on the capital outlay process
and one of the ideas was to move
up the date so legislators have
time, not the day before your
report is due, but you know, at
least a month before, and she
said, well, on these water
systems, if you move up the
date, then the water systems
can't go through the hoops to
get capital outlay. So it
seemed, I mean to me this is
brilliant.
um, to have these people in
place cause she, she remarked,
to a little water systems, can't
get the technical expertise to
get everything in place, so
would that address that then? I
mean, it has the effect a
positive consequence of helping
people through the Capitol
outlay hoops.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair,
Vice Chair, there, there is no
requirement obviously for
planning documents or
application documents for
capital outlay, you know, just
across the board. Um, but we do
think that if we were to provide
more slimmed down reports, um,
that it would be very helpful
for the capital outlay process.
Again, the standard that the
state adopted 20 years ago was
USDA's document, and it is twice
the size that it needs to be for
most of these projects, and you
spend 60.
$1000 when 15 or 200 will do.
And so we do think that this
would help that. It is one of
the reasons we're getting away
from that standard USDA
document.
Thank you. Um,
OK, and then, uh, Mr. Chair, my
final thing is, so in this, as
you do these teams, what I'm
seeing is like kind of a mobile
mobile task force going around
is that kind of part one vision
of this.
Like with regionally based
mobile teams.
We hope, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, that we will
have, um, enough respondents to
our RFP that we'll be able to
have them in the, you know, in
the quadrants so that they
understand, you know, some of
the, um, potentially hydrology
or other issues that might get
in the way, you know, if we got
4 or 5 different teams of them
eventually, we think that would
be really helpful so that
they're not actually mobile but
that they can, you know, they
don't have to travel quite as
far to work with the community,
particularly community
facilitator.
And project managers. Um, I
think your attorney can probably
do almost everything from a
phone these days. Um, but it's
project managers, community
facilitators, people that need
to be out there answering and
helping communities get through
those issues. It's really
important they be local. Can I
add one thing, Mr. Chairman,
this is Vice Chair, I think one
of the key elements also for
success and Merquita was
addressing it this morning as we
were having a conversation is
being able to identify that
local coordinator.
That's one of the key elements
to success is finding somebody
from that community that can
participate on the team that can
represent that, uh, small mutual
domestic because, you know,
that's their community, so I
think that's going to be part of
the equation.
Thank you very much and, and Mr.
Chair, I just hope if if you can
keep your ear to the ground on
the EPA and the UNM and the
apprenticeship pipelines that
would be great to hear about in
the future. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation,
Margita.
I'm I'm curious and, and I don't
know if you're aware, has a MACA
or the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy historically or
currently requested
participation in your programs.
Mr.
Chairman, I know that the Middle
Rio Grande received, I think 6
or $7 million last year from the
last award for that project, uh.
For the under the the culvert, I
guess, that project. So I know
that the middle Rio Grande's
been successful at least twice,
and a MaAFCA, I believe at least
once. I know South Sandoval
County probably had more
applications, but, um,
I think about because.
Thank you. That's good to hear.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK, thank you, Representative
Senator Greggs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and before
I ask any, any question, I just
want everybody to know that that
Joan and I were very
appreciative of the cake and the
the champagne last night. It
really, it really made the day
better. So uh thanks for all of
you guys doing that and it was
a, it's a lot of fun. And so,
uh, Senator, uh, the mayor
called me this morning and said
that, um, he still had your
dancing boots.
I guess you dropped them off
somewhere downtown Gallup. I'll
go find him.
Um,
y'all, but no, that was, that
was a great time. Um, but Mr.
Chairman Marquita, has there
been any
push with the executive order,
uh, when we talk about adage.
Because a lot of the the
challenges with these smaller
guys getting in an actual audit.
So is your, have we, have we
changed definitions in is that,
is that a better system now, or,
or where are we with it?
Um, Mr. Chairman, I don't know
that I have an answer for you on
that. I know that it's on the
radar of the state auditor. He
put some legislation forth last
year, in fact, um, to try to
address some of those things. I,
and I know that he's got more
technical assistance out there.
I don't believe that there's
been any effort that I can
really tell you about, though,
that's made a big difference in
terms of our applicants, um,
because, you know, so many of
them just fell behind during
COVID. Um, it's still a
significant
issue, but with the two programs
that we operate that are subject
to that, which is the colonious
Infrastructure Board and the
Water Trust board, it continues
to be a big impediment.
And Mr. Chair and Marquis,
thanks for that. Uh, that's a,
that's an issue for a lot of, a
lot of things across the state
when you talk about requirements
for small nonprofits and and all
sorts of things. So hopefully
it's a, it's an issue that maybe
somebody will take up and can,
can work a solution around, uh,
but when you go back to page 7
and you talk about what it is
that you intend to do in hiring
engineers, uh,
Looking at that as being a
process where you're going to
have these guys on retainers or
are they going to be employees?
How are, how are you going to do
that, Mr. Chairman, the
statute's clear that we have to
hire, um, uh, contractors, so we
don't intend to have them be
employees. We look to get firms
in New Mexico, um, and hire
them, keep them on retainer, and
have them do work through that.
OK, those can be um
uh annual contracts or do you
have a
have a defined term typically
our contracts don't exceed 4
years. OK, thank you, Marquita
regionalization when you when
we're talking about that, Mr.
Chair, are we, are we talking
about mainly NMFA is going to
create a kind of a regional
setup or we talking about the
projects trying to be
regionalized, Mr. Chairman, for
purposes of the Water Trust
Board, regionalization has
obviously a spectrum, you know,
it can be from.
to true interconnection. Um,
we're trying to align the
technical assistance plan with
our policy which prioritizes and
tries to incentivize.
Real interconnection,
consolidation. Um, again, trying
to get, I think they're between
1000 and 1100 water systems and
if 95% of them serves 25% of the
population. We think that
there's great opportunity to
interconnect and take 5 systems
down to 1, or as in I think
Lower Rio Grande's like 11 to 1
or something.
So interconnection and Markey,
you know there's a lot of um uh
you know, that's my system
that's your.
System stuff and so the the
making those sort of things
work, maybe a challenging issue
for you guys, Mr. Chairman.
Again, the policies themselves,
uh, waive the, uh, state match.
They waived the lung component
if they're interconnecting. So
we think that there's great
incentive with 100% grant at the
end of the project at the Water
trust board, uh, for that kind
of interconnection. So this is,
we're we're putting the whole
Package together with not only
will we help you regionalize,
but you won't have the match,
which tends to get in the way.
You won't have to take on debt,
which tends to get in the way.
If you interconnect, if you
actually consolidate your
systems.
Uh, sure I'll keep my, keep my
fingers crossed. Uh, the, one of
the things that that has
occurred and, and many of you've
heard me mention it is the
community of Timberron down
south of uh of Cloudcroft, that
little community is miles away
from anybody else and their
water system is shot and they're
trying to figure out, you know,
they need $200 or whatever.
It is and and I don't, I don't
know how that will work out and
I don't know, you know, whether
we're able to, to do that, but I
want you to, to
understand there's a, there was
a change in the law in years
past that reduced the mill levy,
I believe it is that a community
like Timberron can impose and
Tim Barron is a is a water and
sanitation district, I believe,
uh, down to, I think it's
5 mL and it had been up like 15,
uh and we reduced that so, so
Timbaron is at a point, even if
they could, even if they could
charge their members more, the
members could pay, they can't
because the law won't allow it.
So I would, I would ask that,
you know, we look into that
because Tim Barron's not by
themselves and a lot of these
communities can address and fix
their
Problem if they have the means
and they don't have the means,
so they're looking at us for.
You know, $20 million or so to,
to fix it solely on the back of
the, of the state and, and
Timarron, in all fairness, I
mean, Timbaran is an isolated
community built for a certain
reason, and they believed that
they would, they would grow and
they would do and they would,
they'd be able to handle all
this stuff and it didn't happen.
So for a lot of the state to, to
step up and care for Timberron
is, you know, arguably unfair.
Uh,
so I think just as we, as we
look into it orca, I don't know
what the law should change or
how it might might look, uh, but
we need to, we need to see if
there's even if it's a 2 or 3%
increase in their mill levy, you
know, that would at least let
them have a role that they can't
afford to have today, so that's,
that's what I would, I would
suggest and, and as we, as we
look at all the projects you
guys see on.
On page 9, the expense.
Of every one of these, and when
we look at at, you know, there's
talk on capital outlay and you
know that we're we're not
spending the money and of course
they're in capital outlay, but
if we're starting to spend money
on big things or help with big
things with capital LA dollars.
Well, it's, it's hard to sit
there and say that, well, man,
we've got to get it spent
because it's a lot of money to
spend. The project is big if
it's a, you know, if it's a
tennis.
in Albuquerque or Alamoordo,
that's a different animal than
some sort of infrastructure
project. So I don't, I don't
know how that will go, Senator,
uh, as you guys look at
different things, but uh, but
capital outlay is still from my
part of the world, a lot of
that's designed to go to uh
infrastructure related projects.
So when we look at how fast it
moves, it's not necessarily just
the capital outlay.
This issue is that overall
projects issue. So you guys,
it's been a, it's been fun
getting all this stuff and
seeing, seeing things actually
start moving ahead because
Senator Padilla and I started in
in 2012, Senator Rodriguez was
here before and we've seen it
where there hadn't been hardly
any money to help these guys.
And now that it's available, I
hope that we really can take
advantage and do some real good.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Marquita.
Mr. Chairman, I would just note
that systems like Timberron that
might have gotten started with a
USDA loan 1520 years ago, um,
are having difficulty using
their own resources to expand,
that is to say, they can't take
on additional debt. USDA has
them in handcuffs. I, I hate to
say that phrasing, but right now
it's been incredibly difficult
to get waivers or a permission
from the USDA in order to take
on even a 10% loan on the water
trust border Colonia side, very
difficult.
So they really do. They have to
have capital outlay because they
can't take on any additional
loans.
And Mr. Chair, again with that,
that's, that is they've got the
the loan they can't pay it
hardly because the revenue
didn't allow them to pay the
interest and the stuff, so they
have to have they have to have
grants. They can't live. They
can't do it without a grant, so.
I hope we can find a solution.
All right, thank you, Senator.
Thank you. Senator Rodriguez,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will
be brief. I know we're short of
time. Good morning again. Um, I
just wanted it before I ask my
quick question here. I want just
to say thank you for thinking
out of the box as you always do.
It's amazing that we're not only
giving you to the NMFA and you
particularly Marquita as the
CEO, uh, a lot of work to do,
lots of projects, lots of, uh,
and more funding, but we need.
More I know in many areas, um,
but you just, you just have a
lot of programs and it seems
like when we come up with new
ideas we hear it all the time.
Let's give it to an MFA. I've
said this before, because we
know you can do it well, but
you're way, way over. I mean
we've given you way too much
truly, but I'm happy to hear
that you are looking at
streamlining the system, for
example, on this thing with the
engineers that you're talking
about. My gosh, what a neat
thing to do is to reduce the
bureaucracy that
We have in that really takes so
much of your time and staff
time, our time, and the peoples
and our constituents' time too,
and yet it slows the projects
they're not getting the projects
as quickly as they should. I'm
preaching to the choir here, but
you know, when I heard that, I
thought, wow, what a neat thing
to do that you would hire
engineers, for example, having
them on retainer readily
available when you need them,
and one of the big pluses to
that is that they're already
familiar because they.
Working on that, so they don't
have to get training on
something new, um, yeah, I, I
like that. Thank you so much for
that, Marquita. But just a quick
question, Mr. Chairman, because
I, I know we're short of time,
um awaa, let's talk a little bit
about that, Mr. Chairman
Marquita, did that ever
materialize as far as looking
into um.
the mutual domestic, they have
this loan with uh and they don't
have any money to pay it, they,
the only way they pay their
little, um, I mean, the amount
they pay NMFA is through their
membership dues and their
volunteers, so I don't know how
they're gonna pay that balloon
payment when it comes up, but
there is a loan that they
haven't, I didn't know if there
was any way to work, to turn it
into a grant or something for
the mutual domestic.
Mr. Chairman, I think that kind
of project is one that if they
applied today and it was on an
existing project, they would
have the ability to ask for a
waiver of the loan match given
that they are, um, the size they
are. So there is a potential if
they applied today to do that we
are looking backwards at
everyone that took on that to
make sure that we, to see if
there's any potential to right
size water trusts board of all
the loan programs that we offer,
it has an annual payment that's
actually
Forgivable. It is the one that
we have outside of our small
business recovery fund, um, the
highest level of, um,
delinquencies on because it's
once a year and systems aren't
ready to make a payment once a
year. And they're, they're
volunteers. Um, so we are trying
to figure out how to reduce some
of that, that, um.
It's not even very much money
coming in. We did it, you know,
for purposes of ensuring that
they had skin in the game. So we
are looking at that. They have
to have their asset management
plan done, which a lot of
communities have been slow to
deliver on asset management plan
is a requirement since 2015 of
any funding. So if they took on
a loan in 2000 or took on got
project money 2015 on, they have
to have an asset management plan
delivered. That's what's
stopping most of us, most of
these
from going and getting converted
to grants. I see. OK. I'm
wondering if Agua Fria uh or
when they applied for that loan,
I remembered if they had an
asset management plan then or if
they did it before 2015, they
may not have it. Mr. Chairman,
we will look into that and, and
get back to most of those
communities because again, it's,
uh, we don't get ready
information so we can't just run
a report. We have to actually go
and mine for it. Um, so it does
take a while sometimes to get
complete information. OK, great.
Thank you very much, Marquita.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
colleagues. I just wanted to
thank everyone. Thank you,
colleagues and presenters and
audience. Thank you for coming
to Gallup on behalf of McKinley
in San Juan County House
District 5. It's a long ways to
drive sometimes. We're all busy,
we all, we're all working hard
throughout the state of New
Mexico. So, and then, of course,
happy anniversary again,
Senator, to you and your wife
and um thank you for your
presentation.
on water and all of the
infrastructure, you know, work
that you're doing, uh, Water's
life and then all of that
infrastructure is, you know,
basic necessities for our lives,
so just wanted to say thank you.
Thank you.
OK, thank you very much,
Representative. I do have a
couple myself and we'll just go
through like a solid uh speed
round here, um.
The topic, you know, is, is
water. I mean, it's, it's never
been a swim myself. I've never
been in that swim lane, no pun
intended in the legislature. But
every time I have an opportunity
to hear about water, it just
totally freaks me out. And so
I'm trying to figure out, so on
page 4 under uh Cure health and
safety issues.
How will you secure safety
issues or how, how will these
dollars cure safety issues? I'm
just curious,
Chair, you can have, um, some
indication that your system is
wearing down a piece of really
critical equipment needs to be,
uh, replaced. So that's an
impending health and safety
issue, whether it's a dam or a
um pump or water treatment
facility, um, leaking pipes, um,
that could cause, you know,
water shortages. There, there's
a number
instances where you can see it
coming, and we certainly would
rather address it before it
happens then after because it's
so much more difficult to
address after.
Yeah, which really leads to my
second, which is the 2nd bullet
there, and I think of the
community of Magdalena.
Magdalena, they resolved their
issue. I mean, do they have a
regular um steady, you know, um.
Reliable source of water there
now?
I mean, to me, that's that's a.
Emergency condition.
Mr. Chairman, I believe they
have, but I, they did not get
funding from the Water trust
board, so I'm not up on that,
but I, it's not been one that
folks are continuing to ask for
funding on. So sometimes, you
know, no news is good news. And
so I think that that's been
addressed and I know you're part
of this show is the funding and
the financing and all that. I
get it, but I'm just curious if
if you had any updates there,
um.
On page 5, to date, 12 water
systems have received 100% grant
for design only projects. When
you talk about the other
commentary of hiring a team to
help, you know, pull all this
together. I think that's one of
the best things I've heard in 12
years. Congratulations, kudos
that that that technical
assistance is gonna be very
important to help avoid, you
know, land grants and others and
mutual domestics getting into
all kinds of trouble with their
audits and stuff like that. But,
but do those, uh, are any of
those land grants that have been
approved?
Um
Lane Grant folks trying to get
water systems into their areas,
do you know?
Mr. Chairman, um, I know that
Land Grant Mercer was added to
our legislation about, I don't
know, 10 or 15 years ago. I
don't know though. I, I cannot
tell you right away which which
land grants may or may not have
been funded, but they are
eligible, um, and they'd be
eligible for both the technical
assistance plan. They'd be
eligible for the design only
element and again design would
actually take place after that
technical assistance documents
complete. So if we did that for
them, they, in their small
system, they can come forward
and ask.
For a 100% grant for the design
of that project and then be in a
really good place to seek
funding from a number of
sources, but I don't know of any
land grants off the top of my
head. Just want to make sure
that they're eligible and they
know about it and that they have
the training necessary to which
it sounds like it does good, um,
on slide 7, I heard your comment
regarding USDA and the
Did I hear you correctly to say
that once you receive USDA
money, it it, it, it lends
itself to restrictions on other
monies you can bring into
projects, Mr. Chairman, if
that's the case. lens
restrictions on other loans that
you may have in place. So we,
the finance authority and our
loans, we allow for clients to
take on what we call a, uh, to
take on loans at a shared lien
level. So as long as they meet a
certain coverage, they can get
another lender to come in, you
know, co-equal to NMFA.
We'll share, you know, if
there's a shortage in revenues,
we'll share equally. Um, USDA,
we've done a number of them,
where USDA has come in on a
shared level with us because we
were there first. Our loan paid
off. The community went to get
another loan and even behind it
subordinate to the USDA and
they've not been able to get
approval to do that.
So it's really very interesting
and it's been a couple of years
now. It used to take a couple of
months to get them approved, and
we've had others go more than a
year before they can get
approved. It's a full-time job
to get their approval right now.
I hear that on the broadband
side, you know, I created that
office of broadband access and
expansion. We just were awarded
$6685 million for New Mexico as
a result of that office and the
plan that we put together, so
very proud of that and very
excited about that. Um, however,
uh, the monies that come
From USDA, what we're telling
the local localities is create,
you don't want to commingle the
money, so create separate
accounting practices around each
source of dollars that are like
each other and if you have USDA
dollars coming into your
community, do not commingle them
at all with anything because
that's going to cause you more
problems than it was worth the
100,000 they gave you versus the
other 10 that, you know, so
agree with you there. Um, also
on slide 7.
I'm an optimist, you know, are
you gonna be able to get
accountants, project managers,
community facilitators, I think
all that is fantastic. It's a
great idea and it'll probably
take a while to do it, but what
sort of a plan do you have to
pull all that together?
In terms of an RFP, Mr.
Chairman, well, or just is it an
RFP or is it just your staff
will, you will be staffing those
positions? No, Mr. Chairman, we
will not be staffing those
positions. We will be hiring
contractors. Donnie's been
leading a team to put together
uh a request for proposals.
It'll be a competitive proposal
process, but we will not be
getting into technical
assistance, the finance
authority level. We're not
staffed for that and, and we
could not, we could not do, I
mean, I'm I'm a business owner.
I've
Business owner for a long time
and I, I need a margin if I'm
gonna go and do some kind of
work, even for a government
entity because I've got, you
know, I've got a, um, so it just
I'm wondering about the
throughput on a dollar because
the RFPs are going to result in
a margin of 1% to provide these
services to the state of New
Mexico and so just wonder if
we're being as efficient with
with the dollars that come
forward for this.
Mr. Chairman, we looked when we,
when this concept came up, um,
the concept of bringing on
technical assistance personnel
when we don't know for sure how
long we may or may not be doing
this program is very difficult.
So we try to bring on staff only
in those instances when we have
an enduring program that's going
to have repeated revenues. We're
not certain, you know, after a
couple of years, it may be that
this is not a good thing for the
Water trust board to do. I don't
want to have staff that I've
brought on that have a very
niche.
Uh, purpose in our, in our, in
our staffing because right now
we basically have people that
specialize in underwriting or
loan monitoring. A loan is a
loan, a grant is a grant, so it
doesn't matter the program.
Technical assistance is a very
different animal. Um, so we
were, uh, I'm very hesitant to
suggest that the finance
authority is a good place for
that. Yeah, so I again when I
created that Office of Broadband
Access and expansion, one of the
6 items that they were charged
with doing was to have a group
of technical specialists that
would help.
Uh, cities, towns, universities,
whoever in putting their
broadband plans together because
if you're in Columbus and the
mayor there is, is a wonderful
human being but just doesn't
quite have the bandwidth. He's a
volunteer like I am, doesn't
have the bandwidth to put those
plans together. So, you know, on
water, I just don't think it's
gonna that role is gonna be
going away for a very, very long
time. So, but I hear you I hear
you loud and clear there.
Just have a couple more.
Um.
On page 9.
Just trying to figure out. I
agree with you that $790,000 for
cost overruns is less than 3/4%
of the total amount. I mean, you
can't build a gazebo in your
backyard without without having
the cost overrun piece to it,
uh, would it be appropriate to
have the locality or the
project.
Put the amount together to even
get to play with any of this
money?
Mr. Chairman, so as part of
their proposals, they have to
have some sort of contingency in
their construction documents,
and we have been asking them to
increase their contingencies on
all of our programs, drinking
water, water, trust port
colonius. It's still often not
enough because the delay of
bidding is the bigger issue. So
when they, they come with their
plan with their expected costs,
they can add something there,
but if they wait 2 years to
actually do the bidding, those
costs have increased
dramatically in their
percentage, obviously. So who is
the, is this 790,000 state
costs.
Overrun contingency or is this
what the local projects have put
together
at the project level so we're
keeping back, let's just say
$1000 and if someone that
doesn't have the resources, we
do a resource test before we
give them the additional grant,
um, but we will look at their,
their project, look at their
bids, see how often they bid,
and when they simply can't get a
lower bid will then provide a
grant if they don't have the
resources internally. OK, thank
you very much, um.
Almost done there, um, oh, so on
page 10, the 990 notices of
intent. Do, do you have to file
a notice of intent in order to,
is it a requirement to apply if
you didn't do an intent, can you
still apply, Mr. Chairman, it is
for one purpose, which is that
you need to get access to the
application and so you have to
get a password and a user login.
So yes, we have to get the, you
can come at any point if they
haven't filed their notice of
intent. That was my next
question to the day they hit
submitted.
needed. They can't extend the
summit date, but they can get it
right up to the date that it's
due. And do you know if these
are always are these always
public entities, uh, and mutual
domestics or whatever that are
allowed to apply for these
dollars, Mr. Chairman, yes, they
have to be under private project
that had a public interest in
it, Mr. Chairman, that's
correct. It's like a P3. No, no,
they're all we're coming going
to come hard with that one this
time. Qualified entities are all
public entities, tribal
governments included.
Do you know if any of these are
uh place and use, um.
If it's a different place in
use, are they eligible? Let's
say they're going to move water
from say, one basin to another
basin here in New Mexico. That'd
be a huge project of a lot of
water we know exists that just
nobody's living there, so why
wouldn't we move it to another
basin where people are living.
It is with a project like that
be eligible for something like
this, Mr. Chairman, if they can
get the permits, they can get
the, they can apply for the
funding so we don't, we just say
you need to have all applicable
permits in place, um, and so it,
you know, the finance authority
or the water trust board process
is really agnostic.
And then the um the I my
question before is, do you
always have to be public
projects? Could they be
nonprofit?
Mr. Chairman, no, nonprofits are
not eligible under the Water
Project Finance Act. OK,
wonderful. Thank you for that
speed round. I learned a lot
about water in the last hour and
15, Mr. Chairman, pretty
visionary on your part. I'm not
sure if you saw the news report
about the Navajo Nation looking
at
rail, through train bringing
water from the east coast. Yeah,
yeah.
So that's that's visionary, you
know, bringing the water to the
people. It's not there where
people aren't using it, why not
move it to where humans are
living, um, wonderful. I think
everybody here had a question,
so that's great. So now we're
gonna move on to item number 7.
Thank you, Donny. And again,
great to see you again too.
Thank you for your continued
work. So we'll go to item number
10, update on the small business
recovery loan fund and the
project we dropped in your lap
with 2 seconds of notice and
go run Chairman, we will have a
fewer things to say here. We're
Still, um, gathering some data,
but we do have some updates that
I want to make, um, so the
You receive one of our
presentations. I'll just remind
you that the small business
Recovery Act was created during
the first special session of
2020. So June of 2020, just
months after the pandemic
started, what was happening was
that a lot of small communities,
a lot of small businesses, we're
not really getting access to the
federal relief of the P3 program
and that came out in a couple of
waves, but you know, certainly
by the time this program came in
place, there was expected to be
a relatively short.
pandemic. You saw that with the
P3's 8 week, um, funding, uh,
this program was put in place
with the concept that kind of
mirrored the P3 as to the extent
that the state could, right? We
can't forgive debt, um, but it
was as close to um.
Free money as possible and that
it was so incredibly flexible,
um, so that was the, that's the
backdrop of this piece of
legislation, uh, finance
authority was allowed to make
very specific kinds of loans.
They had to meet some rigorous
tests ultimately, when the
pandemic continued and when we
found out really what the
impacts were, the law was, um,
updated and expanded in 2021. So
the amount went from uh
businesses being eligible to
receive up to $75,000 to
businesses being able
To receive up to 150,000. We,
um, allowed for increases of uh
uh the actual asset. So we
looked at their expenses in the
first round as gross expenses
and in the gross profits and
then the second it was net
profits. So a number of new
businesses were able to take
advantage of what we call that
2.0 program, and it offered more
flexible funding even yet
because it was pretty clear that
the pandemic was
Go to go on longer than we had
initially anticipated, um.
The first round we opened 866
bar of the loans we received.
Sorry, let me just say that we
we regularly go out and receive
get feedback from our clients.
We do, um, surveys to find out
where they are and their job
creation to find out if the
business is still open, what
kinds of difficulties they've
seen, so that we can bring it
back to our original estimates.
We are, we've done one round,
we're in the midst of our second
round, um, which we've updated,
which we expect to have done in
the next couple of weeks. Um,
I'll go to page 3, to remind you
that we made 8880 loans totaling
about $40 million under that.
1.0 program, um, when 2.0 came
on, it explicitly allowed for
the 1.0 loans to get refinanced,
which means they could access
more money and they could
postpone their first payment
because the terms of the first
loan where they were 3 years of
interest only, um, paid annually
and then they could extend, they
could kick that loan out to 3
years then of, uh, principal and
interest payments monthly if
they wanted it or they just paid
it off at the end of 3 years.
Uh, 2.0.
The first year's interest free,
no interest accrues, then the
2nd year interest begins
accruing and it is then, um, so
your first payment under the 2nd
program is really 2 years after
you made the loan. So it's a
long time between when you got
the money and when you have to
make your first interest only
payment. You make one more
interest only payment and go out
for 7 years of principal and
interest. So I say that because
one year of interest only
period, 2 years after you made
your, uh, you know, one payment
two years after you made the
loan.
the loan is a difficult thing to
remind clients of, many of them
in that two-year period of time,
uh, converted the loan to a
grant in their minds, even, even
though many of them have
guarantees, um, so we, it's been
a, it's been kind of a process
ultimately we made about 700 new
loans under totaling 138 million
under that 2.0 program. Um,
We are now getting a full
picture on page 4. This is not
different than I think you saw
last year for our update because
frankly, it's, it's all still
coming due. You'll see on the
left hand side when the first
interest payments are due under
the program 1.0 and 2.0
combined. And the majority of
that funding you'll see is
coming due. The first payment,
interest payment is coming due
in 2024 and about more than, you
know, almost 30% coming due in
2025. So many of them don't even
have their first payment.
Do,
um, so as they are starting to
come on board, it's about July,
August, September, um, that
we're seeing this year, the
crush of new app new
first interest payments coming
due. On the right hand side,
you'll see first principal
payments, um, and it mirrors
very much what you see on the
first interest payments. Um, so
we are still very early in the
detection of defaults. We know
2.
loans have been paid because so
many of them are just now seeing
their first interest payment due
we're having a lot of difficulty
getting that first payment in.
So we have, you know, if, if
you're looking at anything 30
days or more past due, we have
about half of them that fall
into that category. Um, they
typically happen the first time
when they get that first one, it
takes a couple of months to get
them onboarded and understanding
how to get their payment made
and a lot of hand face to face
time with those clients.
And it's becoming more than the
finance authority can handle.
I'll turn you to page 4,
Uh, which is that we have
decided that we either need to
beef up our internal loan
recovery team, uh, substantially
to deal with the amount of face
to face time or find an external
contractor. We've decided the
second is a better interest is
in the best interests of the
actual portfolio. We went out
for RFP and in May, our board
awarded a loan servicing and
customer support contract to a
group called BSD Capital. They
operate under the name
Lendistry. They are a technology
Driven community development
financial institution, which
I'll remind you means that
there's more than half of their
activities are serving low and
low income persons, um, or
communities, um, and they do
this sort of loan servicing and
loan origination for state
programs, federal programs, and
their own lending. So they have
a number of different portfolios
since their inception in 2015,
they've made about just under
$10 billion in loans.
Um, serving more than 636,000
businesses. So this is a group
that has, you know, really solid
technology driven platform, and
they're able to then take on the
administration of our program.
They have the resources
currently to do that. So we are
negotiating a contract with
them, which we hope to have
finalized soon will then turn
over the loan administration of
the Small Business Recovery Fund
to Lend industry. One of the
things that they offer in
addition to
just already having the ready
trained staff, um, and having
the systems to support that is
they have a they're affiliated
with a nonprofit called the
Center Vital Industry. It's a
nonprofit technical assistance
group where they actually
provide mentoring. They have an
online library of courses that
people can take at night if
they're a small business, that's
often when they need the
resources. Um, if they need, um,
assistance like they have
fallen, maybe they're part of
the got impacted by the fire.
And need some sort of
modification. There's no process
in place at the finance
authority to really go through a
consistent modification process.
So this group has one in place.
They have a framework for their
other programs will be using
their best practices as part of
the loan servicing, but they
have a framework that says,
great, give me your financials,
tell me the situation, and
they'll put in a modification
request that will, you know,
it's they're standard terms, but
they go through a review of the
financials. If someone can't
make their
Payments, they are offered
technical assistance
immediately. Um, they get
personal calls regularly, so it
is really more more person to
person kind of conversation,
because again, they have the
resources for this, um, and so
we're really excited because we
think it not only will increase
the potential for the repayment
of these loans, but it will more
likely be a lifeline to these
businesses that may be
struggling and don't know how to
proceed next. So rather than
just kick them into collections,
which would be
Frankly, our next step, there's
an intermediary step of
technical assistance, again,
mentoring one on one counseling,
a library of technical resources
available to them. Um, so we're
very excited about that part
because we think it's the spirit
of keeping the business in
place. The program was offered
by the legislature because we
wanted to see these businesses
succeed. Many of them ended up,
you know, the pandemic.
Unfolded in ways that were not
expected and so they are now
finding themselves with debt
that they're having a hard time
repaying, so we're there to help
them. Lend industry is there to
help them try to make the best
of that situation with the
resources that they need and
it's often that they don't even
know how to set up their
QuickBooks right. They don't
know how to do a number of
things. That's what this group
can do. So we're really excited
about that part. Um, I, because
that's just not something the
finance authority would ever be
able to equal. It would take a
very long time for us to
replicate what
They do. I think technology we
could get, but that one on one
person, uh, that personal touch
is not something I think we'd
ever be staffed to do. So we're
very excited about that. We
expect that we'd be able to
transfer this portfolio at the
end of September, which again is
when the crush of these
applications is coming due.
They'll receive letters, emails,
phone calls, uh, from them to
understand that this is, you
know, not some phishing attempt.
They'll receive notification
from us that says, no, they're
legit. They're going to take on
the loan servicing and they'll
work to set up
automated payments, which is
really how they make this as
cost effective as possible. Um,
so that's the big news that we
have on this program and as I
said, we'll have more after we
get our, um, our survey back for
the current survey that we're
currently doing, we'll know
more. What we do know from our
current survey.
Page 6,
they're required borrowers under
this program, 2800 of them are
required to report on their
current employees and to notify
NMFA of pending and filed
bankruptcies. Um, we have
received notification of
closures, only 4 businesses have
notified us. However, when we
did our outreach, um, 80
reported that they'd closed 63
of them reported that they'd
closed permanently, so it's
pretty clear that that report.
the well-intentioned is
incredibly difficult to get
businesses, particularly those
going out of business, uh, to
provide, um, so we know that
there's more there that they're
not telling us. We have a pretty
good beat on their bankruptcies.
They're required to tell us
about their bankruptcies that
really doesn't happen. Um, we
have a, we signed up with the
court system to get that, and we
also get it from a third party
source, uh, as part of the
bankruptcies, we're required to
see all collections. We can't.
Um, while the bankruptcy is
being settled, um, we know of 26
to date. That's a fourfold,
7-fold increase since last year.
Um, so we're seeing the, the
impacts of the pandemic and
other things, um, hit 16 of
those bankruptcies, um.
have been closed and 10 of them
are still active, so about $1000
of loans 980,000 have been
written off because of the
bankruptcies that have already
closed out and 10 totaling about
785,000 are likely going to be
written off soon. Um, and then
we've only been made aware of
two deaths, but we expect that
there are more out there. The
borrowers have died and
obviously the pandemic being one
of the contributors, but not the
only, those loans only totaled
$7,272,000.
Um, with that, Mr. Chairman, I'm
happy to answer questions. We'll
have more data for you once we
are done with this negotiation,
and we will have received back
our, um, full survey, um,
because again, we're only
partway through that survey.
And with that I'm happy to
answer questions.
Thank you. Excellent update, uh,
Representative Serrato.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Ms. Russell for the
update. As always, this is great
information. I just had a couple
quick questions. Um, you have
here on, on, for us it's page 5,
I think it might be slide 6 for
you, um, that 63 had permanently
closed. Do you have an amount of
how much that that would be
anticipated there repaying to
the fund, Mr. Chairman, no, we
have not got, we've not got.
Cross tabulate the closures to
the loans so that we get the
reporting in from one, then we
have to go and connect it to the
loan that they did. Um, we have
the data when they report it
because we put it right in our
system, but we're still having
to translate the, the surveys,
um, to the actual businesses.
Thank you. And similarly, once,
once, when these loans are
repaid, does that mean the small
business recovery loan fund
remains an active fund for you
later what what are those funds
that the repaid loan become
Of the dollar's interest and
principal returned to the state
investment council. So the law
provided for a direct investment
of severance tax permanent funds
into this program and they get
the return, so 100% of the
interest in principal flows back
to the SIC. Thank you. And then
I sent the data you're getting
from these surveys is just
fascinating. It's an
interesting, um, you know, look
at businesses in New Mexico
getting through the pandemic,
you know, going through some of
these environmental disasters in
different places.
All those things. Um, one of the
things I'm curious about, and I
don't know if you're this is
part of the survey, um, or if
this is possible, but is it
possible in these conversations
to find out if they utilize
other tools offered by the
state, other grants offered by
the state. I'm just kind of
curious that in the ecosystem
that we're creating, how much
are they aware of, you know,
just the small business
revolving fund or is it, or, or
the, yeah, the that, or is it,
you know, are they utilizing our
full spectrum. Mr. Chairman, at
the time that we they applied,
we captured that data, so we
tried to, the data we
Captured at the beginning was
where they were a year before
they applied, um, where they
were at the time that they
applied and where they were
going to be, where they expected
to be a year from now in terms
of employment, so we wanted to
see just sort of some trending
information again, we thought it
would be a shorter, um, uh,
duration of, of.
COVID activity. Um, and we asked
at the time that they applied
what other funding they had
received, so we knew at the time
of application what they'd been
challenged, what they'd been
receiving, whether it was
federal dollars or state
dollars, and we know that
through the two programs that we
operated on behalf of one on
behalf of the economic
development department that
small business LEDA grant. We
have more information there and
then we operated the um the, the
CARES grant program in the month
of December of 2.
20, um, we received a lot of
information there about what
other dollars. So we have
between those three databases
because there was
14,000 applications that were
filed as part of the CARES
grant. Um, we made loans to
grants to about half of them,
but we had a lot of data that,
you know, again many of those
applied under all three
programs, so we'll do that cross
tab tabulation once we're in a
position to get all the data in.
Makes sense that it would take
some time. I definitely think
that, you know, especially on
this committee, a lot of folks
who are
Invested in how our local
economies are working, how we
can, you know, spur more
economic development, you know,
I know that we often will talk
about, we don't want to see a
lot of these programs we do just
great, it's a loan program that
no one's going to use. How are
they all kind of working
together? Um, and then the last
question I had, um, and, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Ms. Russell is, you
said that it was a sevenfold
increase in the past year, the
bankruptcies, um, that obviously
that's a large chunk. Do you see
that as a trend that's going to
continue? Do you see that just
kind of a one-off? Any thoughts
on that? Mr.
Sherman were so new into this
trend, uh, you know, it's just 2
years of data that we have. We
got, we had 4 bankruptcies when
we made this report last year.
It was the first of those
reports. We now are at 28, so we
know that there's, you know,
increasing, um.
I, I, I can't tell you whether
that's an anomaly or if that's a
burgeoning, you know, beginning
trend. Well, thank you for the
update. Thank you for letting us
know about Lindus industry as
well. That sounds very exciting.
They'll be able to kind of offer
some of the support to, to
ensure you guys are able to run
well. Thank you. Thank you.
OK, thank you, Representative.
Just had real quick questions
myself, um.
So on land industry, how are
they going to be compensated?
Mr. Chairman, they will get a
percentage of collections, um,
so if they, if there's a flat
percentage, um, and they will,
you know, hold borrowers to the
terms of the loan. Um, so they
won't, there's no incentive for
them to keep a non-performing
loan under the contract that
we're negotiating on the books.
So it will have, it'll have a
rigorous collection process, but
again, with the concept that
technical assistance sits
between its first
and any collection effort,
there's a, there's a
concentrated area of
collections, but, you know.
That won't help if people aren't
going to pay. Well, exactly. I
used to do this work in my call
centers, by the way, and it's a
really tough type of work. Um,
do they get any other
compensation other than a
percentage of what they recover,
Mr. Chairman, they get, there's
an onboarding fee to get the
technology because again they're
going to get emails, letters and
calls from all of on every one
of these borrowers outstanding.
Um, and then they will get a
percentage of loan servicing fee
and then a collections fee if it
gets to collections, so.
Uh, so net net, I don't know if
you're willing to make a
prediction like this, but this
program, I do believe it helped
a lot of people, a lot of small
businesses. Are we going to lose
money on this?
Based on the trends of what you
see so far with the, the section
on bankruptcies and, you know,
all this other kind of stuff and
the, you know, tough time
getting them to make the first
payment versus the moving into
much what will be much larger
payments when they are actually
paying principal and interest.
Mr. Chairman, there will be
losses. These are unsecured
loans. So net, do you believe we
will be whole, or are we going
to lose money, Mr. Chairman, I
think we will lose money without
a doubt, it's really hard to
recover an unsecured loan.
And so I, with the finance
authority wasn't part of the
conversation about how to make
up the terms of those. We
weren't part, we didn't offer
any. I don't remember we didn't
provide any estimates, but there
were estimates of about 30%
loss, um, at the time that was,
that that was being debated, um.
And I, you know, I'm not sure
that's out of the realm of
possibilities at this point we
don't see it quite that high,
but it's still again very early
in the first collections. We do
think that the chance of
recovery under Lend industry is
much greater because they have
far greater technology for skip
tracing and other things to find
businesses we were communicating
to them through emails. If you
changed your email.
It's hard to find you again, but
they have more tools. Don't lose
our number. Don't lose our
number. Technology is very
helpful and that's one of the
things that, um, uh, increases
the chances of success.
Thank you. That's all I have.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Marquito,
who, who made the rules of doing
these unsecured loans aboard.
Mr. Chairman, that was in the uh
was explicit in the legislation
that was passed.
Hm, could you know what, uh,
it's kind of hard to, uh.
Put out that money and not get
it back, and yet we're looking
back at these small water
authorities that are struggling
to even survive, and yet they
can't get money due to the fact
that neurotics are wrong, you
know, I just,
I thought, Mr. Chairman, with
the exception of identification
criteria, um, and you know, the
ability to figure out how to
deal with bankruptcies. Finance
authority was told very
explicitly what the amount of
the loan would be, what the
qualifications are.
Um, the legislation was very
clear. In other words, Mr.
Chairman, you, you didn't have
any say over it.
Certainly, certainly not on the
security of the loan, no sir,
you know, we, we sit here and
talk about.
Money is here money there, and
yet.
We just gave it out.
And now you can't get it back.
Mr. Chairman, we cover a
significant portion of the
portfolio. I don't want to leave
you with the sense that all that
money is gone. No, no, I
understand that, Marquito, but
Uh, what, what do you, what is
your thought of what you're not
going to recover 30%, 40% Mr.
Chairman, with the first payment
just now coming due for the
majority of the loans, I really
can't give you any trending
information. I, I just don't
have that. No, that's fine.
Thank you, Margi. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you, and, and these
are simply questions, you know,
I mean, but even, even along the
lines of um.
You know, inflation,
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia. So even
along the lines of just simple
inflation over the pandemic
post-pandemic period, even if
you were to recover all of this,
it's still going to be worth
less money to the state as it is
from a throughput standpoint.
So, you know, there were
legislators that wanted to make
sure this happened and I, you
know, I was there at the time
and I just, you know, let's see
how it goes for us. Um, thank
you very much, Marquita, for all
of the presentations and all of
the work. Um, appreciate you
very much. So we're gonna go now
we're a little bit early, but
I'm gonna, I would like to ask
for any public comment on the
agenda here.
Do we have any public comment?
Do we have anybody online,
mister?
Webmaster.
No. No. OK. uh, we always like
to include public comment just
in case if anyone of the
legislators would like to just
run up and make public comment.
I know you have a lot on your
minds. I know you had a lot of
opinions. I've been around you
people long enough to know you
have opinions.
Since you didn't, you didn't get
me there from the last one real
quick I didn't even see you
there. I'm sorry. You know, I, I
know, and, and Ms. She, I just
think it would be a great
opportunity for the chairman of
chairman of this committee to
put out a um
A letter to the to the editor in
the Albuquerque Journal talk
about the program and talk about
now that the loans were coming.
Do you know Marqui I know would
just love to write it.
For your signature and it was
just,
you know, and honestly, I'm, I'm
kidding in some ways is very
excited to have something else
to do.
What? Oh,
I could you hit him on the way
out the door, please? I'm trying
to leave early, but yeah, no,
you guys, I, I, I don't know,
there's, there's.
There's a lot of people that
they're going to go after and
they're going to get a call from
a, uh, from a collection agency
is what you're going to get, but
if there was some notification
that was out and I'm, I'm using
the letter to the editor, but if
there was some notification that
went out.
Not condemning people but just
saying now is, now these things
are coming due, maybe it would
then click in their head and
something could happen. Mr.
Chairman, if I left you with the
impression that collections is
the first place that will start,
I think I left you with the
wrong impression. They'll be
doing loan servicing. So they'll
receive an email, a call, a
letter to just establish contact
with them and say these are the
resources that are available to
you. This is how we're going to
collect payments, just loan
servicing, which we
Currently do at the NMFA. They
will go through a rigorous
process before.
Collections is ever on the
table. Collections is the last
resort when it's an unsecured
loan, we're not going to do very
well on that. We'll go after
them, we'll report credit, all
that kind of thing. But our goal
is to keep these businesses in
place and to have the technical
assistance be a really integral
part of the loan servicing
concept.
Collections is our last ditch
effort, but our what we're
really banking on is this
technical assistance and the one
on one work that they do. So it
is primarily a loan servicing
and customer support contract.
Not collections. Mr. Chair
Marquis, I think we all knew.
We all knew that this could
Occur in that,
you know, the goal, goal at the
time was to get money into
people's hands, keep them open,
uh.
And hopefully people would
recognize the fact that they
were obligated to pay it back
and
There's going to be a lot of
them more than you see right now
that aren't going to feel that
way. So, hopefully, hopefully
we'll get as much back as we
can. Senator Padilla is
absolutely right to look at the,
look at what sense.
If that money had been available
in the bank even or if it'd been
invested in the market, we've,
we're not just losing the
principle of this. We're losing
the
The interest as well that we
could have gained. So, anyway,
but it hopefully it helped a
whole lot of people and they
stayed in business and and that
worked that way. Mr. Chairman,
we saw it just in the initial
reports, um, 8000 employees. So
it, it definitely had an impact.
Many people, um, said that it
was critical. We still get
letters thanking us for the
support that they would not have
made it this far. So, you know,
that's anecdotal. We don't have
real data yet, but we are trying
to put that together. It's just
a hard picture.
To kind of gather all the right
points to show that that effort,
along with the LED program or
the CARES grant program, what
role they really played.
Thank you, Senator. I have one
last question, the, uh, the 464
loans that were refinanced are
those in the 1,672 loans on
round 2.
Or those separate. Mr. Chairman,
those are separate. We try to
keep them separate for you. So
1670 were actual new loans in
Mr. Chairman, that's correct. It
was twice the number that was
made in the first round. OK,
great. Well, thank you very much
again. Thank you. OK, so
committee, I just want to let
you know we are, we have no
public comment that we're aware
of, but come on in if you want
to say something. Um, we asked,
item number 8 to be here a
little bit early. So I'll give
you guys like a 10 minute recess
break, go use the bathroom,
whatever you wanna do, uh, try
not to get any fist
in the parking lot and then come
on in here right around 11 and
if the presenters are not backed
by or here by 11, then I will
absolutely stick around if you
all don't want to hang around
for the later, so we'll, uh,
we'll stand in recess for about
15 minutes. Come back, let's
just come back at 11:05.
