slim amount of committee members
where, um,
A committee of 1 or 2 at the
moment.
But, uh, we're sort of wrapping
up for the, the meeting this
month, so, um,
Thank you so much.
I know we have 2 members in the
hall that may be coming back.
Let's see and uh.
OK. They'll come in when they're
available. So we're gonna move
to uh local recipients, item
number 8, local recipients of
New Mexico Finance Authority
financing, and there we go, um,
we are excited about inviting
folks that are utilizing the
funds that come out of the New
Mexico Finance Authority to come
and talk to us for a little bit.
We want to learn from you, uh,
you know, what did it do for
you? Uh, what do you think we
should be doing differently and
maybe if you have suggestions
for the future, I'd like each of
you to present for about 10 or
so minutes if it's all right
with you, and then we'll
Um, you can ask us questions or,
well, we will ask you questions
and you're welcome to ask us
anything as well. So let's go
ahead and start with Donna
Venable, rates and regulatory
manager, Continental Divide
Electric Cooperative,
Incorporated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning committee. Thank
you for inviting us.
This is a background,
Continental Divide Electric is a
cooperative that was formed back
in 1945 under the New Deal.
We are owned by our members. We
are not owned by stockholders
like P&M or SPS, the larger
utilities. So we are very
conscientious about our members'
money. We are very conscientious
about what our members are
asking us for.
Right now, Red Bull Broadband is
a growing division within
Continental Divide Electric, and
we, we are terming ourselves at
an energy and telecommunications
cooperative right now.
We have very experienced local
telecommunications staff. We
have several folks from
CenturyLink that transferred
over to us once they saw what we
were doing. They were extremely
excited.
We are focused on sustaining
both our electric and our
telecommunications up to our
members' satisfaction. We are
community driven and as a
cooperative, we are not for
profit.
So how it began for our
telecommunications division is
in 2015, we had several of our
members come to us at our annual
meeting.
After several outages.
With other telecom carriers
asking if there was anything we
could do to provide
telecommunication services in
this area in our service
territory.
We applied for and received a
grant from the state of New
Mexico to to conduct a
feasibility study.
We had several things we wanted
to.
Wanted to do in this feasibility
study. We wanted to provide
fiber which is considered
futureproof.
It's also very expensive, but we
wanted it to be at that not for
profit level. So we could
continue to serve our members in
that way.
The prices should be at or below
the national benchmark?
And it should still be.
Even if we couldn't get an
entire service territory.
Covered, we should at least have
a 35% take rate MBA viable
telecom carrier, and that is
exactly what that that uh.
Feasibility study showed it
could be done, it could be still
be a not for profit, and it
could be fiber. Why did we want
fiber? Fiber, like I said, has a
is futureproof. It has a minimum
20 year lifespan for the cable.
It's light going through cable.
There's not a whole lot that can
go wrong with it.
It's your communications on each
end, the things that send out
that light and the things that
receive your light. Those
communications change about
every 5 to 7 years, but they're
not real expensive.
Fiber supports all of our modern
technologies. Um, I can give you
an example. I was
Prior to having Red Bull, I was
trying to do my master's degree.
I couldn't.
With the available service I
couldn't participate in video
calls. I couldn't watch the
videos I was required. It took
hours to download.
It was extremely frustrating, so
I, I did wind up dropping out.
Now, I'm working on it again, so
not sure why I'm 62, but that's
all right.
So
Once we determine
That and we got our members'
permission, we did have to have
a bylaw change in 202016 in
order to provide internet
services along with electric.
We started working with Finance
New Mexico.
OK
Excuse me.
In 2017.
To build out the city of Grants.
Grants had a 4,113 locations
that are serviceable by fiber.
That grant required that we pass
those locations. A pass means
that we've built out the fiber
backbone and within if you sign
up for service, we have to serve
you within 10 days.
That saved a lot of money
upfront. It also required
continental Divide to have skin
in the game because we build out
that last drop to the service
locations. At the time in 2018
and 2017, it was costing us
about $1400 per location.
We are now at 63% of locations
and grants take our service.
The the holdouts still have we
still have a lot of elderly
folks that it does what they
want it to do. It's too hard to
change my email address. It's
understandable, but every time
there's an outage, we, we get an
influx of calls. That was so
successful that we went ahead
and entered into another
agreement in 2019 to build out
the village of Milan, which is
just west of Grant.
Um, unfortunately, sacred Wind
had come in at that time and
were putting up towers and had
folks in contracts.
So we were a little behind the
times that that one we're only
at 42% in Milan, and folks are
still happy with their other
service again, it's doing what
they need, but we are available
within 10 days.
But the money that the revenue
we received through those sales
and grants in Milan allowed us
to build out the backbone.
To other communities.
Blue Water and San Rafael.
I'm sorry, I don't have those
take rates with me, but.
They're at least in the 35%
range.
In 2020, we petitioned, we
applied to the New Mexico Public
Regulation Commission for a
grant to provide internet
services to the Pueblo of Zuni.
The broadband grant through
public regulation commission
uses New Mexico universal
Service funds.
This was a $40 million project
of which Continental Divide had
to put up a quarter, 10, which
is $100.
This was the largest project
that.
PRC had had done for broadband.
This was during COVID. They felt
that it met all of the needs of
the community.
Folks were working from home, we
had school from home. We didn't
and no one had good access in
this community. So it was, it
was a first.
And, and I apologize, I need to
skip back to the finance New
Mexico. We were the first
broadband.
Project with Finance New Mexico.
They were our first financer. It
was a big learning curve on both
sides. So we took what we
learned there and applied it to
that PRC grant.
During construction, the
governor of the Pueblo
approached us and said, We have
some AFA funding that was
earmarked for internet. Could we
pay for our residents' internet
service if you want to, sure. So
they are, we are offering a
gigabit service with a router to
the residents of SUNY.
They did not pay for any
commercial services, only for
the residents.
In 2020 we also participated in
the rural Digital Opportunity
Fund reverse auction.
This money was through the FCC
and it was a lot of the calf to
Connect America funds that were
not awarded.
During previous rounds.
Those funds had a lot of
restrictions to them, and
several communications carriers
could not could not apply. We
were into communications carrier
at the time, so we were unable
to apply for those earlier
rounds.
Unfortunately, it was a reverse
auction. They had $16 billion to
award?
As the as the auction proceeded,
they wound up only awarding
about half of that. So they
still have $8 billion they
haven't awarded. There's going
to be another round probably
after the bead money.
I
shuffled through. So we received
A grant for it is a grant for
$38 million. We received
$315,000 a month for 10 years.
There's not a whole lot you can
do with that.
We'll either wind up having to
borrow money and use that.
Monthly payment from the from Ar
off to make those loan payments.
Or we have actually been able to
leverage that those dollars
along with other grants that
require matches or
Not necessarily a match, but we
can carve out those areas and
still get the backbone in and
the middle mile.
One of those is actually uh
reconnect 3, but with Reconnect
2.
I don't know if anyone remembers
the New Mexico broadband
infrastructure grant program
that started in 2018, I believe.
As part of the application for
that we were required to apply
for Reconnect 2.
We got it. It's a very small
community. It's about a 65
locations in the very rural
mountains of New Mexico and we
actually started hooking books
up last week.
COVID hit, we had trouble with
contractors we had trouble with
equipment we had trouble with
supplies, so we did have to file
for an extension, but it is
almost complete now.
Reconnect 3 was a deliberate
application for the.
Communities of San Fidel, San
Mateo, and Cerro. It's
approximately $3.2 million and
there was no match required with
that one because those are very
rural communities and very
socially vulnerable.
That one we haven't started on
yet, we do need to build M mile
between grants and San Fidels.
We've just cleared rights of way
with BLM and State Land office.
In 2020 we approached Cibola
County about 2 locations that we
were unable to file for grants
for, which is Seboeta, which is
north of
Laguna
And the middle mile portion into
San Mateo to complement that
reconnect 3 Grand.
They gave us $1.2 million and we
were able to connect the
community of Sevoeta. They've
been online for a year and a
half and we are starting that
Middle mile project next month.
In 2023, we were awarded
reconnecto which provide
internet to the village to the
village of Tru and Bluewater
Lake. This one also does not
have a match because it is a
rural community and it is under
that poverty threshold, as well
as being more than 20 miles
from.
City, which is considered Gallup
because they have their
population is over 20,000.
So one successful project.
Allowed us to prepare.
Request funding for additional
projects.
We now have not quite 5000
customers. We serve grants,
Milan, San Rafael, Bluewater
Village.
And Sunni and the village of
Rama, which we've self-funded.
And we have 2 more applications
in with the federal government.
Because of the, the partnership
we created with Finance New
Mexico.
It's much easier to show that we
have had a project. We met all
of the goals that were outlined
by the Finance New Mexico
project. We were to have passed
the 4000.
Locations in grants, the 1200
locations in Milan.
We were to offer 50 megabits of
service up and down, which is
symmetrical.
During COVID, we actually did
more than that. We provided free
hotspots in all of the parks.
We doubled our customer speeds
for free.
We became a recipient of the
emergency broadband benefit
program, which gave a $50.
Um, discount on their internet
service.
Once CVID was over, we
discovered we found that it
didn't cost us any more to
provide that service at 100
megabits, so we upped our
package, our package just to the
100 megabit for the same price
for so our mega our
Or um
Minimum package is 100 megabits
symmetrical for 4995, and we
offer a gigabit service at 8995.
The 8995 is $40 below the
federal benchmark, the 4995 is
$50 below the federal benchmark,
and we are still able to do that
as a not for profit.
So we're very proud of the
things we've accomplished with
the partners that we have
chosen.
The these partners.
Support
Our business model.
And we're also very, very
appreciative of our members'
support. We get lots of phone
calls from every area. When are
you coming here? Well, we're
following the money as as we get
grant money, we'll be there.
We stay safe and we work hard
and are providing a
life-changing experience to our
members by bridging the digital
divide.
our ultimate goal is to provide
fiber to the premises to all of
our members, and this will
require additional partnerships
and lots more funding. We do, we
are looking at once the 2nd loan
closes in 2027 if we have not
received additional funding
through the federal government
or through the BE program that
the Office of Broadband Access
and expansion is doing, looking
at another partnership with
Finance New Mexico.
The last page is just a short
map of the different areas that
we have received grant funding
for outside of the finance in
New Mexico.
OK, thank you. Um, thank you
very much. Um.
We'll just stop here and ask any
questions. Anybody have any
questions for the uh
Representative Serato.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation. It's
really exciting stuff you all
have going on and such a rapid,
you know, 4 years is so quick,
so it's amazing to see the
growth. Uh, I'm curious, um.
You know, a lot of times we talk
about laying out laying down
fiber, laying down sewer lines,
laying down, you know, a lot of
these utilities. Have you seen
any of these communities
successfully, you know, when
they lay these fiber optics, you
know, or the lay the fiber lines
down to partner with utilities
to get other um services and put
it as well at the same time as
there had been any successful
efforts like that. Um, Mr.
Chair, Representative Serato, at
the moment, no, we own our own
system. So we are hanging it on
the electric system if our
is underground, we follow the
underground path. Um, for new
construction, we, we do have
contractors calling ahead and
saying we're putting an
underground. Can you go ahead
and put fiber in now in case
they want internet later.
We do have one subdivision
coming up in ZUNI that has done
that, and a lot of the new
residents, the new building in
Cibola County have done that as
well. I know it's a bit um
periphery of what you're talking
about but it was kind of a
curiosity as you likely know,
you know, a couple of years ago
we passed a constitutional
amendment allowing state funds
to be used for the private
connections to broadband and
utilities and aspects like that.
I know we're going to start
looking at the rules. I believe
uh we worked on this one,
together. Um, and so I, I, I
know we're gonna be working on
these.
rules coming up and so I'd be
wonderful to continue working
with you to see how we can uh
make sure that the.
That we're getting the funding,
we're getting the rules right so
the funding gets to the proper
places those private connections
can be made and done in an
efficient manner. And the reason
why I mentioned that is, um, you
know, in the I live in Santa Fe
represents South Side. We have
sewer lines we're connecting and
I'm looking at working with the
city so that the private, the
private owners don't even have
to deal with an application
process in that sense, how much
can we, you know, funnel it
through the city if possible. So
we'd love to keep you, um, you
know, keep your information so
that we can continue to work
together and make those rules
work for what you all are doing
out here.
Thank you.
OK, thank you, uh,
Representative Johnson. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, uh,
for your presentation. I'm so
happy and pleased with the
pueblo of Zuni who who committed
their AP offense to pay for
their internet, any
conversations or interests um
from the Navajo Nation we're
doing the same.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, Senator
Representative Johnson, we have
met with their consultant,
America's Communications, and
Mr. Portillo has informed us
that President Nygrin wants to
do 5G. He is pursuing cell
phone.
We would be, we would have to
have a tribal council resolution
in order to apply for any grant
funding through BE or RUS.
They are unwilling to pay for
any middle mile that is not on
Navajo land, even if it is part
of the grant, and they do not
want the the grant to exceed
$77,500 per location.
At present we are averaging in
the very rural areas about
$27,000 per location.
Now, that does include getting
middle mile. That's not just the
backbone in there, but there is
no middle mile out here. They
have requested that we work with
cell towers to take fiber from
them. Unfortunately, they don't
have.
That much fiber running to their
tower. They're just doing enough
to run their towers.
So it's, we've got a few more
meetings set up, but no one has
mentioned anything about using
ARPA funding for any of.
You're very welcome.
Well, thank you very much. I'm
just so glad to hear about this.
I'm the one that created that
Office of Broadband Access and
expansion. You have trouble over
there, let me know. I don't know
that I can help, but I'll do my
best. I'll go knock on the door
and beat the door down. I love
the work you're doing, by the
way. You Kit Carson, Hamous
Mountain. I mean, you guys are
just.
everybody could learn something
from you. And Mr. Chairman,
we've also partnered with
Socorro Electric. They did
receive a connect to New Mexico
grant through the Office of
Broadband Access and Expansion
for Magdalena. They did have to
request an extension. They were
unable to get the middle mile up
there in time, but they have
asked us to step in as the
internet service provider.
So, um,
You know, I'm also the one that
carried the legislation that
puts sacred wind now I think
Conet I think is what they're
called into the rural broadband
Act. But prior to all that, they
had made the decision to go into
like the uh Milan area, I
believe, is that right?
Mr. Chairman, decided to go
there so far outside of their uh
their footprint, their typical
footprint. Actually they started
started putting towers up in
grants and then expanded into
Milan when we came on board with
fiber they were, but we.
Practically run them out of
grants.
There you go
A little competition ever
physically healthy. It's
healthy. And then the last
question I had, I don't, uh, the
continental divide pursued
funding, you talked about 49 and
I think 89 for 100 meg and then
for the gigabit, uh, was it 80
8989. So what happens when the
free period goes away? What's
going to happen to those rates?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that was after
COVID, we discovered that it
didn't affect the price of art
of receiving the signal and we
have plenty of bandwidth. So we
left those prices low.
Do you anticipate those going
anywhere north or south based on
what's going to happen now with
all this other money coming in.
It could go down.
Where's that.
That's what we like to do. We
like to electricity prices, I
don't have any control over
because I'm purchasing that from
someone else, but signal price
for fiber is cheap,
communications, the ends, the
communication ends are cheap.
It's getting it up. That's
expensive. And and uh you said
for almost 5000 broadband
customers now, almost 6000,
almost 6000. That's exciting. It
really is. These things are
finally moving. Uh, what is the
total number of customers for
CDEC. Mr. Chairman, we have
23,800 electric meters. OK, OK.
Wonderful. Well, if there are no
other questions, thank you very
much. You're welcome to hang out
and learn some more about this
one or whatever you'd like to
do, so we'll now move over.
Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
inviting me here today. I'm the
deputy superintendent at the
Gallup-McKinley County Schools.
My name is Jovanna Hanks, and I
have been very privileged to
serve in the district since
2002. Um, we have had a very
long history with NMFA projects
and I did provide for you today
just a couple of pieces of
information about the district.
Um, one of which is our
strategic plan. Um, this was our
second iteration of strategic
plan from um.
Uh, 2022, and so of course we
will be listening to our parents
and our students and our staff
and our community as we revise
this in the coming year.
Um, I also provided one of our
college and career pathway
flyers, um, the district has
really looked forward into
putting relevance into education
and so a two pronged approach
for ensuring that students or
college and career ready. One is
our middle college high, um,
program that we currently have
which has almost 500 students in
it, and those are students that
will be uh graduating with an
associate's degree or more with
a high school diploma. The other
prong of that is our
multifaceted career pathways,
um, in which
Students can join into these
programs to the state's
three-tier sequence, but with
that we are also providing
district paid internships so
that students are getting on the
job training in the career of
choice or getting those soft
skills in order to help them
become more employable and more
desirable after they leave high
school, um, and so with that,
our most recent graduating
season we had 167 students
graduate with um college and
career certificates on their
actual.
Diploma, which means they have
an industry certified
certificate that they can go out
and leverage in order to get
into either technical school or
into employment.
Um, with NMFA they have been
helping us, um, one of the most
relevant areas they have
financed for us is our revenue
bonds for our teachers units. We
have leveraged over $60 million
in financing from NMFA since
2002 for Tege projects, um, our
2002, 2005, and 2006 projects
helped us build teacher housing
in Navajo Suru, Tohatchi and
Segai, um, and Crown Point.
In um 2023 when we got our
outside adequacy money, we also
leveraged a loan there to finish
Rema housing, and most recently
we've applied um for a revenue
bond in order for us to have um
Gallup housing.
Um, housing in our areas is
absolutely essential, as many of
you are aware, um, the district
serves a very vast geographic
area. We serve over 4,957 square
miles. The furthest school away
from me from where I sit right
now is 2 hours. So Sega is my
furthest school away, and it
would be difficult to drive to
every school in our district in
one day. Um, so these areas need
places, especially being located
on um Navajo Nation lands. They
need area
is where we can have licensed
staff stay and so NMFA has been
absolutely essential in helping
us fund these projects, um,
while recent efforts have been
made through the public school
capital Council to provide
programs to fund Tege housing
that is not a systemic program
yet, um, and so we are still
heavily relying on NMFA in order
to finance those projects.
Um, in addition to that, we
really look to NMFA as changes
started to be made in the way
that we present our financial
statements and why I say that is
because many of you are very
familiar with the requirement of
the retirement liability to be
presented within our financial
statements and explaining that
to someone who isn't really
knowledgeable about why that's
so drastically changed our
financial statements was very
challenging for us and one of
the things that we found is when
we started
Working with MFA, um, they knew
New Mexico. They know the
challenges that we're facing.
They know the areas in which we
serve and they were very
responsive to our needs, we saw
that they were able to lower the
fees, um, and different
processes that we were having to
go through with either a private
sale of bonds and there's and
those types of things, and we
were able to get some of the
disadvantaged funding savings.
Um, so they have been absolutely
phenomenal to work with, um,
they have provided us a lot of
financing options and the most
recent
projects that we've done with
them is the replacement of
Lincoln Elementary School,
through elementary school,
Tohatchie High and Red Rock,
which are currently um in
progress of being built, if you
have time and want to drive by
Red Rock Elementary, um, that
school is being replaced. It was
built in the early 1950s, um,
and the district has actually
consolid several elementary
schools in town to right size
facilities within the city of
Gallup. Um, so that facility is
actually replacing um.
We, we did 3 schools. We did
Lincoln, Jefferson, and Del
Norte.
Along with Red Rock and that
replaced in addition to the
existing school, Roosevelt
wonate, Washington, and
Rockyville Elementary, and so
really we've tried to right size
the elementary school offerings
within the city of Gallup. Um,
New Turf, one of the things that
we're targeting is long term
cost savings. We are in
extensive drought in the state
of New Mexico, and so we have to
be um very careful with what we
move forward with, new HVAC
systems at Chi Dodge, um, a lot
of our schools, unfortunately.
Do not have adequate heating and
air and so we've really targeted
those HVAC systems over time,
um, the districtwide telephone
system, which was done in 2018,
um, really put in a lot of
hardware and infrastructure,
mostly for our technical
program, we leverage the UAC or
ERA program in order to help us
finance that, but we were unable
to find funding for that
telephone system. We did do some
bleacher replacements for health
and safety out in Crown Point
and Tohatchie. Um, and then
recently we leverage
um, the remaining of our sale
for a match with the ESR funds
to replace HVAC systems at
Navajo Elementary, Rama, Twin
Lakes Stagecoach, Indian Hills,
um, and I'm very pleased to say
that my remaining balance as of
right now for the about $130
million of investor funds we
receive is $6647 which will be
spent by September 30th.
Um,
I, I can, we can spend money.
Um.
Future projects, um, that have
been identified as being
eligible for full replacement
through the facility cost index
through the public school
capital outlay Council, that we
will likely be coming to NMFA um
for matching funds um will be
Navajo Pine High, Crown Point
High, Crown Point Middle, Gallup
Central High, which will be uh
remaining or alternative school
but will be transitioning into a
technical center, um, so that we
can make it a magnet school for
our technical programs we are
targeting.
Half day Am p.m. type program
for those students who will be
in the technical pathways. The
reason that we are attempting to
do this is that many of you know
that it is very hard to keep
licensed um staff. It is very,
very hard to keep licensed
vocational staff in our
geographic area and so by
maximizing that location, we're
hoping that we're able to keep
those programs as stable as
possible, um, and then Gallup
High School and Davids Heat
Elementary. Um, so no
funding needs in the Gallup
McKinley County schools, um.
I, I will also say that we have
been challenged with a declining
assessed valuation within
McKinley County. Um, that has
heavily impacted the district
and so we in 2017 were able to
go out for $25 million in bonds,
our last sale, which was in
2021, we were only able to go
out for $600 the drastic
decrease in the SAS valuation
had to do with litigation that
was lost um regarding grazing
rights, the tri-state um closure
as well as the Escalante.
Power plant, um, and so we are
working very hard because we've
carried a large amount of debt
for an extensive period of time
to avoid skyrocketing the debt
levies, um, to stabilize, uh,
the funding that we've asked for
from our voters, we're still
hovering above 8% levy for all
of our um tax members, um.
I am definitely open to any
questions that the committee
has, but as I mentioned, it's,
it's been a very positive
relationship for the district,
um, and although we've had a lot
of challenges, um, I will say
2008 and 2016 are two years that
will stick with me for the rest
of my career, um, in MFA has
always backed us.
And we really appreciate that.
Thank you very much. Do we have
any questions, Representative
Johnson?
I don't have any questions. I
just wanna thank you for all
your work and um.
All right, thank you very much.
I don't think we have any other
questions. I, I, I just want to
say, uh, and maybe this is a
question, so the housing in the
more rural districts, does that
truly help your uh recruitment
and retention. I lived in a, in
a teach region. I know it's not
in your district any longer, but
in ZUNI actually, uh, for my 4th
and 5th grade years, and it just
was a huge deal. I mean, that
district would not have had any
teachers, if I recall.
Chairman, uh, you said it
eloquently, there, there would
be no way for us to keep staff,
um, uh, for those areas that are
on the Navajo reservation, of
course there is no opportunity
to rent or build, um, for
teachers due to the restrictions
on the land, and we've been very
thankful in working with our
tribal system that they've
allowed us to put these
additional units on the land
that they've provided us to give
those schools, um, I will also
say that the city of Gallup is
in a uniquely tough situation
and there was actually
a document produced um 2 or 3
years ago about the lack of
housing within the city limits
of Gallup and it's in a similar
circumstance because even though
most people don't, don't think
about tribal lands being very
close to the city of Gallup.
There are large portions of
tribal land that are right next
to the city of Gallup and so the
available land for, um,
development is pretty small in
Gallup, um, and so we have found
that due to the teachers in the
county, which was.
Where we started our retention
and recruitment has stabilized.
Um, I think I started the year
with.
10 teaching vacancies of a
teaching staff of over 800
teachers.
So it has been, I mean, there is
no doubt about it. It is a game
changer. Wonderful. And I know
that you're not providing
palaces for people to live in
either. I mean, but it's just a
wonderful thing that you're
doing, so keep it up. Um, thank
you. I think that's about it.
Thank you so much for your
presentations. We're gonna try
to do this, um, with each of our
future meetings want to hear
from folks that are utilizing
these funds. I will ask the
staff to do a couple of
different things this next time.
So I'll just put it on the
record, I guess now if we can
probably move this to the end of
the first day.
Each month that way we get more
participation from the, I want
more people to hear your
stories. So, so thank you for
that and um then we'll also,
we're done with DARP if you guys
are we're done with you with
your presentations. Thank you.
And then if we can also invite
the local mayor or chair of the
county commission, just to come
on into the welcoming so we can
meet those folks, you know, on
the record as well if we're at a
university, maybe we invite, you
know, obviously what you've
done, you know, the president or
the whoever chair of the
governing body or whatever. Um,
all right, with that, um, I'll
entertain emotion.
To adjourn.
All right, moved by
Representative Serato, seconded
by Representative Johnson.
Thankfully, thank, thankfully.
All right, we'll stand in
adjournment till next month.
Thank you.
Thanks to our staff.
