Eddy and Lea County District. 41
was in a house for eight years.
This my fourth year in the
Senate.
I don't have opposition, so it
looks like I'll be back. The
other thing is, I guess my
favorite color today would be
peach.
Well, thank you.
Thank you. Chair. I'm
representative Kathleen Cates
from District 44. It's all of
Kerala's parts of Rio Rancho in
the northern part of Albuquerque
and the unincorporated ever of
Alameda.
I am the mother of two adult
Children.
And live in a multi generational
home.
Lou.
Good afternoon. I'm
representative Liz Thompson
House District 24, which is the
near Northeast types of
Albuquerque. I have wind rock
and uptown in my district.
And, um, this is I'm finishing
up my 10th year and those of you
who know me know my favorite
color is the brightest pink. I
can find. Thank you.
Representative will come over to
representatives, Roybal
Caballero and then work our way
in this direction.
Good. Good afternoon, Um, chair
members of the committee, those
viewing and the audience.
Uh, my name is Patricia Roybal
Caballero. I represent house
District 13, which is the far
Southwest Quadrant.
Of Albuquerque, and I'm happy to
serve on this committee. I've
been on this committee since I
took office. Thank you.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
Everyone, representative Eleanor
Chavez. I represent house
District 26, which is on the
west side of Albuquerque.
And that representative Chavez
your favorite color.
My favorite color is yellow.
Thank you, Son. Beautiful and
the New Mexico flag? Yes.
Good morning, everybody. My name
is Jack Chatfield. I represent
District 67, which is the
northeast corner of New Mexico.
Colfax, Curry, Harding play San
Miguel and Union counties. I
live in Harney County.
Has
610 people 50,000 cows. Ah, just
alright. Throw that in there. My
favorite color is red all day
long every day.
Good afternoon, everyone. Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair. I am
representative Wanda Johnson. I
represent House District five
McKinley in San Juan counties
Northwest New Mexico about 15
Navajo Nation, Chapters and East
Gallup. I'm glad to be here and
Senator Gallegos is drinking out
of my favorite color, or that's
the color. I like your cup
turquoise. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair John
Blockhouse District 51
representative. I have Otero
County. My district is pretty
much the city limits of
Alamogordo. And it's a beautiful
district. We have white sands
right outside of town. We have
the Space History Museum for the
state. We have the New Mexico
School for the blind and
visually impaired, So we are
very diverse, Awesome district
and my favorite color. I guess.
Madam Chair Johnson stole it
from me. Turquoise as well.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Good afternoon,
everyone. I'm representative
Patty Nouns Trump. I represent
House District nine, which is
Gallop and I represent seven
Navajo chapters. My favorite
color is red and I've served on
this committee since 2001.
It's been over 20 years, and at
one time I had the honor to
chair this committee. It's been
a lot of fun. It's like Great
committee. I look forward to a
great interim, and I know that
will happen under your
leadership. Mr Chairman.
Alright, We're going to go now
to Senator Rodriguez. Yes. Good
afternoon to everyone. I'm Nancy
Senator Nancy Rodriguez from
Santa Fe District. 24 high,
everybody and favorite color.
And did we get a favorite color
from representative Red Red?
Okay, Senator. Favorite color.
actually, can I guess because
I've worked with you for so long
now purple.
Perfect. We go.
Thank you, Representative
Romero.
Thank you. Good afternoon. I
want to be like Nancy. Um I'm
representative Andre Romero from
House District 46 in northern
Santa Fe County. Um, we have
four pueblos. We go from the
city of Santa Fe into the city
of Espanola. Um, I'll go with
like aquamarine blue. Well,
well.
And the madam vice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm state.
Rep. Choi Garrett, northwest
Julio County, home of the
Petroglyph National Monument.
That's the spiritual physical
heart of my district.
Um, I am born in the year of the
dragon. And this is the year of
the Blue dragon, which is my
favorite color. Thank you.
Well, thank you very much. Madam
Vice chair, a honored to work
with you this year, and, uh, I'm
gonna catch her right off guard
and have representative Luhan
introduced herself.
Name role location while you sit
down, I'll give you a few
pointers on what we're doing
here.
Um, your favorite Italian dish
and, uh, no. It's a favorite
color. Whatever you'd like to
tell us about yourself. Thank
you, Um
Good afternoon. Um Mr Chair and
everybody, uh,
Representative Terra Luhan. I
represent house district 48 here
in the capital city. My favorite
color is blue and born and
raised in my district chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative. Sorry to catch
you, you but you walked right
in. I do want to ask our
committee director Sabina Gainer
to introduce herself in the
Legislative Council staff That's
here today. I'm Sabina Gaynor. I
worked for the Legislative
Council service and I'm assisted
by Marc Edwards and Clinton
Turner.
Thank you very much. Sabina and
I just for the committee's sake.
If you haven't had an
opportunity to work with
subpoena, and she's fantastic,
have worked with her for several
years. Thank you for your work,
Senator Michel Petit. I'm going
to share the committee this
year. I did share science and
technology for about 10 Years
vice chair chair and all that
moved over to this committee
when I got back into leadership
because you can't share
Whatever the way that is, with
our rules, and all that, um,
represent the I used to be the
Southwest Cardinal Bergoglio
County. Now it's the bottom
portion of Bernalillo County
with redistricting. This is my
12th year in the Senate, and I
thoroughly enjoyed the work that
we do here and I appreciate all
of you. I know we're going to do
a lot of work to get a lot done
here. So as we move forward, I'm
going to ask, Um
The world renowned international
super sensation Rockstar who I
just love by the way, she just
outstanding.
It's all uphill from there,
so we're going to get an
overview on the New Mexico
Finance Authority. Everybody
members and exactly what they
do, how they do it and all that
we have Marquita Russell, chief
executive officer of New Mexico
Finance Authority, take it away.
Marquita. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. About half hour to 45
minutes. Alright. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. It's a delight to be
back before you again.
I am going to go through just a
couple of things today, mostly
some organizational issues. I
think many of you know us by our
programs. Not many of you know
us by our function and our
faces. So I'm going to put a
little bit of a little bit of
face to to some of our
operations today and then give
you a preview of where we're
going this interim what I'm
going to ask you to consider in
terms of actions and maybe we'll
start first, though, with
obviously an update of where we
were during the legislative
Session.
So you've got a presentation
that's being handed out. It's
also up on the screen and I'll
just start you on Page two so we
can turn the page just to give
you a sense of who the finance
Authority is. I'm sure you've
seen this before. I'll note,
though, that we have a couple of
new board members. Teresa
Costantini AIDS was one of the
members that was added during
the session You actually were
able to Senate was able to
confirm her. So she is a sitting
member of our board.
She serves in the role of, um
Uh, vice President for Executive
and administration at U. N. M.
And that's a statutory position.
Some some CFO of a higher ed
institution needs to sit on our
board and she's currently
filling that role. So we're
delighted to have her. She
brings a huge amount of
experience in many of the things
that we do. Um and then,
obviously with the new with the
announcement of Secretary
designate tendered, dying
candor, Dean, I haven't met her
yet.
From energy, minerals and
natural resources. She now sits
as a member of our board. So
those are some of our updates.
We are fully. We've got a full
board right now, and they're
very active, doing a number of
things. Um, but for those of you
that don't know who we are very
briefly. If you're listening, we
are a broad based finance agency
that was created in 1992.
Um and we're government
instrumentality. We are our
chart Has 73 FTE s on it. As of
today, That leaves it We only
have two vacancies in which our
HR director has been working
tirelessly to fill every time
she fills us.
Every time she feels that we add
more people just for context.
When I took over a CEO have been
at the finance Authority now 24
years but didn't take over a CEO
until December of 2019. There
were 39 bodies in our building.
We are now 71 people in the
built well in several buildings.
um and currently building a new
facility.
In the midtown Santa Fe area so
that you can so we can house
everyone
Um so 71 employees currently
we've got two to go. Um, we're
governed by that fabulous board.
There are five committees that
meet monthly as part of our
board. So we worked them pretty
hard, actually, um, they oversee
our operations approve our
budget, approved rules, policies
and projects that they are, um,
quite an active board.
We have an all spend a little
bit of time going through some
of the acts today, but we have
expansive programming to New
Mexico.
Um, you have authorized us to
operate 25 programs through 13
different apps. I would also
note that does not include
several of the programs that we
operate for our sister agencies.
We are from time to time asked
to be sort of a fiscal
administrator or to run as we
did during the recovery program
of recovery.
The Carers grant program that
was not statutorily authorized,
but it was, you know, a major
source of activity. So the 25
programs or just those that have
some statutory, um, connection
There are two major statutes for
the Finance Authority, the MM FA
Act, which primarily houses are
programs for local governments,
and then the statewide Economic
Development Finance Act, which
sometimes we call sweat for
which houses our economic
development programming. We have
several other acts. However, um
I would note that we are the
administrator of four other
boards, um, and their respective
committees and one executive
task force.
And we are forced overseen by
you, a 2529 member Oversight
committee.
On Page three. There's a large
list of programs. I don't I just
like to remind folks of the
breadth of what we do will spend
a whole lot of time on this
page, other than to draw your
attention to a couple of the
columns on the very left hand
side, you'll see whether we
consider that an active program
sometimes that means we're
accepting new applications.
Sometimes that means we're just,
uh we still have loans
outstanding, and so we're
servicing the portfolios but no
longer accepting applications,
So it's a mixture. Um, we have a
column just to the right of that
which is whether or not it's
funded.
Not as many columns. Um, I'm not
as many check marks in that
column.
Um And then on the very right
hand side, I would just draw
your attention to the fact that
we have a policy partner that we
work with in virtually every
program that we operate, so the
Finance authority makes loans
and grants. We work with various
policy partners, many of whom
are identified in statute to
determine who should get the
funding and under what
conditions
So we don't purport to be a
policy expert. We purport to be
experts at making loans and
grants. And so that's one of
draw your attention to the fact
that we are partner with some
really wonderful agencies and
the Legislature, um, in
determining which projects get
funded.
On Page four. I just want to
highlight a couple of those
policy partners. Those those are
those boards that I talked about
earlier. I'll start with the
water trust board. It's probably
the board that other than the
Finance Authority board the one
that we're most closely
associated with its been in
effect since 2001.
And it oversees the water
Project fund, which is now a
very large fund that makes
primarily grants, but also if
you loans to water projects for
now, six kinds of projects
across the state, the
Legislature, you all amended the
act that and added wastewater to
that list that won't be in
effect for another couple of
years. But I note that that's
coming our way.
But five other kinds of water
projects representing a broad,
uh
Subsection of water usage across
the state.
Um, The act also creates two
funds. The Water Trust fund,
which the Finance Authority is
the beneficiary of because it
receives annual distributions
over to other water Project fund
and then the Water Project Fund,
which we hold at the FAA. And
that's the fund from which we
make grants and loans primarily
receives funding from severance
tax bonds. Though this past year
the Legislature was quite
generous and appropriated an
additional $50 million to the
Water Project fund to help us
Um, make some of the loans and
grants on the list that you
authorized
So that's the water Trust board.
It's 16 members. We currently
have one vacancy there, and it
operates a with a policy
committee and a project review
committee.
On Page five.
Um, I would note that we have
the colonias Infrastructure
board.
Um, it is a board that is very
similar to the water trust
board it it, um funds, grants
and loans to colonias designated
colonias in the southern part of
the state.
Um, Currently those the funding
awards go out as 10% loan and
90% grant across the board. They
can find a variety of projects.
Water waste water, solid waste
disposal, flood control, housing
and roads, and we make the
grants and loans that are
recommended by the Colonials
board, which is here on your
left and currently is chaired by
former senator
Mary Kate happen.
Um
So that's the colonias
infrastructure. Uh,
Board. I will go to Page five.
The Opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Act. At
least that will be its name. As
of next week. May 15th House
Bill 195 becomes law effective
in statute.
It is now going to be a 14
member board. Um and it will
oversee two funds, a commercial
development fund, which you all
created back in 2022, and then
most recently, a housing
development fund and that
Housing development fund will
fund both workforce housing.
And of infrastructure needed to
support affordable housing. So
do two different kinds of funds
that this new board new expanded
board will now oversee. Once
again. The finance Authority, Um
up holds those funds at our
agency, and we make the loans
that are recommended by the
board.
And um, Madam Chief executive
officer. The appointees on all
of these. It's the group that
appoints them to the board.
Or the position in the
Legislature. That's what that
is. Just want to clarify that.
I'm sorry. Yes, some of those
things correct for the
Colonials, for instance. Um,
that doesn't come through
Legislative council, but
instead, leadership makes
appointments to the board
directly.
In some instances there from
Legislative Council so that
yeah, I think particularly for
colonials that could get that
could get confusing. I
apologize. Um
Uh, so let me see which border
we on now. So Enterprise. Yeah.
Opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Act that
will go again to a 14 member
boards starting next week. One
of the things that changed in
addition to adding to members
that have expertise in housing,
the governor will name the um,
formerly the state auditor
served as the member of this
board.
Um and that got changed over
with hospital 195, and it is now
the executive director of the
Mortgage Finance Authority. Is
he Hernandez? So that is going
to have that 14 member board.
Three of them will have deep
experience in housing.
We don't yet know who those new
housing members are. But I
understand the governor's office
is working diligently on
background checks for two
members that they've identified
that will add both, um, some
expertise in non profit housing
development largely in
affordable housing, and then one
in four profit development
largely for workforce housing,
So we're looking forward to
those new members.
On Page seven. We have the
Finance New Mexico Advisory
Board. That's a board that is
required as part of the new
Federal Newmarket Tax credit
program that we operate that
programs received about $346
million in tax federal tax
credits. It requires that we
have a board that is accountable
and represents either low income
persons or low income
communities.
And so their job is to ensure
that the tax credits are
benefiting, uh, that the desired
um, targeted populations. Um,
that board is actually comprised
of leaders from across the state
and is appointed by the New
Mexico Finance Authority board.
This is the one time we get a
say in who Who's on that board.
Um, and we are required to have
this board meet. I think a
couple of times a year in order
to maintain our compliance.
Um, with the federal guidelines,
All right, So those are our
boards. We have a we have a two
member of boarding team.
All they do is board
administration. It's a full time
job between all the committees
that we operate.
And I'm very excited to say that
when we get our new building,
we'll have our own boardroom
that will see at least 16. So in
January February of next year, I
look forward to hosting you all
in our in our open house.
Okay. I'm page eight. Want to
just talk about how the finance
authorities? Uh, activity is
driven. It is driven entirely by
funding levels. We have a couple
of programs, primarily
infrastructure programs, um,
that have predictable levels of
funding. So the public Project
revolving fund, which receives
regular distributions of
governmental gross receipts tax
and when not needed.
For bond payments or for
anything related to our bonding
program flows into the loan
fund, the public Project
revolving loan fund, so we make
loans annually from that
distribution, and then we
reimburse those loans in the
public markets, so we're able to
fill that fund up whenever that
fund starts to drop. So if if
activity is high, will be out in
the market several times a year
if the mark
Market activity is low. We might
only go out one or two times a
year.
Um, so that's one that receives
a very regular source of
capital. We could easily do 200
to $300 million a year from that
program alone.
The drinking water state
Revolving loan fund is an annual
capitalization grant for years
that received about $8 million
than that kicked up a couple of
years ago to about $13 million,
and now it's roughly in the mid
twenties. That's blue, largely
because of the increased money
that came down through the
bipartisan infrastructure lobby.
I l
They increase the amount of
funding so we have a lot of new
dollars available through the
drinking water State Revolving
loan fund. We operate that
program with the Environment
Department and one of the
benefits of the new dollars that
come in annually is that
portions of those can go out in
grant like terms, and so it's a
really good source of funding
for critical water projects.
I mentioned earlier, the water
Project fund, which primarily
received severance tax bonds,
colonias against severance tax
bonds, and then the local
government Planning fund, which
receives appropriations over
from the PPR. F that you
authorize, um, and into the
planning fund.
The majority of our funding from
that sweat felt law the
statewide Economic Development
Finance Act, the programs we
operate there. The majority of
it comes through federal sources
to date 97% of the funding
that's been made available
through that program. Through
that lot. The programs through
that law have been federally,
uh, derived
Um
And then I would just note
Lastly, the opportunity
Enterprise program, which now
has two different pots of funds.
We now have 100 and $20 million
in total for the Commercial
development Fund, which is
called the Opportunity
Enterprise Revolving Fund and
125 million through the Housing
Development Fund again overseen
by that board. Those are the
first new pots of big pots of
dollars that we've seen into our
programs.
I mean, we're appreciative of
the trust that you've put in us.
So those are programs. Um and I
want to just spend a little bit
of time talking about how it is.
The Finance Authority operates.
We are. We are now divided
largely by function within our
agency again Going back to that
concept that what we do our
loans and grants. We're not
experts in water. We're not
experts and housing. We're not
experts in infrastructure. We
really are very good lenders. If
I do say so myself and granting
agencies and we have functions
within the agency.
That look at various elements of
making a good loan. You have
loan origination credit, um,
monitoring project oversight, So
that's how the agency is set up
and we changed that way back in
early. 2020 was very helpful
during the when we had to go
remote during the pandemic to
have these smaller, very focused
Departments before we had been
organized by program, and that
really meant that you couldn't
add any dollars to any program
without it having a major impact
on our staffing levels and our
ability to meet your
expectations for funding.
We have also added a significant
amount of technology to our
operation, so not only just
cyber security uh you know, I t
security kinds of things but
then operational efficiency
technology that helps both our
ability to serve your
constituents as well as help
your constituents have easier
access to the Finance authority.
And then we have undertaken. Of
course, A an internal compliance
program based on the enterprise
risk management.
No template where we take a look
annually at the major risks that
we have.
Every year. We expect to see
that we'll have as a high risk
to the agency cybersecurity and
technology issues because not
because we don't do a good job
with abating, those in
mitigating those risks but
because it's just an ever
present need, and so we will
always have that as a high risk,
Regardless of the kind of job
we're doing now we will stay
vigilant as a result of some of
these
Uh, results. Um, I've just got a
page 10.
I would note, you know generally
how the enterprise risk
management model works. I will
spend a lot of time on it, but
it looks at the major risks
stopping us from being able to
meet our mission.
That's so we're looking at
operational risks. We're looking
at project risk. And, um, we're
looking at, uh, funding risk.
Um, we also look at governance
and culture. Uh,
Um
Primarily as one of the risk
factors going into it anyway.
I'd rather spend some time on
page 11. If you could turn that
then these are the risks that we
had identified as part of our
most recent enterprise risk
assessment, the ones that are
highlighted in bold are the ones
that were currently um of
addressing as part of fiscal
year.
2024. So we've been looking a
lot at succession planning and I
have some, uh well, I think are
very exciting introductions to
make in that regard. We have
been working for the last two
years on updating all of our
policies and procedures to make
sure that a staff comes and goes
that we don't lose any of the
expertise as a result of not
having documented what we do. It
also allows us to bring on
people and have them be far more
effective early on in their
tenure.
AT N M F a
I mentioned earlier technology,
making sure that all of our
systems talk to one another, so
that we're spending time
analyzing the data rather than
just inputting the data, um and
and reducing potential errors
that come as a result of manual
entry.
We are very much focused going
forward on identifying the key
metrics that despite our success
in being able to capture that
data and report that data were
early in that infants, you were
very early in that process, But
it is what we want to be talking
to you about next year or the
year after is what we hope to
achieve with those dollars and
whether we actually achieved
those with
What we hoped to with those
dollars. That's a big target of
N m F A. Um and we we've hoping
to give you some good progress
on that front.
Um
One of the risks is program
management prioritization again,
making sure that we have good
practices in place to oversee
the dollars that you've
entrusted to us. We're in the
process of starting a large risk
rating process, which will risk
rate all of our loans. Everyone
in our portfolio will have a
risk rating, and it will then
systematically drive things like
our loan loss reserve in our
financial statement.
Not entirely, um, exciting
stuff, but really important to
the things that we do.
Staff development and training,
data governance. Cybersecurity.
I think I've talked about most
of those, um and then strategic
planning. Our board is actually
meeting next week to do its
portion of the visioning so that
we have, um as as a three year
plan some goals to meet so that
we can help fulfill
The role that you've asked us to
play.
12. I don't expect anyone to be
able to read this. Um, I know I
can't. But this is our or chart
and I mentioned earlier were now
divided by function, and I've
got on the succeeding pages some
breakouts with a lot more detail
here that in font sizes you can
probably read starting on page
13, the office of the CEO.
Um, I have with me today are new
executive assistant who started
during the session. Laura
Williams. Laura, you want to
just wave
Our compliance officer and
deputy counsel brand, Otero.
He is the one that's running
that Enterprise Risk management
program.
Ryan Decker, whom you've met
before our policy and capital
strategist is here. And, um the
other two are not here today,
but I'm sure they're listening.
Our job is to help ensure that
the strategic direction is being
met that we're working directly
with you and your constituents
that we're working on policy and
impact development.
And communications, including
investor communications.
On the next page. Our Finance
Department, which is headed by
Oscar Rodriguez, I think you
have met him once or twice
before he's been with the agency
and about six years now he has a
large portion of our activities.
He has our financial planning or
Treasury and controller
operations. Our client services,
which deals with lung
collections, in particular and
closing of loans, as well as our
board administration.
Um and I don't believe any of
those folks are here today.
Probably running financial
statements on the next page. I
would be happy to introduce
Fernando Martinez, who joined US
April 1 as deputy director.
Fernando. Many of you know
Fernando, He was most recently
executive director of the
Renewable Energy Transmission
Authority prior to that was in
state government for more than
20 years, many of those in
different division director
positions at energy, minerals
and natural resources, and I met
him more than 20 years ago when
he was the bureau chief of the
Drinking Water division When we
were operating are
Drinking water state revolving
funds, so he brings a wealth of
experience to the mm FA. His
knowledge of the state is, uh,
is deep, and we're really
excited to have him join us he
is taking over the
administrative functions of the
agency, including Human
resources, office management and
records, Retention, R I T and
our innovations groups report
now to Fernando as well.
And our chief legal officer, Um,
our chief legal function and
then Opperman is our chief legal
officer, and he's here today.
Wait for the folks. Damn. Oh,
Okay. Thank you and your
favorite and your favorite
color.
The so really happy to have
Fernando can't tell you how nice
it is to have a partner in this
role.
Um, I will turn your page to
page 16. Fernando also oversees
our programs department. John
Brooks, whom you know, um
I think his favorite color is
blue. Um, he oversees four or
five different divisions, so
it's another large portion of
our agency are lending and
credit divisions report directly
through John and I'll remind you
that we blended those lending
functions. We used to have a
private lending function and a
public lending function and more
and more.
Um our projects are falling
between those two areas where
you have private entities
creating public infrastructure
and public entities doing things
that used to be within the realm
of private entities. So
Having them combined allows us
to provide deeper representation
in your communities. So John's
in charge of that on page 17.
Program Administration we now
have to program administration
groups. We've had a long
standing water group that
largely oversees the water trust
board in colonias. Um and we
also now have one for community
and economic development. We
created that department last
year for all the project
oversight that needs to occur
for things like Opportunity
Enterprise are venture capital
program.
That sort of thing as well as
some of our smaller direct loan
programs.
Um
Brain is not here today, but he
joined us just over a year ago.
and then we have a newly created
project oversight division will
be adding to that group part way
through the year. We expect, um,
it's now headed by Dani
Quintana, who you all probably
knew when he was in various
roles that state government,
local government division
director Cabinet secretary of
Veterans affairs. He's got a
outstanding resume and we were
really happy to have him again
knowing how local governments
operate, really helps us. Make
sure that we can work through
any issues that might be
stopping infrastructure from
getting developed problems in
project development. He's there.
He's he's literally in Silver
City Day, working through some
of those issues, but we'll be
adding someone to his team to
help with more commercial
oversight, more kinds of
construction over
Site.
We used to rely a lot more on
the Environment Departments
Construction Programs Bureau.
They have also become,
incredibly, uh, busy, and so
they don't have the capacity to
serve as us as a contractor.
Operations and innovation.
Operations, innovation and
information technology, as I
mentioned earlier also reported,
Fernando Um and they are
responsible for those things
that we talked about earlier.
And that's page 18.
Page. 19 not won't spend any
more time on our functions, but
facility management will notice
becoming a much larger role with
the building now coming up with
25,000 Square foot building now
coming online at the beginning
of next calendar year.
Um, And so that is our staff.
And did I miss anyone?
No, I think I just missed Rick
Martinez, who is a contractor to
Mm Fe used to be an employee of
enema phase, and there's a long
time helper to us in this
effort, so I'm sure you all know
him.
So I go to page 20. That's now
that we've talked about staff.
Let me just remind you of what
happened during the legislative
session as it relates to N M F a
You all endorsed several pieces
of legislation is your meeting
in early December or November
last year, most of which were
highly successful House Bill 28,
which was R P p R F
authorization Bill, um, was
passed and signed into law now
authorizes 138 entities to
access the PPR F As you recall,
they have to have authorization
in order to apply.
To our program. And so there's
now 138 new entities able to
apply that authorization is good
for three years.
House Bill 29, which sends money
from the PPR F over to three
different funds Drinking water
state revolving fund Our local
government planning fund and
then 5 million that goes over to
the Department of Cultural
Affairs for its facilities fund.
Hospital 148, which is the water
trust board authorization Bill,
As you know, from that
particular fund. We can't make
grants and loans until you have
authorized the projects, so we
received the appropriation, but
we can't use the appropriation
unless you give us authorization
to do so. Um, and that bill this
year was House Bill 1 48 55
entities appeared on that for 65
projects.
And we have awarded several of
those, but not all of the
dollars made available this
year.
And then lastly, um
There was house Bill, uh, to, uh
one and it's a Senate.
duplicate. Duplicate, Um Senate
Bill 185, which moved it.
It in its original form was $150
million appropriation to the
Water Project fund, because that
was the difference between what
we expected to get and the
amount of applications that we
had pending this year.
Ultimately, that bill was not
successful, but $50 million was
added to House Bill two to help
make up that difference. So we
have about 100 and $65 million
available for the $275 million
worth of requests this year.
And then, lastly sent a bill to
10, which was had requested $60
million to three different
funds. Um, ultimately, that Bill
was not successful. There was,
however, a small appropriation
of 1.75 million in House Bill
two. For one of those three
funds. That's the childcare
revolving fund. So those were
the pieces of legislation that
you endorsed and and how we
fared.
On page 21.
I'll talk about some of the
bills that you didn't endorse
that also went through and were
signed by the governor.
House Bill 211 as three times
amended, um was sort of what we
consider to be an expansion and
clean up Bill.
Um, it added Waste Waters
ineligible project to the Water
Trust board it allowed for the
water Trust board to fund
capacity development activities.
And it temporarily reduces the
amount of funds directed to the
office of the state Engineer for
adjudication. It also does some
other cleanup items throughout
that bill had not been kind of
reviewed for quite some time. So
there's a number of changes that
we considered a cleanup nature.
House Bill and I mentioned there
that because of the way in which
we do the water project
authorizations the first time
will be able to open an
application for, uh, wastewater
under that will be next year, so
we'll be making the first
recommendations for wastewater
in 2026, so that's when you'll
see that will come through.
House, Bill 195 was a major
piece of legislation it
authorized, um housing changes
to the Opportunity Enterprise
Act again that now has two
funds, the Commercial
Development Fund and now the
Housing Development Fund Housing
Development Fund. Um, allows for
workforce housing, and we are
now working through the rules
for that program. We're defining
what middle income means, Which
is what the law
Said. The workforce Housing is
to address um and
Uh, it received about $125
million in House Bill two and
then $50 million for the
commercial development Fund.
That bill also made some minor
changes to the opportunity
Enterprise, which is the
commercial development fund to
ensure that it's going to, um
not primarily non owner
occupied, uh, businesses so we
don't want to have
That fund fund owner occupied
facilities because there are
other sources of funds. For that
The change here was to, um um,
focus on the fact that these
dollars are intended to go for
spec development.
Another bill that passed was
Senate Bill 216 was amended.
once the MM. FAA affordable
housing bill that was sponsored
by Senator Rodriguez and
representative Cates. It expands
the use of the PPR F to allow
explicitly for housing, which
had not been part of an emphasis
statute before accepting and
Polonius
Um, it adds nonprofit housing
developer as a as a qualified
entity.
And expands the use of the local
government Planning fund to
include affordable housing
plans, flood inundation, maps
and archaeological clearances.
Um and then Senate Bill one,
which was the water trust fund
appropriation again. That bill
ultimately didn't pass. But $50
million was added into House
Bill two and our thanks to
representative Chatfield for
helping carry that effort.
So those were that was this
session.
And then I'll just sort of point
you to what we have coming up.
Um
But some water first
As I mentioned earlier, the
public project revolving fund
Um, is the fund by which the
anima Fay is best known. It is
our largest program. It's the
one that has the most liquidity
in the most potential to help
with infrastructure and capital
needs across the state. Um, we
are seeing in this high interest
rate environment amused by those
entities that are considered
disadvantaged entities because
their median household income is
below the state's average, so
we're seeing some higher volumes
in those areas because we can
offer zero and 2% interest
rates.
So that's I would just note that
For many projects of
When they have to borrow and
they are low median household
incomes. This is a great place
for them to go. And we are
seeing, uh, an increase in those
kinds of applications.
Um
The other thing that we have
done is add, Um
Uh,
Turning to the next page page 23
We talked about it During the
interim, We added the Junior
lien, which is a third lean
within our bonding program to
allow a home for those
nontraditional PPR F credits.
Um those are non profit housing
developers. Now they are public
improvement districts, charter
schools and land grants. So what
I would call land secured
transactions.
Um, those really didn't have a
home in the PPR F though they
were qualified entities because
of the nature of the way that
they're secured. So the PPR f If
you've got a G R T backed alone,
or utility of water utility
backed loan. Um there's a plenty
of space for them in our senior
lean in our subordinate leans,
which are triple a
But there wasn't a place for
these others. And so we created
a new program. We talked to the
U during the interim about that,
so that we can provide access to
credit for those entities that
are again qualified but didn't
have a place in our program.
Um So one of the mention to you
that that that indenture is now
done, We have not issued bonds
against it. That probably won't
happen until next year because
many of those projects aren't
currently authorized. There are
a couple that did appear on the
legislation bill from last year.
And then lastly, Mr Chairman,
Our expected interim committee
activity as it relates to
program development, which 24
back page.
Pieces of legislation that
passed last year and this past
year this past session have
broadened many of the tools and
programs available at the N M F
a
And because of the way in which
our rules are promulgated or
established.
The the interim committee and
our board have to improve the
same set of rules. So you're
going to see before you this
year, a number of updated rules
so that we can implement the
changes that were made last year
and this past year. So for
instance, um, last year Senate
Bill 423.
Um, which was an endorsed bill
amended, Um three programs to
allow for working capital and in
some instances, moved the rule
making authority from our
partner agency over to an M F A.
So we have behavioral Health
Capital Fund, Primary care,
Capital Fund and Childcare
revolving fund. All of those
program rules will need to be
updated.
Two of them will come through
you.
We'll also have to update our
policies to allow for those new
uses.
This year's house built to 11.
That's that water project
Finance exchange that added
wastewater.
Um, it also, um
Requires an M F A to now set the
standard the financial standards
for the loans and grants that
received the funding before the
water Trust board had to set
that water trust portal men has
a process for its rulemaking
through, um, the New Mexico
Rules Act. Um, but the finance
Authority will now have to
promulgate rules as it as it
relates to
Financial standards so you will
likely see at least reports on
that, if not asking you to
actually approve those rules. So
we will be looking at the way in
which those have to be
promulgated, but there certainly
will be information ahead of you
this year about those changes in
rules and policies and again,
Both boards are going to have to
amend their policy and we're
going to have to get updated
rules in both instances.
Hospital 195 the Opportunity
Enterprise Act.
Also has to have updated rules.
One set of rules will go through
the New Mexico Rules Act. Those
are the ones that are being
promulgated by the Opportunity
Enterprise Board. They've
already started that, as a
matter of fact, they met last
week in initiated the formal
rulemaking process, and our hope
is that if we continue to thread
the needle on timing on the
calendar, that we will have
those done if
Finalized at the very end of
July, which means that we could
open up the program by about mid
August for the housing
development funds, so we're
really excited to have been able
to take that step last week. Um,
so that's where the opportunity
enterprise you, though, will be
asked to approve rules for the
housing development loans.
And updated rules for the House
for the opportunity Enterprise
loans, so there will be two sets
of rules that will ask you to
review and approve this year
related to the opportunity
Enterprise.
There will also be policies from
both boards on those programs,
and we'll be updating you on
those that you don't approve
those
And then lastly Senate Bill 216.
Those were the changes to the
PPR F, um to add housing. Those
rules will now need to be
updated in order to allow for
the housing and non profit
developers. Um, will also be
amending our policies and we'll
keep you updated on those again.
You won't be reviewing them and
you won't be approving them.
It will require that we update
the local government planning
fund rules to allow for those
new uses.
Um and those will come through
you.
And then it's very possible that
will need to update these
statewide Economic Development
Finance Act Conduit bond rules.
In order to facilitate the
nonprofit housing use of the PPR
F to keep them tax exempt. So
we're looking at those, but if
that has to happen that also
comes through you because all
the rules adopted pursuant to
sweat for an enema Fe Act all
come before this board this
committee
So, Mr Chairman, there is going
to be a lot of work ahead of
you. We have some exciting
updates to make during the
session to you as well on our
venture capital program on the
progress we've made in the
Opportunity Enterprise
Commercial Development Fund and
other things that we've got
going on. But that's the bread
and butter of the things that
will need you to do this year.
And, um, we asked for your
patients as we get through those
rules because there's a lot of
them.
And with that we are happy to
answer any questions.
All right. Well, thank you very
much. Marquita. That was
fantastic, as usual as Senator
Rodriguez and any others Just
let me know. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and Good
afternoon, Marquita. Thanks
again. As I always say, for your
great work, just a little point
of maybe elaborate a little bit
on the P p r F and what we did
with Senate Bill 216 that
Marcato talked about because one
of the reasons that it was
necessary to make the change on
the flood maps.
In archaeological plants enter
the local government Planning
fund. We actually took the PPR F
and then we added the local
government planning fund to the
same bill, and in that area we
put in some changes for grants
to be able to happen for local
governments, for example, and
the soil and water conservation
districts because the state
engineer's office many times
Requires these these plans and
these districts, Silliman Water
conservation districts can't
afford them, so they never get
going with those plants, and
that was one of the reasons so I
just thought I'd elaborate a
little bit. Thank you, Marquita.
Thank you, And they are excited.
They're eager folks are eager to
have that set of rules.
Actually, I thought that would
be sort of the last one. We do.
But we already getting requests
for the affordable housing plan
grants.
Um and we're getting requests
for when we can get those flood
inundation maps that are
necessary for these, they'll
soil and water conservation
districts to stay in compliance
with the officers, State
engineer so those should be
relatively simple rules, but
they will be ones that will ask
you to adopt fairly early on so
that we can start helping
communities with their
affordable housing act.
Plans. Thank you. Thank you.
Marquita for your foresight to
and your help. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Senator,
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I just
want to really say thank you to,
um Marquita and bringing on
Fernando's
Um Hmm. Huge. Thank you. Um, but
I think I'm gonna I'm gonna miss
him at at Rita, Mr. Chair, So I
want to know, um, in regards to
Rita. How
Or what we're looking at, you
know any proposed
Um help or innovation or
information coming from them.
And as you're working
As part of the authority with
Rita as we're looking to grow
out transition, and with all
this funding that we're giving.
And kind of plotting and
planning out, especially with
development loans and issues.
How we're going to work with
him. We're trying to meet the
demand of how we're building
out. The, um
With the E T A and transmission.
So, Mr Chairman, you know one of
the duties. I'm sure this will
be next on your agenda is to
oversee the activities of the of
Rita of the renewable engine
Energy transmission authority
doesn't really relate to. Mm Fe,
but honestly, with Fernando on
on board Now we have a much
heightened awareness of the
projects they're doing in
potential needs ways in which
some of our funding conduct tail
with some of their efforts.
I don't have anything to report
but it is now solidly on our
radar that there may be ways for
us to support some of their
activities or to help the
communities in advance of those
transmission lines coming
through or even after this
transmission line, So it's on
our radar, But I don't have
anything to report sir. Thank
you, Mr Chair right now, the
first and foremost thing that
we're doing, especially as we're
expanding what is going on with
NM FAA?
Is looking at our infrastructure
and the planning and development
of that, and it's crucial. It's
critical to what we're doing
here in New Mexico. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
And thank you, representative,
representative Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, just
real quick. Thank you for being
here. Thanks for the
presentation.
Just
Just because of last year, um
What we experienced. Is there
any way that, um we're able to
see those those rule changes
ahead of time with at least a
couple of weeks so that we can
review them and
Make sure that we have
conversation questions back and
forth, so we don't
Grill you sorry in the last
committee or one of the final
committees that certainly Mr
Chairman again. I think the
Maybe one of the sets of changes
will be more extensive. Just
because we haven't updated them
for a while, and that's for the
PPR F the others should be
relatively modest changes, but
we're very happy to get them to
you as early as possible so that
you can see them and again once
we know the schedule will start
working around that schedule.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Okay. Thank you, representative
representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you. Marquita again. Um
For a great overview. It's
always very helpful. So, um,
along the lines of
representative, um
Luhan.
It occurs to me that as we are
Ah!
Developing policies and then
Including much more.
In your arena for lack of a
better word. It's a huge
Um, arena that's growing.
Um
In terms of how are we? Or have
you all talked about
Process agency because you have
several
Agency, cross agency or inner
agency involvements.
Um, I'm curious as to how we're
going to
Um, recommend and integrate
renewable energy.
Development into, for example,
or housing.
Development.
Within the policy development.
Because
I think we're a little bit
behind.
And if we are going to be, um Mr
Chair, developing
Further housing, which increased
housing then I think that we
need to be prepared.
For, um not only integrating,
but promoting as much as
possible. The use of renewable
energy. Um
In terms of all
Uh, electricity, water, the
whole all of the infrastructure
of a housing development
project.
And
The second part of that is in
working interagency wise.
We need to also ensure
That we
Participate.
In the regulations and policies
from the federal level to the
state level because I believe
that
They are already
Integrating renewable energy
into their RFP s.
They're looking more favorably
in the request for proposals
that are going out. They are
encouraging the use of the
infrastructure.
Funds, and I believe there was a
presentation made by the
secretary of energy. I believe
not too long ago. I saw it on
something C span or something.
where she highlighted that they
were going in that direction and
encouraging states to follow.
And I think, also N C A. N C.
It's so thank you. NCSL will
have, um, a great presentation
in reference to that as well. So
I just I want us to be ahead of
the game because most of our
affordable housing
Is need to be affordable and we
need to find ways to reduce the
cost or to get rid of the
perception that if you go
renewable, um then it's going to
cost you more which is not a
good It's not true.
So the higher volume that we
increase in the world of of, um
renewable energy just like
anything else reduces the cost.
So that was a long winded way to
ask the twofold question that
I'm I'm really concerned about
how we're going to integrate all
that. Thank you, Mr Chair. Mr.
Chairman. I'm going to phone a
friend here.
We've we've exceeded my capacity
for renewable energy a while
ago.
Um, Mr Chairman, Committee
members delighted to be here,
especially in the new capacity
with great opportunity. I was
standing and excuse me for the
record. Just going to say your
name entitled, please. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, where that
was Okay, Mr Chairman, Committee
members. I'm Fernando Martinez.
I'm the deputy director at the
Mexico Finance Authority.
Um, delighted to be here today
and answer to some of the
questions that have come up.
Um, I'll start with with some of
the ones that representative
Luhan
Um
Brought up Mr Chairman,
Representative Luhan. Um there
are a lot of opportunities that
I see with a lot of the
programs, existing programs and
new programs that are coming
online from the Mexico Finance
Authority to work with.
Renewable energy developers as
well as transmission developers
in terms of workforce, housing,
broadband, Um
Other other things like that.
We're finding more and more that
when you go out into these
communities and you're putting
in these clean energy projects
that there has to be some
community benefits to it.
And working with the renewable
energy developers. There's
opportunities there to put
packages together for those
community. Uh,
Benefits packages, I think and
so I think in the very near
future, we will have an
opportunity to meet with the the
new Renewable energy
transmission Authority Director
Lynn Moss dollar of talked with
her some even before I left
about this, um about these
opportunities, and we will get
with some of the renewable
energy developers and
independent power producers to
see what sort of packages we
could put with these and work
with the communities that are
going to be impacted by these
projects.
Um, in terms of policy, Mr
Chairman and representative
Patricia Roybal cover cover,
little, Um Caballero just want
to say that that that is the
trend. You're exactly right
where we're trying to align the
local, state and federal
policies in terms of any time
that there's public funding
involved that you tie it in with
clean energy initiatives, and
there's a lot of ways you can do
that through the implementation
of community solar.
Or or other measures like that.
That or smart meters or things
like that when you're talking
about the housing, so there's a
lot of opportunity there.
Um, whether it's workforce
housing or if it's commercial,
housing or affordable housing.
There's ways you can incorporate
that because there are
opportunities to get to the
underserved communities here
that normally wouldn't have the
opportunity to have, um this
type of clean energy available
to them, and the whole idea
behind that is going to be to
generate
A lot of clean, affordable power
that's reliable, and I think
that's super important to the
state. Um, in terms of we can
have this clean energy for a
clean energy future, and it's
affordable for all it puts us at
a competitive advantage to other
states and and really helps our
citizens here in New Mexico, so
I think there's just a lot of
opportunities here to build and
strengthen the communities
through a lot of collaborations
with energy, Minerals and
natural resources Department as
well as the renewable energy
transmission authority in some
of these efforts and the public
regulation commission as well.
Mr Chair and thank you and I
welcome you on board. This is a
real asset. Thank you, Marquita.
Um, so along that same radar, we
need to start talking also about
geothermal.
Because right now there's
housing developments that are
being um, looked at not just in
Santa Fe but in some of the
rural communities and we're rich
in heat. And so in those houses,
housing developments. They can
then access um not just the
heat, but electricity is
generated from geothermal, so I
would keep that on the radar,
and I believe
Um, in that same presentation,
they referenced, um not just
community solar things that are
accessible to under served as
you mentioned and low and
moderate income because we need
to introduce, uh, there
World's to clean energy, but not
only that make it affordable for
them to stay in their home to
sustain their homes for the long
term. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative.
Any other questions from any
other committee members.
Going once. Okay? I have a
couple just real quick.
Thank you very much for the
report. This has been like I
said before. Excellent. We love
working with the leadership team
that you have there and thank
you to all the folks that came
from an M F A Today we really
look forward to the next year,
just real briefly on the new
rules that will be established
for the O E F. You know, I was
the sponsor when we created it,
and then this year's sponsor and
trying to get all that work
done.
Do you have a timeline on when
the rules will be completed and
Um, when applications will begin
flowing. Do you have any insight
on that? You talked a little bit
about it. But is there a
timeline? Mr Chairman? There is
a timeline. It's a tight
timeline. But the opportunity
Enterprise board met last week
and and formally initiated the
rulemaking process in advance of
the law, becoming effective as a
result of that action, we can
hope to have those rules in
place by the very end of July
like
July 30th of July 31st with the
expectation of opening up an
application by
Mid August will be working with
the board very closely in policy
development alongside the rule
development, but it does require
a public promulgation process.
Rule comment period. We've had a
lot of people very interested in
this, so I believe that we'll
have that board pretty active
between now and the end of the
summer, when the application
We hope will be opened.
Appreciate that. Thank you, and
is that for the full end to end
now that there's two swim lanes
there with Oh, yes, Mr Chairman.
The rules that the board is
adopting are it's one set of
rules for two programs. So once
that rule is done, will have
updated rules for the commercial
development fund, and we'll have
the new rules for the Housing
development Fund.
And then does this committee
need to meet to do anything to
activate those rules? Mr
Chairman, not for the O. E. R
B's rules because they go
through the rules Act. Um, but
our loans that we will make once
they've actually got
applications. Um, the loans that
we make will go through you. So
those are two of the rules that
we won will be updated and one
will be new. But those are two
of the rules that we're asking
for you.
To consider this year. My
expectation is that they would
be in the fall. I don't think we
need to get too far ahead of the
process. But again, I don't yet
know our schedule. So once we
know the schedule, we're going
to be asking to, um, will be
prioritizing the rules that
we're asking you to adopt so
that we get the most time
sensitive ones first.
Thank you. And just another
quick follow up there. So our
application, is it?
Is it? The practice of these,
um boards and application or
they all different.
To accept applications
throughout the year, or is there
going to be an opening closed
period? I know that when we
implemented the monies, or the
dollars for the pandemic relief,
um I think he had all in some
cases. It was all gone. The
moment you activated it.
Can you give us a little more
insight there, Mr. Chairman on
these programs. Um most all
these boards will open and an
application period because their
scarcity of the dollars Um
because of that there is a
prioritization process so
Because of the scarcity, we will
have competitive applications.
Um, and so there will be an open
up formal, open and close and
then all of that will be posted
on your website for the public
to view and all that Mr.
Chairman. Yes. And then the
current chair of the board is
Joe far. Is that correct? Mr.
Chairman? Yes. Is there a period
of time that he can be chair or
is is there
Is it a rotating role, or can he
be a re elected chair? And how
does that work? Mr Chairman the
bylaws provide for two year
terms for the chair of the vice
chair and the secretary. Those
terms are of June. 30 of this
year, the board will have a
nominating committee. We meet
again in two weeks for the O E R
B board, Um, and they will put a
nominating committee together.
They nominate and elect those
three officer positions, but
their two year terms and are
they renewable one after
another, or do they have to sit
out a two year period? They can.
There's no. There's no limit to
the number of terms they can
serve. Great.
And I guess we did a pretty good
job with that one then because I
really want to see that thing
moving along. So, um, that's all
the questions I had. We have
Madam Vice chair. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you for the
presentation. Great to see you.
On board as her deputy, Um
On the rules last, uh
Interim We had an issue because
we would get the rules and have
to vote on them at the same day.
I just like to request for rules
of if they can be sent out to
the committee before the
meeting, so we can take time
just to request Mr Chairman. I
hear all of you. Yes, we will.
Again. They weren't so
substantial as last year, so
we're hoping that they will be
more modest in scope.
And a little easier to absorb,
and you had a lot of them last
year week again Appreciate your
indulgence in patients from last
year, But those programs are
about to open. So the good news
is we got ahead of him and were
able to
Um, have programs ready to go
soon.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Vice
chair and thank you to the staff
and to you, Marquis to the Chief
executive officer there. We're
going to move on to our next
agenda item, So I'm gonna draw
everybody's attention unless
Sabina to go to the presentation
table. Please. Um, I'll draw
everyone's attention to the
white document within your
folder. This is our work plan
and meeting schedule and
locations, etcetera. I do want
to remind everybody that we have
Required things we need to do
and then we have other items
that we may have added to the
work plan, so there was a call
for those work items. Um, work
plan items to all of you at an
earlier date, and this is the
document that we've arrived at.
At this point. I'm going to ask,
Um Sabina to walk us through
first the work plan and then
we'll go to the meeting,
location, dates and locations.
Mr Share members of the
committee. So if you start on
Page two of the work plan
document
Um it's largely the same as last
year because it's an oversight
committee and
Everything's required by
statute, or isn't
Ah!
But first will receive the
reports from the entities that
we usually receive them from
like the Border Authority, the
colonias Infrastructure board.
Those are all under
Uh, item A and then we'll
receive the reports from an M F
A is required by statute like
with regards to the public
Project revolving fund.
Um is murky dimension. The new
report will be on the housing
development assistance under the
newly named Opportunity
Enterprise and Housing
Development Act.
Um and we'll also consider rules
adopted.
To carry out that on Page three.
Committee will hear from the
Cultural Affairs Department, the
bioscience Authority, Um
Mm. FAA Economic development
initiatives and the committee
will consider, um the need for
legislation to improve upon
existing statutes and programs.
Um, committee will look at
public private partnerships
again.
And there's also a catch all at
the end of
Would all like to hear.
And we turn to page four.
There is the meeting schedule
and the locations. Um, I want to
note that the September meeting
dates have changed.
From? I think it was like the
12th and 13th.
To the ninth 10th.
I think, he said. September is
that October It's September,
September, Okay, it's nine and
10. Sorry. 10 is correct.
Correct with that. I stand for
questions or okay, thank you
very much. Sabina. And again.
Thank you for your work on
getting all this together. We
have some questions,
representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I was just
looking at the, uh we will
receive reports from the border
Authorities, Spaceport Authority
and the New Mexico renewable
Energy transmission Authority is
that because we have also just
been designated to, uh, received
reports from them, but they have
They're not within any Mexico
Finance Authority. There are
separate thing, which we hear
reports from
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield. That's correct. It's
if they're in that list. For the
most part, it's required by
statute.
And like the border Authority is
required to
Uh, give a report to the
committee every year by a
certain date and
So is the renewable energy
Wonderful. Thank you, Mr Chair I
just was making sure from my own
understanding of the structure
that they were not part of it.
Um, if a, but they were
something that we got a report
from. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Okay. Are there any other
comments from members of the
committee on the work plan? We
will spend a little more time on
the meeting locations and dates.
We'll come to that in just a
moment.
Any other questions. I had an
item that I had submitted. Want
to make sure that it's here and
I'm reading this correctly, and
that is other potential or
innovative new types of
financing options. Which item is
that?
United are also spoken to, um
Marquita about that, just to
make sure that they were
comfortable with that, and she
did say that they were, um just
wanna make sure that I thought
I'd seen something but
Yeah, I guess we can make that
item number l or, um
I'm comfortable with that, but
I'd like to see is that we
Dig into new and different
financing mechanisms that are
done really around the country
that are working for others to
get larger projects done.
And in potential implementation
here through legislation,
whatever it is that we would
need to make some of those that
we like to work because we do
have excellent tools, mechanisms
modalities right now, but I just
think we should constantly be
looking at new and more creative
ways to get things done here.
Does that make sense?
To the
Mr Chair? Yes. Okay. Thank you.
Any other questions or comments
on the work plan?
Representative behind
Thank you, Mr Chair.
With the couch. All I'm looking
at page three. Is that, um
As things come up. I mean, as
we've addressed already today
with regard to infrastructure,
and I'm missing something.
And, um
I'm building out. Those
opportunities are looking at
those opportunities. As as
Fernando had just mentioned is
that something we could add?
Going over the list here. I'm
trying to see where that would
fit.
Mr Chair.
You know if you can give me some
assistance to you see anywhere
or if that's okay?
With the chair.
Mr Chair, representative Luhan,
it could be added as a new item.
I think possibly, uh,
I think it goes, it goes to what
the chair was speaking about new
opportunities and looking at how
some of these are doing more
specifically, you know.
Taylor to New Mexico and kind of
Hmm. Where those opportunities
are where we can meet those
needs even to what in regard to
what representative Robocop
Vietto was talking about. I
think that should be added to
The agenda. Thank you, Mr Chair.
So what is the committee wish to
do add items or catch all on
item Hill on Page three.
Catch on. Okay, So can you just
maybe for the committee's sake?
I know that I had one, which was
new, innovative financing
options. I think Representative
Luhan. Can you give us the what
you would call that I would say,
um, Infrastructure program.
Are building out the
infrastructure programs and
opportunities, I guess to catch
all Is it an educational item?
Or is it where we want the
committee to make some sort of a
decision?
I think that it could lead to a
decision through policy so then
it it will start out as an
education and then moved
potentially. Okay. All right.
Thank you. Any others? I think
you had one more representative
Robel caviar. Oh, you were
mentioned during representative
Hans comments. Did you want to
chime in
I just wanted to see you
captured it part of this. The
education leading to policy
decisions. Thank you. Thank you,
representative.
Any other comments?
On the work plan.
And I forgot Topic.
Representative,
Um Mr Chair. It was supposed to
be
All that representative Luhan
mentioned that you captured but
specifically in renewable
energy, clean, renewable energy,
and we have that to be in place.
Mr Chair. Yes, we can.
Okay, any other comments or
other topics or other things
that we'd like to see on this
work plan?
Okay, um, representative Block.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don't
know where this would fit in on
the agenda or the work plan, but
I do.
I would like to hear from rural
New Mexico communities,
especially regarding the O. E, R
B and other funds like that, and
maybe getting a rural group
perspective on many of these
Projects and how their needs
differ from
The Rio Grande corridor.
Maybe.
In addition to that,
Okay. Thank you, Representative.
We see that as an educational
item, or do we have a separate
educational? Okay, so well.
Catch alls catching a bunch of
all, isn't it? Yeah. Okay. So
represented block Does that Is
that sufficient? Thank you. Mr
Chair. This thank you,
Representative. Other items for
the work plan.
I'd like to vote on this
separately as the chair will
have that privilege. Um, all
those in favor of the work plan,
as designed
I'm sorry. We don't need a
motion or do we do we need like
a motion or anything.
Um, moved. Entertained
represented. Chatfield moved to
have a 2nd 2nd from the vice
chair. All those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed.
Carries, so let's just go ahead
and go over the page number
four. Sabine, I need to walk us
through that.
Dates and locations.
But you did briefly, but let's
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
We're meeting today on May 9th
and sanity but, uh, in July,
will be meeting in Albuquerque.
Mm. On August 12th and 13th and
Gallop.
The ninth and 10th of September
and succor Oh,
And October 9th. Surprisingly,
early is our last meeting.
Um, I think we have something
else going on in November.
So there's something going on in
early November. I'm not quite
sure what it is. Bless you.
Alright. Any comments, feedback,
Feelings? Emotions? Uh, I don't
know.
Representative Terrazas here. I
think they should all be in
Silver City will be very busy
that that thank you for your
comment that I said yes. That's
all. I got This chair. Yeah.
Quick question last year we
needed in November meeting to
finish up everything, so I just
want to make sure that we have
adequate meaning time.
To do all the work.
So just a little concern. I
don't know.
Marquita has an input on that.
Marquita, madam. Um, Mr
Chairman, vice chair is correct
the water Trust board.
Which does an annual
applications cycle is working.
Last year. We had the meat on
November 1st, and it really
pushed our clients. Um and so if
we meet any earlier than that
the final meeting is
In October and early October.
There won't be a recommendation
from the Water Trust board,
which is fine, they'll still
make a recommendation to the
Legislature. It just wouldn't
come forth as an endorsed bill,
but I just wanted to mention
that's the that's the one catch
on. Having that earlier meeting
is it's It's not easy or
possible for us to meet, uh
The water Trust board
authorization endorsement
timeline.
Okay. Thank you. And so, Sabina,
I guess.
Sean is not here, and I know
she's the keeper of the
calendar. She was here earlier.
Um
Can we just put a request in for
a mid November?
Is anyone opposed to that
representative of El Caballero?
Um I'm not opposed Mr Chair, but
it is advisable that we add that
day because we're going to have
a legislative council meeting.
Oh, which time we're going to be
approving all of our interim, So
if we put it in, that will be
part of the approval this
upcoming week before we make
that decision, representative
Lindstrom and infrastructure all
tied together, and we do have
other committees that work on
infrastructure, particularly the
tears committee. I'm wondering
if once we come up with our our
strategy from this committee
That someone yourself would go
to the final Tears committee and
ask that our stuff be dual
endorsed. In other words, I know
that you and I are super
interested in P three's the
infrastructure requests that was
made by the other legislators
here today. It makes sense that
they know what's going on also,
and it might
I'm not asking for a joint
meeting. That's too hard to
coordinate, but it would be
great if
You could have some
representation to show up and
say, Hey, guys, this is what
we've come up with. We'd like
your support. So if I'm more
than happy to do that, I'm sure
the vice chair is to speaking
for you. Sorry. Um, maybe the
two of us. We can take that off
line with you to get it arranged
on where you want us to go over
in here because they do have a
meeting in late November on the
according to this on the 25th
and 26th. Thank you.
Yep.
Anything else on that point,
Representative Cates. Thank you,
chair. Um, just a suggestion. If
we need a meeting in November,
um, to be able to just final
review of what we are looking to
recommend, I would suggest
November 12th and just to bring
it to the chair's attention. I
sit on the Transportation
Committee and so I'll be
attending that November 25th 26
meeting as well.
Thank you very much. Let's make
that an option. November 12th
Savina for the mid November
meeting, representative Thompson
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, we just
had to fight with lifts else
Legislative Council to get extra
days. So I'm just wondering, Is
it okay to just add extra days
without Legislative Council
approval, so that doesn't just
automatically happen because we
requested I am a member of
voting member of Legislative
Council. Few members are here. I
know Representative Rebel
coming. Are you voting?
You are voting, so she and I are
voting and others and we can
advocate for that representative
momento so we can we can
advocate but we have to come
with a plan. We can't just say,
Hey, we want another day one
day then we normally don't get
it if we just But if we go in
with this is why and this is the
date. Usually we get it, Mr.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And just,
um, so is it isn't lfc approving
the work plans before?
Legislative Council meets again.
Legislative Council actually
reproved them. It doesn't go
through legislative finance.
Okay. All right. Thank you. And
there's a budget already
designed. There's a little bit
of wiggle room in there. Is that
a great legislative term or not,
I guess. Live wiggle room,
little better with any other
comments on the dates times or
the one additional day of
November 12th November 12th as
an additional day.
I'd like it to be mid November.
Just because I think November
25th is right around things.
Okay? Alright, everybody,
Savina.
Mr Chair. Um, I have to double
check with Shawna about the
November 12 days just to make
sure because I don't know this
calendars are so crazy together.
But I'll follow up.
As soon as possible, right and
what I stated to the committee
is, doesn't just because we
requested doesn't mean we get
it. But if we go in with what we
want when we want it, it's
likely that we will get it so
we'll need you to try to add
that to that, and I can talk to
her. Also any other comments on
the schedule or representative
Chatfield, Mr Chair? Do we want
to make provision that if they
say no for November, the 12th
that
Sabrina is able to. Yeah, figure
out another day and not just
sender. Correct. Thank you. For
that suggestion, representative.
We'd like November 12th. But if
you can work it out, and I'll be
doing some of my work in the
background to sort of rebel
caviar and I can work with on
that to any other comments on
the schedule, the date or the
potential additional date.
I'll take a motion for approval.
Uh, represent Lundstrom. Moved
second by Senator Rodriguez. All
those in favor say Aye, aye
Opposed motion carries. Alright,
everybody, thank you very much.
We will stand in adjournment.
