The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yes.
Yeah.
Okay good morning everybody
good morning welcome to a new
mexico finance authority thank
you to the town of uh so correct
new mexico
new mexico tech university is
hosted I think this is the sixth
interim committee meeting there
a little bit over here as the
southern round house I guess
southern state capital this
summer wonderful thank you so
much for hosting us one invite
mayor to come on up to the
presentation table please make
yourself comfortable
you do have a document that I
believe he's going to prefer to
and talk a little bit about I
think you may have that in front
of you um thank you very much
and before we do that I would
like to ask the committee to
introduce themselves to start
over with representative.
A good morning mister chairman
vice chair member of the
committee ladies and gentlemen
mayor by jerry garcia I
represent houses sixty nine
would cover parts of some one
making mister ball burned you
wouldn't send to this in my
second time please you're very
nice thanks for the hospitality
thank you major.
The.
Good morning mister thank you
thank you for having us we
talked to mayor earlier and I
welcome the use compare a long
time ago uh to biping on us i've
been so auto often oh love the
area
tech has really really good
names from that they're here i'm
center david gage was district
forty one from leon eighty
county actually live in lee
county and little town called
unis but thank you for having us
thank mister thank you senator
can we go to representative
they'll accrue before we go to
representative blackplace
good morning a chairman vice
chair it's pleasure to be here
with everyone always enjoy
coming in so my name is art
delay crucially represent
district twelve in the heart of
the sovaley of albert kirky if
you can imagine the line of
demerication central avenue in
the north and I twenty five in
the south I would be roughly in
the middle of that area so
pleasure be here chairman thank
you
thank you
thank you mister chairman john
block house district fifty one
down in alama gordo and otero
county and is a beautiful drive
over here yesterday and I
appreciate everyone for binger
and I get on my chilly from
limitation I love it thank you
mister chairman.
Good morning mr chair and
members of the committee i'm
representative liz thompson
helps district twenty four which
is the northeast heights of all
the courtesy which includes wind
rock and uptown.
Good morning everyone i'm
representative kathleen kate's
from district forty four which
is all of koralis parts of rear
rancho unincorporated area of
alamita and the northern part of
albert tricky thanks
good morning mister chair vice
chair members of the committee
the audience and those watching
uh my name is patricia roybalka
by yetter I represent house
district thirteen in the fire
southwest quadrant of albert
cricket and i'm happy to be on
this committee once again i've
been on since I took office
thank you so much.
I will go with a representative
of madrid
more in chairman leicester and
the members of sacrament
supplies to be here again I was
here to spot a week ago and i've
found that it's a new home so
thank you all for having me and
that we did a great fifty three
o terror and donate.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
for allowing me to join your
committee today so you just last
week same place so welcome back
to the senate district I think
the mexico tech is now hosted
five interim committees here so
it's essential location I want
to think tech for for hosting us
all the legislators all summer
long for your hospitality we
appreciate it.
Good morning mister chair glad
to be here this morning good
morning members of the committee
my name is jack chat feel I
represent district sixty seven
kofax curry harding place and
make all in the union counties
and I want to say the last time
I was here the tokus out in the
experts from this college showed
us how to blow up a car we got
to watch and block a car sock I
want I want the same to her
at least this time
always good to be here and
really enjoyable thank you
well we do we can to get you to
these meetings representatives
our vice chair
thank you mister chair and state
rep joy garrett northwest of a
kirkey homo petrol national
monument it's great to have
meetings here because you learn
actually where to park where to
eat where to stay and then you
can ask the government a first
person to get that list of
number one accomplishments to us
very soon thank you in a tech
for it just hosting us it's a
wonderful experience.
Ok thank you madam vice chair
before I excuse myself i'm gonna
ask legs counts or committee
director of seven again her to
introduce herself and on the
other staff that is here
hi my name is vinigator mr app
attorney with the legislative
council service i'm sisted by
christine avaska and erika
lance.
Thank you alright thank you very
much senator michael pathy chair
this committee um have been in
the legislature for twelve years
on the senate majority whip I
represent the almost exact area
I I circle representative delay
cruises district there have ah
the southern portion of
bernaldio county than a voting
member of this committee the
entire time i've been here and
board it's been a joy and mr
mayor we know more about your
city I thought I but I could
give your speech now
you are so kind and so wonderful
to us and and also want to thank
mister monzano who is here with
us today as well and just i'm
sure you're just got a number of
things to do and then you know
the clamped show up on your
university campus here so here
we are and we're just so
grateful for all the kindness
that you show us I also want to
thank uh marketer russell and
her team from new mexico finance
authority continue to keep us
right on track with everything
that they're up to and all the
hard work that they're doing so
with that we're going to go
ahead and move over and thank
you representative i'm sorry
senator senator are brantley for
hosting us as well want to go
over to mr mare to talk about
support
thank you mister chair committee
members are senator brantley you
left
one of our favorite sons randall
gain home with you at the m f a
works from san antonio's father
and the buck corn so he's been a
great asset to us from our area
and again welcome and I know a
lot of people have already been
here once and that's been great
we'll host every time any time
you want to have a committee but
also current c r convention
center that you help to bank
role and so I want to just go
over the things that and i'm
afraid has done for us I have
with me ruby lopez the finance
director and choose actually has
more information than I do i'm
just the mouth she's the one
that does all the work so let me
let me start with you uh the
subsidiary sakora is one of the
small cities that has a landfill
and we initially started the
landfilled certification process
about twenty years ago and we
finally got a certified about
fifteen years ago and we have
it's expensive.
Uh the tipping fees are a little
bit more than what you would get
in syrah colorado or some other
places but we have the city and
the county and you'll hear from
magaline also mayor round physio
but an alamo they all use our
landfill and you have helped us
in the beginning uh to start it
we just open up a new cell a new
cell is a million dollars and
you issued that in may fifteenth
you also did our waterline
replacement you've already
arranged one of the best if not
the best in the state we feel
you started that and with the
senator moralison uh
representative trip at one time
are the ones who really helped
us to start it and then the
governor helped us but you have
given us a million five back in
two thousand and thirteen and
that really set us started we we
that probably is uh
worth more than that now but uh
we we certainly appreciated that
again in for infrastructure
projects such as the gas well
project which helped us put get
a bigger coup our gas line we
run the utility our gas line
comes from belin and it's a
forty mile
distance and we have to replace
some of the vows inside the gas
line to be able to have the gas
line more efficient and so that
you helped us with that
the fire truck very important
for us you have to show that
that fire truck now this is two
thousand and seventeen but
twenty twenty four that fire
truck now is a million dollars
it was four hundred and
seventeen thousand or it was
four and twenty five thousand at
one time but uh
the amount of money that it
takes to buy equipment now is
almost doubled uh the convention
center which is an old armory
I know mister cantana said he
was in the mechanism are he was
in one of the
national guard battalions that
used to use that.
But uh general shallis turned
that over to us several years
ago and you can see this was
back in twenty twenty we have
remodeled that into a convention
center and I hope that you have
a meeting in our convention
center and show you what this
money did for us the factor
truck is another infrastructure
thing and that's what is back in
twenty twenty was two hundred
and fifty thousand and if you
look at communities now a vactor
truck is almost three hundred to
four hundred thousand dollars
the wells for the the meters the
landfill and other projects that
we just started this is the new
sal was a million million six
again if you notice the interest
rates are really very favorable
to us you know at one time we
used to go have bond issues uh
we had kires and company i've
been i've been married for about
thirty three years and we used
to have we used to have kires in
the company do our bond and that
was back
maybe twenty five thirty years
ago we'd have to do that I never
went to new york to sell the
bonds but they would take it in
new york and have all this thing
but with the n m f a
and for good or bad is is really
done good for the cities and the
minister is when we can get this
kind of interest rate and not to
have bond attorneys and all that
so has been it's been very good
the last thing uh two things we
are a.
Natural gas utility and the vw
settlement uh the the penalties
that they paid we got a two
million dollar grant to convert
our diesel and I must say it's
not electric but it's natural
gas
and we felt the natural gas was
a next logical thing to go to
rather than electric.
An electric garbage truck is
eight hundred thousand dollars.
A nat and that's a real look at
a real loader twenty six uh cuba
yards a natural gas garbage
truck is four hundred and eighty
thousand dollars
a digital truck is three hundred
and fifty thousand used to be
too twenty
we did was we would this vw
settlement
we dead by three dump trucks or
national gas because where the
utilities we fell it up.
And we got two residential
garbage structure for a million
almost five hundred eight so
that were that was part of the
bridge long that you guys
provided us and then a landful
compactor
twenty twenty three a compactor.
It used to be four hundred five
hundred thousand.
And it was it's nine hundred the
new one that we got was nine
hundred thousand so that's a
total of nine million six
hundred thousand are are turning
principles down to five million
four hundred and eighty six
thousand
we do have we do have a bank
account with you which pays
pretty good interest with the
finance authority and and where
we're certainly happy to invest
that and so I can only say thank
you very much uh the new medical
finance authorities been a boom
for a small community like ours
and we hope you continue the
good job and give ring all gain
arrange
thank you again chairman
committee members
okay thank you very much any
other comments from your
neighborhood
that's you i'm really locus i'm
the finance director and I do
work with enemy and it's it's
really it's an easy process with
them and we do qualify for a
hundred and fifty thousand
disadvantage so
it does help out a lot and of
course the interest rates are
good thank you.
Okay thank you very much just
looking around to see if we have
any comments or questions about
direct i'll come for you to you
for an introduction first
representative assist of
yourself and then if you have
any questions for the presenters
thank you mister chair thank you
committee thank you president
thank you very much for your
presentation only stars as just
to thirty nine in grant hit a
vote catch from counties near
silver city and so i'm glad to
be here thank you for uh in or
tell me what you while making
your presentation I just require
you cannot caught my attention
where you started talking about
the payload of the electric
uhm order to garbage truck and
so I just want to just quickly
ask you did it change the
payload from because of the
batteries or so forth from that
electric um garbage truck to a
diesel one can you explain that
to me or even the I guess the
natural gas one can give me the
payload differences if you have
a no mischairman committee
member representative the
payload and change
their their good strong trucks
but then the other thing I
didn't mention was that you have
to put in about a two filter
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars charling station
so on top of that after you get
the truck so no the pale did
they don't go anywhere from
twenty two to thirty cupic yards
and are you know our regular
that gives you usually one trip
around we'd pick up about four
hundred at one time four hundred
to fifty uh can't and so that
that you can make one trip
around with that without having
and you can go into small areas
if you have a I mean if you get
the ba- we don't have a friend
in front loader we have the rear
loaders with the hydrolic which
and so
it's about the same size of the
same thing with the natural gas
and the digital dead they're all
the same size
and in your answer my second
question that about the
charging station so thank you
very much that's all I want to
hear thank you very much thank
you.
Thank you very much
representative just looking
around to see if we have any
others are right senator robert
is if you'll introduce yourself
and also if you have questions
for representatives they are
given to chairman good morning
to the presenters i'm nancy
senator nancy rogery guess from
santa fe and I don't have any
questions here with you today
and mister chairman
okay well thank you very much I
think that you've presented
actually i'm guessing two or
three times now to some of the
committee members here so we're
just very thankful that you've
welcomed us you're you're nice
central geographic location and
the state really helps us to get
to you rather easily so thank
you very much for your
presentation we're going to go
ahead and continue moving on
thank you thank you very much
thank you committee members okay
so now we're going to ask to go
to the next item here
update on the drinking water
state revolving loan fund will
have john brooks chief programs
new mexico finance authority
michael vonder
managing director public
programs new mexico finance
authority.
The.
The.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee michael bonder
hide it with the new mexico
finance authority.
So which see before you is an
update on our dricker water
state revolving long phone
program this is a one of our
legacy programs at the finance
authority
and we'll go over this
particular program and give an
update
started with the background in
regarding the take a water state
we've offered long phone it was
established in nineteen ninety
six a part of the federal safe
trick of water at which was
desired to use
repair replacement a creep safe
water infrastructure throughout
the united states.
And so this was a federal
program that was passed by
congress in nineteen ninety
seven congress to appropriate
and an annual funding mechanism
for this particular program and
then beginning
to uh create a ward from the
environmental protection agency
or epa
through a capitalization grant
mechanism.
In the particular grant with it
when it allows for us to do as a
state is put in the evidence of
plan oh how we were fund
programs
and then uh find different set
asides or activities with the
the program but also create if
what we call a fundamental list
of all the projects that we find
on a annual basis.
With that particular fundamental
list and and that application
through a tiny use higher the
status to provide a twenty
percent match for the fine so
every time we apply for the
grant we have the identify
twenty percent state match in
order to go with uh the the
phones that we confirm to
federal
federal allocation
based on the state jicker water
revolving phone act
it isn't a minister jointly by
the economic develop you can act
new mexico environment
department through the dricker
water bureau and also the new
mexico finance authority the
finance authority is the state's
grand tea were responsible for
submitted the grant
and the applications to epa and
also provide the the state match
providing financial assistance
and minister the mom monitor the
projects and the financial
reporting
sets the section of the program
we have made a hundred and
ninety lounge towing three
hundred and ninety million
dollars throughout the state of
new mexico.
In two thousand eleven there was
changes that the federal level
which require a federal subsidy
that which in a method delivers
to all our loan recipients or
most of our long recipients uh
through a principle forgiveness
because the way that the active
structure we are unable to
provide grants so we can't make
a grant and end up long
combination what we do is
provide a principle for given us
and then a long component after
that and so with that that is
sort of the background of the
drink of water revolving long
for a program in michael will go
it to some of the components of
the program
thank you john and good morning
again and excuse me my apologies
I guide to hate to interrupt you
we did establish a corner and I
want to make sure that I get
these minutes approved on the
official record so i'm just
going to take a brief resperate
break here for just a second you
have minutes in front of you
committee we do have a corner
these were sent to you several
days ago it was about a week ago
um i'll entertain a motion to a
doctor minutes from the last
meeting
senator or the biggest moves do
we have a second.
Representative thomson is second
all those in favor of ci
although suppose cn is habit
minutes adopted thank you very
much committee thank you sir
please can pursue.
Okay
my apologies mister chairman
members of the committee
as john mentioned our we're
providing a no review of the
drinking water state revolving
loan fund he also mentioned that
a twenty seven percent of those
federal capitalization grants
are used for a set aside
activities mostly at the new
mexico environment department
they have a capacity development
program they have a small
systems technical assistance
program though the environment
department is also the primacy
agency for the state and so
their responsible for the public
health aspects of the program
and enforcing the safe drinking
water act and and implementation
of those set aside activities
the environment department is
also responsible for reviewing
and ranking project except
submit pre applications and
providing a fundamental list of
projects that are prioritised by
the environment department for
the finance authority to phone
from the loan fund.
Eligible entities are very
bright eligible entities really
any public water system that's
publicly or privately owned or
community water systems non
profit non community public
water systems are eligible for
the program so if a water system
has a public water system number
they are eligible whether they
are public or private
some eligible projects for the
drinking water estate revolving
loan phone drinking water
treatment water line storage
tanks wells meters in our
between systems and now with the
recently passed by partisan
infrastructure law we're also
funding lead service line
inventories and eventually
replacement of those lines if
they're to be found and emerging
contaminants studies that are
ongoing and treatment for those
types of projects as well
and so turning to slide four
I mentioned the bipartisan
infrastructure law the bill this
is a very acronym heavy program
so I apologize in advance for
that
but historically we'd received
about eight million to eleven
million in federal funding for
this program up until about two
thousand two that's when the
bill increased funding levels
for the drinking water state
revolving loan fund and it did
add those two new sub programs
as well the lead service line
replacement program as well as
the emerging contaminants
program so with that increased
funding in federal and state
fiscal year to twenty twenty
three we receive a total of
twenty five million uh in
federal funding through our
regular bay scrant as well as a
general supplemental grant that
was authorized by that act
again mf provided that twenty
percent match that's required
through the pprf you're familiar
with the p p r f appropriations
bill thank you representative
garage for carrying that last
year that allows us to provide
the state match uh for the
drinking water estate revolving
loan fund
last fiscal year twenty twenty
four we receive a total of more
than sixty one million.
Federal funding that included
the base program general
supplemental as well as the lead
service and emerging
contaminants programs that I
mentioned earlier
again we provided that twenty
percent state match through an
appropriation from the p p r f
that was a six million dollar
appropriation.
This fiscal year we already have
three applications in for
federal capitalization grandsons
are totally more than thirty
five million we have another cap
grand application and
development perhaps a second
emerging contaminant's grant
those are about seven million
dollars
the state will not be submitting
an application for the most
recent allocation of the lead
service line inventory
it has not been much demand for
that funding we receive twenty
eight million dollars last year
we are working through that
funding we've allocated about
half of the loan find out to
projects that are proceeding
with those lead service line
inventories.
Are turning to page five jan
also mentioned the subsidy
factor of this program from two
thousand eleven when subsidy
first was introduced into the
program at prior to that had
been one hundred percent loan
through twenty twenty two we
required to deliver a minimum of
six percent of our annual
capitalization grads to provide
that subsidy to disadvantage
community assistance are a
disadvantaged community
assistance program the bill
increase that mandate to a
minimum sixty one percent so
that is a large amount of
dollars than going to
entities that qualify for the
disadvantage of community
assistance program so we did
make some changes to the
policies and twenty twenty two
we increase the number of
entities and communities and new
mexico public water systems
that would benefit that we're
then qualify for that
disadvantage finding that change
resulted in about two hundred
additional severely
disadvantaged areas in the state
which then can get the maximum
of subsidy available under the
program.
Is essentially grant like terms
i'd offer is a hundred percent
principle for giving us on all
those loans.
Ah you'll see breakdown of some
of the changes that we made in
twenty twenty two
what we began to do is look at
affordability criteria and
compare our communities to the
national mhi rather than the
state m h I it's a national
program we felt that was
appropriate I certainly is open
the door to many communities who
can now take it vast of better
interest rates and additional
disadvantage funding and
additional subsidy.
Um any disadvantage community
would receive fifty percent
principle for giving us under
this program severely
disadvantaged seventy five
percent you can see the
percentages we use there for
seven really disadvantaged
seventy five percent our less of
the national m h I would qualify
for that seventy five percent
finding
and then between seventy five a
but less than a hundred would
qualify for that fifty percent
of federal subsidy on their
loans from the finance authority
we also removed the catholic
service cap up to one million
dollars to fund it zero percent
and the remaining would be
funded a non disadvantage rate
we remove that cap so it is zero
percent interest for all of our
folks at qualifying the
disadvantage of community
assistance program we in fact
took a page from the environment
departments clean water program
and moved our interest rate down
from one percent on the non
disadvantaged communities to
point zero one percent and these
loans can go up to thirty years
for folks that qualify for the
disadvantage of community
assistance program
turning to flight six.
We want to mention some of the
current program activity
it's important to know we have
performance measures from the
epa they measure the utilization
rate really against all
available funding sources those
of the capitals we talked about
that we apply for plus the state
match which comes from the
pprath and then also principle
and interest repayments that are
coming back into the fund we
call those tier two funds but
those are available to be lent
out as well
historically it's been a
difficult program to run with
all the other funding sources
available that that offer grants
in terms of capital outlay the
grant portion of water trust
board and colonious
infrastructure board can be up
to ninety percent of grant like
terms for those programs and
other low cost loans that are
available through the pprf
and the new mexico environments
departments rural infrastructure
program
but we continue to four john the
increased federal funding and
those new programming
initiatives have made it a bit
of a challenge to meet those are
rigorous utilization
requirements but performance is
strong we have over committed
our loan signed by about thirty
five million dollars we're able
to do that because of the
revolving nature of the fund
with those interest and
principle payments coming back
into the phone as well as
additional grants we're able to
overcommit the phone we use them
a cash modeling to make sure
that we have sufficient funds
when those dispersements are
due.
Then over the past couple years
as we want to mention I think
with with many other
construction programs that
aren't are disbursements were
were lagging in comparison to
the number of awards we make in
the number of loans that we've
closed and that those high
dollar amounts primarily just
due to competing projects and
priorities of other funders but
we want to mention that we've
got twenty three projects now
that are inconstruction that's
over a seventy five million
dollars that are in construction
now as well for dispersements
coming through so the program in
this fiscal year we've already
processed about five million
dollars in disperse miss here
just in the first two months a
fiscal year twenty twenty five
and so that is a really positive
sign for the program we have our
project over a site manager here
donna quintana whom whom you
know he is now actively involved
in monitoring these projects
he's looking at drawdown
schedules project completion
timelines really just a a great
resource for us to keep these
projects moving to get the money
into the ground and just to
continue the success of the
program.
Are the final slide of number
seven is a chart we wanted to
show the last six years the last
fiscal year is twenty nineteen
through twenty twenty four in
terms of our binding commitments
those are awards those are
projects that are approved by
our board as well as the volume
of loans that we've closed and
then of course the uh
dispersement.
You see that their dispersements
are you know in the sort of nine
to ten million dollar range over
the last couple of years but the
number of awards we've made in
the dollars of between sixty and
seventy million for the last
three fiscal years and we did
close ninety three million
dollars in loans for this
program injure in fiscal year
twenty twenty four that's a
that's a record for the program
so we certainly saw a little bit
of a downturn through the
pandemic that the increased
funding from the bill
are additional oversight that
we're providing again it really
both well for the future of the
program uh we've got this our
third year a bill finding we'll
have two more years of the
bipartisan infrastructure lying
to his funding levels and we
feel at the program is on the
right track that we want to show
you where we've been and and
where we hope to go
and so with that mister chairman
I think that includes the
slides and john and I would be
happy to answer any questions
from the committee.
Okay thank you very much for
your very efficient presentation
thank you
learn so much from you guys
alright i'm just looking around
to see if we have
questions here I have
representative kits.
I thank you chair and thank you
very much for your presentation
I know that yeah absolutely
there's a very efficient
presentation but just to
clarify.
The low dispersement amount is
not during the covet years it's
the share.
So i'm assuming part of that
dispersement is well because is
that this year or is we're
calling at twenty four and it
was dispersed last year
disbursement said mister
chairman on member that
dispersements that were
processed in fet and fiscal year
twenty twenty four.
Thank you and you said that the
their low because their other
funders out there yet you've
closed so many so um
is it just a matter of timing or
do you see that
but people are scrambling to try
to access right now mister
chairman and member I would say
that
it really has just been all the
the issues that we that we know
about in terms of just inflation
and construction contracts and
you know sort of a lack of of
bidding and and bids that come
in higher than the funding
sources that are available and
just those things just delay
they end up delaying the
dispersements for the project so
while the projects have been
approved while the loans are
closed we've just seen various
reasons what your national
reasons I don't know that
there's a specific to new mexico
that have just really delayed
those dispersements getting out
the door but now we see here in
the first two months already of
this fiscal year and we've
processed half as much as we did
all of last fiscal year so we
feel it's on the right track
just various reasons for those
delays and just getting to
actual construction and getting
the money in the ground thank
you thank you manager I just
want other questions you see
that the the
the lead service line
replacement are for community
water systems would public
school systems.
That are obviously a part of
community water systems would
they be eligible for these low
interest mister chairman yes if
if they are if they have a
public water system number and
they are a school that is
delivering water and they are
part of the drinking water
bureaus under their perview as a
public water system then yes
absolutely they would be
eligible for the program.
So think you mentioned well
unless so you're saying that our
public school system so are are
the public school systems
accessing this to be able to
replace.
A lines going into are are
buildings our public school
buildings for mr chairman and
member I would say that the
environment department has been
working with the with the public
schools then and schools in
general
on these issues a prior to this
funding being available we have
not had a a school system come
in yet to to do an inventory to
another mostly municipalities
but yes we have not had one come
in yet
thank you very much
thank you
representative robot cover yet
you're next thank you madame
chair and thank you for your
thorough presentation on fact
page for I also have questions
concerning the um
the uh
none application the last item
on the on the age.
Where you're not to seek um
submit another application and
it's sort of along the same
lines on it concerns me because
as we all know that is a major
factor in really older pipelines
piping systems.
And we also understand madam
chair that are schools around to
create it and other public fund
structures are as well county
courthouses city of someone so
how do we.
Besides the environment
department how do we.
Insure.
That were actually meeting a
need perhaps they are not
applying maybe that has
something to do with the way in
which we're outreaching or may
be information and flow whatever
have you been able to gauge why
that is and then.
How we can intervene so that we
don't necessarily so that they
can apply thank you manager.
Mad insure and member of coverer
that's an excellent point we
absolutely do rely on the
environment department as the
enforcement arm if you will the
compliance arm of this program
and of the safe drinking water
act
to make sure that they are
reaching out of to everybody
who's eligible for this program
at week we do the same at our
level at the finance authority I
know that many and I can't speak
to if it's schools but many
applicants have started the
process they have submitted that
pre application they just simply
need to follow up with the
environment department and make
sure that they're providing the
supporting documents that the
environment department needs to
put those entities then on a
fundamental list that then is
delivered to the finance
authority through what's called
an intended use plan so I know
it it sounds alarming in terms
of the sort of lack of I don't
may not be a lack of interest in
just that folks have not
provided all the documentation
that they need to get through
the pre application process so
that they can be put on a
fundamental list we did receive
twenty eight million last year
forth for the lead service line
funding as I mentioned early
were about halfway through that
allocating that to water systems
those are really just for the
inventories to understand what
are the materials what are those
water lines made out of and so
we're we're working through that
but to then apply for an
additional twenty eight million
on top of that as we're still
working through
is just money that as of now
which would probably not be put
to us as we're still working
through that for a sprant so I
absolutely understand your
concern I think there is folks
there in the system they just
haven't made it all the way to
us yet
thank you madame manner chair
representative in terms of the
at the other portion of your
question regarding outreach our
staff is
a tinning various conferences.
You know the drink water
conference or they have and also
the infrastructure conferences
and also going to you know and
different and stake holder
meetings of which we're talking
to public water systems about
these particular programs and as
michael alluded to once we you
know we make the connection at
at that level they have to
follow through and make the
application through the fire
department.
Thank you madame chair follow up
question
is.
In the grant arm.
Application process is there
anything that prohibits us.
From applying.
Or reapplying I would say or
getting requesting another grant
and when is the next funding
cycle the next.
Um application cycle that you
can tap into i'm just wondering
if the feds have restricted our
ability or is it just part of
our fiscal management that we
want to make sure that we're
getting as much done under one
and completing that because it
it really does concern me
because then then toys a
critical
its critical that these
inventories occur and also it
concerns me because in the
smaller rural communities where
our school districts are removed
in someone um they probably are
the most in need and so i'm just
wondering if we're placing our
own restriction on that
reapplying or is there something
in the ground application that
prohibits us from doing some.
Madam chair and representative I
don't know that there's anything
in the rat application that
would would prohibit us from
doing so but we certainly have
been meeting with e p a
regarding these caperiod
applications making sure that
there there will be future
applications available there is
two more years of bill funding
that will include additional
funds for the lead service line
program as well as the emerging
contaminants program now there
may be changes at the national
budget level of how those funds
get allocated but they certainly
have been consistent with the
funding levels in a lot for the
states throughout this time
period so there will be this it
there will be additional
opportunities for the state to
apply for a future dollars this
one this this next one just did
not seem a appropriate given the
we do not have a a fundamental
list of projects if you will to
move forward we're still working
through that that first grant
but things are starting to pick
up a little bit thank you madam
chair and finally I would just
say that the we we need to find
ways to kind of increase so
outreach maybe through the
school board association works
superintendent whatever it aches
are to get word out into those
smaller communities thank you
madam chair.
Any other questions I I have one
question for the two of you.
In our state we often have
drinking watering emergencies a
couple of years ago it was
charmer is the drinking water
state revolving long fun and mf
introduction with the
environmental department how do
you address those emergencies
where people have gone through
this process because it's an
emergency is that a role that
you play.
Madam chair yesterday as and
again we since the environment
department that since the
drinking water bureau really is
in tune to every water a system
out there any issues they might
be having uh we always direct
them as a first stop to the
environment department so they
can work with them so that if
this funding sources is a viable
option for them we we wanted to
we wanted to work for them but
we we
you know we we offer these fine
serve you know to those who are
available to take that on it
sometimes it doesn't work in
terms of the timing and so forth
but if they do contact the
environment department and
submit that pre application and
work towards getting on a
fundamental list we can move
expeditiously at the finance
authority through our process
are monthly board process so we
certainly
understand there are emergencies
out there and other issues that
water systems are facing we just
direct them to the environment
departments they can get into
the system and two us and once
they get to us we can certainly
move expeditiously through our
process to get the to get an
award out there.
See no more questions.
Representatives around us
thank you patternshire I wait
but uh print not like a.
Hearing or see it did the other
day or earlier
manager I think thank you very
much for your presentation sir
my question here is on page.
I don't know what page it is and
how page number o six versus a
long time is over overly
committed by thirty five million
dollars and I knew you cannot
kind of rush over that but.
Can you explain that one more
time to be police certainly
madam chair and represent the
because it is because of the
revolving nature of the fund and
this fund has been around since
nineteen ninety seven that was
the first cap grant that new
mexico received we have
annually repayments coming in in
principle on interest we also
have the state match and the
additional dollars that come in
each year through the federal
government through epa so it's
look at they look at as as a
whole listing it's the entire
program uh that then would be in
available to lend out so are we
we are able to over allocate
over commit if you will because
we know there will be additional
capacits coming into the state
we know that annually we have
about eighty nine million
dollars coming back into the
fund through pennsylv- uh
principle and interest
repayments and so we're able to
over allocate which is what we
call by new commitments are no
in that it may be a year to or a
year let's say before they
actually get to be desperacing
the funds so there is some time
that's why we use our some cash
low modeling to try to project
out over the next five years
what funds will be available
when will the bills come do in
terms of the dispersements so we
do keep a close watch on that up
and I hope that I hope that
answers your question
somewhat manager gentleman I
just
so this projection of thirty
five million is over the next
five years old i'm understanding
the currently we have over
committed the fund by thirty
five million dollars that is
just a current status we've got
you know about a hundred million
dollars and two or two funds
those repayments that I talked
about that have come back in
into the find so if you take
that plus the capraints we have.
Were thirty five million dollars
over that in terms of what spend
committed to water systems
they've not closed the loans yet
nor made any dispersements are
those commitments but we're just
able to do that based on the
revolving nature of the fund
okay I just I mount sure the
only reason I asked that it's
because I just.
Private banking is a little bit
difference I just I just you
know what i'm saying without me
getting into that deep and so I
just my only question to that
would be what if there was an
interruption.
I don't know we were looking at
the economy right now we're
looking at you know or my
opinion
it's a little shaky looks a
little rough
and so my question would be is
what happens if there's an
interruption of your cash for
these commitments is what what
steps would you have to take to
meet your overcome
mr chairman it and member I
would say we would just look at
all are available sources we
talked about the interest and
and principle payments coming
back in there's also interest
earned on the fund there's other
sources was it within that two
or two dollars that should there
be a disruption they would have
to be fairly catastrophic I
would think you know we've
certainly projected out over the
next one year two years you know
to make sure that we're we're at
a comfortable level so we don't
over promise by a a large amount
but we want to make sure that
that's manageable I mean still
keep in line with the with
projects moving forward
thank you manager I just want to
understand that a little bit
better thank you so much
thank you see nobody else thank
you so much for this important
presentation that will move now
uh to the local recipients of
animal faith financing a richard
roms the mayor the village of
magdalena and and you can sell
our city manager in tooth their
consequences.
It's going to hit the button
that has looks like something
you go I was that better
most of the chairman and
community members thank you for
inviting me here today
wanted a like to start out and
compliment
the
financial thirty staff in santa
fe
closure to work with
knowledgeable and they always
have a solution to many times
you're an into no we can't do
that they always look for a way
to help myself
i've been very thankful for
their input right now we have
loans on fire truck guard some
equipment
we have some a law enforcement
vehicles in the process i'd have
been very proactive helping us
with these loans are were
disadvantaged community so it's
nice to have the phone and
authority resource out there
my goal is the mayor is there
make sure the village has the
best equipment are lottery years
of service on it
we're looking ahead right now we
help an emergency request in I
think through drinking water for
a replacing an old deductible
cast iron line it keeps breaking
we're all to reach you note for
two
grandson plemonary engineering
reports for water and wastewater
our system is quite all the
wastewater system is the old
clead tile that started collapse
so we're looking at getting
these done and and reaching out
for funding
next year and in the twenty
sixth and twenty seven
so there are trying to be pro
active silver problems
it's nice to have the finance
authority there to help us out
I really don't have my child to
say that and thank you uh
helping our community move
forward.
Are
we have a lot of
plans in the works we have va
major improvements that are
airport and street funding
so I guess that's all I have
alright thank you very much
that's go to misconduct
good morning mister chair madam
chair and members of the
committee
I know it's getting late it's
getting lunch time but please
forgive me i'm going to pass
this out while you watch and
look at my waterlines in t c on
the city manager in t c
and so i'm gonna pass this out
I was.
Ok now when you get your
booklets and i'm sorry before
you continue a firm air round
can come back with any of some
questions for you after the
presentation so come on back up
if you would mind sir thank you.
Okay good right ahead now and if
you want to pass the water lines
around to or you just want us to
see those why not let's take a
look at those if we can get
those to the committee please
apologize to try harvard
no problem on the problem
right of you can turn off your
certain if you want to leave
yours on
you may or if you want to turn
your my car there you go
all right mister chair and
madame vice charit and members
of the committee then when you
get your little booklet I
intentionally folded a piece for
you to go right to because
representative heats you made a
comment that caught my ear and I
wanted to show this are directly
to you is this ms this this msd
this main street district road
surface improvements
that was funded by new mexico
finance authority colonials it
was it was funded it was awarded
in january of twenty nineteen
I drove by at this morning and
they are still working on it
I wish I was kidding.
That that in its just a tiny
tiny little street it's a street
right in front well not run from
catty corner from my office down
and so it's a block across the
intersection and another block.
It is cursed
it is called it macado street
and everybody in town is now
calling it macadon street I
promise when i'm when I kick the
bucket i'm gonna be buried in
that thing because it is just
been one thing after another in
their street now
representative cates I just
wanted let you know they had
been tried to.
To award it course engineering
takes time and then they awarded
it three different times the
third time we still had to go
back and cut it up into
different pieces but that's not
even the really in or well as me
thing last summer we finally
started construction on this
teeny tiny little project.
We are still working on it it's
been fourteen months later we're
still working on it now part of
it is my fault
I asked for we finally got it
going we ran into waterlights we
ran into fiber lines we ran into
every single telecommunication
or communication line that you
possibly could is right there in
that street.
The watertable in that area is
about eighteen inches low or
eighteen hi lol something right
there it's right there
I could dig a hole and hit the
water the water table and
because it's right over the top
of the house brings the the
hotsprings table okay.
We finally get all that fixed we
finally get all of the that the
telecommunications moved we
finally get all that stuff
moved.
Anna movie shows up and wants to
want to film their movie right
in the middle of t c.
I think I cried and and I
probably cursed because they
wanted that street and in order
for them to stay at the in order
for them to film that that that
that movie the street had to
stay a state's stay the same so
I called my representatives I
called our people and said look
this is what's going to happen
but I really in in my heart my
soul I believe that the movies
movie industry in our in our
state is very.
Is advantageous to us and I
really did not want to check
them out.
For this little tiny
little tiny project.
So what we did is I put them on
I put the contractor on pause.
Told him he has to be back the
end of me so we had a movie
actually filmed in is called the
edington.
Phoenix.
I can finish walking phoenix
yeah all kinds of neat stars it
was it was really kind of
interesting to look at your
window and see people out there
running around doing movie stuff
it was me
so that was a project.
Then we start up again in may
and of course what happens in
june july in august in new
mexico
our brain are arranged starts up
now last week where this close
to finishing it we have a
another water line that's in the
way that we didn't even know was
there so now I have my what is
it it's my title I can force
people to do things that they
don't necessarily want to do
no I directed my water direct
department to go and move this
water meter
and so that will be done
tomorrow morning.
And then finally we can leave
pavement on that little piece of
that little piece of downtown
truth or consequences and we
will get it into we will get the
finishing product in well the
finish I will keep the finished
product we will get the
paperwork into you guys and we
can finally put a stop and a
finish bowl on
msd
main street district road
services project for one point
one million dollars that is five
years in the making.
That's just one thing.
My entire might might my packet
at the very beginning it just
really should I know it i'm not
going to go through it I already
took up to a lot of your time
the water leaks in our city
the but I really wanted you to
see the pictures
of of our water leaks and of
course water leaks classes pot
holes and
and then you know where the the
the hot spots around the water
leaks fixed how much it caused I
don't have to exceed anything to
anybody but how expensive it is
to fix
infrastructure but I also left
it that toward the end there I
just really wanted to show you
that new mexico finance
authority as much as we
appreciate everything and we
have got our little fingers in
every part of money you guys
have but we also utilize usda we
utilise anybody.
III was at the point where I was
almost your point of of putting
a golf on me up.
And
and so I just really wanted to
give you this kind of
information to review and in and
of the very end of it there's a
huge piece paper that's cut that
is.
Folded in house and it'll show
you that throughout all the
different funds all the
different projects that we have
that are funded seventy one
point four million dollars
through slowing through **** are
little bill our little city and.
And it's not just infrastructure
that you help us with
you also have helped us
purchase a
and about not abandoned buddy
and you an old building on old
bank building that i'm going to
move my my police department
into
you have helped us you helped
with the hospital you've helped
you you're funding is so
important to these communities
to the size of macdalena to the
size of to your c to the size of
the coral and we just
with your bonding and we just
could.
We couldn't do what we do
without your help and I just
really want to make that very
very very clear
I stand for any questions
okay thank you very much for
your presentations senator
gagas.
The.
Thank you miss chairman thank
you
I want to go back to some of the
discussion and cheers say about
her five years in did you see so
I do utilities and
during color costs really really
increased doubled
did that hurt I guess with
limited amounts of money
that would be part of this delay
yesterday say that mr chair yet
senator guy goes yesterday yes
absolutely that that was it is
I think before covered you would
see that you had you know a
little bit of an over
estimate you know the engineers
estimate and of course you know
with what the contractor would
come in you would have a little
bit but I mean I and then those
that document that you'll look
at what it says here is it says
okay the funding source but then
it says are funny our amount was
one point one million dollars
and back on there street okay
nine hundred thousand of it
alright that that breaks down
that little
down here here it is the
original repaired was in
december of twenty twenty two so
of course everything twenty
twenty and twenty twenty one was
on parts but then the original
bid scope there was no bids even
received
but then they reduced the scope
rebuild it in january of twenty
three
as one point one.
And then they reduced it again
to an and that's when I showed
up into your seat was the april
twenty twenty three that's
that's when I a.
Was fortunate enough to be able
to become part of this community
and so then you can see yeah
that's it's exactly it and and
not only the costs but they
supply chain we are still
waiting on some of these other
changes some of these other
projects we are still over fifty
two weeks waiting on an electric
component for our
your error
utility got a scatter system for
the water.
Utility.
We're still waiting on that and
so and and and i'm loud and
obnoxious and grumpy and I get
onto people I can't imagine what
the smaller communities have to
deal with as their as they have
part time.
Part time staff and and and
stuff like it's just.
Nineteen three now I think we're
finally starting to move it out
but I mean yeah nineteen now
it's it's been a struggle.
I think that in mister
I guess my next question is on
your.
Bidding process are used in cs I
i've worked with welson
so I understand they do a great
job
on the engineering site but i'm
wondering on your procurement
process are you gone out to our
appear you don't see s r you can
your contractors mister chair
senator gaggles
we are going through with these
we are going through the the rfp
process as to get the best price
we do you like ces quite a bit
we utilise hgac quite a bit we
utilize I guess he see as
technically a morally capital
you know for our trucks and
stuff like that
source well we've really yet
we've really
will just use anything we can do
to get our bills in two
contractors hands and eyes and
hopefully get their their
wallets or get there their bid
documents open so that we can
get this projects done on thank
you for that in was chair and I
know that so brightly has done a
lot trying to I like the area
and the issues.
A last question is what is your
economic driver I would assume
it's tourism
but I know going backwards to
current government martin time
she asked me to find ambulances.
For their c and at that time we
donated two from loving to tear
see because of the resign
I would say is now issue back
probably sixteen seventeen
somewhere that are even at that
point time you guys didn't have
the buildings of just ambulance
service in its sort of my fear
is that if.
We don't do something to help
you it is only going to cherry
more but i'm wondering what
would be amazed main driver and
community for tax.
Mr chair senator googles
you stepped on something that I
was meant to sit down and just
say it is how appreciated we are
i've sent it about she is just a
she is just a eight
advocate for our community and
and we literally could not have
functioned without her
like talk about an aggressive
and advocate for our community
and which we just couldn't do it
without her and so we appreciate
her very very much i'm also I
was going when I was going to
originally sat down but
representative of keys got my
brain going I wanted to also say
I shout out to my
shouldn't say the word old but
my x representative
representative chat field went
whenever I lived up in the north
but I moved from the north
because I was tired of it
snowing in september and in me
so I went south and so a center
of.
The yes.
Elephant beautier c williamsburg
are very much on the the
tourism.
The tourism dime of course in
all during a labor.
During memorial day.
Fourth of july mm and labor day
we have we have over one hundred
thousand people out at that
leak.
They need beer
they need to go in and take a
shower they need to go in and do
things I mean they need new
belonging and cheese you know I
don't know it and my or states I
don't know what they need they
need all kinds of need stuff in
there and so they come into the
community and and they spend and
they look around and we love it
that they're downtown and
they're there
checking out our galleries and
our
coffee shops and our little are
little as our little restaurants
and and from being from moving
in I have to see this as
sincerely as I possibly count I
have never seen a community
that
takes care of their cells by
lunch time you can't get into a
restaurant at lunch time over
there you have to take your
lunches at certain times or
you're not going to get back to
work in a regular time I I am so
I i've i've said this to many
many people i've never seen a
community that takes care of
their own small businesses so
well as as truthful consequences
does it
it's hard warming to see them
taking care of their cell
other themselves well thank you
for their will keep in prayer
mister just closing I would say
that your legislator your
senator is to nations when I
matter of six three on five five
now
thank you for your insurance
thank you
alright thank you very much
senator and now to the
supersensation senator brandly
well thank you thank you all
mister chairman there's there's
some of the pipelines here see
pipe water lines going around
and it really is amazing to
actually see that i've been
saying this for number years but
truth you're consequences
because of these water leaks
have made national headlines
we've had in s n b c we've had
nbc doing stories on this
because we're leaking over two
hundred million dollars a
million feet of water annually
so it's flooding the seats
streets of tier see at any given
time.
As she mentioned we had walking
phoenix and emiston out of water
when we're trying to to promote
ourselves as a as a rule movie
set that's not that's not a
stressful is having to shut down
this happens quite frank
frequently with young kids and
schools we shut down our schools
the number of times were we'll
get a text that say the towns
because of water leaks is out of
water and parents have to come
pick up their kids the hospital
has had to actually invest in
some some major water storage
facilities because they could
not risk being mid surgery and
running out of water in the
crisis that has we have on any
given holiday weekend she says
our population jumps to over a
hundred thousand people and we
just can't manage the number of
visitors coming in and most
important representative see it
can tell you were home to the
the new mexico that transholmed
there and when they're out of
water it's a it's a public
safety crisis that starts
happening within our community
and the reality is as hard as we
fought for water and I want to
think the governor's office who
came in representative armstrong
and harmeo nightime **** came up
three million of our capital
last last year the governor
contribute a little bit to that
to help us really the biggest
advocate has been when I pleaded
my case to secretary kinney of
the environment department to
say this isn't just a a public
safety and economic development
this concern this is an
environmental concern because
the amount of water that's
leaking out and going to waste
and he has been a bull docuous
personally come down seriously
and I just want to go on the
record I think you would agree
with me that I appreciate him in
finding ways to just get the
money out there we've talked
about how frustrating it is
because as a legislative barely
we allocate funds then we drive
by projects and it could be two
or three years later and they're
just breaking ground on the case
here every drop it's leaking out
on the like water is is money
and this water is going to waste
and he's coming here we've
talked about how we can declare
emergencies to experience our
spending.
And the legislator magaline i'm
sure you would relate to that
when a city is completely out of
water and there are trucking
water into their residence
somehow that needs to be
prioritized to the bridge now of
computer right I mean we can
divert traffic but we actually
have constituents they're out of
water and it's really been a
better crisis on there I just
want to publicly think secretary
kitty I want to think to your
seat for the work we have a long
ways to go we have about a
hundred and twenty million worth
of of infrastructure that we
still need to to
were placed and I guess is the
legislative body when I sit here
as a new legislator I think gosh
how in the world did we get to
this how are we replacing
wouldn't pipelines and and not
just this community but many
real communities is there seems
to be responsibility on us that
then to say there's a life span
to this new infrastructure that
we know in a wealthy legislator
or putting it today how do we
make sure that in fifty you know
sixty seventy years that we have
the resources that we are
somehow saving to replace
constantly replaced aging
infrastructure new mexico so
that we don't see ourselves
coming in here and quite frankly
dealing with failed leadership
for many decades before how how
do we make sure that we are
preparing for switching out this
infrastructure as we move
forward it's hard to think that
far because at this point we're
just trying to catch up for the
years that we've haven't done it
but I appreciate your time and
appreciate you sharing the story
that we're are struggling where
thank you thank you mister chair
all right think you senator
representative caters
think you share and thank you
very much for your presentation
thank you for all the detail I
mean just the work that you put
into this presentation is very
impressive and and I like a good
show and tell and so that pat
papers on terrifying so thank
you
I I want to I I understand that
leadership in t r c may
understand that there's
opportunity economic opportunity
to hold off on a project.
And and be able to reap the
benefits of bringing the film
industry into the for a while
what I am concerned about is why
are there water pipes we don't
know about
that is a deep concern for me I
am very grateful there you have
stayed in new mexico it's one of
the beautiful things about our
state doesn't matter if you want
snow or not we have a space for
you here rule or urban and
but I do think that was we are
taking this opportunity to
invest in the infrastructure and
water being the most important
part of that investment
that we are
we are
I don't know mapping
a building site so that we
understand what is buried that
is white concerns me the most
I wanted to ask you do you feel
that t r c has a special
difficulty with the water
infrastructure given in the
spectacular and magical things
about the water introc
mr chair representative case I
believe that and i've told this
story to my elected officials
and as you can tell him a
storyteller so be careful I told
them I said ladies and gentlemen
what would you do if I walked in
just ten years ago I went in to
a commission meeting and I said
you know what mrperiod mayor
mayor protem commissioners
I think
I think we need to start looking
at our infrastructure
and I think you know if you guys
would give me this was the
course that's just say ten years
ago I said yeah you're not to
give me a couple million dollars
and i'll see what I can do about
in a prioritising our
infrastructure and see and where
we need to do.
They would have
ratefully sold put me in
a rubber room
nothing's wrong nothing's
leaking down the street there's
nothing wrong
but that's just human nature
that's not I I i've I don't like
blaming somebody because we only
know what we know when we know
it
and so I I yes you're right
there are everybody knows
there's a life cycle there's a
life cycle to us there's a life
cycle to the economy there's
life cycle for every single we
should know that there was a
life cycle to these water lines
whenever tierc was first
incorporated more than likely
there was not much of a planner
and so you're right there that
the waterlines
kink across this way and they go
zigzag that way in this that the
other and so that's whenever
you're running into these
different water lines that
people did know where they were
out but has since retired and
that cut that that institutional
knowledge went with them we are
now putting now course with the
the wonderful technology that we
have we are now
pinpointing and
have a full gis system as a of
of the water system that we've
been able to work with with our
engineers with and I don't mean
to advertise for this i'm just
just this was just a
presentation that I had so I
don't mean to be present to be
advertising but what I do is
what we we we have that
relationship with them where we
do have the gis system we have
people who are trained to be
able to
take care of or we found we
found a water lane just a few
weeks ago they found a water
valp a water valve that didn't
even know existed so they were
able to drop a pin dropped the
pin i'm really not that all I
should know better dropped the
pin and so it was able to be
added to the.
To the gismap and so they were
we're working on that because my
water my water director and
myself do not want to leave the
city in the same place that we
found it and so we're really
trying to push it up and make
sure that we have maps and we
have knowledge and we have
information
thank you mister charlie thank
you very much that's what I
appreciate I see all these
projects that get done I like to
hear that I hope that we see
some giants mapping that is on
use projects that need to be
funded to make sure that we have
long term investments
I agree with the senator that
this has been national news i've
had constituents where in my
district who are very much
concerned about all the leaping
you know the the effects the
entire state
since water is the most
important thing in our state and
the management of the water
that we are sending for our
compact when we hear that it is
being that it's leaking through
faulty infrastructure it becomes
a very inextricant for my
farmers up north who are on a
very strict
supply and so thank you I love
to hear that that you're
investing more in the gis I have
one just suggestion in and is
that these larger projects in
the smaller communities that
i've worked with one of the
strategy is that they've used
that i've been very impressed
with is that they are buying
their supplies almost all at the
same time and securing it in the
area and which they're building
and then they're breaking ground
so that they really know what
the budget is it's not
it's it and so having strong
project managers to be able to
do that it's a way for them to
actually know what the budget is
controlled the cost in the
timeline.
Because they've actually
gathered the materials and in
one place and so I I make that
humble suggestion and thank you
mister chair
alright thank you very much
representative representative
mobile coming in
thank you mr chair and I agree
with everything that my calling
just stated and
recommendation is is a wise one
at that also has worked in my
previous work as economic
developer for civil accounty are
one of the things that
way back when it was there
that I found out you learn a lot
of things when you're in these
positions as you just indicate
it
the city the water that leaks
and it stays setting for a while
raises a red flag also from the
standpoint of a public health
concern because sitting water
attracts mosquitoes attracts
fun guy all kinds of other
things has the I have several
questions but first one has the
environmental department or
anyone else
brought this concern up and
helped you to address how you
might mitigate that thank you
mr chair representative of cover
cabinet we are we actively spray
for vectors
we have a veteran spring program
in originates out of the city
and then we also go out into the
county so we we try to kill them
that are thank you mister chair
that is absolutely
the correct thing to do and
thank you for doing that because
it when he saw the photo and
brought back memory I had
flashed back of the sitting
water collecting all kinds of
algenia bad l g.
And up northwest thank you for
that so
I also want to talk thanks the
the senator for
all of her
advocacy in whenever it's taken
to highlight for her ability to
highlight this to us um the
other question that I have is
have you been able to identify
I know that we've had a number
of these committee reports the
number of reports to come from
our smaller communities which is
really helpful when we heard
directly from you where the
bottled next r in the process
i'm looking at the folded copy
you gave and then some of the
other time lines where where
does the bottleneck occur does
it occur
in the bidding process in the
procedures perhaps that are
there
with just a bureaucracy of dfa
or
are you able to pin point where
the major bottlenecks are
because that would be extremely
helpful to us in being able to
address are are concerned
through the administrative
channels
mr chair madame representative I
work were you just left that
teed up for me to go after to go
after the bureaucracy and
my my my my little sole just
says
sincerely I think just buy this
little bit I think you're gonna
know i'm going to shoot you
straight okay I think you're I
think you're going to get that
I would love to say it's
bureaucracy
but it's not it really was in
this part particular thing it
really was the lack of
contractors able to get out
there now on their side of it it
may be bureaucracy on their side
of it it very well maybe but I
i'm not aware of that I I don't
know their side of it on our
side
and and see I come from an area.
That is remote so when i'm
interested i'm thinking you know
when you're eighty miles from
cruises you're a hundred
and
hundred and twenty five hundred
fifty miles from from
albuquerque but when they're so
much going on kirky there's so
much going in washing is there
so much going on and belong and
and and sanity
why would I take my company to
cheer seat
m and n and do the mobilization
do the
mileage per damn for my
employees when I can get four a
one point one million dollars
water or street project when I
can probably go into
rule in fort of those of us not
rule bernalie county and I can
party get a two million dollar
project
I mean i'm just i'm just saying
I I just out to me that's just
logical I why would I go to tear
c and do this when I can get at
least or even even one one
million dollars and just be at
home at night sleeping in my own
bed
that's what I think map so thank
you and thank you for
thank you for that that's very
important to know because we
also have suggestions whereby
you can go ahead and tap in to
I would say the non traditional
pathways of
seeking contractors for the for
their various different types of
work that you need to undertake
and I would suggest that
I would suggest just offer one
suggestion and that would be our
trade unions are unions labor
unions
they specialize many of them in
this in this area in these areas
because they're multiple
different their multiple areas
that
are required to undertake these
projects and they also work were
not just with a big contractors
but the small country.
Actors and it's the small
contractors mister chair
historically that have lost out
on bidding processes or other
things and they have the same
capacity as the larger but
because of what you just
described
you know there they have those
different circumstances are more
appealing but when it's just a
smaller contractor I think you
will find a a lot more receptive
netsorked it just a suggestion
that that might be helpful just
tapping in to see if they have
additional resources available
to you and thank you for your
working for your patience and
for your dedication to our
communities this year's t r c
it was raised in our parcel last
christmas area and t r c was
always our affordable cause we
were poor and
date daytime trips or whatever
and we've always enjoyed it
thank you very much mister chair
okay thank you representative
representative that assess
louise m that assess
thank you mister
m the russell's now ready or
eight the chair rock where car I
want to ask here the mayor just
expand a little bit please
on I know you ran out of water
and I don't know how long it got
was and just like bottle up
quick so we can move how long
how long will you out of water
and what if you go down to
resolve that issue and for it
not to happen again
that goes some years back
unfortunately that was
a I think an employee error to
caused out it took us a couple
weeks I was not the mayor at
that time
the village are not maintained
or two backup wells
they used up their money at that
time to do that we have three
water wells functioning we drill
the new one last year.
Finally going to get that I have
a contract meeting next week
with the new contractor to get
that well hooked into the system
so will help for operational
wealth the new well came in
about two hundred galance a
minute which is pretty awesome
nice clear water so that project
is moving ahead now don't
understand what you are looking
for and information we have the
benjamin well on the website the
town we're looking at putting us
door additional storage tank I
have the money for the out of
putting a booster pop pumping
into a tank that all help with
our contact time with the water
with the chlorine i'll give us
additional backup water supply
were
going to request yes everybody
knows costs of doing building
house
requesting the next legislator
for a one point two million
added a million dollars we have
to make that project happen
that'll give us additional
water storage we're also looking
out ah a generator that can
function on the different wealth
and our booster tank argh we
without power at one point for
fifty two hours as corollatory
again
everybody involved jump trade in
and got us back
in service so the water
i'm very proactive i'm watching
that
mentioned there to your sea
problems with the now being in
staff are we just how it are
company put in fiber optic we
found a lot of things that
weren't there we have maps that
are not accurate
the one water line showed down
the middle of the street was
actually clear up against the
fence line the contractor hit it
with his boring machine
other issues we've had the
repaired streets they buried to
shut off
so we had a dig down and find
your shut off else that area.
A lot of things were done in the
past with no oversight and where
you have a lot of issues that t
as is are going through
the soon as the tour heal well
is online they'll give us a very
good backup process
i'm looking into future continue
upgrades and mention doing a
study out of our water lines
we have all doctorable calls
there and we have steal and pbc
going there at a rawader cars
talking other engineering firms
they're consensus is the start
of one side of town rip at all
up and start over
we're running into the old
daughter counts their lines are
breaking and
so we're trying to not have a
water prices in the future
so I guess if the does that
answer
yesterday mr mayor that does
thank you mister
mister mare thank you very much
I I think you're not all of us
recognize that are
waters prior the new goal rate
especially in the mexico we
don't have any water and army I
think that resources very very
very very important and down but
what I was going to tell yours
you know what the story that you
guys are kind of sharing is
happening all over to mexico
this happened all over the
mexico even in my own district
part of I used to have parts of
your county and I got
redistricted into his all one
catering but
you know
we heard water projects all over
the state it was similar stories
in part of it is you know we
didn't can also stuff just a
rustrator one or one run a water
line in certain directions this
is tapering this is getting
going and not whatever went back
to survey those things or
whatever and you have that
because it's just the way things
were done many years ago.
But that tells you the age of
our over infrastructure we I
myself in my district in grant
county have a little place
called handover and those people
just recently they've been out
of water several times over the
last couple months last time was
three days that's tremendous and
no one contacted us to last day
so you know then we're running
around trying to get water
trucks in so forth rates that
they can at least
get water to their animals and
and sending out water bottles to
these people have you know
watered hydros
but you know we have problems
like this all over to mexico and
I think the legislature in the
executive branch has to turn
around and make
water a priority
and I know that we have done
that to a certain disyou know
extent but you know we have also
some some speed bombs or some
walls that we got to deal with
some of those are you know
I have i'll use handover as an
example handle we're has a
hundred and ten thousand dollars
worth of capital outlet
they have another hundred
thousand dollars of federal
funding they have another five
thousand dollars
long from the federal government
can't use any of it because the
executive word that we have
standing mandates that you have
to have all your audits in order
so you have many minutes police
around around the state that are
finding themselves in that same
situation where
you know they don't have their
audits in order and you know
you've got rule little these
little a political subdivisions
these are you know that have
worked
for a long time probably not
doing what exactly what they're
supposed to do and I see that
the the reason that we should
have our audits in order
absolutely but we also have to
sometimes recognize that there
are certain situations water in
particular.
That when it community like can
over like the lenner you know
your truth for consequences have
a problem with water that we
need to maybe make some
exceptions maybe we need to you
know say
I miss chair
and committee we we are having
were struggling to keep our
accountants and so you can't
find accountants to come over
here and just step in in line
and so so he and why want to
order it special you gotta go to
seven years back when account
myself and so many of these
accounts
are counting from shrinking in
size there they we have a lack
of accountants period throughout
the country so many of these
accounts are going to work for
bigger firms are going to work
for corporations and all of a
sudden your little cpa firm
downtown who used to be able to
hire these accounts out of the
university or whatever they're
being taken and these bigger
corporations are giving them
really good dollars to leave
income work for them because
they've found themselves that
they have a shortage so I think
we're caught in this this you
know this I don't know this
whirlpool of the lack of of our
accountants that need to have a
small domestics or
these political subdivisions
whatever that don't have their
their audits in order which in
turn they can't use their capped
a lightly in turn we've got all
this situation so we can't fix
so it's just setting that we got
a part of money that we can't
touch so it's just I just want
to see that to make my
colleagues aware of and i'm sure
they have similar stories but
thank you very much for your
presentation
ok thank you very much for
representative any other
comments questions feelings
emotions okay well I have a few
just just to wrap up of a few so
so and mayor and endows in
cities
let's see your city manager
excuse me so I heard you loud
and clear is there also a work
force issue for you to get this
work done you you have to juggle
a gigantic project whether it's
a you know a five thousand
dollars projectory one or two or
five million dollar project.
House the work force treating
you to get this these projects
completed.
Up mr chair
are work force
is lacking and for for all the
reasons that a representative
throws it said is
nobody wants to come back to
these small towns unless they're
ready to raise their families
and then at all you always want
to go home to raise your family
are city our city water
department well our citi water
department is always looking for
a we cannot get
certified in medi certified
people and so we have to work
them as
as opera are not operators we
work them as general labors
until they get there and this is
where some of what
representative are covered cover
rail had said is some of this of
the
bureaucracy is for the water
department they have to get
their water one and then they
have to wait a year to get their
water to
and then they have to wait
another year to get their water
three so those are also and I
understand why i'm not i'm not
i'm just stating facts okay i'm
not stating passionately i'm
just stating facts here so we
have sold from within ourselves
we are we are trying to build
our own water department from
local people who want to stay in
the community who want to live
there who want to be part of an
and become
certified operators of their
of their infrastructure whether
it be water waste water
and tears and throw it another
not into it we have our own
electric department
so
mayor did you have a comment
we face same issues though with
the getting water masters
getting right now is getting
test.
It takes for ever to get a test
lined up
i've been very frustrated at a
different water meetings I have
talked to the agencies about it
are
the reward to test
level one had questions for
level two or three excuse
the operators study for a
certain test
so they are spent one of our
issues the they get people
trained and test I have a water
one level and we have a contract
with the
water two and three are and over
cr operations
today i'm gonna try to hire a
fifth member for our utility
crew
i'm not very optimistic people
don't want to work anymore we
lost one of our restaurants in
town because they can get enough
employees so getting worked for
us together
on the large level all the major
contractors they're costly
trying to higher
people
they've got to work out there
but can't get enough work for us
to do it people are I mean these
are good paying jobs too
you know utility work for some
things like that
so work forces kind of any issue
so
and I do do you thank you for
your comments both of you and
this is you know exactly the
reason why we wanted to have
folks like yourself present to
this committee because this is
great information for all of us
to hear for the work that we
well serve on multiple
committees and but this is
perfect for what we wanted to
hear from you do you camp on to
state wide pricing agreements
when you're doing these types of
projects or do you typically go
and rfp them yourselves or how
do you obtain a contract to get
these this work down i'm a
business owner myself and I have
to jump through hopes of them
sometimes feel like they're on
fire and sometimes that they
burn you they really do because
it takes so long to but do you
camp on to state why pricing
agreements to get some of your
work done.
Mrperiod chair we do that when
we can.
I am trying to say it
I don't think that we could have
forward to do a and if when you
do get a chance to look at this
you're going to see that there
is a nine million dollars
usd a long career of funding
long grant blue okay
for us to do that through a ces
contractor boy would he love us
so so would see es
this is my opinion I
I would be reluctant to go
through ces on something that
big
because of the looks
forgive me
because then are to me and III
be talked out of this but this
is my opinion
i'm going to give it to my i'm
gonna give it to my contractor
when the rfp process the the
criminal code
right in my opinion for
rightfully soul makes us go out
for bid it takes some time yes
it takes time to get the specs
it takes time to do all that
stuff but it makes it go out bid
we advertise in the journal we
advertise in the sun news we
advertise in the local newspaper
wherever that may be throughout
the state your local newspapers
the sierra center and we
advertise for those and that
lets
jose construction know about it
that let's wait from jose
construction to
the big ones come in
i'm a fair market person and so
to me that
the fair market
I think and I don't remember who
it was I don't maybe it was
senator googles had said that
said the same thing and I do see
where if you've already gone out
for a couple times golden ces
get the project going bury this
money you guys said it bury this
darn money let's get it rocket.
And that's what I agree with and
so I think in my head i'm
sitting back here listening to
you guys and I think that's what
what i'm gonna do as we get all
this that we have been
appropriate in all we go out for
the beards if we don't get
anything then we go through the
different
price agreements and III I don't
disagree with that a bit but and
that was my opinion.
Thank you mayor did you have a
comment
eight I try to use price
agreements whether I can
specially purchasing provider
partners we just recently took
over a counting fire station
we've been covering that area
for allows two years anyhow but
not we officially have a second
fire station I use price
agreements where I can
get the jobs going of things
done
i'm right now i've requested
some bids for a project has been
eight weeks no response so we
went with another contractor I
have a bids in for generators on
four buildings are we have the
money sitting there to contract
a bit their project doesn't
return my phone calls so I guess
they have more work than know
what to do with are for key or
can she is the same thing we
have
some of the contractors are nice
they tell you a front it's not
enough money in your too far
from out yeah and they won't
even bid out of project one car
tractor was trying to find a
smaller company that do it i've
never heard back from themselves
but I tried to use price
agreements when I can of civil
date purchasing so
thank you I do suggest that you
maybe even in your minis
municipal league meetings or
when you're together with all of
your colleagues that you talk
about may be doing something
along the lines of developing
clear clearly defined statewide
pricing agreements that all of
you can you know participate in
and all that kind of stuff
because it seems like it'll get
projects moving a little bit
faster just like you just like
my business anyone else it's a
business owner in this room and
as to me that a payroll and and
and and have cost for your
business it is incredible
however within his increased
over the pat since the pandemic
and what have you in them
leading up to it but if you look
at
the cpi at the consumer price
index it says that inflation is
increased depending on where you
are in the country at nineteen
to twenty nine percent in the
past.
Thirty six or so months
my question to you is what why
do we hear that projects have
increased there have doubled and
tripled in size and would have
you when the actual number is
somewhere between still a huge
number but nineteen and twenty
percent do you care to comment
on that at all
is it your location is that
would cause as a the dramatic
increase in a and push the
button if you could so we can
hear you.
Couldn't quite hear everything
you said but
our location is against their
sit it's hard to get people to
respond hard to get
worked down
I try to do what I cannot
constant within a procurement
code
sometimes there's a person there
is qualify to do it
sort of
do that but if it's hard it's
hard on a to get
get quotes get people to show up
there are some companies now
that are expanding into the
corrowary electricians and hit
in air conditioning because the
demand is so high and the local
people
responding so we reach out to as
many folks
thank you madame city manager to
become it
mr chairs you can see I was very
clark very tightly on what you
said
no they don't they never don't
up to me that's why everything
should be we go in the state i'm
asking people about this so
everything should be a twenty
five percent more relational you
know yeah and that's making
sense and that's what that would
come my little brain going and
so
I wonder
I wonder
I think I think that maybe due
to our
rules that we don't want to
leave out of court you don't
want to leave lost cruise so I
don't want to leave el paso
maybe I I don't know
why encourage you and your
colleagues when you can when you
get together with the municipal
league and what have you that
you have this conversation i'm
bringing it up everywhere I can
because I think it's really
important
if there's price couch in going
on that's one thing at that
that's something that you know
you have wasted overcome that
you know the other thing is
yeah I mean if you have a I keep
harping on this one too if you
have a statewide pricing
agreement there's no none of
this ridiculous.
You know within three years
doubling the cost of a project
are you because that's just not
happening so i'm happening with
wages they're going out but it's
not they're not being doubled by
any means and supplies are not
going up twice or double their
triple so that's why i'm trying
to get my hands around why do we
continually hear and we we have
quotes for public schools at a
thousand dollars to square foot
now by the way I don't know I
serve on that committee as well
can you believe that and it's
just amazing so
cut last two questions that I
had for you is do you report you
know that the shape of that
water lines slice that you
showed us do you report that to
a centralized water repository
database of any kind I can't
imagine you're the only ones
facing that type of water
quality issue
mister chair the regardless of
what those lines look like the
quality of tierc's water is it
it gets a reported every
and forgive me I don't know
exactly how often we have AAA
person who does all of that she
make sure that all the reports
are in and everything they doubt
that are reported to me she make
sure that everything and we have
clear clean water regardless of
what those look like we have
clean water
I I was teasing some of the
women that I what came up in the
elevator with for for us for us
women of a certain age it's
really good for our mineral
intake and so
but no our water is
and so our water is clean and it
is a appropriate it it's gone
through the enemy deed checks
until we are we are good
but that's really great to hear
and I lived in to your sea as a
child over three different
summers and I loved it
absolutely loved it I love to go
there for vacationing and
whenever we can get away just
have like a little relaxation
time so thank you for everything
that you're doing there the last
comment that I had then will
wrap up here is I think
representative are well covered
yet of represent two and that's
a long the lines of the last
question.
Are you depositing information
in two e community health
database of any kind of the
statewide level or is anybody
tracking like trents because
even if it's just a small
decrease in water quality as a
result of a teacher showed us
you know you do that over a ten
year period that's pretty
significant but are you
reporting that anywhere is that
being logged anywhere for you
mr chair you got me I don't know
is if it were my community and I
know that senator brown is
working her rear end of trying
to get all this square away for
you and i'm very supportive of
her work as well I would be
siring blaring if I had if I saw
what I just saw you know and i'm
just very concerned for you so
what are you doing with the data
cause that's really what helps
you to tell that story
I would think that
our medical professionals as
they are seeing patience that
they are
that they are the I I know that
they have to do certain
reports also to deal which
and to whoever else they answer
to
but honestly i've never i've
never touched into that I
you guys have given me quite a
lot of homework to go home with
i'm not exactly sure I have the
hospital ceo and there'll be a
phone call that I make and just
ask this this question is is
where is these where are these
trams and the is that water
negatively in fact impacting our
our our citizenship are our
people and of course that's
absolutely not we know that we
are providing clean appropriate
water to the to the citizens
but it does down.
To reason that once it goes
through those pipes.
I i'm when I ask that question
and I apologize that I don't
know it I apologize
mister mirror
chairman now there are protocols
for magazine
we do
sampling every month various
locations that set up out of
rare model department we do it
they call residual walls we have
somebody check their chlorine at
various sites different sites
are in the week we take samples
up the overcurrent
we do quite examples things like
that i'm sure you're all aware
of the lead copper rule that's
going around
it helped a lot when they were
putting fiber optical because
they part hold by the meters and
stuff had one of our water
people are documented out we've
been around at a rest of them
last week we have our
documentation just barrada
summit that are federal
government for the outset
where fortunately we have good
good water it's very very hard
but it's good in drinkable water
okay well thank you I just I
highly recommend that if there's
not somebody not presenting to
your town counselor village
council whatever you call your
local governing body that you're
looking at that looking at trend
lines and all that because it
sounds like you're collecting
some information but you know
based on the quality of what we
just are in their transportation
of that water there's there
could potentially be some health
related issues there thank you
both very much up mr merger
right at
miss chairman committee I have
one of the thing that papped up
this morning we're talking about
revenue streams and how to run
our village
some years ago we had
rechallenged tax and rev on our
gas tax that we weren't they
were giving us four hundred and
fifty a month we are two
stations and are
the distribution point I will
get four hundred and fifty
dollars a month we challenge
they are.
G have jumped up to twenty five
hundred a month I talked to my
clerk this morning it's been
fluctuating maybe a hundred and
fifty dollars so they are not
giving us our share of the gas
tax for roads
right now we have three
electrical contractors working
in the village one of them told
me yesterday there there are
spending five hundred dollars a
day on eastern
and the usage rate of major road
we have the hundreds going
through the stations do a great
bill the tax and rabbit shorten
us on our gas tax so we're gonna
pursue the item c go after my
gain it's unfortunate that we
have to do that because the
reporting the sales are the gas
tax paid is going to tax and
around there is no reason the
short change is so thank you
alright well thank you very much
for that and I really appreciate
the presentations it's exactly
where trying to do with these
presentations to go around the
state thank you very much for
the presenters I do want to let
the committee know it's now a
twelve oh six now we're going to
come back at one fifteen sharp
please
we do have lunch beyond the
doors behind representative
