Executive director border
authority and
we have also
have a campus cust the weather
started yes mexican affairs and
foreign trade specialist and
then we also have joseph j the
larussa senior advisor global
trade and infrastructure is that
correct yes okay gentlemen
please take it away
thank you mister chairman i'm
joe deliberately
in addition to my day job which
consistent of advising the
departments of transportation
economic development mister
chairman i'm so I am also the
chairman of the new mexico
border authority so I just
wanted to begin by introducing
are with me had our fiatto I
believe is maybe on this third
week uh maybe the fourth week is
the executive director of the
new mexico border authority
a hero comes to us as a graduate
of the new mexico military
institute in rosal and the
graduate new mexico state
university he's had a career
reporting involved both the
agricultural sector on both
sides of the border specifically
the cattle industry are so an
extensive career and
transportation of logistics and
recently came down from the
alpasa metropolitan planning
organization we're again he
developed expertise and federal
and state funding for
transportation infrastructure
projects also with this is how
many cash letter are composed
customer who is contract
employee with the economic
development department was a
previous executive director of
the new mexico border authority
I won't say how long you go home
and then uh I agree with the
chairman I just if I I don't
know if we're pulling a
presentation up for
yes so do we have the
presentation for the item number
six
i'll continue to to kind of go
the the first site is just a
list of the border authority
current membership
court with the border
development act the border
development the uh bore
authority is organized of seven
voting members the chairman or
chair who is the secretary of
economic.
Uh development or designing I am
the designing in this case and
then we have members that are
pointed by the governor with the
advice and confirmation of the
senate
and then we have uh the
lieutenant governor who services
an extra physio are non voting
member so with that i'm going to
turn over the the presentation
starting with slight three n b a
actions FY twenty twenty four to
the executive director
good afternoon and members of
the committee my name is cut out
of the executive director for
the new mexican world authority
and i'll continue with this
presentation
well the n mba actions for from
fiscal year twenty twenty four
where facilitated economy growth
the n m b a has secured funding
and infrastructure investments
enhancing border region
infrastructure leading to long
term job creation and economic
opportunities for new mexicans
has experienced trade and
commerce by enhancing the
efficiency of new mexico
international parts of entry uh
the n mba supported the smooth
power of good and services
resulting beneficial for new
mexican businesses and consumers
duties new mexico experts have
grown more by by more than fifty
percent from twenty twenty three
to twenty twenty four
the n m a
u delicious new mexico's
proximity to mexico's interest
industrial house into a want to
promote by natural collaboration
economic opportunities for both
side of the water.
Has enhanced collaboration with
the economic partners by leaking
industries and businesses with
the new mexico economic
development department and in an
industry groups the nmba
foster's strategic partner chips
and business and business group
has promoted jump creation true
infrastructure development and
industrial park growth the n m b
address critical infrastructure
that he should see that promote
long long term job creation and
economic development for the
border reading.
It has supported industrial
development promoting those
shortly relevant by
collaborating with local sea
holders as a result isn't that
the design those real base has a
one point seven million square
feet under construction
on the next slide we have the
store to you can issue which
consists of create creator
coming again that we've never
neighboring states in in mexico
to advance priority regional
projects we have ah having
constant communication with the
the c ups you have quiet as the
state of two hour and local sea
holders uh and as well as or
neighboring cd
to to broke to promote the the
border region projects mainly
that that can lead to be us
becoming
more competitive region within
the US border.
We were we will compile data and
evidence to justify the need for
additional service and
investments and make the
information available to the
public on a revent agency
website
uh we have
we have been assisting to the
password and PO u board meetings
where we we discuss the
infrastructure projects that are
happening in the region and we
we also plan to to attend them
the message about the amp
meetings to to to coordinate
together with n m DO t and other
smaller smothering and is to to
see their needs
request capital outlay and
special appropriations to carry
out projects as well as increase
agency revenue to have a greater
impact on the water region and
strengthen partnerships with
local and real state colors to
continue identitifying pretty
cold infrastructure priorities.
In this light you you'll see the
performance measures from from
past fiscal years and you will
see that in his call you're
twenty four there some of the
the the targets were where met
this was mainly do because the
the executive but she is sixty
executive director position was
bacon for for the my early of
date of the year.
Does being this the the agency
being charged.
On their nba project updates
we have the feasibility study
for the expansion and more
institutional so that that is a
poor of entry the nba and US e s
a finalized that the study in
june of twenty twenty four we
are waiting on gsa total project
cost next very consistent with
environmental study.
For their column was that
control project finally said was
completed in march twenty twenty
four construction you suspected
to beginning the following
twenty twenty four financian we
are finalizing the total project
budget
their final parcel needed for
construction has been at a
acquired there are bs should be
in june twenty twenty four and
we are expecting the the rfe
quotes in september
for the border highway connector
the with an embealty completed
faces a mb of the contract of
their feasibly study face c
environmental studies underway
and the screen working on the
contract for phase deep
preliminary design finalising
the total project budgetary
needs
face a good provider provides a
least of potential alignments
for the connector from beat them
in the chief highway to magazine
that road in some part they
prefer alignment has been
determined as part of the phase
be component on the feasibility
study and an alternative three
was a preferable turning
construction phase he's under
animal tea and currently waiting
on confirmative approval from
the past to import
the work how we connect your
face to additional funding what
secure for face to face to will
look at the best connecting
point to texas and they interest
highway system.
Said that there is a elevated
weather ten final design pending
a with through there has been
approved revising final budget
for a one million gallon tank.
Column was a continuing ways
what are part final design and
environmental document completed
payment approval received in
june of twenty twenty four
pending a year with a village of
columbus updating final budget
nba pob parking lot final design
and environmental document
completely in twenty twenty
three the n m a board of proof
construction in twenty twenty
three final finalizing budget
and procurement
and mba commercial parking lot
finally signed completely in
twenty twenty four finalizing
budget and project schedule.
Shortfall on all price are being
considered to be funded by
eighty d's border planning and
infrastructure appropriation
from twenty twenty three.
This.
On the next next latest we're
going to present some of their
border satisfics for their said
that there is a proventory and
the column was poor venture
on this lady receiving their
northbound vehicles and this is
a and these are commercial.
Vehicle said that there is a
poor of enter expect especially
tops last year numbers.
Of process commercial vehicles
currently processing around
seven hundred and fifty trucks
per day but
beers are too three fifty in two
twenty nineteen so that there is
a proventory service a creek of
function.
Air in may when takes us going
on grab greg about implemented
in enhanced the ps inspections
so we we we are as an strategic
point
for for the region of their el
parcel metropolitan area.
Um.
In may when when that
contingency happened we we we
serve us a an escape ball for
for the traffic of commercial
vehicles in the region.
And.
We've dead there then the
project of remotely
the bodie
breach in in all parcel we we
hope that we can attract some or
most of that traffic into
and we are preparing we we we we
have other.
Projects as the boring harry
connector is going to be happy
happening probably up around the
same time.
And we can.
I have that project ready by
when they're starting that
project.
That they're worrying how a
connector will have help us.
Capture that traffic and keep
that traffic for future years.
These are their colombos
commercial north on vehicles uh
statistics
truly see some began in july
currently the forties average in
the hundred to a hundred and
twenty three per day.
This is this said that there is
a poor of entry not bound
people.
A statistics show that we we
were pretty much around the same
it's pretty constant.
It's it's just when we have made
your continues you see in in the
seat of a parcel region and why
is that.
The numbers increase.
For a column was not phoned pob
the there has been at an
increase these year one on
on board and crossings
we currently don't have a major
reason for it but there's a
disease cho that it's it's been
increasing and has been up every
month.
Well from january two july.
Thank you so at this point I
wanted to just highlight a
recent proposal legislation that
um would affect the new mexican
border authority as a going back
to twenty twenty three
the executive branch through the
governor's office and edd did
work with representative small
and later representative latter
on a to be thirteen which was
amending the bordered
development act
one of the things that I think
has happened between the time
that the board authority was
first to established and where
we're out today has actually
been a shrinking of the staff
and resources that had been
dedicated are to the small
agency and so what this are the
intent here was to basically do
some restructuring adding some
qualifications of the executive
director position to ensure they
had some a relevant experience
and also adding a participation
or the requirement that there
will be appointees from border
communities specifically
municipality a border county.
And then also are adding a state
legislator on from a border
district is an appointee to the
border authority and so again
that was HB two third HB
thirteen of twenty twenty three
it was also clarifying some of
the contradictory language in
the statute and strengthening
the provisions for the border
project fund and some of the
bonding language
even though the border authority
doesn't have much revenue I
think the intent is at the in
the future to be able to build
it up to be able to finance and
bond projects and that was the
attention when it was originally
introduced but then again last
year there was a bill that was
introduced there was not i'm
consulted with the executive
branch or the bore authority or
edd and that was h three or
seven that was actually moving
the border authority from edd
and are changing membership and
revealing a certain provisions
how we again ultimately didn't
take an official position but it
was problematic I think from an
operational standpoint in that
because there is a staff of four
uh the border authority realize
heavily on the economic
development department for
everything from h r actions
procurement contracts basically
all of the training and
administrative support and that
you would get technology phones
equipment but that bill
ultimately I think was withdrawn
or did move forward and then we
did have hm fifty six which
ultimately didn't pass but we
read very carefully I was
looking at the south central
council of governments and
consultation I believe with the
southwest council of governments
kind of holding some stake older
meetings to look at changes to
the border authority again we
were concerned with the fact
that the south central council
of governments actually doesn't
cover the area in donate county
it's actually part of the our
parcel mpo then apportion is the
mercy of alien po and so there
were some issues but ultimately
um we are committed to any of
the issues that were contained
either n HB three o seven fifty
six.
Are working through our border
authority meetings or other
opportunities to kind of advance
and address some of the the
points that remain as as a bills
are introduce.
Think you use it and then just
to find a lace
joe's have mentioned
i'm the new executive director
being in front of the agency for
about four weeks and as a new
executive director of the new
mexican world thirty might
commitment is to build on and
the agency's momentum and
strength any trawl as a as he
catalysts for economic growth
and quality of of life improving
the border region.
In the next year the will focus
on in hand enhancing an orange
restriction to initiatives they
being crossed border penalty and
expanding or revenue streams to
increase or impact we will
prioritize collaborative
learnership in a way to problem
solving and inclusive community
community engagement to address
the unique challenges and
opportunity so for for by
national region by doing so we
aim to solidify nmba's position
as a trusted convenient
facilitator and champion for a
thriving and receiving border
community as we embark on the
strategy
I am excited to work alongside
or dedicated team state callers
and community partners to chape
a brighter future for the state
of new mexico together we will
see support tunities over call
obstacles and create legacy of
progress and prosperity for
generations to come thank you
very much.
Okay thank you any other
comments from the percentage.
Oh okay do we have any questions
comments or vice chair guarantee
thank you mister chair thank you
gentlemen for presenting
I asked this before the program
but it's been an issue with an
unupdated kind of disfunctional
website can you let the
committee know your plans.
For updating and making a robust
transparent informative website.
And if there is a timeline known
that would be helpful.
The.
Thank you mr chairman are vice
chair it's been a long process
for the previous after even find
out how they can redo that
website and ultimately they were
able to work with the department
of information technology
essentially the company that
operated for when the funds will
go through the whole long story
but it is now a functioning
website and we are able to now
update it and are in the process
of getting the right information
are getting new photos getting
the updated I kind of contents
we want to have a more robust um
uh website that is actually
linked to some of the regional
data not only for projects but
also through the
week times that their areas
crossings provide some of the
statistics like we're presented
here in the presentation and
just overall I make it a much
more
involved website have a calendar
of events so some of the
partners that herardo is kind of
talking about um different
conferences other meetings are
projecting out some of the
meetings that we have already
known but it at least in the
immediate term we won't be able
to advertise the meetings and
post the agenda's for the border
authority and other kind of
information are that we should
have been doing are previously
but we're unable to i'm just
again because there were no
resources and the abilities to
kind of maintain that website
but moving forward we are
hundred percent committed to
maintaining that website and
have the ability to do so now.
Thank you and mr chair and and
children as one of the sponsors
of the memorial I do think it's
really that transparency of how
things take places really vital
especially since.
The border is such a center of
powerful important economic
development my next question is
will the border authority
personnel be participating and
they
got what is the csg for.
Out cancel state governments
border legislative conference as
september nineteenth to twenty
first I think several of us are
members of that and there will
be legislators from both sides
of the borders in mexico and
other states of america will you
have a presence of that.
Mr chairman vice chair I can't
say that I was that was on my
radar but I can tell you we will
have someone attend if you
believe that that would be a
beneficial we can definitely
commit to that I can't tell you
exactly who will go but we will
send someone
thank you I I think it's
important i'm reservation
how suborder authority
addressing the huge border
issues for example I met with
sheriff come stewart who has
explaining that actually human
traffic is making more money
from the cartels now and drugs
how what is your role in address
seen that or facilitating
discussions about those issues
that as you know our new mexico
wide concerns.
Thank you mister chairman
madamice chair so this is
probably one of the most
complicated I think issues in
questions that arises from time
to time and it seems like you
know where they said when we
point out that there really
isn't a role for the border
authority in terms of security
and those kind of larger issues
but at the same time that are
related to kind of security and
and human trafficking drug
trafficking and and kind of
illegal activity or what I can
say is that we do facilitate the
forums for those types of
discussions on one of the things
it is provided for in
the border development act is
the information of the new
mexico to our commission and the
new mexico sonora commissions
which have security work tables
unfortunately those meetings
have not been convened are but
we recently
went and met with the some
representatives of the
government of tuaba and are
moving towards are finalizing
the agenda and setting the at
that you know getting that back
in place and then we'll be
proceeding to sonora are the one
thing I can also say as well as
that there's the opportunity to
develop up and create community
and
businesses and things are
locating on the border the
illegal activity tends to move
to those kind of areas where you
don't have construction
personnel and traffic and you
know law enforcement and all of
that kind of activity i'm in
enough to say that we want to
kick that cam down the road and
move that stuff elsewhere but we
also believe that a secure
you know the port of entry
facilities upgrading in the
technology and kind of the those
free up then the resources for
cbp and border patrol had have
another sector so that those are
some of the meetings that herdo
and highman some of the other
staff are regularly attend is
with the regional are customs
and and border patrol staff and
again court facilitating our
communications between land
owners that um the federal
agencies may need to.
Um
access for their operations i'm
including some other ranchers in
the columbus you know long and
county and also dog or can areas
and so you know the border
authority is just I think it's a
is a partner in a facilitator of
of those discussions in those
efforts and a support.
Thank you mister chair that's
really important so i'm glad
that that's going on
a second another question I have
is originally the sanitaries
that elevated water take when I
first went to meetings i've been
following it since twenty
sixteen actually
it was a two million gallon tank
how come it was reduced to one
million.
Thank you mister chairman out of
my sheriff so I was not around
in twenty sixth team but in
twenty nineteen and what is
presented and is there's a big
picture of it as the designed by
wilson and company was a one
million gallon ground water tank
are that subsequently became a
one million gallon water tank
because our significant issues
with water pressure i'm in its
critical for fire suppression
and construction uh down at the
border in the industrial area
and so that's why we came and
elevated um that was funded for
four and a half million dollars
which again as the price of a
one million gallon tank are
subsequently there is talk about
making it a two million gallon
tank
we went back and forth on that
are consulted independent
engineers in addition to the
cruel engineers and you know
there's a need for the one
million gallon tank a two
million gallon tank what about a
capacity which could potentially
support a proposed development
are but that development is i'm
filed on an account it requires
a tone two million gallon tank
to serve up to five thousand
homes and some of the other
things that has to build there
and so are concerned was that we
would be delaying the one
million gallon tank to pursue
the two million gallon tank when
we don't need the capacity
currently so what the border
authority aboard and and will we
would propose is to work on a
plan and we're currently doing a
sentence to their strategic
infrastructure master plan
contract of wilson and company
along with the aero head center
and center for a better porter
economic development and msu to
determine what all of the
infrastructure needs are and how
that'll stimulate growth so that
we could also present to
committees i'm such as this and
another legislative committees
to our only show with the
infrastructure needs ours
documented for true build out
but what the return on
investment will be so you know
if that two million galantank is
needed and the state is going to
pay for it that's going to
benefit that developer and
solely that developer and there
may be some issues with th.
Unless we can demonstrate that
there's going to be a
significant public return i'm in
so we're working those numbers
and to have a better idea we're
also working with the communal
rate regional utility authority
because they have been plagued
with a number of issues which
have been in the media
everything from discolored you
know water and arsonic you know
plants that weren't functioning
and so we also is a board and in
a you know in our kind of the
valuation I did question whether
it was a good idea to store two
million gallons of tank of water
and attained particularly one
million gallons it isn't
currently needed when maybe that
water might not be
uhm
in the best can of drinkable
potable you know kind of
situation and so but it's
definitely we need the one
million gallon tank we have to
address the water issue we've
had some companies that have
been out there working had to
stop constructing there's no
water being up you know pumpting
available we also have issues
with the fire martial and
getting certificates of
occupancy when you don't have
you know the right water
pressure for fire suppression so
they're having to do boosters so
we're trying to get a handle on
all of that to make sure that is
were building the one point five
million square feet that I think
harardo talked about an
industrial space we're doing it
strategically and it is part of
a larger plan and we're not
doing things which have been
done previously kind of helped
or skelter a kind of
disconnected sometimes they just
build best without thinking
about what their downline i'm
kind of implications are so we
are really trying to facilitate
and guide those discussions
thank you mister chair.
And your when will that
strategic report when do you
entice appeared at being
completed.
Thank you mr chair metal vice
chair we will have a draft
available by the end of the
calendar year or so i'm looking
at november december i'm so they
by the time we go into the
legislative session in january
we'll have that available for
all of the legislators i'm to
review as well as kind of some
of the preliminary
recommendations and um kind of
assessments and so that that's
our goal and I think we're on
track to meet them.
Thank you in and my last
question mister chair actually
comes from a.
A personal friend who lives in
two hundred and has a home and
ill pass so and he would like to
know about fast passes for
people that are regular not
necessarily businesses but
people that regularly commute
back and forth in sanitaries
that if there's a way to make a
fast pass that's for a wholesale
road rigors.
The.
Here they are mister shirt malam
by sprint best year there's a
program by the fellow government
called century and anybody can
imply for it in order to uh have
a chance to cross faster through
the dedicated lines they are
dedicated lanes at the port of
saturday was at downtown there's
two and
it's a very convenient for
students also house wife's
taking the gets to school across
the border but that's easy to
apply and it's hoping for for
everybody so daddy's a father
out program but it's also well
promoted by the bore authority
in the region to warrants love
that in hopefully in the near
future when we have the the new
problem for that remote
modernization of the port of
interest and that there is a
interest structure and on that
port will be uh century lean for
commuters so
if your friend or anybody can
want to know more easily can I
touch base with us had added
them myself and we will guy them
through the portal for that
federal government in order to
apply it online it's very
simple.
Thank you and my consider it
thanks you
those are all my questions
okay thank you matter vice chair
representative uh both coverage
thank you mister chair and think
you are for your presentation
that kind of it was hard for me
to see.
The chart on page on slight
five.
Um but I did get the gist of it
the performance measures.
So I have a couple of questions
about that you know I served as
one of the border legislators
for a while and we had some
really good conversations with
my counterparts of course from
the various arm mexican side of
the other border and this was a
few years back and
we we had discussions concerning
human trafficking back then now
it is it has accelerated so you
mention that.
Um there was some response to
representative guarantee about
the security customs and border
patrol it.
Occurred to me and looking at
the commercial and non
commercial.
Um I think it's a second to the
last item there
the the trucks are all inspected
as that correct amazed.
Yes okay so they're still
getting inspected truck by truck
by truck which will add it to
mr chair one of the concerns was
the long lines in the time and
signed you know you can't.
Satisfy everything all at once
so there were a lot of issues on
the table we were still talking
about the
nap area we were still talking
about a lot of other things that
have now developed but I want it
just to make sure that we're
still doing the inspections of
the trucks because one of the
major concerns then was
we did not want to make it easy
at all to hide.
Um any human traffic in that was
potentially not potentially that
was going on however it was
disclosed mr chair that that you
know when they can't do it one
way they try to find another way
and so they've been multiple
other ways that they've been
entering the country or going
back and forth i'm glad to hear
that those inspections have not
stopped the other thing that was
brought up in my day and serving
on on this um.
With the screw was um they there
was concern about night.
Having regular meetings um
we didn't have regular meeting
schedule so i'd like to can I
ask the question how often does
the border authority
meet with your counterparts and
are how are the local
communities.
Bright to these discussions or
these meetings and I don't mean.
The.
Necessarily the former I mean
formal communities like those
that are
members of the that's already
but those that are informal that
on the ground um
communities that are impacted
but they don't necessarily have
a voice at the commission or at
the city council or any of their
other how how do we listen to
their concerns to do we have.
Are maybe seasonal meetings or
town halls or
how do we tap into their
concerns because on both sides
of the border there were
communities that were concerned
about what was going on but they
didn't know where to articulate
it to home to articulated how
we're to get the answers number
he got and the mexican side they
have very good.
Are ways to tap in but we were
not so good so I just wanted to
ask that question and see how
well that is rolling out if it
is at all.
They give mr chairman
representative robert cabito so
I you know I think this is
probably one of the biggest
challenges you know we face is
how we can be more communicative
and do further outreach
I think you know and i'm excited
to to have her ideas and and
hyme is also helping us are
making sure that we have
translation available at all of
the the meetings since his fluid
and spanish and has about
ability to to translate in real
time but I can also say
you know we were trying to take
the show on the road so to speak
more often i'm so each of the
border authority meetings and
goes to a different community
along the border so we're
meeting every other month
and what we're doing there is
also relying on
the community members themselves
to try and help us spread the
word until I know we're having a
meeting to try to grow that
membership and one of the things
were also talking about is i'm
starting up a regularly at least
quarterly
kind of community meetings where
we go out and we have um just
based on information we've heard
from the media social media
issues that have kind of arisen
like you know the water issue in
some impart like you know sees
no agricultural you know i'm
activity that is happening in in
columbus you know I went and
visited ah a dog or county you
know the summer i'm to talk
about ways that they can start
maybe revitalizing some of the
programs down there that have
you know gone away due to water
issues you know as the water has
become salt here and and you
know certain crops can go there
how can the border authority
facilitate with usda and others
some of those opportunities and
discussions about grants and
accessing that more colonials
funding there is an entity that
was
established called the southwest
board of regional commission and
and the legislature generously
worked to to support new
mexico's contribution to that
entity and there's about two
million dollars of funding
project for project funding
either is available to a number
of counties that are not just.
The ones we think of like
doniana luna and he don't go but
it goes out to eddie county of
the sierra of a lensier and some
of the counties that are
considered a believable terror
countries that are part of you
know the the the border region
and communities are and that
funding i'm through US eda
can be used in many cases to
even federal provide match to
other federal grants so it's one
of those where parts of federal
money that can help communities
leverage other federal funds
that can be used as match to um
certain state funds so we need
to go out and once that notice
of funding opportunity is
published and make sure that
that reaches you know all of the
smaller community is and
everyone that really I think
could benefit from that i'm sort
of a program getting that
information on the updated
website and there's also a
proposal that will be having i'm
coming up from a an entity that
seeks grant money for like small
businesses to help them develop
websites and so they do that
again by going I into
communities and and basically
going to wherever the the main
street is and some cases and
just knocking on doors and and
seeing if the small business is
that that around those
communities have access to the
internet and how they can help
and build a website and again
there's graph money that's
available for that it's a really
it's about doing I think some
like work and getting out there
and letting folks know that
there is a borer authority that
is available and willing to help
identify resources and direct
folks arm into the places where
the information is available I
don't know if you want anything
about some of the other meetings
you have or if you feel that's.
Thank you mister chair
representative development
regarding your question on truck
inspection the good thing is
that they are several programs
between mexico and the us at the
federal level app for inspecting
as you know it is city pat the
customs trade and both against
terrorism that is functioning
well the company supply also and
they
comply with all the needs to be
part of the fast program which
are trucks a pre inspected or
they have all the systems in
place with cameras escorts to
the border so that the issue
regarding migrants on board
carable it's it's a practically
zero
also because of all the systems
in place and equipment
technology at the ports of entry
with gamara x ways and
everything so uh
we don't see and also as just as
an example the attempts from
governor about two shut down the
board or put a hands inspection
suscirator was mentioning they
have never find anybody inside
the cargo across and our
inspections father are also
that's a customs but a exactly
at the at the exit of costumes
they enter through the
inspection for feather and state
for their the service truck they
quibbed mechanically so they are
different steps and that's why
most of the time uh not anymore
is used to cross illegal
migrants through caravan
thank you just in and closing
there is a few things that I
might suggest i'm putting on my
community organized for hat
there are a lot of community
groups that are not necessarily
as I mentioned earlier formal
but they're the promotors who
work door to do reference to.
I mean family to family revenues
to health care
they're great outreach.
There's also there was also
enough I have forget which
legislator and it was a several
years back i'm when I mentioned
he has a good handle on how to
reach out there's posted in
little.
Restaurants and little store
fronts of posters that are say
conoscaus recourse of something
of that nature right now you can
do a learn what's available for
you your resources whatever post
it just like.
Points and then phone numbers
web emails whatever to where are
they can tap into it saves if
you don't have a lot of
work force in your up to help
you.
Just by posting those in
updating them on a regular basis
there are still a lot of
non what's the word
unsophisticated ways of
communicating in our communities
the tire shops talk to the the
yantels talk to the mechanicals
and then the mechanic was talked
to the read the lady and the
board read the lady talks to the
truckers that come in and out so
there is that kind of
communication network so you
want to make sure that they're
informed an believe it or not
when they walk into their
premises they look.
And they see what's available
and the other thing is the radio
is always going and
it's still not struck or
stumbled a
enter load lacting else has been
searchment in los angeles mass
bobbles
when we don't have access to
anything and we can afford it
what is it that we go with back
to basics you know radio
these little panflat as you know
whatever
and and that's where we need to
tap into because there's a
general fear that you are
associated on america and we
need to dispel that fear in
order to get the resources are
appropriately and the
communication going so we have
to be careful about their
language that we use to we don't
refer to immigrants as illegal
immigrants there you know
they're undocumented or not back
in there whatever use more
friendly terminology
but anyway these are just some
suggestions because I hear it.
Um I come back and forth all the
time between albert to my home
town of less crucials and and
basel in I hear it just from the
bad battles and from all of them
that.
There is a a big need but they
don't know who to tap in to for
a number of things you are not
the answer to everything but you
certainly can facility that was
part of the bigger picture when
the border authority was
established but anyway that's
thank you mister chair that's
thank you for your presentation
okay thank you very much
representative do we have any
other questions comments.
I don't see any representative
here anything
so urgent just want to say that
I don't have any comments
requests I want any questions
but I have a comment just you
know keep on keeping on you
doing a wonderful job
we can learn a lot from what
you're up to down there I I hope
that you will.
You know again to continue to be
innovative i'm always impressed
every time I go there on
everything else that you have
gone on trouble shoot you know
raise your hands you guys are
great about that and then I also
appreciate all of the efforts
that are made to connect with
you know the incubators here in
the state I I know that there's
quite a few have made their have
landed in your shop to to work
with you I think those
connections are just fabulous
you know
also are the chambers of
commerce and all this that you
know associations and things of
that nature so just keep doing
what you're doing I think you're
doing a great job don't slow
down don't take your foot off
the pedal
you know I guess the only thing
that I do have to say is that
when the large.
I was there last time I was
there there was a lot of the.
The.
A fines for the commerce
windlates yes and and and is it
mere they getting bigger.
They look bigger to me
they are getting bigger okay.
Alright cause they're trying to
make their way through you know
downtown albert and slowing
everything down just a
year or it will good job thank
you very much everybody
appreciate you.
Okay so now we are again a
little bit ahead of schedule
here so we're just happy to keep
moving here i'm gonna ask our
presenters for item number seven
to come on up to the
presentation table shares a
swanson new mexico i'm sorry a
coop one of one understanding
new mexico's rural electric
cooperatives are shares once in
chief executive officer new
mexico rural electric
cooperatives carming camble
grant program manager the new
mexico rural electric
cooperatives and take it away
latest.
Thank you.
Can you
bring it up now and made him by
vice chair also members of the
committee thank you for having
us today.
Can you hear me ok we can and
end and to both of you we did
have a full house this morning
but you know we're in the middle
of the campaign sees a new
number of things going on so
people are pulled in many
different directions it's okay
you guys are yet and but we are
very excited to hear from them
thank you so today thank you
mister chair today we wanted to
just provide additional
education that some of you may
or may not know some of your
very familiar with the electric
cooperatives I may also have
some information you're not
familiar with and I want to
share that information with you
today and also just give you
some updates on where we're at
in the cooperative world with
some of the things that we're
working on that I think the
legislators will find important
and they're definitely important
to us.
If you want to turn to the
second page of your
they do happen if there.
This after the right one I
guess.
The presentation.
Okay ok I just want to make sure
thank you I don't know it was up
there they told us to only bring
slipes look at you thank you
mister chair.
Okay
so our armand goal out the new
mexico rural electric
cooperatives we have fifteen
member cooperatives here within
the state of new mexico and we
have three associate members
that cross over into the state
and new mexico from texas and
arizona but are goal for
association in particular to
protect our member interests and
this is through advocacy meeting
with all of you doing community
outreach
doing grass roots out with our
membership across eighty percent
of arm new mexico we also
administer a self insurer's fund
for our electorate co operatives
and we manage statewide
communications regarding
advocacy and again community
outreach.
We also assist and providing and
coordinating training in some
cases and sharing their shared
initiatives that the
cooperatives may have we also
coordinate all of that we are
head quartered in seeing a fee
right down the road to blocks
from the capital
the electoral cooperatives there
is a misnomer sometimes that we
are kind of the same as I use
and as many of you know we are
not we are non profit we
remember owned in member
governor utility we have an
elected
board and that board of
directors decided in managers
governs that cooperative we also
we have one of them here today
who said on one of our words
it's different representative
jack chatfield
then we also provide electricity
to members and our rural and
underserved communities and we
are in the areas that the
investor owned utilities do not
serve.
And each member hasn't equal say
it is a democratic vote so every
year annually they can vote on
new resolutions they can vote on
policy changes they can vote
board members in an out and
again self government and those
members are paying for the
infrastructure across rolling
mexico.
Yeah.
I'm not sure how many people are
familiar with our seven
cooperative principles these are
a principles that all co
operatives this means generation
transmission cooperatives
and are distributing
corporatives there are also some
financial cooperatives and
insurance cooperatives that
support us across the united
states but we do have open and
voluntary membership.
We are it's a democratic member
of control as I just described a
minute ago and also members
economic participation.
And we have autonomy and
independence through that
governance or other principles
regarding education training and
information and providing that
and then cooperation amongst
cooperative so this is co coops
helping co ops what that means
is when we have mutual aid for
example we can just pick up the
phone call or fellow coop and we
will show up they will show up
from across the country if thus
what we need them to do and and
we also have concern for
community that's another
principle that we.
Finanders were hearts and that
we work on a lot through
advocacy or advocacy efforts
because it's not just about what
the cooperatives are doing there
are the backbone and for only
mexico.
Um there they are who keep the
lights on and they are concerned
for their communities and our
employees are living and working
in those communities.
Power delivery.
Just to talk about power
delivery for a moment here i'm
sure many of you have also seen
these lights in particular or
this sort of infographic before
that explains how generation
works generation and
transmission
about power plants in some cases
of the power plant right now
it's a lot of renewable so i'm
going to give you some renewable
statistics which you have in
front of you as well but are
generation and transmission
cooperatives we have two of
those try state in western
farmers that provide our power
we do have a long term power
supply contracts with them for a
distribution co op's.
So that those are transmitted
through our transmission lines
the energy and then it is
stepped down if you take a look
up there at your infographic and
so that week it through
transformers so that we can get
that out to our communities
whether that's it could be
industrial as well.
Am we have industrial commercial
and residential customers.
And then we work through the
just reaching harpetives who
obtain local renoble energy and
that includes their some behind
the meter energy that we also
buy back solar from our
customers are members as well.
So we do have a renoval energy
mix which I do have to go over
with you here at a moment and
then the distribution
cooperatives also own the
infrastructure that delivers the
power to their members so roll
new mexico all of our members
there are over four hundred
thousand I do have those
statistics for you.
They are the ones who pay for
all of this infrastructure
through their rates.
Taking a look at the electric
cooperative history I put this
map in here actually my team
that I did not do it
the coverage of principles were
established actually in england
and eighteen forty four a lot of
people didn't know that I did
not know that delay wouldn't
interforperate if several years
ago and then our first when we
were electrified that was in
nineteen thirty seven that was
by president roosevelt and he
created the federal rural
electricity and administration.
Our first co operative and new
mexico is central valley
electric cooperative and that
was established in nineteen
thirty seven and then in
nineteen forty two nreca which
is our national rural electric
for operative association was
formed.
That was incorporated i'm sorry
yeah incorporated.
And that is too represent our co
op interest nationally and in
nineteen forty four hour
association in mexico rural
electric cooperatives with
established and it was to
represent all of our cops at the
state white level.
And then twenty twenty four that
is eighty nine years after the
creation of roll electric
electrification act their eight
hundred and ninety six nre ca
coop members and forty eight
states and we serve over forty
two million people across role
america.
The.
The.
So where are our electric
cooperatives they are across the
united states you can see there
in that blue area we provide
fifty six percent of the of
the i'm sorry we provide power
to fifty six percent of the
american landscape and in mexico
as I said it's about eighty
percent so that's all of that
blue space and we also serve at
ninety two percent for assistant
poverty counties nationwide.
So a new mexico as you take a
look at this map here.
Kit carson is the only one who
does not belong to our
association the rust of them
deal and if you take a look at
our.
Yeah.
Gnts operating a new mexico
there are troy state generation
transmission western farmers as
I said and we also have arizona
generation transmission that
comes over the new mexico line
from arizona cause these serve
are associate members dunkin
valley and more maybe you serve
nab a pouch in the future.
And then real grand is also
served by texas.
So here are the statistics
aren't for our cooperatives in
particular we have four hundred
and fifty thousand new mexico
restaurant residents that we
serve.
We operate over sixty one
thousand miles of line across
new mexico we distribute over
five million megawhat hours of
electricity every year and our
service areas are in thirty two
out of thirty three new mexico
counties.
We average four meters per mile
we do have one or two co
operatives you only have one
member for mile and we provide
over eleven hundred quality jobs
throughout the state of new
mexico.
We have twenty two percent
population and poverty compared
to seventeen percent for new
mexico and thirteen percent for
the us.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Why are these statistics are
important for our legislators as
when we are making decisions
especially financial decisions
or compliance requirements any
of those things we have to think
about who they are impacting
when we make this decisions and
we're thinking through there's
lights of different ways that we
can help provide information and
I think what's important to
worse is that we do have a seat
at the table when we're talking
through those because we are
very interested in economic
development for rural
communities or interested in how
we can retain our folks with in
the communities and i'll talk a
little bit about some of our
challenges here in a moment.
So for long term electrification
planning to let you know where
we're out we do do we do have
four year
and long range work plans that
each co operative has.
And the plans contain system
improvements that they need to
do they also
contain new construction
initiatives.
And then they also work in
conjunction with in with
different partners in particular
now we're working with the dot
were working with forestery
energy environmental broadband
are rural to me with
communications partners and then
we are other utilities and this
is both at the federal in the
state levels I participate every
month and the three times a year
we have large meetings with our
rural electric statewide
associations across the united
states.
So I do work with folks at the
federal level as well
and to accelerate these plans we
look for federal and steak brant
opportunities and we have some
bent submitted a couple of those
one in particular that we're
waiting to hear back is on its
about two hundred and six
million dollars that we applied
for through
grip to so we're waiting to hear
hopefully within a month or two
if we are going to be awarded
there's brands.
Our current ignition initiatives
were expanding current solar
generation and adding battery
storage where rebuilding
transmission lines to a higher
voltage we're adding
transmission lines to tie into
substations or deploying new
technology such as advanced
metering infrastructure or
replacing wood polls with steel
falls and we are also adding
pulls to reduce band to increase
reliability.
We are also adding an upgrading
substations across rule new
mexico.
The.
The.
Some of the challenges that we
currently have
and this is with our brance in
particular and i'm sure that you
has legislators here about these
things are often and that is
that we have complicated
applications processes their
restrict eligibility
requirements there is a very
slow turnaround in some cases in
up to one year for some.
And we also reporting appliance
above and beyond what is
currently required for regular
businesses requiring contractors
indoor more staff but makes this
difficult for us is our ability
to higher and retain within
rolling max account as you all
probably know it's becoming more
difficult for us to hire and
retain we also are unable in
many cases the cooperatives
cannot pay as much as I will use
or contractors can so what can
happen is where you train
through our printership programs
and they go through that
apprenticeship programs in about
program they graduate and pretty
soon they are off to a
contractor or an I o u.
We do have as little as few
hours I should say right now
twelve employees and one co
operative.
And that can go all the way up
to about I think we are close to
ninety in another and our
largest cooperative in our
cooperatives here even though
they seem large like him as
mountains for example they have
about thirty three thousand
meters that's small in the
cooperative world for some of
these large utilities there are
some utilities out there
cooperatives that have two
hundred and twenty thousand
meters.
Four hundred thousand meters
there are not very many of them
but all of ours are small and in
rural some of the other
pressures that we have are
around regulatory constraints
the more regulatory requirements
we have the harder it is for us
to comply a simply because our
employees where many hats.
They were permitting delays and
then snowballing requirements
are the increase over time and
they have been especially in the
last ten years as you probably
know we've been dealing with a
lot of supply chain issues
especially since covered.
And we are still trying to catch
up.
Ordering transformers large
transfer more interest in
particular they can be eighteen
months up to three years out.
Depending on on where we can get
them.
The increasing liability
especially around wildfires.
Liability with a wildfire can
actually being for up to coop
and so there is some legislation
that we hope to work on going
forward that can help alleviate
some of the pressure on these
cooperatives.
Our work force uncertainties as
I talked about we have aging
employees and we have not been
able to replace them and there
are higher wages offered as I
mentioned before by other either
contractors or ious.
We are also having slow economic
growth in these role communities
as you are familiar with and
then the electric transportation
requirements that are also
applied to these rural
communities are difficult for us
to meet.
We have also adding fiber to
power lines from broadband
expansion we continue to work on
our broadband expansion and
that's one of the reasons why we
are decreasing the span and
between polls because that's
going to help us full
attachments it's going to help
alleviate some of the issues we
have with broadband in
particular but we're working
through that and we've been
grateful to work with our rural
telecommunications
company isn't also with office
of broadband.
Just to give you an update on
the.
Just our co op status for the
new mexico energy transaction
transition act I think it's
about says transaction it should
be transition didn't catch that
I am sorry about that but the
troy state generate generation
is on the left there
and western farmers through
southwest power cool is on the
right this is our current mix
for both of our generation and
transmission that are supplying
power of two are rule
cooperatives so co ops have
exceeded the current eta
requirement of twenty five
percent by twenty twenty four
with a power that's provided by
the gnt and that includes our
local utility solar end behind
the meter generation so this is
the current mex with troy state
we are at thirty three percent
already renewables and if you
take a look at western farmers
for window particular were at
thirty seven percent.
The.
And then some of the upcoming
renewable projects that I wanted
to make you aware of that
tracey western harmers and
arizona gently they all have
wind solar and storage projects
planned and funded that will be
coming online in the next few
years and they're well ahead of
that eta schedule.
As an example we have a few
examples here that reserve a
county electoral has a nine mb
solar project in the works right
now southwestern electric is
looking at eight mber project in
studying how to be able to
utilize that power locally from
the wind firm that will be
constructed in north east new
mexico.
As more funny becomes available
co ops are preparing for
expanding salary and storage
statewide.
The.
So that is our basic overview of
of what we wanted to provide
today and we wanted to also just
understand if there were any
questions that you have for us
or any other information we can
provide either today or at some
other point that you would like
to know or have from us.
Thank you very much are there
any other comments from our
other presentation.
The.
The.
That's
not at this time i'm just here
for so forth questions moral
support could be
do we have questions and
comments representative chat
fields.
Thank you mister
I i've heard that some of the
coops are having to shut down
during times of high fire danger
high wind uh.
It's going to be very unpleasant
to.
To folks to lose their
electricity whenever the wind
blows harder things get
extremely dry uh there's some
other things I know that they
can set that.
Makes it work you know if
there's.
Some type of thing happens maybe
he'll go off on its own before
it starts a fire.
Ah tell me.
Where we stand on that and what
can we do so as you know the the
ios have a will pm in particular
has instituted their
their shed off their power
shutoffs the coops have elected
not to do that the only time
that as of right now their plan
to do that is if it is a fire is
actually happening
and that's or emergency reasons
obviously we have to turn turn
the power off but for high winds
that is not their goal they are
not doing that right now they
are not doing this notifications
what can happen and I think this
was a recent example of that is
if p and am for example
might shut theirs off for
whatever reason high winds that
could impact our coops for
whatever reason and so we may
have to.
Notify our members of course but
I remembers in particular or
being communicated to on a
regular basis about why we're
doing it or if we have to
because it is a fire so our goal
is to continue our communication
but it does not the plan right
now for the cooperatives to do
that they are not participating
in that.
So I know for a fact that that
are cooperative has not done
that
I just wonder if there should be
some type of restriction on the
liability.
Uh the co op has.
Uhm
definitely we need to be
responsible and we are
responsible back.
Uh.
There there is a I think there's
a.
In overreaching need there to
provide electricity to the
public.
And if it becomes a situation
where we are so liable.
For something that's out of our
control that's not good so
thank you with you thinking
representative traffic.
Okay vice chair guarantee.
Thank you mr chair thanks and
thank you for putting your
emails names positions and the
phone numbers I got fee forget
so many presenters that is like
who was how do I get a whole lot
of thank you you're welcome out
of vice
let's see and also thank you for
explaining it this is one of
those areas that you hate to
tell people I really don't
understand electric corporative
is so the education is really
valuable thank you I have a
question really does so is that
a rural electric.
A covered.
Otero county.
Covers radio sill so it is you
can and then.
Manifest heard them the town of
riod also is
supplied power by pn and all the
surrounding areas
are served by terror county
electric cooperatives.
Thank you for thinking mr chair
and thanks for that so really
good also downs is that terrible
counties.
Or is that that's that would be
p and m madame
thank you and to hack her name
so I was so I would get lost in
their critics what is iostand
for and what is gnt sorry and
sorry madam care that is
investoral utilities
and then and gnt he is
generation and transmission co
operative
thank you in your office.
Yeah.
Okay a representative garcia
come back to your reps of luck
thank you mister german now
thank you the presentation
will represent some little bit
was the liability factor you
know I know one of the coops
took a twenty million dollars
hit your couple years back as a
refund of power line and called
the fire if you clarify who
flattered energy that you know
that law should have been for at
the end of the day
for that where it fell on the.
Fell on the trouble the tree
fell on the line.
Well what i'm getting at the
moment is basically what
happened at the end of the day
the cooperative all hit them the
pride the money i'll come back
to the consumer eventually the
consumer british struggling to
steer live something that you
guys didn't call
a god made whatever reason that
fell you know the customer will
get paints to work on transit we
really need to introduce
legislation.
Two avoid a coop from game here
or something they have no fault
I agree representative and all
that current and talk a little
bit about vegetation management
some of the the issues to that
we are dealing with around you
know being able to trim the way
we're supposed to you and you
want to talk about that.
Go.
No.
Chair
representative deficits here.
The the cops are are facing.
Those issues with the wildfires
burning and and being held libel
for things that are outside of
their control.
And so they're having to put
more money into vegetation
management and also their head
paying higher premiums for
insurance or not able to get
coverage insurance coverage
enough for an incident like that
one that happened a while back.
And so those costs those
increasing costs and vegetation
management which runs in the
millions of dollars for these
small corporations.
Um
are having to be incorporated
into rates because that's the
cost of doing business and so
the members rates go up and so
it just.
It makes it harder for the.
People that are living in these
royal communities because they
are in ing costco thank you
carmen and mrperiod reversing
about i'd also like to let you
know to a few of the things that
the cops are working on and
grants that we're working on as
well or to make sure that we
establish robust
wildfire mitigation plans we are
working with state forestery
will be working with bln two
ensure that we have the
appropriate plans in place to
just depending on the size and
scope of the electric
cooperative but further with the
issues that we have around
insurance and acquiring
what so for example it used to
be that it would be you know for
you know two million dollars of
coverage it was you know not not
much for twenty million dollars
of coverage which it goes up I
think where it what and how much
is that costing now a couple of
million
just for a liability
if if they'll leave an insurers
at all so some of the things
that we are following are there
has been some utile legislation
established there are spent
someone wyoming and some other
states and we've been working
with our western states together
to talk through how we can
protect our cooperatives from
these from the liability and
also to work collectively with
forestery with vom with
landowner so that we can also
ensure that we have appropriate
vegetation management going
forward.
No mister chairman and.
Presented you know it started
the co op
passing the book you know if you
if you look at history and you
have a hurricane comment of
florida somewhere not an oil
platform out what I was for a
gas prices
the automatic you go up because
they cannot absorb those kind of
hit and that's not the co op
taking.
Passing the bucket you have to
and it has to be passed through
the poor people as you rule in
mexico my district it's about
four hours and we need to
protect those people so
therefore mister we need to
protect the call up from having
to have a panda but liabilities
in your back and after while you
can afford to
know you have to possible to
somebody in the way thankful the
presentation the another thing
which german that this is really
good to educate people.
Could a lot of people have no
idea what was happening and this
is a good educational piece
thank you representative and mr
chair.
That's all I have insurance
thank you thank you represent a
representative lock
thank you mister chairman thank
you all for being here today I
appreciate your presentation
very good job
I just had a few questions for
you guys on page
I apologize this is challenges
you know the challenge is paid
mister chairman it talks about
regulatory constraints uh so
regarding that mrperiod chairman
do we I mean i'd like to hear a
little more about regulatory
constraints in particular like
on the state level for example
what is it that we as
legislators could do to help
alleviate that pain I know right
now with its summer time so it's
hot and our electric bills are
going through the roof what can
we do as a state to make your
businesses and his co apps.
More receptive to a very easily
changing regulatory environment
right now and then what what can
we do legislatively to ensure
that we can either claw back
some of their over regulation or
be able to be more amicable with
your partners mister chairman I
know it's a million dollar
question so I apologize I think
I have an answer thank you mr
mister representative so I I
think there are a couple of
things and I can give you
some examples
covered is is a good start it's
a good place to start just
because then this was before my
time before I got here but I
continue to do the reporting
once I got here
I took this role little bit more
than eighteen months ago and
there were required reporting.
That we have to do on a monthly
basis every cooperative had to
report their collections
activities
they have to port reports how
how many how often
who they who they were where
they were and that was quite an
onerous process in in getting
that information turned down and
we started compiling it through
the statewide organization at
one point because for some of
the especially the smaller
cooperatives to compile that and
file that they don't have any
want to do that for them on
their behalf there are also
things that have come out
recently there is what's called
it was raw five sixty eight that
how to do with inner connection
rules and what we have to do to
comply with that I don't know
that it was necessarily aimed at
the cooperatives at the time
that it was
that it came out and again I
wasn't familiar with with
exactly how that happened
about it essentially talks about
how we
manage interconnection how we
need to report and comply with
in a connection and originally I
think it was more centered on
the investor owned utilities
however the cooperative were
cryed out after some after some
conversations with the public
regulatory commission was
somehow were wrapped into that
so what's happened now as we've
haven't had to hire contractors
outside of the cooperatives to
help us determine how we can
comply if we comply with if we
comply with those rules and
again our members are paying for
that
there have been a couple of
instances aside late as well
where we've talked about things
that we could possibly pull back
and one example would be
notifications around
collection's activities
there was a requirement that we
had to do door notifications for
example
and and physically deliver those
we do have a few different ways
that we can do that.
And I obviously to rule trucks
which takes a lot of fuel when
you were going try and
definitely electrical vehicle
you would not be able to use and
renew mexico to do that sir are
there some rules that we're
reviewing with the prc that we
could possibly pull back.
One other one that is not
regulatory but it was through
their office server engineering
was a pe required piece of
legislation that was passed word
essentially says that we need to
have even on our own maintenance
I believe a AP stamp.
For every job that we do.
We only have three ps across
fifteen coops one of them as a
retiring and for us to do that
for when this is something we've
been doing for eighty five
years.
That is something that we're
going to have to roll back
because we're not going to be
able to comply with that
so I think what I would offer is
that
when we're looking at
legislation is to take into
account who is serving rural new
mexico.
What the impacts are going to be
on those members because we
don't have shareholders they own
the cooperatives and every piece
of legislation compliance
anything that's going to cost us
more money or more employees
where we have to hire more
employees that's costing those
members any of the bills that
may for example the the low
income bill a couple of years
ago that was put forward.
That would have been our low
income members subsidiaring
subsidising our low income
members so there are certain
things that may be applicable to
you know staying on a fall but
lost cruses that aren't going to
be applicable to these co
operative communities.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you for that very comprehensive
answer in I I appreciate that I
was writing it down all the
notes here and especially I
thought I thought all these
cooperatives could totally
afford is cyber truck rate.
Probably not so I think that's
very important to consider these
policies before we put him
through so that we ensure that
are low income folks especially
in rural new mexico are not the
ones that are taking the hits so
I appreciate that and as you
said work force that is huge
mister chairman I think that is
so huge because we need a next
generation to help fill the gap
that we currently have and then
also be able to continue to do
the work in the future and I was
so happy to to meet with some of
the folks in your youth because
you thought and it was very cool
I was in santa fe for a
committee hearing and I I saw
them there and it was awesome to
be able to talk to them so I
appreciate your work there and I
think that's so important but I
hope I hope the executive
branches listening very
carefully when it comes to
regulation on the co op's
because I believe how many
square miles do you guys serve
again sixty sixty one thousand
miles representative mr chair
sixty one thousand miles I would
just leave that that's just line
miles wow
well thank you so much mr
chairman thank you both for your
presentation and keep up the
great work thank you
representative mister chair
okay thank you representative
thank you very much I have to
see the same I am sure a version
of this i'm not sure if this
documents been shared before but
I learned a lot today of things
that I didn't even know about
you know which you're up to and
everything that's fantastic I do
want to let you know I got
heavily involved with them more
as some miguel county when they
were happy the issues with
female and reimbursement in all
the contractors that they were
working with I wrote letters to
anyone that would receive a
letter from me and phone calls
and trying to get the money
loosened up and check the the
cages where we need to to to get
them paid but you're right I
mean they can literally wip out
you know not just a cooperative
but any other entity that needs
to maintain with public dollars
and but have you to get other
things done or whatever stuff
what a mass and fiasco that was
and and I have to say that in a
lot of ways you're sort of
the cooperative in my opinion or
sort of like the local
leadership.
The.
You know happen in many
communities as well i'm very
impressed with how the boards
come together at the history
that they have and the tradition
of service that they have I
think you're right on with
everything that you said on page
at nine I told me she I
understood the last bullet there
is at twenty two percent of the
population is is living in
poverty inside of the the
cooperatives or outside it I
think I don't know if I read
that the right way
that's the cooperative status
statistics page
chairman that that's
twenty two percent of the
populations that are served by
cooperative
at an.
The population served by in you
know living in another area is
outside the copies of their
numbers so do you see that
improving over time I I know
that when the r r a came into
being it was largely because of
the poverty across the country
and some of the the southern
port states and what have you
and it really helped turn things
around but do you see that
twenty two percent reducing or
or what directions are going
mister charit and I don't know
that we're going to do that
because so the was formed
essentially because invest
around utilities did not want to
serve rural areas
and so the farmers were
interested in being able to
electrify rural america and and
last week change or approach to
economic development across new
mexico and not just new mexico
but the united states we see
more and more people leaving a
rural areas in the concern there
is here is going to support then
the infrastructure for the rest
of the members who are left out
there who owned that
infrastructure with those those
cooperatives
so I don't know if that's going
to change it's going to it's
gonna depend on how and what we
can do in new mexico so that we
can come together
collaboratively and determine
what we want to be and what we
want to represent and how we're
going to further attract people
to roll new mexico well and and
I support everything you're up
to because what what you do is a
lot of the areas that you cover
are highly agricultural as well
and so food production in one of
the bills that I was able to
move through the legislature in
and a lot of the kind members I
think almost every member here
was kind enough to vote for it
was the free breakfast and lunch
with our school children yes but
in addition to that they do
receive additional funding if
they are to I think it's thirty
one percent for breakfast twenty
nine percent for lunch average
of about thirty percent per meal
if they make a creep
relationships with local farmers
and ranchers so that they can
get that food under the table
into the lunch rooms into the
kitchens and cafeteria's
quicker.
If you're not doing what you're
doing that's just not going to
work because a lot a large part
of it where you provide your
services are in those areas
where that food and those
vegetables can be grown that way
yes so thank you thank you
doing that if you got a page ten
thousand the right hand side the
first sub bullet
expanding current solar
generation and adding battery
storage is is there a a plan put
together for all of you are for
all of the cooperatives or are
you able to or is that prepared
to maybe you can't even talk
about that I don't know but is
there a plan while you're sort
of classic public bodies because
you have boards and all that but
um is there a plan to on how
that the network needs to look
feel and where the word needs to
be located well so
so because we start from a
storage okay misreturn thank you
so I I think it's gonna be
dependent on or a generation and
transmission
co operative since they supplier
repower and it is going to be
you know and collaboration with
our distribution cooperatives
about where and how we can where
we can put storage where we can
have the storage and I think
there has to be a plan with a
long with our other utilities as
well because it doesn't just
impact us rated impacts it
impacts everyone are um
other again our ios and then our
cooperative's across the country
so it depends on where we get
our power where the powers
coming from where we need to
store it do you want to add
anything to that or.
Well i'd like to say that
they're really looking intensely
at that to take a take advantage
of funding and and tax credits
in such um but it it is going to
take that close relationship
with their generation and
transmission
suppliers because of the
the the relationship that there
in and the contracts that you
know that they have but but it
is it's something they're
looking at very closely and and
are up there you know there is
some pilot projects that are in
the works that they're thinking
about and then and then
regionally how to best put out
throughout the state
and mrperiod terror just to add
to that one of the things that
we do is we we do try to work
with the universities we work on
ah different ways that we can do
different things for example
will be at nmsu tomorrow and you
know some of the projects that
even the students are working on
that can help with this even
mobile microstory to rate my car
get grids in case of fires you
know what what can we do in
those scenarios so we're looking
at storage
battery storage across the
entire state and again working
with our g anties to do that
thank you so on storage I
actually have some people I want
you to talk to all reach out to
you madam executive director
there i'm sorry see you
and then you use the word in
that bullet solar do you mean
solar only or do you mean all
renewable energies that are
being produced uh when otherwise
in this particular bullet we're
referring to solar but they're
expanding all renewables that
cross new mexico
wonderful this is excellent
information thank you I think I
may be we need to do some more
of this the edge micate is my
son say edge and making them
down to educate you know a lot
of my colleagues in the legs
they cause a lot of really in a
week live in sort of like the
pin m area if you will and we
don't really pay a whole lot of
attention to what's going on
with whatever we absolutely need
to be doing that because it
offets together so.
Thank you very much thank you mr
chair for your support yes thank
you any other questions comments
concerns anything at all all
right well thank you very much
for being here to appreciate
thank you message here and you
are the first to get their cell
wonderful we feel very probably
what's excellent by the way they
will what a great what one or
one was perfect it might be a
four or one but you know
whatever
thank you mister chair madame
vice chair and members many
thank you and so with that
members of the committee will
