you hope to get out of your
experience working on interim
committees. Thank you. We'll
start with Representative
Roybuck Cabiro.
I think you mentioned, Madam
Chair, and um greetings to
Members of the committee, those
in the audience, and those
viewing. I'm Patricia Royal
Caballero. I'm happy to be
serving once again on this
committee. I've been on this
committee from the very
beginning, and I really
appreciate um all the work. I, I
like being on this committee
because it's my field of
expertise and study, which is
public budget budgeting and
finance, so, and what I did for
my career and what I hope to
Continue to see as we evolve and
we've seen a lot of positive vol
evolution.
In this committee and in the
work of our executive director
and all of the staff is the
continued seeking out of
creative and innovative ways in
which we can um invest.
For the future of our
communities. That's the most
important thing that I think we
can do and we in uh Marquita
Russell's report, I'm sure we're
gonna hear a little bit of the
background and history of how
we've evolved and, and really
addressed that. And so that's my
hope for this committee, this
session again. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative Beda. Thank
you, Chair. Good afternoon,
everyone. It's really great to
see everyone during the interim,
I honestly and sincerely missed
everyone in our little break.
from each other.
But it's good to be here. I'm a
new member of this committee. I
represent House District 69,
which encompasses 6 counties,
Berna Leo, McKinley, Valencia
San Juan, Socorro, and Cibala,
very large area. I'm excited to
be a part of this committee, and
I hope to, what I can get from
this committee is seeing where
the issues that my constituents
have brought to my attention
intersect with this committee
and their purpose and just
preparation for the upcoming
session. I, I look forward to
hearing all of you from all of
you and seeing your expertise.
on this committee as well. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Mejia.
Madam Cher, good morning. Um,
good afternoon, everybody. It's
been a long day.
Um, as a newly, um,
representative of.
I'm sorry. My name is Angelita
Mejia. I represent uh Chavez
County District 58, and as a new
representative, I, my goal is
just to better understanding of
Um, what's going on?
Thank you.
Great Senator Tobison. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm uh Senator
Nicole Tobias and I'm from
District 21, which is the
northeast pocket of Albuquerque,
um, some of us, by the way, are
new and old.
But um, I'm a freshman senator,
and so what I hope to get out of
the interim committees one, I'm
already, I'm traveling the state
and I'm loving, I'm just
learning more about all the
little pockets in our beautiful
state. They're all so different,
um, so that's one just really
seeing it firsthand and then to
learning as much as I can and
lastly, getting to know um the
other legislators a little bit
more because we don't have much
time for that, uh, during the
session, as you know. Thank you.
Good morning madam chair
committee and.
All of our guests, uh, and
Representative Tara Luhan. I
represent House District 48 here
in the capital city, um, big
question you have in front of
us, but I think, um, this is my
4th year, serving on on this uh
committee, um, and now as a, as
a voting member this year, um.
And perhaps uh we, I'd like us
to really focus in on what we
have already accomplished and
really bring that in in light of
what we are seeing and.
In the economy, uh, at large the
federal economy and how we are
going to be more reliant on
state dollars and states
investments and really uh
coordinates with, you know, our
subcommittee that we we have
this um this interim session and
how they are, um, what they're
coming up with because we don't
have a lot of time during
interim and we, we need a lot of
focus because I think we, uh, as
I'm talking to my constituents.
And I'm traveling across the
state already. Um, and this is
the this is the pending question
and issue for for all of our
state agencies, uh, and for our
economy is what is happening at
the federal level, so I think
we, we really want to focus on
that this uh this interim and
really with the infrastructure,
um.
pieces that we have already made
investments in in how we are
fully uh looking at how we have
uh the sectors that we are um
investing in in sustainable
agriculture, for instance, and
technology. So I know we're
gonna get the update from
Marquita, uh, Russell, uh, here
shortly, but
We have to pair those those
things together because one is
affecting the other, and I
really would, what I hope I,
that's what we get out um out of
this interim. Thank you.
Representative Lord.
Hello, thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Stey.
No commentary please.
I remember stepping Lord him in,
uh, District 2 which now Berlin
towards County. It's my first
time in this committee. I'm big
on oversight and this ties in
with a lot of the other
committees I'm in, so I'm very
happy to be here. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. John
Block House District 51 in
Alamogordo, and it's my 3rd year
on this committee. Great to see
you, Madam Chair and Mr. Vice
Chair. You guys flip around,
it's hard to know who to call
Mr. Chair or Madam Chair,
but uh but uh it's Mr. Vice here
this year. Uh, I would be lying,
madam chair, if I didn't say
what I'm looking forward to, is
to get as many of these dollars
that we oversee back into House
District 51.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And um.
Committee, it's I've never been
on this committee, so I have no
idea what I'm supposed to get
out of this committee, um, but,
you know, from listening to
Representative Lujan, I guess we
get to control the federal
government from here, so I'm
looking forward to that, um, and
so that will be very
interesting, so I'm, I'm hoping
we get that out of this
committee, um, but, uh, you
know, I really have no idea what
we do in this committee. I guess
I look forward to learning.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
Debbie Serana. I represent House
District 21 in Bernalillo
County. I also have never been
on this committee in 9 years in
the legislatures, and but I've
lived with joy, a rep the the
the chair quite a bit and she's
always talking about PPP, so I
want to learn everything I need
to about PPPs. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And thank you, chair. I am a
representative Kathleen Cates
from District 44. That's all of
Corrales, parts of Riar Rancho
in the northern part of
Albuquerque and Bernao and
Sandoval counties, um, I'd like
to introduce you today. I have,
uh, legislative intern from the
Ask Academy, Owen Peterson, who
is accompanying me today. So,
um, be always interesting to
find out what he thinks he's
learned today as we go for our
planning meeting. This is my 3rd
year on this committee. Uh, I'm
very proud.
to be sitting on both the
quasi-governmental oversight
committees this an MFA as well,
um, I am so fascinated of the
power of uh this agency and how
they are able to invest in the
infrastructure that is um what
we say in the real estate
business, deferred maintenance
has occurred for many decades,
and so I, um, I'm very much
looking forward to um seeing the
funds that are going to all of
our district.
works, so thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair Patina.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you to the
members, uh, Senator Michael
Padilla. I um spent 10 years
chairing the science, technology
and telecom Committee, and then
when I got back into Senate
leadership as the majority whip
in the Senate, you can't share a
legislative council create
committee for the new folk. So I
moved over here as chair and
vice chair with our A chair this
year. So, um, thank you very
much for being here. I represent
the Southwest Quadrant. Well,
really, now the redistricting
the southern portion of Born Leo
County. I've been in the
legislature for 13.
years and I've been a voting
member of this committee, all
13, and I will say that uh the
outside of the legislative
Finance Committee and the
legislative Education Study
Committee and the Education and
Finance Committees, which I
serve on Senate Finance also as
my standing committee in the
Senate. This committee actually
has a lot of cannoli. So
Representative Block, you might
want to listen up here. There is
an awful lot of dollars to be
had and things to be had in
terms of public works projects
out of this committee. So one of
the things uh for the chair's
request is what do we hope to
accomplish this year?
As an individual, I hope, and I
was hoping that Representative
Block might say this, and I hope
others will. I want to get the
dollars out the door, if you
will. I mean, let's get people
to work and, and we've been
doing a lot of that with a lot
of these public dollars. We're,
we're very rich right now in New
Mexico. I just want to make sure
that we're making really good
decisions so that when we make
infrastructure and public, uh,
infrastructure projects happen
that they are there for the, for
the ages and for the long long
term uh period. So thank you all
very much for being here, Madam
Chair, over to you.
Uh, Representative Terasas,
you're next to introduce
yourself and what you hope to
achieve during the interim.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for this opportunity to
speak and um I hope that first
thing I'd like to see, Madam
Chair, is
I'd like to see us work really
good together and, and have a
lot of meetings in Silver City,
New Mexico.
I just wanted to see if
everybody's paying attention.
Madam Chair, I'm from, I'm from,
uh, District 39. I'm in
southwest of Mexico, uh, that
corner. It's a beautiful area.
Hea Wilderness, we have a, uh, a
lot of tourism there. Um, we
have uh the, the Fort Baird. We
are the only copper mine that's
uh that's producing copper here
in New Mexico, right there in,
in Grant County.
And so, uh, you know, I, I guess
what I look forward to doing is,
is again, working together and
see if we can, uh,
I think the chairman or vice
chair said at night well that uh
we need to get people to work.
And uh see how we can invest our
dollars, the dollars that we're
very, very, uh, fortunate to
have right now and put them to
where we can leverage them the
best we can. Thank you, chair.
Senator Ramus and then
Representative Barrigo.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and uh first of all, you
know, it's good to see everyone
again. Um, also, I'm just glad
to be, be up here. I was, I was
so happy to hear that we're
going to have a meeting in, in
my district. I represent
District 38 when Luna Grant in
Hidalgo County. So we'll be
having a meeting down in Deming,
so I really do appreciate that,
Madam Chair. Thank you very much
for reaching out. I hope that
went nice. Um
Uh, Representative Terazas
mentioned their mind, you know,
we, we really want to keep that
going as best as possible,
especially with now with all the
different EB mandates and, and
uh electric transmission lines
we need to put up. There's
nothing we can do uh when it
comes to these issues when, when
it comes to copper, and without
copper, we can't do much of
this. So, uh, not only that, but
we can't forget where our
money's coming from for the stay
in New Mexico and, you know, oil
and gas is very important to us.
We've got to do everything we
can, of course, to keep these
clean, but at the same time.
time, you know, um, you thank
them every, every day for all
the, all the money that they
bring into the state of New
Mexico. And I'm just looking for
being new, a new senator, being
new to this committee. I'm just
looking forward to learning from
each and every one of you and uh
working with you all to
hopefully we can put it, put up
some good bills for this
upcoming session that's gonna
really make sense and do better
for the state of New Mexico.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I was listening
to you all and online, just a
minute ago, um.
I'm Cynthia Brego, uh, District
17, and if you think about
Albuquerque, it's more where
Cottonwood Mall area is, um, and
I understood that, uh, what
people were talking about was uh
what they wanted to see come out
of this committee, um, for me, I
wanna see uh more or learn more
about the inner workings of the
different departments for the
state and um I also
So I'm looking for efficiency
and effectiveness of programs
and departments, so that's what
I would be looking for, and
hopefully, uh, share some of my
experience, um, having worked
for the city of Albuquerque for
uh 28 years. Thank you.
Thank you, I'll introduce myself
and then I'll have this stuff be
introduced. I'm state rep Joy
Garrett from Northwest, uh, West
Side Albuquerque, um, this is my
5th year, I think on the
committee. It's a profound
committee and our privileges
that we have oversight of one of
the most effectively highly
functioning organizations in the
state. That's New Mexico Finance
Authority. They also have an
updated website, and if you've
ever dealt with websites,
s for government. It's a
pleasure to actually have a
deeply updated, uh, website. So
I want to thank uh Marquita
Russell and her staff for that.
Um, one thing about this
committee, I got my first call
from a constituent asking me for
a letter about a project that he
was applying to with the NMFA.
It was so exciting because I
actually knew what he was doing
and um so I think all of us will
get more educated on how to help
our constituent.
and organizations. Uh, he was
building and is building,
actually the first little office
building in my district. My
district doesn't have office
buildings. It's surrounded
outside of it, but that was very
exciting to me to see, I, I
don't know if he got it, but the
fact that it was there, he found
out about it. Uh, it was
actually very inspiring. The
other thing I have to say is I
have to give a special award to
John Bloch, and I'm sorry I
didn't bring anything. Sean was
the most punctual.
remember during the last 2
years. And as a retired teacher,
he was always on time.
Um, so just a word to the wise,
it's great to be on time. We
also leave earlier for all on
time. Also, we have um 18 voting
members. That means a quorum has
to have 10 people and many times
we've had to call around
sometimes Joe Cervantes or Nancy
Rodriguez would show up to make
a quorum, even though they had
other things on their plate, so
try to come if you
can't come, let Sabine and her
staff know quickly, um, because
we have, we have to approve a
lot of things for in a in to
carry out their uh work, but I
just wanna really acknowledge,
uh, representative block's
punctuality and attendance. I
think he's been to every
meeting, but one and he had a
very good reason why it couldn't
come. So thank you.
Representative Block, and with
that, I'll have our,
I'll have.
Madam Chair, for uh purposes of
transparency. I had a flat tire
this morning, so I just thought
I'd say that.
Thank you, my
back to 11 more comment. I know
that uh he was the latest today
because I walked in before he
did, OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think John should wear a crown
today, some sort of a crown.
We're all busy people and uh so
thank you for being here and
with that, I'm gonna have our
staff director, uh, Sabina
Gaynor introduced herself and
her staff.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sabina
Gaynor. Um, I'm the lead staff
attorney on this committee, and
I'm assisted by Martin Fisher.
Thank you.
And uh Madam Chair.
Yeah, uh thank you, Madam Chair.
I just wanted to mention
something to the committee, um,
so you may have heard in our
first meeting of legislative
council this year, uh, myself,
the, uh, minority whip in the
Senate, the majority whip in the
House, the minority whip in the
House, the four of us were
tasked with a special
subcommittee or or a committee
for this, this year, uh, where
we're going to be looking at uh
reforming the interim committee
process. So if you uh have any
feedback, I've been saying this
city to one of my committees as
we get going for the year. If
you have feedback
information, suggestions,
recommendations, whatever, if
you want to funnel those to me
or your respective whip in your
caucus, please make sure that
you do that because we have 18
members of this committee, as
you can imagine, you just heard
from the chair a little while
ago. Uh, we have half the
legislature serving on the water
committee. I mean half I so to
to obtain a um a uh quorum is a
pretty serious matter. So if you
have suggestions,
recommendations, we already
have, uh, we're gonna have our
first meeting, uh, I think later
this week, but uh would love to
hear from you. Thank you very
much, ma.
church.
Thank you, Vice Chair. And with
that, we're going to turn over
the meeting uh to Marquita
Russell. She is the chief
executive officer of intimateA
and you are getting a handout,
uh, as she begins her
presentation, uh, so when you're
ready, go.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
It's, it's a little intimidating
to be in front of a group that
is uh still relatively new to
who we are and so I stopped me
whenever I've gone past your
knowledge base because that
happens a lot. It's, uh, we've
grown a lot over the last
several years. So even if you've
been in the legislature and been
a casual bystander. It's very
likely that we may have changed
from the point at which you last
knew us and if you're brand new,
there's a lot to catch up to.
So, um, my apologies in advance,
but
I will, I will do my darndest.
I'm Marquita Russell. I'm the
CEO of the NMFA, um, and I'm
very happy this is my
I think 24th interim, um, uh,
I've been at the agency almost
25 years and um I've seen a lot
at the both the legislative time
and in in our agency, the growth
of our agency and I'm very proud
to represent this organization.
I'm joined today, uh, with Mark
Chaikin, who's our new general
counsel. He joined us from
taxation and revenue at the end
of uh April. He was a deputy
there and in charge of its tax
policy group, so, um, he's brand
new to our.
organization, though he did work
with us once before, um, Laura
is back there, uh, Laura
Williams is my executive
assistant and uh many of you may
have met Rick Martinez, who was
a former NMFA board member, a
former NMFA employee and now
works with us part-time, uh,
with you all.
So I am speaking from this
presentation. It's got a lot of
small print. I'm mostly, it's
here for your reference, but I
do want to walk through some
basic elements of who we are, so
we'll start on page 2, the New
Mexico Finance Authority, as was
mentioned earlier, is a
quasi-governmental entity. We
were created back in 1992, um,
basically to oversee public
infrastructure and planning and
development of dollars, um, it's
become quite a broad-based
finance group as you'll see in a
minute.
We currently have 75 individuals
working for us. Uh, we're
budgeted for 77 and our new
budget which kicks in in July,
is expected to have 80
individuals. So over the last 5
years, we will have doubled um
our uh staffing size. So it's
been quite a growth period.
You'll hear this theme a lot.
Since 2020, a lot has happened
uh with the finance Authority.
We are governed by an 11-member
independent board, the you'll
see that listed on the left hand
side there, our chair is Cathy
Keith, um, many of you may know
her from her, she had spent time
in state government in the early
2000s at the economic
development department and has
worked in many different
capacities in local government,
um, higher education. She
currently works with uh Lannel.
Um, and we have, uh, several
Several of our board members are
state appointed member cabinet
members, for instance. Um, so
our board, much like the
mortgage Finance Authority board
or Housing New Mexico, as
they're now called, um, oversees
our rules, our policies,
approves our projects, um, they
oversee our operations, they
approve our budget. We are not a
state budgeted entity. You do
not see us in House Bill 2, so
our budget is separate and aside
from the work that you all do,
um, and then we work them
because we do a number
of different projects. We have
several different committees
that we run our operations
through. So we have 5 different
committees. Um, I have not
listed them here, but I assure
you we worked them pretty hard.
There's about a day a month that
each board member dedicates to
the work of the finance
Authority, um, between our board
meetings which last about 3
hours, our committee meetings,
each of them are on at least 2,
many of them 3, and those are an
hour to 2 hours um apiece. So
there's a lot of work that goes
into the finance authority
operations and we have
a very dedicated and able board
that helps us do what we do.
Um, we are now authorized to
operate 27 different programs
through 13 different statutes or
acts, um, and our primary two
acts are the New Mexico Finance
Authority Act, um, which in that
purpose, as I mentioned earlier
with the planning and financing
of public projects and then in
2001, 2003, yeah, 2003,
statewide economic development
Finance Act, which allows us to
um offer the benefits of a, of a
public.
Financing agency for economic
development projects.
We are also the administrator of
4 separate boards. I'll walk
through those with you, so you
may see us attached to other
boards like the Water Trust
board and others, and then we
are the um administrator to the
executive task force of the,
it's the drought task force,
which is now back in the news as
we've been uh tasked with doing
more things under the executive
order the governor just issued.
And then, of course, we're
overseen by you 24 members, half
of you are new, um, and so I'm,
I'm excited this will be a, an
interesting session. Um.
On page 3, this is that
expansive list. I don't plan to
go through it, but just to give
you some sense of how our agency
has evolved since 1992, for
years we operated just the
public project revolving fund
when I joined in September of
2000.
We had made only 50 loans
between
1992, September of 2000, 50
loans. It took a while for our
agency to get started for our
programs to get developed, but
we were fairly sleepy agency and
at that time, um, we worked very
hand in glove with the
legislature. It was anticipated
we would always stay a
relatively small organization
and then some stuff changed. Um,
you can see that for the most
part, we had um a little bit of
activity in the early 90s, in
the 2000s, there was a little
burst of activity and new
programs were added.
to us under Governor Richardson.
Um, we were then fairly sleepy
again and then you'll see in the
last 5 years a bunch of new
activity in our programs. So we
basically finance public
infrastructure. That's where the
majority of our time and dollars
are spent, whether it's water
projects or roads, um, even fire
trucks, I'll, I'll count that in
infrastructure for right now.
Um, but then we also have a
large part of our organization
that's a growing part of our
organization dedicated to
economic development and
community development. And so,
the, the um programs that we
offer, some of which are very
small, very few dollars in some
of these programs, but a lot of
power in the law that that
created them. So we are rich
with authority and not
necessarily with money in all of
our programs, and you'll see
that as we, as we look at this.
So on the very left-hand side of
um slide 3, you'll see whether
or not there's a check mark if
we consider it an active
program, and by that I mean we
are either currently um making
loans and or
France or we are um in the
process of servicing those
loans. So we may have run out of
those dollars from that one-time
pot of money that was given to
us, but we're still servicing
those loans. We consider that
active staff is spending time on
it, so that's where that check
mark comes from. The next column
in from the left is whether it's
funded. Could somebody apply now
for those dollars and you'll see
there are many fewer check marks
here, um, and that's largely due
to, you know, we typically fund
from single appropriate
ations or maybe two
appropriations, but the only a
few of our programs have
regularly recurring sources of
funds, and you'll see that our
drinking water program that's
federally funded, our water
project fund and our colonious
infrastructure fund. So those
are 3 annually funded programs,
um, and then I'll spend, you'll
hear a lot this um interim on
the public project revolving
fund which we call the PPRS, so
not quite the PPP, the
representative Sanatta talked
about, but the
PRF, the public project
revolving fund. It is that
flagship program. It is where
most of our organization spends
its time and where we have the
greatest amount of power to make
an influence in your community
by improving your
infrastructure, and that program
receives a dedication of tax and
allows us to replenish those
funds, um, as we need to. So
while it's not a, an annually
recurring source of funds, the
mechanism in place is in place
for us to replenish that fun so
we, we have plenty of capacity.
there.
Um, on the, I'll go to the
boards that we administer on
page 4, the one that we probably
are known the most for is the
Water Trust board, that's been
in place since the early 2000s.
Um, it's currently chaired by
the state engineer Elizabeth
Anderson, and it has on it a
number of water users, uh,
different types of water users
throughout the state, so you'll
see both regulatory policy group
and then actual water users that
sit and make recommendations for
how to spend the water project
fund. Um, and
So those uh board members are on
the left-hand side. I would note
that we, um, there are 6 types
of projects that are now
authorized to be funded and the
job of the Water Trust board is
to is to select the best
projects and then hand them to
the finance authority for us to
make the grants and loans. So we
worked with these boards, we
call them policy partners, and
they select the projects and
then send them over to the NMFA
and we make loans. That's really
what our job is, is to make
grants and loans.
Um, so 6 types of projects, most
of the money goes to storage,
conveyance, or delivery of
water. Those are what I consider
your basic pipe projects, water
tanks, um, we do federal,
federally endangered Species Act
implementation, less than 1% of
our money goes there, but there
are a few important projects
that have been funded over the
last 20 years. Um, restoration
and management of watersheds,
not a big source of activity for
us, um, but a steady handful of
projects that we see annually,
flood prevention.
which is becoming a much larger
part of our uh water trust board
funding.
Um, water conservation or
recycling treatment and reuse of
water that was basically once it
was captured in order to use it
as a potable or a potable
offset, it needs to be treated.
That's really where that one
comes in. And then lastly, um,
in, uh, last year, not the 25
session, but the 24 session, uh,
a bill was passed to add
wastewater as an eligible water
project. Um, I think that's
largely if you don't take care
of your wastewater, you be, you
have a water problem later on.
Um, the act itself creates two
funds, one of which sits at the
state investment council, that's
the uh water trust fund, and
that has a corpus of dollars,
the interest earnings are spun
off and sent to the Water
Project Fund, and that's the
fund that we make our grants and
loans from.
The water project fund also
receives a net 8.1%.
Of the senior severance tax
bonds, um, that amount has been
growing over the last several
years and so, um, among the
other new programs.
Stop for a moment while we check
if
Coron I broke it. I do that
sometimes.
You can continue.
Uh, so the water project fund,
which again receives that 8.1%.
So a lot of dollars have been
coming in and as you'll see in a
little bit, there's also other
dollars that have been sent to
the finance authority, uh, for
those, uh, projects coming out
of the Water Trust Fund. Um, and
then also in 2024, a new area of
activity for the NMFA and for
the Water Trust Board. We were
authorized to use the water
project fund to fund technical
assistance and capacity
development for water systems.
And the water trusts board is
rolling
that out in two different ways.
One is to actually do the
planning for small systems, many
small water water systems,
mutual domestics are unable to
actually complete a water
project because it takes a
really long time and these are
often volunteer boards, turnover
of the board's projects go
sideways. So we don't end up
getting as many planning
projects done, which then
doesn't put them in in line for
the water trust board, the
Colonia's infrastructure, um,
other federal dollars, look and
uh in
In fact, our drinking water
state revolving fund. So our job
there was to hire engineers that
would then go out working for
the Water Trust board and
actually get that planning
completed so that they are able
to spend their time getting uh
the rest of their project
together and can start accessing
the dollars that are available.
The other area that we're
looking to use those dollars for
is in facilitation of
regionalization, a lot of money
out there for infrastructure,
but if systems want to actually
integrate and blend, it takes a
lot of legal work, accounting
work, uh, you know,
non-engineers need to come to
the table and figure out how a
system can be combined and that
we will do that through these
dollars. So we'll send out a
team of attorneys, accountants,
uh, community facilitators to
figure out how to take several
small water systems and.
and move them into one regional
system. That's important because
there are more than 11,000 water
systems in New Mexico.
Fewer than 5% of them serve, so
I think it's like 33 or 35
projects or 75% of our
population, which means that we
have 1000 water systems.
Serving just 25% of our
population. Some of these are 25
folks, 10 households. They're
very small systems that exist in
New Mexico and they all have
infrastructure. So to the extent
from the Water Trust port's
perspective to the extent that
we can regionalize and allow for
greater efficiencies and, and
management, we think the better.
So that's one of the reasons the
Waterrust Board has put its
money there. It follows along
with policies that the Waterrust
Board has taken to incentivize
regionalization.
Uh, the next page I will go to
is colonius infrastructure. It
was created about 10 years after
the Water Trust board and in the
likeness of the water trust
board. Here there are different
projects that we can oversee, we
can fund water, wastewater,
solid waste, flood control,
housing and roads in those 12
southernmost counties where they
have designated colonials, um,
and I would note here that we
have an interesting combination.
We have 7 voting members.
Some of whom are appointed by
legislative council, and we have
5 non-voting members, and so we
get a lot of input from people
that have boots on the ground
there, but again, very much
similar to the Water Trust board
and the way the dollars are
delivered, the way they accept
applications annually and again
send them to the Finance
Authority to make those grants
and loans.
On page 6, the opportunity
enterprise and housing
Development Act that's a newer
board, um, but it's been a
little prominent because of the
amount of funds that you all
have dedicated to the projects
it it it oversees. Um, it is now
a 14-member board, um, and it
has two different funds that it
oversees, one for commercial
development, really true spec
development where it's not owner
occupied in order to sort of um
have small businesses grow.
facilities or to have new
businesses come into New Mexico
and, and located in the New
Mexico, there has to be a
building or a site ready space,
and that just doesn't exist. So
a lot of small businesses end up
using their capital, uh, their,
their, their money on space and
on, on physical uh uh locations
and that's just for a growing
business, not an efficient place
for their dollars to be
utilized. So for small
businesses in particular, it's
important that they have a place
to go to and for businesses
coming into New Mexico.
they have to have a site that
can be built relatively quickly,
and the com the commercial
development program funds just
that. So if you are primarily
owner occupied, we have other
programs you can address, but if
you are not primarily
owner-occupied, and you're
building a facility for someone
else's use, that's the program
to go to. Um, and then there's
the housing development. So
besides what housing New Mexico
does, which they do incredibly
well. The opportunity Enterprise
Board oversees the.
of funds for workforce housing.
Which the um Housing New Mexico
does not fund, so it's outside
the scope of what they do, and
then infrastructure for um low
income housing. So different, it
adds to what is already
available at the mortgage
Finance Authority, but just on
the, on the edges. So we don't,
if they're already doing it, the
opportunity enterprise program
between what MFA does or Housing
New Mexico, and Opportunity
Enterprise.
Um, and there are two different
pots of funds there. There's
$120 million pot of fund for the
commercial development in the
$125 million pot of fund for uh
the housing. So those are
relatively new programs they
have taken a while to get hold.
This is brand new areas of um
opportunity for New Mexico,
frankly.
And then lastly, on page 7, we
operate a federal new market tax
credit program, and in order to
do that, we have to have an
advisory board that represents
low-income interest or the
interests of low-income
populations and persons, um, in
New Mexico is comprised of
leaders across the state, you'll
see those on the left hand side
and it's job primarily is to
keep us in compliance with uh
the community development
financial institution rules.
They provide a lot of input
about what's needed in New
Mexico's communities. We
primarily
economic development and
community development projects.
A lot of healthcare, um, goes
into, uh, our funding is used
for healthcare in particular.
Um, so those are the four boards
that we oversee and again,
you'll hear our names associated
with them quite a bit, but it's
important to remember that the
boards that we just talked about
are the ones that select the
projects finance authority is
staffed to those boards and we
help with some of the policy
development, but the Finance
Authority board does not make
decisions about which projects
get funded, they just, once
they're selected, we, um, we
underwrite them to see if
they're able to take on the debt
and make the actual loan. So
there's a little bit of a
difference between what the two
boards do
and the finance Authority staff,
um, work with both boards and so
it gets confused pretty easily.
Um, Madam Chair mentioned on
page 8, that we have uh
different ways to find out about
finance, uh, about the finance
authority, and I've just taken a
couple of snapshots of our
website, which is um NM
finance.com and you can see if
you're looking for local
government programs, you hit
public financing at the top, and
there are different ways in
which you can be um routed to
different programs. We have
staff members you can contact
there. There's several different
ways to uh get information from
NMFA and pretty soon we'll be
actually back in an office where
you can knock on our door and
we'll be there. Right now we're
not, um, so give us two more
weeks and, and I'm hopefully
we'll be there. um, but that's
how you access the public
projects and then similarly on
page 9, that's how you access
our economic development and
community development programs.
I would note that several of
those, as I talked about
earlier, have limited funding
and so while there's a, there's
a place for them, um, there's
not dollars available, so we
don't have money available.
For our behavioral health
capital fund. We don't have
money uh for the primary care
capital fund, and you were all
very generous to provide 111.75
million two sessions ago and 10
million this last session for
the childcare facility revolving
fund, and so that program is in
development now, we've update,
we're updating the rules to take
advantage of the changes
recently made and that'll be
available then in August, so
you'll start seeing that on our
website come August, and that's
an important program to help.
small childcare providers
expand.
Um, all right.
All right, so those are, that's
a very broad and quick overview
of some of the things that the
Finance Authority gets into, and
I wanted to spend time just on
the top 3 programs that we
operate. What are the three
things that people know us for,
um, and the first, of course, as
I mentioned earlier, was the
public project revolving fund.
Um, that's that program. We are
a AAA uh bonded program. So
Moody's, um, and sorry, Standard
and Poor's has looked at us and
said, you are a AAA program. So
this program allows us to go out
and
an issue bonds that are and get
some of the lowest available
interest rates in the market.
Um, we have a, actually a whole
bond website that you can go to
and see what our bond, who owns
our bonds, what they see and
what they think is important in
terms of reports, um, if you
want that, that, uh, email link,
I'll get that for you. I didn't
include it in this, um, but we
go out regularly 3 or 4 times a
year and issue bonds to help
replenish the funds and keep
making loans. So monthly we
accept applications for fire
truck.
s we buy a lot of school bonds,
uh, water system loans, um,
universities are, are now
funding through us as well
because we can provide very low
interest rates at very limited
cost to the communities. So
there is no fees. There's not an
application fee, there's not a
closing fee, no fees associated
with this whatsoever. Um, when
you get approved at the Finance
Authority, you're approved with
an interest rate cap. So you
know at the time that you go in
on this PPRF what the the
the highest interest rate will
be. Um, so, and it will likely
be lower unless interest rates
have really gone up quite a bit.
They will likely be lower than
that because when we make the
loan, when we approve it, we
take today's rates and we add
3/45%, and that's the max you'll
be charged under this program.
So at the time you're approved,
you know exactly the worst case
scenario in terms of your
interest rate. That typically
doesn't come into play, but in
the last couple of years, the
interest rate markets have been
quite um frenetic, and that
has come into play several
times, particularly this last
year. Uh, there was a community
up in the Gallup McKinley Public
Schools 2 years ago where that
interest rate cap saved them
almost a million dollars over
its 30-year project for its
Terige. So it can have
significant savings, uh, to the
entity and it has very little
cost to the finance authority.
And again, that is a program
that we accept the applications
monthly.
Um, in addition to those very
low um tax exempt interest rates
were also able to use the funds
that you have provided us, uh,
to help buy down the interest
rate through disadvantage
funding. So if it's a
disadvantaged entity, that is
that the median household income
of the borrower is less than the
states, we can take on a part of
that loan at either 2% or 0%,
and we'll put that interest rate
in the most beneficial place for
the borrower themselves. So we
help buy down the additional
costs by
that up to $500,000 a year per
entity can be applied of this
disadvantaged entity funding.
Um, so many fire trucks are done
at 0%. Um.
That's the largest part of our
portfolio, probably 0% fire
truck loans, um, and school
districts were buying down a lot
of interest rates on school
district loans.
Um, we are limiting that, we
limit it to equipment loans can
only receive $150,000 and
infrastructure and building
loans, it's a max of 10% of
their projects. So because we
max out at $500,000. We don't
provide that disadvantage
funding for uh loan greater than
$5 million.
Um, and it's a very strong
program, so we've been operating
this program since 1994 when we
made the first loan, as I
mentioned, it had a very slow
start, but we have made um more
than 2200 loans, um, since
inception, totaling more than $5
billion. This is not, this is a
liquid program. It's got a lot
of strength. It's got a lot of
diversity. Um, we've taken
Great care in managing that
program, it's very
conservatively managed. It's
probably the thing that they
complain about most, um, is, is
How, how conservative we are,
but we believe that what's best
for the finance authority's
program is often what's best for
the communities overextending
when you're a public body and
not able to take on the project
long term is not in anyone's
best interest. Um, and we've
never had a default as a result.
We have, however, with using
that extra uh liquidity in, in
the program itself, we've
created a new bond lean, which
allows us to fund new loans that
don't typically meet our our
standard program. Um, and so
nonprofit housing developers
were made um eligible two years
ago, they can access now the
program through our new uh what
we call our junior lean program,
public improvement districts
which have always, I think, been
authorized since
As far as I can remember, um,
have been eligible. They are,
but they didn't really have a
home there cause their land
secured transactions, those are
now, uh, they have a home at
the, in this new junior lean,
charter schools, land grants,
and now rural Electric co-ops,
which were expanded this past
session with uh Senate Bill 170.
So that's our biggest program.
Uh, you'll hear about us when,
when, when they say NMFA has a
lot of money, that's really the
only program that they're
talking about in addition to the
Water Trust board, but that's,
that is a program where we're
able to, because the capacity of
the program is based on the, the
health of the portfolio, we have
the ability to make um uh
several $100 million of loans
annually without really hitting
the impact of the, uh, without
hitting the capacity of the
program.
Um, I will turn you to page 11
and just note a couple of other
uh programs. So again, we're,
we're, our activity is driven
entirely by funding levels. Um,
and the other two programs that
have seen the greatest amount of
um activity or of the water
trust board.
Um, the drinking water in
colonia's infrastructure, those
have all on the right-hand side
of page 11, you'll see that the
water uh project fund has
received nearly 60% of the $1
billion of awards we've made
since uh 2020, more than half of
it since 2022. So we've seen
significant increases of
dollars, both because there's
been larger amounts as a result
of the severance tax bonds going
up. Again, we received that
8.1%. So as those volumes go up.
Our distribution goes up fairly
substantially, um, but also
because there has been uh $268
million in special
appropriations made between last
year and this year, $18 million
was put aside last year for cost
overruns or projects that were
funded before 2023, those
projects, particularly in the
pandemic that got stuck costs
escalated tremendously, and
there's not the water trust
board was not able to put aside
enough money to keep up with
some of those, so.
million dollars last year.
Uh, $50 million appeared in
House Bill 2 for the water
project fund to supplement last
year's funding, so we saw our
largest amount of funding ever
last year until this year, when
we saw large dollars again from
the water from the severance tax
bonds and an additional 200
million that was put into House
Bill 2 for projects that were
authorized this year and next.
So we've done just under a
billion dollars of funding. We
have another, I think 15 or 18
applications that are still
pending that total about $68
million. The Water Trust board
was unable to make awards to
them in May when we typically
would make those awards because
those entities were not
compliant with the state audit
Act. So we do a pretty
comprehensive review of
regulatory compliance, including
the State Audit Act, uh, water
rights, confirmation, and
And whether or not they are
compliant with state
regulations, water regulations,
if they don't meet all those
hurdles, we are unable to make
an award to them. So, uh, we
still have the money though,
we're gonna do one sec another
second round. This will be the
3rd year in a row in which we've
done 2 awards to the Water Trust
board applicants. Um, similarly,
on the very bottom, colon's
infrastructure, 72% of the money
that we've delivered in the
colonia's infrastructure has
been delivered since 2020, so
you've seen that most of our
activity has
happened in these last 5 years.
Um, and we have about $12.5
million yet to award from the
colonious infrastructure fund,
again, because several
applicants did not have their
audits together and were unable
at this point to get an award.
Um, and then lastly, in the
middle there, the drinking water
state revolving fund, which is a
federal program we've received
dollars under that program, um,
almost 30 years since 1997, um,
and typically we were receiving
about $6 million a year. It got
goosed up to about $8 million a
year, then $11 million a year,
you can see over the last 5
years, our base program was 34.3
million, we received an
additional $42 million from
federal, federal dollars, um,
and those are
awards we have in hand, um, for
regular programming, and then
they, they gave us two
additional kinds of grants, one
for lead service line
replacements and another one for
emerging contaminants. So we've
seen more than $100 million
about $105 million for project
funding. Um, that's what we
actually have in hand for
projects from the federally
funded program. So that it's a
significant increase, uh, than
what we typically would see. So
those 3
uh water programs have driven a
lot of our activity at the
Finance Authority.
But on the left-hand side, I'll
tell you the other thing has
just been the new authorized
programs. We have seen since
2020 7 new legislatively created
programs that includes 32
programs for um the
COVID-related programs, uh, what
started this growth was the
small business recovery loan
fund, um, then the, it followed
up with the New Mexico Vida
recovery grants, so those were
two programs that um we run
through the finance authority
and, and appear in statute.
Uh, it was followed up with a
venture capital fund, uh,
charter school facility
revolving fund, and then the two
opportunity enterprise funds, as
well as this last year, the
solar access fund. So these are
all new since June of 2020.
We have also opened up 4
programs in partnership with
state agencies. We are, have the
ability to deliver dollars like
federal dollars in particular
that state agencies receive
because we can't, we have broad
authority to make grants and
loans. We've been able to
deliver um the Federal cares
grant. There was a $100 million
that we delivered in December of
2020 to, uh, we received 14,
almost 15,000 applications in
one month, in 3-week period, and
we had to process through and
about half of them got funded
from.
that, from that $100 million.
More recently in the last two
years, uh, we helped the early
education, uh,
Child early childhood education
and care department, uh, with
two of its federal programs, the
supply building grants, and the
second tranche of their
stabilization grants, and then
lastly, we've just opened up in
partnership with um Ener, uh,
the energy efficiency revolving
loan fund. That's a very small
federal program. It's about $6
million that they're looking to
make energy efficiency, uh,
improvements in particular
nonprofits. They're looking to
help community um nonprofits in
particular.
Um, but others will qualify, so
there's information on their
website and ours on that very
new program. It opened, I think
a couple of weeks ago.
And then we have, as I
mentioned, the the program
expansions, um, the essential
services working capital
program, which was an offshoot
of our um uh economic
development revolving fund, the
Cannabis microprogram, which was
an offshoot of our um economic
development revolving fund. New
markets tax credits, uh, we
opened up a small loan pool in
2021, and then the SSBCI Capital
program that is a federally
funded program. So that, that's
what's driven our activity over
the last
5 years. Um, so there's a lot of
deeper funds for existing
programs and a whole bunch of
new funds both in depth and in
breadth. We are doing more
things and we're funding deeper
levels of those things, um, and
so I
That's, that's the basic
overview of what, what we've
been doing. I wanted to spend 2
more minutes, 1 going through
our recap, um,
And uh
The recap from the 2025 session,
so I'm on page.
12, um, you all, uh, endorsed 5
pieces of legislation last year.
Um, one of them was the PPRF
authorization bill that started
the Senate Bill 115. Ultimately
it received um it obviously went
through both chambers
unanimously and was signed by
Governor Lujan Grisham, but 200
entities were given authority to
apply to the public project
revolving fund through that
particular piece of legislation.
House Bill 41 again uh carried
by Representative Cates, um,
sent about 13, about 13.25
million from the PPRF to
different funds, the drinking
water state revolving fund, the
local government planning fund
and the cultural affairs
Facility fund, um, there was
only one negative vote through
all of its hearings, and that
was in Senate Conservation, um,
but it was otherwise signed by
Governor Lou Hunkersham on April
7th.
Or what a trust board
authorization bill, um, uh,
authorized us to make grants and
loans for 62 entities to 84
projects from that 2025 from the
$2025 and that was signed on
April 7th.
And then we had and which was
those 3 bills, I would note show
up every year. Those are 3
pieces of standard legislation
that you'll see from the finance
Authority. What was new this
year was we asked for changes to
that federal drinking water, uh,
state revolving loan fund. We
hadn't updated that program
authors the legislation in more
than 20 years, and there had
been changes at the federal
level that we wanted to keep up
with. For instance, the emerging
contaminants money that we got
in, um, has to be made as grant.
And because we didn't have the
authority to make grants, we
were kind of stymied, so it was
difficult to deliver the dollars
the way the feds wanted us to
because our, our statute was
limited. It also allowed us to
increase the term of the loans,
they were capped previously at
20 and 30 years depending on the
the um underlying wealth of the
community, they're now capped at
30 and 40 years, consistent with
federal government.
And then lastly, we took one
more shot at getting funding
into the behavioral health and
primary care programs, um, that,
uh, received a hearing and
obviously was tabled because it
was not in House Bill 2, but it
did include $10 million for the
childcare program, which was in
hospital too, so we made a
little bit of inroad in those
three important programs, um,
but didn't make uh
Didn't make it all the way to
the end with all three.
Um, there was also other pieces
of legislation that we followed
because they impacted NMFA
either very directly or, or a
little bit. Um, the first one
was House Bill 128, which was
the creation of the solar access
fund, that's now a $20 million
grant fund that sits in NMFA for
us to make energy efficiency,
um, projects happen, solar
energy systems happen in public
buildings, including tribal land
grants, uh, school districts,
mun
Municipalities, counties. So
wide variety of public bodies
are able to access those
dollars. We operate that program
in partnership with EERD.
Um, Senate Bill 170 made some um
changes to it had two really
important pieces. One was that
it um provided a predictable
process or electric utilities in
particular to pre-deploy
infrastructure, and so that was
a very important piece for site
readiness. It also, um,
Uh, allowed for the finance
authority to make loans from a
PPRF to rule electric co-ops. So
while other electric utilities
are able to access the finance
Authority's PPRF rural Electric
co-ops were unable to do that.
So that change allowed us to do
uh to um include those r co-ops
and then it also eliminated for
a short period of time, the
legislative authorization
necessary to apply to the PPRF.
Um, Senate Bill 175 and that one
passed and is, uh, we are
working on the changes now.
You'll hear a lot about that
this year.
Uh, one of the
Uh, Bill that passed was Senate
Bill 175, and that amends the
childcare facility loan fund,
um, in, you know, in, in
anticipation of those $10
million it broadens the use of
the fund to include
employer-based centers, um,
prior to this, it did not
include employers, so it was
only providers. If you were a
business that wanted to open or
expand a childcare program for
your employees, you are not able
to use this fund, you are now
able to use that as a result of
Senate Bill 175.
And it also provided that a
portion of the loan could be
repaid by providing services in
lieu of um making an actual loan
payment. So that contract for
services got built into this
program, um, in Centerville 175.
Two other pieces of 197 was a
small but important bill. It
allows for um emergency medical
service fund distributions to be
pledged to debt, so I told you
earlier we make a lot of 0%
loans to fire trucks, they're
often secured by their fire
protection fund distribution,
um, ambulances didn't have the
same uh ability to use the
funds. So now they can do that
through this law. Again, very
small piece of legislation, but
it will have a huge impact
because of 0% loan.
It's hard to find um any place,
uh, so we're happy to provide
that service and then House Bill
19 and Senate Bill 169, uh, they
did those, those are two big
bills. They impacted NMFA only
in the sense that they created
advisory committees to which I
am now named. So that was just
minor. I just, it's all about
me. Uh, I would just note that,
you know, we now sit on those
boards as well as the tribal
infrastructure fund, the
colonius Infrastructure Fund and
the Water Trust Board and
drought task force.
Um, this upcoming year on page
14, um, we want to talk to you
about our agency overall, our
board approved this last year a
strategic plan. It's a 3-year
strategic plan because as you've
noted, the growth in the agency
over the last 5 years has been
tremendous, and we want to be
able to uh prepare ourselves for
the next level of growth. So
we've got a fairly short window,
a 3-year strategic plan in
place. We are um undertaking an
integrated business application
project, um, there we're trying
to link together all the
different.
programs that are in the NMFA
operates on into one system.
There are, in some instances, if
you apply for an uh a loan,
you'll apply in one system and
IFA staff will then do its
underwriting and loan spreads in
another system, it'll then take
that information and make the
loan in a third system and then
lastly, go into their jail in a
4th system that is both
inefficient and it provides
massive opportunity for air.
So we spend a lot of our time
now with guardrails on manual
processes, that's got to be
replaced for long term for us to
be successful. It's got to be
replaced with a system that
provides those guardrails. So we
have good people and they are
the guardrails to all of these,
you know, what I'll call fat
finger mistakes, um, but that
really shouldn't be, and we
can't be that lucky all the time
to have such good staff. And
then then lastly, we've got a
data uh management project and
records management. It's part
and parcel of our integrated
business application. We want to
make sure.
The,
the information sits only in one
place at the NMFA and that that
information is locked down so
that we know it's, it's very
good data, um, and that is a big
step forward. A lot of our
programs are operated still off
of spreadsheets because there
isn't one source of where the
data sits. So that's an
important element we are, uh,
about the 2nd year into the data
management project, we expect to
be done with the integrated
business um in about 18 months.
So we're at the very beginnings
of uh the
integration process itself,
we've completed the planning and
the procurement.
The other thing you'll hear
about this year is our programs
that are in development that
childcare facility revolving
fund, the, the expansion of that
and the ways in which the
contract for services will be
utilized. Um, the charter school
facility revolving fund, we are
seeing um issues with that, the
er the kinds of funds that are
needed are not necessarily
either captured in statute or in
our program and we want to talk
to you about where we're seeing
some disconnects between what's
authorized and what, what
charter schools are are.
asking for. Um, and then our
solar access fund by December of
this year, we have to have rules
done for that program.
Um, the expanded capacity will
be amending our rules again to
include the rural co-ops and to
make some changes, uh, for those
few years in which we do not
require legislative
authorization for the, for
projects to access the PPRF and
you have to approve those rules,
so you'll be seeing those. Um,
you'll also, uh, hear updated
reports on the technical
assistance program we talked
about earlier and on how the
wastewater implementation is
rolling out.
Um, and then lastly, because we
have all those new pots of
federal funds, we've been asked
to um spend a little bit of time
talking to you about whether or
not we've been impacted by the
federal cutbacks and how those
dollars are going. So you'll see
some um loan reports on those
programs, and then we are
required to have the water trust
board present to you the
coonious infrastructure report
to you, um, the opportunity
enterprise and Housing
Development Review Board.
There's a be a report from that
group, um, the Economic
development revolving.
Fund, which has about 5 or 6
different programs operating out
of it, we will make 2 reports to
you this year. That's an
important, this will be an
important topic because we are
currently not required to have
projects authorized by the
legislature before we make a
loan, but that burns off next
June, so as of June 30, 2026,
um, we will require legislative
authorization for us to make a
loan to a small business in your
community. So they'll have to
appear on a list, um, if this,
if we don't.
make a change to this
legislation in the next year. So
we'll want to spend some time
talking to you about the impacts
of that particular provision,
um, uh, sunsetting at the end of
next year.
Uh venture capital program,
we've invested all those dollars
today and we're happy to tell
you about where those have gone
and what that looks like. Um,
and we are required to report to
you annually on bonds that we
have issued utilizing delegated
authority. um, we had a piece of
legislation passed about almost
10 years ago, but ours is the
only agency that's required to
report back to you. So you will
receive one of those reports and
you'll understand, um, what
bonds we issued, who the
underwriters were and what the
interest rates were. And
And then lastly, the small
business recovery loan fund. I
think this is the last year in
which you will receive a report
on that.
So, lastly, contact us um in a
couple of weeks, we'll be in our
new building. Here's a pretty
picture of the draw. He's an
artist's rendering of the
building because right now
there's still uh pieces of
construction equipment in front
of it, so I couldn't get a
pretty picture, um, but it looks
very much like that, uh, will be
located at 810 West San Mateo
Road, which is in um the Midtown
area of Santa Fe. It's about a
block north of Saint Michael's
and about 2 blocks west of Saint
Francis, so.
Um
Over in that or if you know,
chocolate may even were across
the street from that, uh, we'll
be really happy to walk you
around and uh and
Show us, show you the new
offices. We're incredibly
excited to have a new building.
Um, it's the first time in our
thirty-year history that we've
had a place that actually had
the right space for us. We,
we've had our departments spread
out, um, we haven't had
collaboration spaces like we
need to, so we are really
grateful to be, um, almost in
that new building. And so that
is that in Madam Chair, I'm
happy to answer whatever
questions you might have.
Thank you so much, um, CEO
Russell, um, as you can see,
there's massive amounts. I'm now
gonna give you a test on what
she presented. So take out your
pin if you've uh not been paying
attention, you may not pass the
test. Joke. I just missed giving
tests to students, um,
maybe I should do it. OK, uh,
we'll start with Representative
Kateson and Representative Lu
Han.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and thank
you, uh, Ms. Russell for your
presentation. It was great. Um,
it's such a uh.
A reflection of the fact that we
see how much uh the agency has
grown in the last 33 years, and
I would think that that is very
much a reflection of its
leadership and knowing that you
have built that trust and that
credibility with legislators
before even the ones here. And
so I just wanna say thank you
because I am so very proud. I
see this agency is truly
changing lives and so I
appreciate that. Um, I, I wanna
talk a little
bit about the primary care
capital fund. So we talked about
it last year. Is it my
understanding this is an
opportunity for uh primary care
provider or providers, medical
providers to be able to get low
interest, uh, loans for
infrastructure, whether it's
bricks and mortar or maybe a
more expensive medical equipment
to be able to open up in smaller
medical facilities, clinics
throughout, um, New Mexico. Is
that correct, my
what that is. Um, Madam Chair,
that's correct. I would just
note that they are either
nonprofit.
be uh primary care providers or
clinics owned by local
governments. So if there are
for-profit medical care
provider, that's not the program
for them, um, but for nonprofits
it is and I'll just note that a
lot of them are using this
program to buy facilities that
they used to rent.
part of their cost containment.
So we'll see a lot of these
loans going to nonprofit clinics
to make sure that they can buy
and stay in the building, uh,
that they've been occupying for
sometimes 20 years, rent
escalates to the point where
they can no longer afford to be
there. So it's been an important
tool for that kind of project.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Ms. Russell for that
clarification. Such an important
program as we uh continue our
conversation about the lack of
access of medical um providers,
especially
in our rural areas where these
sort of privately owned clinics
would be um an even more in
need. So, um, I'm gonna put you
on the spot here, Ms. Russell.
Why do you think it was not
funded?
Ma I'm sure, I'm certain that we
haven't done enough work with
the budget committees to make
sure they understand how that
works, um, I, I would, I would
start there, put the onus on us,
we have not done that exercise.
We've made, it's a very small
program received $5 million back
in 1995. Um, we've made about 20
loans overall, um, and we've
received, I think $700,000.
Uh, so if you saw, we have 5.7
million in actual no, 5 million
in appropriations and $5.7
million in reversions. So that
program got clawed back a couple
of times to help with solvency
cause it was initially general
fund, uh, funded. Um, and so I,
I don't, I think it's just a
lack of understanding of what
role it plays in the whole um
healthcare world. It's a small
part, but it's an important
part. I thank you, chair, and
thank you very much, very
gracious answer, Mr. Russell.
Um,
I do appreciate it. I know that
we've talked about this in
previous years of, of the
importance and how, you know, we
saw this in 1994 when this uh
this program was created and for
many years it remained unfunded.
Our conversation continues about
innovative in multiple ways that
we can support medical access uh
through outer state. I hope that
we consider uh from this
committee and from this
agency about bringing this back
for the next legislative session
and to get some funding. Thank
you.
Representative Liu Hong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh.
Thank you. Um,
wrestle for being with us again
and for all your, your work and
your staff's work. I think it's.
It's, it's, uh, I think what we
need to say a little bit for
cause we have so many new
members too is, is the amount of
work and, and what we've added
to what you're responsibilities
are, um, and I was talking with
LFC and just the amount of
money, um, because we have the
the revenue, um.
Um, assurance in our favor, but
we are, we are now, um, really
spending more money that are not
uh non-recurring finding that
we've never seen before, so
that's, that's uh that's, I
think it's important for us to
have an overview of how that
spending in our budget are
really interacting with NMFA and
MFA is previously mentioned, and
I hope with your overview that
our, our new members understand
why I brought up the federal
relevance because throughout
your presentation.
at least 13 times you've
mentioned federal dollars, and
that's leveraging those dollars,
and that is, um,
That is a dependency on those
dollars, so right now you said
that we have 100 in $5 million
of federal dollars that we are.
Can you, can you, can you, I
just want to revisit what you,
what you referenced there and in
addition to saying, if that's
what we have at hand, what is
the dependency from these
programs that we have on those
federal dollars and what is the
leveraging, the leveraging that
we use with state dollars for
those federal dollars. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So, Madam Chair, I
would note that prior to 2020,
actually prior to 2022, we were
getting capitalization grants or
regular uh safe drinking water
projects in the range of about
$8 million to a $13 million
depending on the year and about
70% of that would go to the loan
fund, and we are required to
match that with the 20% match.
So there's about $8 million to
$11 that was available for
projects. And you'll now see
that that as a result of the
federal grant
Dollars that started coming in
in 2022, um, from BIL and IIGAA,
um,
Those dollars have increased to
roughly
20 million a year, so we're
seeing, you know, a larger
amount of dollars in these last
3 years. So I think that'll
continue for about 2 more years,
so rather than seeing small
chunks of dollars, we're seeing
large chunks of dollars. Two of
those projects, um, two of those
programs, those pots of funds
require that 20% state match. So
House Bill 41 that that
Representative Kates carried
that you all endorsed, um,
allowed us to move 6.25 million
of the PPRF into the drinking
water.
State revolving fund so we could
secure both the base grant and
the supplemental grant.
OK, thank you. So as we get into
this conversation, maybe you can
help us with the maybe a visual
of what that looks like, I would
appreciate that. I think that's,
and you mentioned it too that
you are, you are watching, um,
what is happening with the, the
federal dollars out there, so I,
I look forward to um
understanding that a little bit
better as we as we move forward
and definitely by October, we're
gonna have a.
A definite answer, hopefully
with the the federal budget in
place and we'll know uh a lot
more where we where we stand,
uh, Madam Chair, so
Also, um,
With our new policy.
I do have
I think I'm gonna be having a
couple of side, um.
conversations with you and just
regard with some of these
fundings that we got, but one of
the things, one of the bills
that I worked on was the um.
Where am I? Was uh
The solar access fund and we got
$20 million in there, so that
will start in the the first of
July when we start to getting
applications or that's process.
Can you, can you give me an
update on that?
So we have to, um, work with the
Department of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources in
establishing the rules and the
statute requires that those
rules be in place by the end of
this calendar year. Our
expectation is they'll be done
sometime in the fall and we'll
work on um how that
prioritization will work. So the
big
The heavy lift in new program
development is the filter, like
which projects do you select?
What do you require of them? Uh,
what do you hope to see from the
projects and there's a large
A number of
Entities qualified to access
these dollars and a fair
diversity of the kinds of
projects that they can do. So,
um, helping, working with the
policy partner really helps us
figure out which are the
projects that would have the
most value to New Mexico, uh,
generally speaking, and that's
the policy work we still have to
do. So policy and rule go hand
in hand, and that'll happen, we
expect in the fall. OK, and then
just so you'll know what I'm,
I'm gonna talk about later is
referring to the PPP, the um
As we develop legislation each
year, um, trying to figure out
how we, how we legislate that.
You're already engaged, um, as a
The in between with us building
out our economy and economic
development. What aspect of
that?
Could be leveraged further is
one of the questions I want to
be looking at as we go down the
the road here, Madam Chair, but
I appreciate the time. Thank
you.
Thank you, um, Representative
Terazas and then representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. Uh,
thank you for the presentation.
I, I think my biggest, um, my
question is, you've grown
really, really fast in a short
amount of time. Uh, it's in the
last 4 years, tremendously, um,
and I don't know what that
percentage is. I mean, you
probably know it off the top of
your head, but at some point,
any anytime we have growth of
that magnitude, we have to take
a pause and a breather and let
it catch up.
Where are you at with that, and
do you feel that?
Um, you know, because we're,
we're talking about other things
here, is that, is that something
that you're concerned with? Is
there something that you're
gonna take a pause and say,
look, I need to kind of get
this, um, this.
Entity kind of balanced and so
forth because that's what it
takes. It doesn't matter if you
get hire new people, you still
have to, um, uh, work with them
and see their capabilities, see
how they're gonna work with
others and how you're gonna be
effective, and so, um, where are
you at with that?
Madam Chair, thank you for that
question. That is a, that's an
excellent question, and it's
what keeps me up. It's the only
thing that keeps me up is making
sure that we've taken on, uh,
what we can handle. Um, the
integrated business application
project is probably the most
important project for us to
continue at any pace. We've
maxed our staff out. We've been,
we've grown, so we've doubled
our staff when I took over as
CEO in December of 19, we had 39
employees and we are budgeted
for.
80s starting in July.
Um, and we currently have 75
now, and our building, of
course, only allowed us to
60, so that was problematic, um,
that's the new building, um.
But that integrated business is
the biggest issue that we have
because our people have been the
guardrails. We have lots of
checks and balances built in.
Um, one of the things that
you'll hear when we do the
organizational overview is that
we do our annual audit, we are
subject to the audit Act. We do
our annual audit in the form of
um an annual comprehensive
financial report, and ACTA. We
haven't had findings, we get
GFOA, um, commendations for our
A for for our annual report, and
we are actually in a position.
To bring in our auditors.
Before we've closed out the year
end, so they do their field work
starting in June, um, so that
they can get their fieldwork
done as we are closing out. We
do a hard close every month. So
it's been a significant lift
from just personnel, um, and to
your point, we can't always
expect to have such good
personnel, so the systems that
we're that we're working on
those two projects that we
talked about are critical for
our long-term success for us to
be able to keep up because our
folks have been with us for a
long time.
they grew with those programs
and if we were to lose one, it
would take a very long time to
get some of the, that kind of
expertise back. So we've been
working on policies and
procedures. We've been working
on uh uh systems, um, you know,
really with the guardrails are
built into the system and then
lastly, prior to the growth, we
reorganized our organization,
the agency, by function. We had
prior been organized by program,
which didn't allow for
any differences in funding,
cause if you had, you know, a
couple extra dollars, you either
totally overfunded or totally
under or understaffed for the
level of funding that you had
when you do it by program.
We did it, we've changed it up.
We have now an entire team of
analysts, for instance. So
rather than having a commercial
lender and um uh local
government lender, we have
lenders generally and then we
have a very deep bench of
analysts that we've been adding
for the last 3 years to support
both of those activities. So
it's, we've, we've got a lot
more departments than we used
to. I almost put the work chart
in there, but it's, it's the,
the print is very, very small,
um,
we've, we've spent a lot of time
making sure that we are, we are
working by function that we've
standardized our functions to
the greatest extent possible
that we have standard operating
procedures for all of those
functions and then this last
piece which is that we are
putting this system in place so
that all of that can be
supported. So we haven't been
doing a lot of, it's, it's not a
lot of fun work, but we've been
working really hard over the
last 4 years, and our board has
put a lot of money towards those
kinds of foundational
Um, uh, initiatives because we
can't exist if we don't have
them in place.
You know what, um, Madam Chair,
I think what happens is when
we're growing like that, that's
one of the reasons I, you know,
losing Hispanic Spanish at one
point I just said, you know
what, I'm good, I like to be
healthy, strong, and effective,
um, I think
If we're not careful about that
and we keep loading them.
We're gonna, we're gonna break
her. She's, I'm, I'm telling you
not because I don't have
confidence in you. I don't care
who you are, it's, you can only
do so much, and you're gonna run
your, your, your, your best
horses to death, and they're
gonna quit or they're gonna
retire? How many people are
ready for retirement? I'm not
trying to run anybody out, but
it's, it's a real thing. It's a
real, it's a real deal. Madam
Chair, we, we, we have, um, uh,
we've had a couple of key
Um, retirements over the last
couple of years, so it's very
much front of mind for us. I
would say about 10% of our staff
could easily retire today. We
have a number of um former, you
know, retired state employees.
They were bureau chiefs, um,
deputy directors, uh, that are
now employees of the NMFA after
they've retired from the state.
So we have, you know, we get in
a bunch of really talented
people, um, you know, they're
still the height of their career
with plenty of years left to, to
work. So we have a lot of
those. Um, we've instituted an
off-ramp program for part of
that which is to say if you know
that you're, if you're a key
employee, you've been there for
a number of years, and you are
set to retire, um, that we will
work with you so that you're
able to transfer your knowledge
over a period of time, so you,
we find a person that's going to
be receiving the information you
you work um very deeply with
them, and then you kind of uh
burn down your time as they
start to take on more that's
been helpful. Excuse me, I
didn't mean to interrupt. I'm
sorry, I'm sure that.
your phase out or how do you do
that? 3 to 6 months. OK. So,
Madam, I, I, I'm not gonna beat
that anymore. I just think, uh,
we have to be uh cognizant about
that, I think that's something,
you know, it's what you're
successful is, oh, she's great,
do this and do this and do this,
and at some point, you just need
to take a breather and get
things kind of um, you know, get
them calibrated properly to
where you know everything is
running smooth and
And then you're ready to take
the next, the next step. That's
just my advice my chair. Thank
you very much for that answer.
Thank you. Uh, next, uh,
representative Royal Caballero
and then Representative
Puerrico.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Marquita.
As always, an excellent report,
um.
So just because representative
of us brought this up. I wanted
to just comment, um, one of the,
the, um, the things that I see.
That is great about your
leadership, is that, and it's an
excellent example of effective
leadership is being able to
anticipate growth.
You're able to see Madam chair,
where we're going with our
legislative intent.
Throughout the years and setting
up the systems in anticipation
of our legislative intent and
then subsequent bills and
legislation that guides you. So
I just wanted to commend you on
that because throughout the
years I've been on this
committee since uh my first
term, and I've seen you be able
to do that, which is why, Madam
Chair, during COVID, you were
able to set up emergency relief.
Um, funds as per our um
sessions. How many emergency
sessions we have, I don't even
remember, but you were able to
then step right into that
without
Uh, with very little, um,
problem, and so I just wanted to
to mention and commend you on
that because that is a sign of
of of excellent effective
leadership, so.
Thank you for that. Um, a
question cause I don't remember.
Under, does the jurisdiction of
the strategic water supply fall
under the water trust board or
is that an independent body.
Me believe that is under the
Interstate stream Commission.
OK, I kind of suspected that,
but I, I also see that with the
strategic water supply, we, it
also aimed to set up grants and
loans.
I think primarily loans, which
would you
Be overseeing or not overseeing,
but providing um those loans,
should they be coming through
you or how are they going to be
handled the both the the grants
and the loans. Madam Chair, I do
not believe they were intended
to go through the water trusts
board, so we've not heard of a
role for NMFA or the Water Trust
Board in the, the, those funds.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. It's
a little bit concerning only in
the sense that you have the
finance authority has the New
Mexico Finance Authority has the
expertise and the knowledge, um,
and so I would hope that
Somewhere, I don't know how to.
Or where to go with that, but
that's something that I think um
should be under um the water
trust board, only because it has
the history and and the um
The capacity to be able to
entertain, um, the, the grants
and loans that are going to be
associated with it, but also I
think it draws attention, Madam
Chair, to the fact that we
really need to align what we're
doing in terms of ensuring that
legislative intent.
Um, is aligned with uh things
like our um uh attempts to
Provide clean water supply and
fresh water and maintain clean
fresh water supply, and
All that whole arena of keeping
our clean water as well as our
clean air and clean lands in
place, and there has to be an
alignment between all of those
processes. So I don't know in
your conversations matter, Madam
Chair, with your, uh, other
executives perhaps that you
might want to convey that that
is an area of concern, and we
saw an example of why it is
concerned because of public
regulatory commission recently
reviewed.
Rulemaking in this area, and
because they lacked.
The expertise as a commission.
None, none of the three had the
expertise. So, um, we almost
allowed a rule to go forward,
that would have permitted um the
release of bracket braggish talk
is like water and that was
completely against what the
intent, the legislative intent
was for the strategic uh water
supply. So it's an example of
it's not a line properly within
the the correct um.
Um, board and oversight and
process that's equipped with the
expertise, then we can get into
trouble. So, Madam Chair, thank
you very much.
Representative Borigo and then
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Ma.
Um,
Wow, I am like overwhelmed with
the amount of information that
you presented today, and I just
want to commend you for your
management. Um,
I
I could not honestly believe I,
I did receive your annual
report. I called your office to
get it before I came, and I
really appreciate you guys sent
me that, um, Madam Chair, I know
that government doesn't have
enough money to sometimes
function as as efficiently as
we'd like to and I'm just, I'm
just blown away by, by how much
you guys do.
And what you manage. Um, I guess
my questions are with regard to,
and you mentioned that your
staff had grown since 2019.
And that's like almost tripled,
I guess what you is is that my
understanding that I'm sure the,
the, the staff has doubled,
doubled since 2020, yeah. OK.
Um, that's only like 6 years,
and uh the amount of programs
that you're managing it, you
know, it almost, and I sat on a
on a credit union board for 13
years, so I'm fairly comfortable
listening to budgets.
And, and, you know,
understanding quarterly reports
and balance sheets and income
statements and cash flow and
liquidity and all of that sort
of thing, but to be managing all
of these programs and having to
do that for every single
program. I mean,
I'm just, I'm overwhelmed almost
by by what you were talking
about today, and I guess one of
the questions that I have, Madam
Chair, is with regard to the
technology that the state is
providing you to manage that.
Cause you said you've done some
organizational changes, but you
didn't talk about the technology
that you're using and whether or
not it is sufficient to manage
all of these programs.
Madam Jerry did not talk about
the technology, and I, I,
there's a huge oversight. We are
not part of do it. Do it does
not oversee us, so we're not at
any point related to that. Um,
we've got a separate, I've got a
chief technology officer who we
recruited out of the uh Rio
Rancho schools whose top-notch
and has built a really good
team, and I would tell you that
our, uh, our security systems
are, are very good.
Um, we had to get them
implemented for our COVID relief
programs, we had to make certain
that we had a lot of fraud, um,
and fraud mitigation tools in
there as well as efficiency
tools and then to make certain
that we were several layers deep
in terms of being able to be um
hijacked in any way, but I, I
I, I don't want to talk too much
in public, but they're very good
at what they do. And Madam
Chair, um, I would suggest that
as a um as a group, I mean, as a
committee, um, that that is
something that we really should
be, I mean, for the amount of
programs that they're managing,
um, and how fast technology
changes, I would suggest that
maybe that's something that we
might wanna consider, um,
supplementing their um their
budgets at some point.
in time because.
Technology changes so fast and
gauging the success of all of
these programs is going to be
dependent on and, you know, how,
um up to date, I guess, they're
their technology systems are, so
I would just add it, I don't
know.
I remember if that's part of our
program, but I think that is
something that.
I know that when we were dealing
with
When we were dealing with credit
unions, our technology changed
every.
Every 2 years we were adding
budgets to help supplement, you
know, whether it was security or
or um all of these um financials
that we've received on a regular
basis, and I'm sure your boards
received that on a regular
basis, um.
If staff is leaving, then that
is the key to helping secure
that things are in place for
you, so thank you for that,
Madam Chair.
Senator Padilla, and that will
be our last question unless
OK.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation
and thank you to the staff. You
guys do such a phenomenal job. I
am actually very happy with the
direction you're going. I'm very
happy with the growth that we've
seen. I think you mentioned a
couple of things that I was
gonna ask about, which is, thank
you to the excellent questions
for our fellow members here in
the committee. There are a ton
of, uh, there are a lot of new
controls in place to as you
know, to avoid fraud in this
very unfortunate incident that
happened about a decade ago or
something like that, uh, within
NMFA which I'm sure was
partially part of the slowdown,
uh, and but then you're
regrouped, put the controls in
place, you have the technology
in place. You have an excellent
IT department, you know, this is
one of the major swim lanes that
I swim around here in the
legislature. Um, still have to
adhere to the statewide
cybersecurity requirements.
Everyone just wanted everyone to
know that uh when we created
that office, you have to adhere
to those if you wanted to have a
transaction with the state
government outside of here,
another agency. So thank you for
everything that you're doing
there. I do have some, uh,
specific questions though. If
you go to page 11.
Um,
on the opportunity Enterprise
Act, uh, you did mention that
the housing portion that, uh,
soresentative Dixon and I
created that fund and then we
moved it over and added housing
to it, and on the housing side,
I just kind of wanted to add a
couple of a little bit of
language there. You mentioned,
um, low-income housing. Well,
really, our goal and our
objective there is workforce
housing. Would, would you agree?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, yes,
so workforce housing for
vertical and infrastructure and
low-income only for
infrastructure to supplement
what the mortgage Finance
Authority does. Yeah, so I think
that that handshake is actually
gonna work out really well for
us. We still have about a 42
43,000 dwelling unit, uh,
problem here in New Mexico. And
so I hope that we get, you know,
one of my opening remarks when
we first started committee today
was get that money out the door,
you know, within the guidelines
and the rules and the law and
everything.
But we really need to action
those dollars. I mean, because
that's a lot of money sitting
there that can be very helpful.
So thank you for all the work
you're doing. I think there's a
project in Taos that's going on
right now. I know there's some
stuff, I think in Albuquerque,
but we need this all over the
place and all the smaller
communities as well. So please
keep that mindful if you could.
Also on page 11, you talked a
little bit about, um, you know,
the COVID programs that we
created. I was in the
legislature at the time when we
put those together. What happens
to the dollars that are sitting,
um in fun, are
any dollars sitting, not just
COVID, but any of these funds.
Do you, do you have a report to
us and, and again, you provide
us with so much information as
possible that I've missed it.
But do you report, do you give
us a report that tells us what
sort of sitting dormant in terms
of dollars that aren't moving.
Uh, is that what I'm seeing,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um, we
have not given you a report on
that necessarily. I can tell you
what doesn't have money, and,
and I can tell you what
generally gets money, um, but I
can, um, so I'll add that to the
reports as we move them forward,
but cares grants, I mean, all
those dollars once that
program's over, the money goes
back to the state. So, uh it
does revert oh yes, we, we send
that money back when it doesn't.
When we no longer need it, it
all goes back to its original
source.
So, so, Madam Chair, uh, and
Marquita, thank you. So could we
maybe see just that, you know,
don't want to add any work, but
maybe your CFO could put
together some quick dollars on
what's sitting dormant, not
moving, and then we can maybe do
something creative here to put
it in a fund or another area of
your, your office that uh your
agency that can, that can move
and maybe we put that into
further workforce housing. I
don't know, you know, so if you
could maybe come to us with some
recommendations.
I'd sure like to see those.
OK
Happy to provide that. And then
on page 13, I just again wanted
for the committee's sake, um,
you know, Senate Bill 169, um,
170, and then I don't see them
on here, but the grid
modernization and the micro
grids bills that we were able to
get done, those are huge
economic developers right there.
So I hope that, you know,
whatever your oversight of that
is, please be, if you can please
encourage that the rulemaking,
whatever has to come together. I
know there's a lot that's gonna
happen with the PRC as well.
How does that typically work
when so you are asked to come
and advise the PRC on some of
this stuff or, or what's the and
and and EDD I guess. So, Mr.
Chairman, on, on Senate Bill
170.
That, um, the rulemaking there
goes to the Economic Development
Department, because the site
readiness determination is
really within the purview of
what that advisory group, that
169 creates the, it, it's hand
in hand with that.
Sorry, llama down um
wrong committee
um, so the economic development
department has rulemaking
authority there. There's a small
bit of 170 that has rulemaking
that you will address, which is
related to the rule co-ops and
the public project revolving
fund. So a very small portion of
170 rules will come through you
and the others all go through
economic development. The
advisory committee that that,
that Senate bill.
69 created, I think we'll play a
large part of that rulemaking.
So the advisory committee will
put together the rules, um, and
then they will work, I believe
with uh uh PRC in ensuring that
their processes um meet the, the
intent of the law.
OK. And so when you're having a
discussion, Madam Chair, on
housing, I hope that you will
maybe at some point uh could
also give us some advice on, you
know, how you see housing
dollars moving, cause now you've
got housing dollars in NMFA,
MFA, you have a little bit of
work being done in EDD. I'm,
I've, I've, for two years in a
row, introduced the bill to
create the Office of Housing to
bring coordination to all this.
It's like when I created the
early education department, the
broadband office, cybersecurity
office with some other folks
here in the committee that
helped us get that done. That
was really to bring
order to how we handle
cybersecurity, broadband, early
education. I'm concerned that we
have housing like sort of, it's
one of our biggest problems
right now. We have sort of all
over the place, because I think
companies are going to be like,
well, what's their housing
situation like? Can they house
employees that work for my
company. So, I, I'd like some
direction from you all on what
do you think we need to do with
housing, because we've tried 2
years in a row now, and I'm just
concerned that it's getting,
it's further like splintering.
Do you have a comment on that
now or do you
to talk to us about that later.
Mr. Chairman, I, I will just say
one thing which is a part of our
strategic plan, we're looking at
a couple of different things.
Finance Authority has been
really good about measuring and
telling you how many dollars
we've invested. We haven't been
very good about telling you what
that investment has brought. So
the return of those dollars in
terms of economic development,
community development, that is
not been really something that
the NMFA has done a good job
with. So we are undertaking as
part of our strategic plan, some
very specific um no
we're putting work together for
what those impacts should look
like. We're also looking, um,
another part of that is
quantifying those impacts, and
then lastly, we're looking at
what more other than money is
needed, um reform.
We, we have a lot of money in
different programs. And I'm, you
know, we're not certain that
it's necessarily a dollar issue
in the investment of some of
those things. So we want to take
a look at what's stopping the
infrastructure from going
forward and if it is a money
issue, we know what's offered.
I'm not sure we know what's
needed. And so that element is
something that we're examining
as well this year. I don't know
that we'll have it in time,
because I think our last.
We, we have our last two-day
meeting in September, pretty
early in September, we won't
have reports back on that and
information. We might have it by
the November meeting, maybe, um,
but we're just getting started
on all this work kind of
developing the impact metrics
for us and, and understanding
what's needed for us, cause
again, we have a lot of dollars
and a couple of programs and if
there's something other than
money that's needed, we'd love
to know how to address it. And
if it is fact, in fact, that
we're not delivering the dollars
in a way that's useful. We'd
also like to know that. So
That's information that we'll
have coming to you at some
point. I just don't know when
that'll be. Well, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you, uh,
Marquita. That's excellent. I
really want to hear it. Uh, I
know the executive is still
fully behind a housing solution,
and so we, we definitely need to
come forward with something
there. Um,
Over to page 14 of on the bottom
right-hand corner there, the
venture capital fund, what, what
sits there and, and what are the
sizes of those uh grants, is
there like a set of a swim lane
in there and how large or small
they should be or
Mr. Chairman, we have made some
$50 million was provided uh in
state dollars, and then we've
taken a pot of federal dollars
and added to that, so it's, I
think roughly about $65 million
right now of funds invested and
I'm gonna lose the number, but
it's upwards of I think about 10
funds that we've invested in. So
we've not made direct
investments into any company.
We've made investments into
investment funds, and they are
varied, and they could be $2
million chunks or $10 million.
chunks, it's somewhere between 2
and 10. Um, so if we've taken a
lead, if we're the lead
investors, then we'll take a
much larger dollar amount, but
on some of these bigger funds,
we're just a small part, enough
to get the attention of the
investor so that they understand
New Mexico's on the map, um, and
so I'm, we're really happy to
provide that we, uh, the person
that's run that program for us,
Ryan Decker, has done an amazing
job in getting those dollars out
and putting that money to work
in a way that is impactful.
Well, thank you, madam.
And, um, so on that one and I'm
almost done, Madam Chair, the,
uh, the, when there's a Roy on
like say the venture capital
fund or return this, does it
roll back into the fund to be
reinvested again, or does the
return on investment come back
to the state. Um, Mr. Chairman,
it stays in the fund reinvest it
all from the original
investments that we, that the
state has put into it,
investment dollars that states
put into it, Mr. Chairman, so
the law was passed in 2022 and
2023, we made some changes so
that the actual uh structure of
the
a lot of the, the intended
impact. And so we didn't really
get started with the program
until the end of 20 fall of
2023. And so the first
investments aren't that mature
yet to be able to tell you, but
I'll have a report for you as
required because it required by
July. So I think you'll see that
at the July meeting or somewhere
near there. OK, great. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I am, uh, uh,
I'll just wrap up my comments
with thank you so much for all
the work you do, your team is
phenomenal. Anytime I pick up.
the phone, they either answer on
the first ring, or they make
themselves available
immediately. So you should be
commended for all the work that
you and your team do. um, and
then second, I'm very excited or
interested in seeing the dormant
funds, the the funds that may
have some dormant dollars that
we can do other things with that
are that could actually move
those dollars, because what I
found in the 13 years I've been
here in the legislature is it
like 3 or 300 or 400 funds out
there. And I know some of them
have like $1 left in them, and
others have millions and
hundreds of millions of dollars
left in them. Why wouldn't we
just take those fun?
and scrape them up and say, OK,
let's put them in something
that's actually working for us.
So would love your advice on
that. Thank you, Ma.
Thank you. Two quick questions.
Um, has the downgrading of New
Mexico's bond rating affected
NMFA's bond rating in any way.
Madam Chair, I think the answer
is a technical no, um, but I
caveat that to say that we
believe, you know, every, um,
rating agency has its own
methodology for determining how
far they'll go and
Certainly, S&P, which is had us
at a AAA, had both of our two
top lies at a AAA for quite some
time, sees us as, you know, it's
calculated a one way, Moody's on
the other hand, were limited to,
um, we can't be more than one
step above the state's rating.
And so while that's not a stated
criteria in terms of, in their
written documentation, it's very
clear in every other way, so
they've limited our growth, we
will probably never see a AAA
from Moody's on our public
project.
Revolving fund until the state's
overall improvement because so
much of the state's money is in
us and so much of the state
dollar support New Mexico
community. So it's um, it's an
interesting dilemma for us
because I think they're wrong,
um, but they are built into our
indentures, so we have to stay
with them for a while or change
our program up quite
substantially, but, you know,
we're the highest AA that
they'll give us, um, which is
certainly
You know, it's, it's still a
very strong rating in the public
project revolving fund.
Thank you. And then do your
analysts ever collaborate, for
example, with the LFC, um, or
DFA analysts just in the last
conversation about looking at
the funding and is it doing what
it's supposed to be doing and
what are the gaps? Do they, is
there any collaboration across
your agency with the government,
with the state agencies.
Madam Chair, there's um a lot of
uh we contact our the DFA and um
LESC regularly uh repeat, maybe
it's just higher ed regularly
when we're doing financings on
underlying local governments. So
we want to make sure that
they're in good standing as we
look at their funds because an
audit, which is what we rely on
is always backward looking,
right? You, all you know is how
you did, not what's going on,
what, what, what's expected to
come. So we talked to the people
that are over
their budgets and our most
closely in interacting with them
to understand whether the budget
is or their audit is still a
clear reflection of kind of
where they're still headed, so
that is on a project by project
basis, we have that monthly
informal communication. We've
worked with LFC on a couple of
things, um, really at their
request, they'll bring us into
certain conversations, and then
I would say that they're um what
I call the acronym finance
agencies, the MFA NMFA.
SBIC SIC, we are starting to
gather, um, to start looking at,
you know, ways in which
We can address the areas that
are not being addressed. Um, and
so that's, that is something
actually in the state treasurer
started and she's gotten us
together and started talking
about you have all this money,
you have all this, um, authority
and, and infrastructure,
technical people, um, why aren't
we still hitting that mark? And
so there's more informal
collaboration going on behind
the scenes, um, and then, you
know, depending on the program,
we collaborate very heavily with
the.
I see on our venture capital
program, again to make sure that
they're swimming and our swim
lane are very separate with
mortgage finance Authority, make
sure that we're in separate
areas because our job is to
supplement, not supplant, what
it is that they do. So that's
important to us. Um, the dollars
are, are rare enough and scarce
enough that we don't want to be
trying to compete with something
that doesn't need competition.
Thank you so much for that
answer. And with that, we're
going to complete um Marquita's
presentation. You'll hear more
from her, um, save her handout.
It's a great guide to use with a
finance.com to understand, I, I
visited every month. I learn
something every month. With
that, we'll turn it over to uh
Sabina Gaynor, who's gonna give
us the proposed work plan, which
you have in front of you.
And I'll just note that uh I
wanna think uh Sabina's team for
providing this. It's 140 pages.
I went to print it out and then
I realized, no, they're gonna
give us a copy. It's a great,
um, guide to what happened last
year and what happens in this
committee.
And start when you're ready.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. So starting on page 2
of the work plan, uh, during the
2025 interim, the committee will
receive reports from the
entities that are under its
purview, other than the NMFA,
which include the border
authority, the colonious
infrastructure Board.
The committee will also receive
the reports that are required by
statute from the NMFA. Those are
all listed under item B. And for
instance, it includes the, the
public project revolving fund
Economic development revolving
fund. Uh, there's a full list
there. There are many reporting
requirements for this committee.
The committee will also consider
rules that are proposed by the
NMFA.
Um
On the following page.
The committee will receive
testimony from the Cultural
Affairs department and the
bioscience Authority.
The committee will also receive
testimony on the status of the
childcare facility revolving
loan fund, which was amended
during this past legislative
session is Marquista mentioned
with Senate Bill 175.
Additionally, the committee will
hear a variety of topics
requested by the chair,
including a testimony on the
newly created federal National
Defense area on the state's
border with Mexico.
And the impacts of federal
bonding rating on state bonding
rating.
And if you turn to, there's a
full list, you know, of items in
this work plan. Uh, I'm not
gonna go through all of them.
That's just a summary.
If you go to the last page, page
4.
Um, committee will has its uh
meeting schedule and locations.
It will next meet on July 9 and
10, which is in Las Vegas,
August 11 and 12, and Espanola,
September 9 and 10, and Demming
and for its final meeting on
November 3 in Santa Fe. And with
that, I stand for questions.
Don't all signal at once.
And, and just as Sabina pointed
out, we have all of it in MA and
then we have the spaceport, the
Border Authority, um, which is
why we're, um, I had talked to
Senator Ramos about Demming
because it's the border
authority, it's that military
area with the border. Um, also,
I would just add if, you know,
you wake up at 3 o'clock in the
morning because you're not
taking your organic beetroot.
Um, you can, and you get an idea
like where is this?
Tell us more.
New discovery.
Um
Let Sabina know or let me know
or let Sener Padilla know
because it's a, as you learn
more and see more, you
understand more how this
committee can be very practical.
So don't hesitate to speak up.
They're all so shy man
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you. Um, madam chair and
thank you, I'll be sure to send
you an email or text at 3 a.m.
in the morning because I'm part
of the group that.
can't sleep and wakes up
automatically around 3 for some
odd reason, so.
Anyway, um.
I wanted to add, just suggest on
on, um lead under letter E,
where we receive on page 3,
receiving testimony.
I really appreciate the fact
that you added the number 4.
That's really important, um,
especially right now, um,
When we have um we're having the
border issues that we're having
with the defense uh along the
border, but I also wanted to see
if we could, and I meant to ask
Marquita this and maybe
coordinate.
Um, I know that we have the
tribal infrastructure fund.
And of course, you know, that's
sovereign to the tribal nations,
of course, but I'm interested
because throughout the years
we've we've heard about um
missed opportunities or things
that kind of go through the
The crabs with coordination with
our local governments and how we
can better align and coordinate
our infrastructure development
needs.
And kind of pulls to the table
wherever there are those
overlaps with tribal lands,
count local governments, and
then our funding and financing,
um.
Uh, institutions and how we can
kind of better align that so
one, to avoid getting the
question that we get, that is
that we're duplicating funds in
our capital outlay, that's one
area that we get questioned on.
And second, because of the uh
bureaucracies that the tribes
already have to go through.
And then couple that with
Meeting the requirements of
local governments, and that
couple that with the funding and
financing, um.
That they have to go through as
well, because sometimes they
leverage not only their own
funds, but other state and
federal monies. So
Somehow having a type of
presentation that helps us with
that.
To understand that better and
also tie in the whole notion of
tribal sovereignty.
And, and, um, wherever we can
when we're dealing with these
kinds of issues, um, I'd like to
also incorporate um a little bit
about why tribal sovereignty and
consultation is so critically
important. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And just a note for everybody,
um, we try to have some of the
people who've been recipients of
these grants poured out at the
meetings, and sometimes tours. I
know we went to uh Susan
Herrera's area just north of
Espanola, and I found out what a
$1 million
water tanks pumped looks like,
so you see the realities of what
these small uh areas, yeah, so
if you have something in your
District
Or you hear something that you
think we should know about.
Again, communicate it.
Representative Brego. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and if I wake up at
3 in the morning, I'll just come
over and have coffee with you
or, or herbal tea or something,
um.
Um, so I was
In sort of in line with what I
had mentioned earlier about the
technology, and I know uh
Senator, uh, Padilla.
has been working on a lot of
technology informational stuff,
but I think it's really
important that we start
considering, you know, that the
state uh start looking at our
technology systems uh for
departments because that
It is often overlooked, and I
was wondering if on number 5 on
page 3, we could maybe add um it
says receive educational
presentations or materials on
topics of interest to committee
members relating to finance
programs and technology under
the committee's purview. I
wonder if we could just add that
in there because I think one of
the things that we overlook
sometimes as legislators is the
need and
Especially that um um Marquita,
and I forget your last name
Marquita, but, um, especially.
Russell,
since you mentioned that, um,
you know, you're growing so fast
and in 6 years, it's just
unbelievable that you're, you've
doubled, um,
I think that we, we need to look
at all of our departments in
terms of the money that the
legis legislature needs to
provide in order to make these
departments become more
efficient from a techno
technologically, technological
standpoint. So I wondered if we
could just add that in there,
I'm sure.
Yeah, we, we can do that as
appropriate because also we have
LFC and and a science
telecommunications and
technology also looking at the
same thing.
Uh, Representative Lu Hung. I
just, when we get to
announcements, if we're gonna
have them, I just wanted to let.
Or maybe just now uh. Ah, the
5th.
5th and 6th tier, there's gonna
be a water summit. I don't know
if we're NMFA is in.
be Santa Fe water someone's
gonna be here at the Capitol and
just to let others know that
it's actually really
educational, um, perspective of
how our work that is in front of
us through this committee and
others is related to what the
summit has been working on, and
you, you will get
You could get a per diem for it
as well. Thank you, Matt.
Thank you. With no further
questions, um, oh.
I actually just move that we um
Adopted proposed work plan and
meeting schedule. I could read
your mind.
You did. We have a, a possibly
adopt, uh, some of the ideas
that the ideas that represented
Morego had,
uh,
amend that with that amendment.
Uh, we have a motion to adopt by
Representative Trasas and a 2 by
Senator Grant. Is there any
objection to adopting the work
plan with the added suggestions.
It see no objections, we have
adopted the work plan and thank
you, Sabina, for your incredible
work in communicating and thank
you, Marquita for.
exciting and ensuring that we
cover everything we have to
cover as well.
OK, um, with that,
Um, I'm going to adjourn, just
remember our next meeting is
July 9th through 10th in Las
Vegas, try to be there.
Um
And we look forward to seeing
you and get out information, uh,
later this month.
And with that
We adjourn.
