to
order for the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee.
Um, before we start, I just want
to thank everybody from the
Department of Cultural Affairs
from Los Oceros. I've never been
here. I know some of us have
been, some of us haven't been.
September 21st, put that on your
calendar. That's Fall Festival,
and people will not only have
all sorts of activities, but
they'll be able to pick fruit.
So as you drove in, you saw the
fruit trees. My first question
was, who picks the fruit? And I
found out we can pick it up, uh,
before
our committee, um, introduces
themselves. I want to mention
please only use the public web
Uh, don't use the secure one
because that is our um
webcast. This has been webcast
throughout the state, throughout
the nation.
um, yeah, renation around the
world. Let's not limit. We're
telling the story of Los Suerros
to everybody, um
also, um, I want to thank the
Los Luceros staff for providing
refreshments. We actually had
somebody who was going to
provide them, and they're very
busy and they didn't and so the
Los Los Lucero staff generously
uh provided things that I want
to thank you for also providing
hot tea. That's and half and
half sometimes in New Mexico
it's those squirt things, um,
personal favorite, also lunch is
gonna be provided,
uh, Lauren Abbey from the Museum
of New Mexico Foundation has had
uh the moving arts espanolas.
Some of you know Roger Montoya,
former rep. They're gonna
provide lunch and everybody is
invited. They, they, Lawrence
said, you know, Los Luceros is
not in the middle of a bunch of
restaurants. I want anybody
staff members, presenters, uh,
so there's going to be a very
inspiring lunch, and you're
gonna hear more because thanks
to
um, Eric Vasquez, who's also
gonna be presenting in our first
presentation they have been
working on redoing the
commercial kitchen. So when we
have lunch, you'll see the
kitchen and you'll be able to
eat out outside. So I just want
to thank everybody for making
this happen.
and with that, uh, we'll start,
I'll have the members of our
committee introduce themselves.
Let's start with Representative
Chapfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Jack Chatfield. I
represent District 67 in the
northeast corner of the of New
Mexico. Everything from raton to
protalis. So glad to be here
today. What a beautiful place.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh,
John Blockhouse, District 51 and
beautiful Alamogordo in Otero
County. Great to be here.
County. Oh, sorry
Let me start all over. Good
morning everybody. Um, I'mlia
Mejia from Chavez County. Glad
to be here, beautiful place.
Thanks.
Good morning all. I'm, uh,
Representative Susan Herrera
from the 41st District of New
Mexico and um although this
isn't in my district. Los
Luceros belongs really to Jesse
Sanchez, rep Joseph Sanchez, um,
it belongs to the whole valley
and we always, we've worked hard
over the years to get a Capital
Outlay money to get a money to
self-sustain and we're very,
very proud of this, um, of this,
uh, center and
it is a it is a center for the
whole valley, deeply loved, uh,
you'll hear more about Los
Amigos, the, the, you know, the
advisory group that helps really
keep this place up. It's, it's
kind of an amazing story and,
um, and over the years it's
really, it's really gotten to
be, uh, a centerpiece for events
in our valleys. So, um, I
represent, um, Espinola, uh, up
the Chama Highway all the
way to the border. I go over Los
Espressos Pass, and I have 4
districts in Taos, and then I
hop over Tales in the valley and
I, my district starts, uh, in
Espanola again. So good to be
here. Welcome. Uh, it's great to
have you
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
a Representative Kathleen Case
from, uh, House District 44,
Hoage 44 is all of Corrales, uh,
about 5 or 6 neighborhoods in
Riar Rancho, and east of the
river down to I-25. So the
unincorporated area of Alameda
and northern Albuquerque, and
thank you what a lovely and
beautiful, uh, state historic
site. Uh, we have orchards in my
district as well, and your
orchard obviously has health
y water right. And so I am
interested in learning more.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Sarana, we
can start with you.
Good morning, everyone. Um, I am
Debbie Serignano represent House
District 21 in Bernal Leo
County. If you know Albuquerque,
it's the Monzano High School
area. It's great to be here. It
took me a little while to get
here, but I did make it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Joseph Sanchez, District 40. Uh,
this is literally in my
backyard. My house is right on
top of the hill, but, uh, I just
want to welcome everyone here. I
actually grew up playing in the
some of these facilities before
they were updated and before
they had doors and windows.
Uh, my family actually has
property to the river, a couple
tracks down, so my family's been
here for generations, but I, I
just want to thank you guys for
coming and uh
a lot of amazing things going on
here. The, the Zozobra balloon
was here last fall for the
balloon fiesta, and I'm, I'm
excited for that to come back
and uh
as a member of the
Appropriations Committee, I'm
always excited to support what's
going on here and I look forward
to continuing that. So thank
you, Madam Chair.
Also, I want to, he is the
father of a new walking toddler,
so I hope we see the toddler
later.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just wondered if we're doing
like happy hour at his house
after this is over.
Um,
I'm representative Cynthia
Berego and I represent the west
side of Albuquerque on the
northwest Mesa.
Um, it's really great to be here
because I grew up in Espanola
and um
there's some really great sites
here in Alcalde, uh, and I just
wanted to mention Delancey
Street is just up the street.
Uh, when I was a kid, I took
piano lessons and this right
here on this county road, my
piano teacher was down the
street.
So, um,
it's really good to be back,
back in my hometown.
Thank you.
Whereas Diaz, um, Debbie
O'Malley, and I'm, um, I
represent some of the oldest
neighborhoods in Albuquerque.
uh, Barrelas, and Martinez town,
and then I go all the way into
the North Valley. Uh, so it's,
it's, um
uh, urban, semi-rural and rural
areas. So I feel very honored to
represent District 13, um
I, uh
of my family's also been here
for many generations. In fact, I
got a little bit of a deja vu
when I was crossing the bridge
there
when, uh, cross the bridge
because I remember when I was uh
growing up, we would go visit my
grandparents' farm in uh Veita,
New Mexico, and we would cross a
similar bridge over the ditch
and go into the orchard. The
even though my, my grandparents
had long since gone. The trees
were still producing these
beautiful, uh, apples, so it's
really wonderful. So I, uh, it's
a beautiful area. I haven't, you
know, I hadn't been here, and,
um, so I'm really excited to be
here today with my colleagues.
Thank you,
Madam Cha
OK, good morning, Madam Chair.
I'm a Senator Michael Padilla. I
um, I've been on this committee
the entire time I've been in the
legislature and, um, as a voting
member and I chair and vice
chair of this committee every
other year. Uh, when I, uh, this
is about the 3rd time I've come
to this particular, uh,
location, and it is just
absolutely beautiful. I take
pictures the moment I get here,
and I send them to different
people that are important to me
because I tell them, I almost
feel like I'm in the South
Valley portion of my district.
So I represent the southern
portion of, of Bernalo County
and the southern southern
portion of my district feels
very much like this. And again,
the bridges and the different
things that, uh, Senator Maas,
uh, sorry, yeah, Senator
O'Malley, excuse me, said, well,
there's some myestus in there
too, right? Yeah, yeah, you have
myasthtis as well, but, um, but
bottom line is, uh, I, I, I
thoroughly enjoy uh coming up
here and thank you so much to
the community and thank you for
opening the doors and making
sure that we get to these
facilities because they're so
important as amenities here in
New Mexico, so thank you very
much thank you, Madam Chair.
And as Semina, can you introduce
your staff?
Madam Chair, my name is Sabina
Gaynor. I work with the
Legislative council Service, and
I'm assisted by Martin Fisher,
Gabriel Suazo and Bob Chavez.
Thank you.
And I'm the chair of the
committee, uh, State Rep Joy
Garrett from the northwest part
of Albuquerque, home of the
Petroglyph National Monument,
which is celebrated its
thirty-fifth anniversary and
just as a reminder how important
it is to preserve places like
Los, uh, Los Suerros, uh, the
petroglyphs, these are to be
cherished for generations to
come. So I just want to thank
everybody who had a voice and a
role in in getting this
beautiful place.
And with that, we will, um,
start our first presentation
is the overview of programming
in the history of Los Luceros,
uh, Anne McCudden, the director,
the new director of the State
Historic Sites and Monuments
will be presenting Michelle
Zupon, the site manager, and
it's not on your agenda, but
Eric Vasquez, who's the
executive director of the
Northern Rio Grande National
Heritage Area and involved in
the commercial and economic
development of this area. So
without further ado, please
start
and introduce yourself as you
start so people know who's
talking.
Good morning. Well, let me get
this a little closer.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members. Uh, my name is Anne
McCudden. I met some of you on
the way in, but I am the
executive director of, um, New
Mexico Historic Sites, which of
course is part of DCA. I am
April May June July 4 months on
the job, um, uh, everybody's
been very welcoming to me here
in New Mexico and at DCA and
across the state. Um, I
relocated here from
my last place was in Southwest
Georgia, Thomasville, Georgia,
which is a
very historically rich town and,
um, tourism and history is part
of its, it's fabric. Uh, before
that, I was in Miami, Florida
for
um, 25 years or more. I worked
with, um, the Seminole Indians.
I worked at another, a number of
other historic sites and
museums, and, um, and then I
grew up in Chicago, so I'm, I
don't know, I'm hitting all
parts of the country or
something, but, um, really my
passion is in, uh, museums, uh,
anthropology. I started out as
an archaeologist. I think a lot
of us, I don't know how that
happened, but we do. Then we get
too old to do archaeology and we
go and, and do other things. So
I've been in the administrative
end of running historic sites
and museums for, I guess, about
30 years. So when this
opportunity came up, uh,
just maybe about a year ago, I
knew I'd been to New Mexico a
number of times. I almost went
to University of New Mexico for
graduate degree, but I decided
against it many years ago. Um,
and I just knew that New Mexico
cherished its history and
culture and that it is a, you
know, heritage tourism is about
a part of every state's fabric,
Georgia, specifically, obviously
has a lot of that, but I know
that in New Mexico, it is really
vital, um, and it's not just as
a financial economic
indicator, but it's because I'm
I'm amazed at how many
multi-generational people I have
met
in New Mexico so far. Uh, 25
years in Miami, I've probably
met two people that were born in
Miami, but in New Mexico, it is
amazing how many people have
have family that go back here or
have just lived here for
generations, and that
says a lot. It says a lot.
Either you guys are doing
something right or really
cherish your history and
culture. So I knew that this
opportunity of running these
sites would be a way for me to
share some of my talents, but
also get into an area of
historic preservation and
economic development and tourism
that, um, I think it's just,
it's fascinating. And I am also
amazed at the number of people
I've met. I've been to all the
sites, by the way, uh, multiple
times, but the number of people,
I, I'm not really keeping track,
but it seems like the people, a
number of people I've met who
have said, I love Los Luceros. I
mean, they say it like they
really, and I'm always kind of
like, oh, that's interesting.
You love a historic, no, they
really love coming here, whether
or not they had a
family connection to it. So,
again, that says something to
how the state has, um, funded
and supported these sites, and
what we do. But we do have, if I
just have a few minutes before I
pass the mic over to Eric. um,
and Michelle
I do want to talk about, uh,
some of our other sites, just,
you guys will probably be
hearing about this, but we will
be opening our officially
opening our 8th site. Taylor
Masa Historic Site in early
November down in, um, gosh, I
always want to say, uh, Las
Cruces, but technically it's
Messa. And, um, those folks have
been doing a tremendous amount
of work with the Taylor family
to get that site open, and it's
gonna be an amazing addition,
uh, focusing on borderlands,
folk art, and content that is
not, you know, it's not
completely different from the
rest of the sites, but it's
going to be a wonderful little
addition to the cultural
framework of historic sites.
That's going to be fantastic.
Please take a look out for that
when it comes along. Um, at Fort
Selden, which is just down the
road from there. We're doing
wonderful preservation work on
some of the adobe structures and
building a new entranceway, um,
you know, a lot of times I know
what we do isn't super sexy as
far as the public, uh, but it is
vitally important stuff to make
our sites usable for something
like this, a meeting today
versus the visitor walking in
and making sure they have a
top-notch experience from the
time they find us on a website
to the time they leave the
parking lot. We want that
visitor map, that visitor
experience to be wonderful. And
that includes infrastructure and
physical plant things. And Los
Luceros Michelle will go over
the history of it, but there's a
long line of, um, infrastructure
and improvements being done
here. I know you're gonna take a
tour tomorrow, walk around a
little bit, and see some of the
fantastic work being done on the
hacienda. And, um, at Fort
Stanton, we are dealing with,
well, a small wildfire earlier,
which thankfully did not get,
um, cause too much damage. And I
was just in Lincoln last week
for Lincoln days. They're doing
wonderful restoration on the
Woods house
Um, Basque Redondo and Fort
Sumner continue their wonderful
initiatives with the Navajo and
the sheep, and they just
celebrated Treaty Day a few
weeks ago, and Jimmez Pueblo
just on Sunday had the, um
oh my gosh, I'm drawing a blank.
The marathon and the, um, thank
you, Pueblo Independence Day.
She's been here longer than I
have. You can tell. Um, and
Coronado is tackling, um, some
restoration work in the mural
room. So I know that's a lot. 8
sites. I don't want to give you
too much data on the specifics
of, of each of them, but Los
Luceros is, is a part of that
wonderful
uh, crown of sights. And then
internally, I don't, I think
it's important to note that
myself and the staff have been
spending time on strategic
planning and talking about the
future of these sites. Um, it
hasn't, it's probably been done
in the past, but not recently.
And so, um, we have been
having some wonderful wonderful
discussions led by a third-party
facilitator to talk about
you know, what, how can these
sites be around for a long time?
How can they financially be
around? There is a lot of
physical plant issues with these
sites. There's a lot of
buildings and repairs, um, and I
just come from a mentality that
we know what's going on in the
federal government. We know what
goes on in the private sector,
and
these sites, whether we
uh, supplement education
or whether we provide for
tourism or whether we just the
economic impact that we provide
in terms of jobs and
sustainability. It's vitally
important to the economy in
wherever we live locally and
regionally in the state. And the
only way to make sure that we're
going to be here for a while is
if we give our site managers the
resources they need. We work
with wonderful partners like
Northern Your Grande.
and we look to the future in
terms of financial stability
and, um, you know, just making
sure these sites are here. This
is a lot of acreage. These are a
lot of buildings, and I, the
last one I just came from was 13
buildings and 5 acres, and I was
like, oh, that's enough. And now
I, you know, exactly. Then I
come to Fort Stanton and I'm
like, yeah, so, but it's also a
wonderful team of people helping
from the elected officials on
down. Um, I am gonna be here
today and tomorrow. So I'm
hopefully can meet you all
and have a quick hello or stop
and have a cup of coffee if I'm
in your neighborhood
which I've spoken to some of you
about, and I think that, um, I,
I, full disclosure, I have not
learned this entire financial
process of any means. Jessie
Greenspan has been a wonderful
help. So if I get an acronym
wrong or a committee name wrong,
please forgive me. I will get up
to speed on that, um, but know
that I am here to answer any
questions you have about, um,
historic sites. And if that I'll
let Eric, uh, talk for, I think
you're going to go next and then
Michelle. Yeah.
Good morning all. My name is
Eric Vaskas. I'm the executive
director for the Northern Rio
Grande National Heritage Area. I
am very pleased to be able to
speak in front of you today.
Uh, I, the Northern Rio Grande
National Heritage Area is one of
64 national heritage areas
around the nation. They are
established by Congress, but
administered completely locally.
Ours is a 501c3 here in New
Mexico. We do have some
partnership with the National
Park Service, but as you can
guess, things might be a little
bit tricky this year.
uh, but
so we're very happy to be able
to lean into our partnership
here with the state of New
Mexico, and I wanna thank, uh,
the legislature for helping to
make that partnership possible
and particularly senators, uh,
Representative Sanchez, who has
helped keep this, uh, initiative
that we're gonna be talking
about going for we're entering
our 3rd year now. So thank you
representative. Thank you all
the legislators for making this
possible.
To that end, we have a little uh
presentation in front of you,
the green one.
If you just open it, I just
briefly want to go over to some
of the projects we're doing.
This initiative that was
established by the legislature
is to have a partnership between
the Department of Cultural
Affairs or historic sites, and
an organization such as the
Heritage Area to work on both
cultural and economic uh
development opportunities based
off of this historic site.
Los Cerro says you're gonna hear
uh from tomorrow's tour and
everything is
is an old place
And when the legislature
when the state purchases
property in 2008. I know there
were some questions about what
were we even gonna do with it?
There was some initial thoughts
about this project or that
project, but there, there were
questions
Thanks to this investment, we're
starting to see that a real
fruition of
uh benefits coming back to this
area. This area was the hub of
northern New Mexico for
centuries. There, there's a
historic Pueblo immediately
adjacent to this property, that
hacienda that you're gonna get a
chance to look at tomorrow.
That's older than the United
States. This place is a cultural
center point of northern New
Mexico as Representative Herrera
already mentioned.
So with that point
we all played in these houses
here when we were kids,
uh Representative Sanchez
mentions that. I've heard Leo
Jaramillo talked about that
before. I grew up across the
river right here.
So
this, this place is important to
this community. That's why I'm
very pleased that we're able to
start bringing some of these
projects. We have a brief list
of some of the projects here
that we're talking about, but
I'm just gonna go quickly
through these slides. The one
that Representative Sanchez
already alluded to was the first
one on page 3 or that second one
there is the Rio Grande Sky
Fiesta. Last year we took a
chance and decided to create a
balloon fiesta for the northern
New Mexico communities.
Albuquerque's the, the one in
Albuquerque is great. Please,
don't get me wrong, but it is
far and expensive, and you would
be surprised how many New
Mexicans have never been to it.
So we brought one here, we kept
the prices low and thanks to
Michelle's team on Sunday, it
was even free admission for
everyone to come in to see this,
and we had uh a large number of
people attend more than we were
even expecting, and so we're
very pleased to be able to bring
it back this year, October 25th
and 26th.
We're gonna be handing these
out, some VIP legislative
passes, bring you yourself and a
guest to come on out on those
dates. It's going to be a lot of
fun. We have special shapes such
as the soro balloon and all the
balloons that are being brought
in are specifically curated for
having ties to New Mexico, so
come on out.
The next page we're talking
about the Heritage kitchen,
which Anne already mentioned.
Right next to this building is
another small building which is
a kitchen. We are converting it
into a commercial kitchen,
getting all the licenses up to
date, water turns out to be
quite tricky in spite of its
abundance in this area, getting
everything legal, but we are
hoping to have that open very
soon. The point of this kitchen
is that a lot of the food
infrastructure that was
available for local producers
and such have closed down over
the years, and there's nothing
really available for this
region. So we're opening a
kitchen that can be available
for the
community where we can have
classes where we can have
events, and we're bringing in
some state of the art equipment
to very traditional equipment.
We have a brand new commercial
uh food uh.
um, not dehydrator, uh, freeze
dryer, thank you. Freeze dryer
that we're installing in there
and right behind the kitchen,
next week, if you come on out,
you're gonna get to see us build
an ordinal.
because we're from the
traditional to the modern, we're
gonna have that all available in
this kitchen.
Cultures and creators for art
festivals, the next slide. A few
years ago, one of our first
things we did is we started an
annual juried art show that's
actually held in this very
space.
It brings in artists from all
the different pueblos in the
region and the Hikaria Apache as
well as Hispano artists and
traditional artists and some
modern contemporary artists as
well.
It has turned into a, a lovely
event that we're very pleased to
be continuing it. We're going to
be doing it in April this coming
year. And we welcome you to the
next iteration of that art show.
From that, cultures and
creators, what we're doing there
is we're trying to identify
artists and the creative
industry here where we can grow
on that.
So with that we partnered with
Northern New Mexico College and
the historic sites to hold
entrepreneurial training classes
for artists here.
And at Northern New Mexico
College where they're also
getting uh continuing ed credit
through Northern.
And that was done here with a
number of artists who are hoping
to continue that project as
well. It is the economic
diversification to try to help
to to
bring the make the culture that
makes this area unique and
special and who we are to help
us use that culture to survive
and thrive.
So we've been very reliant and
large employers in the past.
We're trying to learn to lean in
on into our own strengths.
The next slide is the film
industry and melaer training.
One of the original plans for
this site was a partnership with
Sundance.
where the milagros uh nonprofit
was established to do work
training and film work here.
Um
elections happen,
administrations change, that
program went away. A few years
ago, we started to revive that.
We recontacted the Milla
organization. They have since
started to do some classes here
on and off for uh screenwrite
screenwriting training here on
site. We've also entered into a
partnership with uh the Santa Fe
International Film Festival,
where they are
we are working with them to
provide grants to local
filmmakers to be able to do
productions, actually film here.
So giving them an opportunity to
create
unique, uh, films that will be
showcased at the uh film
festival and then spread beyond
that. But
training those people here,
giving them the opportunity to
actually work here and it's
helped foster the industry. Just
moving right along, trying to go
quickly.
If you have the chance, when you
entered, you walked straight
past through the arches. When
you're leaving, go through the
visitor center, which is where
you enter. You're gonna see a
triptych of these retablos, um,
which were recently created by
Joseph Ascension, uh, Lopez, who
was an artist in residence that
we had on staff for who created
these for us to commemorate the
cultures and history of this
area.
Um
photo's nice. You got to see
them in person. They are, he
took years on these things, and
they are very detailed in every
image, every bit of the carving,
everything has meaning.
And this is uh uh we're pleased
to be able to bring this to this
site.
Overall, what I guess what we're
focusing here is in 2008, as I
mentioned, we weren't sure what
was gonna happen here.
But since then, through this
partnership thanks to the
legislature, we are very pleased
that there is actual activity
occurring here that's drawing in
people that is actually spurring
economic activity, training
opportunity, and that is in
large part due to you. So I
wanna thank you for that.
And
with that, any questions or, or
I'll let Michelle go and make
sure we get your passes.
Madam Chair, honored
representatives and senators.
I'm Michelle Zupan, and I am the
site manager here at Los
Luceros, and it is my pleasure
along with the pleasure of my
staff to welcome you here to our
little gem in northern New
Mexico.
Uh, as Anne alluded, I am an
archaeologist like she is, uh,
but my family, as she also
alluded to multi-generational,
uh, families here in New Mexico.
My grandparents, specifically my
grandfather and his brother
settled in Representative
Chatfield's district, uh, before
the turn of the century, as coal
miners, so, uh, we do have long
histories here in New Mexico and
that's part of what makes us so
special, I think.
It is an honor for me to
represent Los Suerros to you,
and I will be giving your tour
tomorrow as well. Uh, but just
to give you a little bit of
background on the history that
you are enjoying around you
today. The history here goes
well back over 1000 years. You
are an unseeded Tewa land. The
name of this place is Fogi O
Winge.
which is place of the northern
flicker.
The
ancestral Pueblo that sits
adjacent to the site. Uh, is an
unexcavated pueblo that is the
ancestral home of the people of
Hano at Hopi, uh, which is the
Tewa village there.
Uh, we also trace ancestry here
to the people of the uh winge
pueblo just to our south.
this was the agricultural lands
for the people of Fio de Pueblo.
Then in 1703, Captain Sebastian
Martin Serrano, uh, came and
established this with his
brother-in-law as a land grant.
It was one of the largest land
grants in this area, comprising
51,000 acres that went from west
of the Rio Grande.
east to what would become
Lastrapa north to Ambudo and
south to Okewinge.
This area that we are seated in
today was the center of that
land grant.
It remained in that family until
1927. Speaking of
multi-generational, the very
first Luzaro to live here at Los
Soerros married Sebastian Martin
Serrano's granddaughter.
In 1757, so we have a very long
history of Luce here.
uh, in the 20th century, 1923,
Mary Cabot Wheelwright purchased
the hacienda and 6 acres of
land.
With Mary's Boston Brahmin money
hacienda might not be here
today. It was derelict at that
time because the country was in
difficult economic times. We
were just approaching not only
the Great Depression, but the,
uh, incredible devastation that
would be caused by the erosion
and winds, uh, of the great Dust
Bowl.
So Mary was able to establish
not only the restoration of the
hacienda, but she created a a
kind of mini art colony here
that drew in artists including
Georgia O'Keefe
Dorothy Stewart.
and many, many others.
Then she passed the land to
Maria Chabot. Mario's from San
Antonio, Texas.
and she was able to farm the
land and keep it intact until
she passed the land to the next
owners in the 1960s and that,
that was the Colliers.
Mary Wheelwright established the
first museum here, which is the
Wheelwright Museum, and then the
Colliers established the second
museum here, which was the
Iberian.
Art and Cultural Museum. So we
are now in the 3rd museum to be
here at Los Cerros.
We have a long and deep history
that I cannot wait to share with
you in more detail, uh, and you
are welcome to ask our team of,
of staff members here. Any
questions that you have about
the history, about the land,
about the culture here. Uh, we
are all very, very proud of it,
and we are honored to welcome
you and to share that with you.
And I do want to introduce you
to our very special donkeys
later on. Uh, Luna and Sunflower
are ambassadors
to the site, and they are very,
very special.
Thank you all so much for
joining us today.
Wow
it's all I can say
Are there any questions? and
please join us for lunch. You're
gonna be here, so there'll be
more time and there'll be a tour
tomorrow at the close of our
official session. Any questions
at this time
Uh, Representative Kates, I
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Regarding your commercial
kitchen, I do understand that
you're using it for community
events and for community
cooking. Is it available for,
uh, local farmers to be able to
produce any kind of
is, is it like a Department of
Health certified commercial
kitchen, I'm assuming that they
can use commercially to be able
to can to sell their products,
uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh,
yes, that is the plan. We're
still in the phases of the
getting the health certification
completed.
uh, like I mentioned, water and
all those little things that.
can be sticking points, but
we're, we're moving through it.
But yes, the plan is that it
will be available for local
producers to be able to come in
and use it as well as just for
us to do programming, but it
won't be exclusively for the
local producers. We also plan to
have, uh, resident chefs come in
and do uh
cooking uh restaurant training
through the site, those kinds of
projects.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you
I don't see any more questions,
but oh.
uh, Representative Herrera and
then Representative Chapfield.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
What's your annual budget now
here?
Uh
Excuse me,
sorry. So I'm trying to get up
to speed on that individually
within historic sites, um, the
entire historic site's budget
is, um, including salaries and
services and everything is a
little over 3 million to
Lowesluceros on its own. I, I
don't have that number. I can
get it to you, but it is, um,
probably it's a little hard to
say actually, I'm I'm trying to
divvy out the numbers, uh, per
site, which I didn't inherit.
And so I'm trying to get into
those details.
Yeah, but I'll get it for you
No, that's OK. That's fine. Um,
Madam Chair, I would, can you
tell me how many staff,
full-time staff people you have
here?
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Verrera, uh, we
have 4 historic site staff here
and then we have two facility
sites, staff.
Uh, so you're running this
operation on 6 full-time staff
members a year, Madam Chair.
Yes, Representative Herrera,
Madam Chair.
not an easy task, I would
venture. Thank you.
Representative Chapfield
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to comment that I didn't
grow up here, but I grew up very
much like this. When I see all
the crab apple trees lay lay
with their limbs on the ground,
but I see all the apple trees
and I hear about that kitchen. I
see gallons of uh
crabapple jelly, fruit, uh,
that, uh, the old-timers, my
grandparents, uh, put away and
it lasted not only that winter,
but
many winters sometimes if you're
fruit froze the next summer, and
it's, it's awesome. It's
something we need to teach our
children, and I hope there's an
effort in place to, to help them
learn those skills of the, the
old timers knew
and uh I see him passed off
sometimes as, as a new way of
life, but to me it's an old way
of life and, and I really, it's
impressive. I, I appreciate the
job you guys are doing.
And my last question is simply,
Eric, how do we get those VIP
tickets?
Uh, Madam Chair, Purcell right
with you, we'll distribute them
right now. We'll just pass them
out as you're switching over to
the next attendee or present
presentation.
Thank you very, very much and we
look forward to sharing more and
seeing more. Um, with that,
we're gonna go to our next
presentation. Uh, while we're
waiting, uh, could Senator Brant
and Representative Abeta
introduced themselves and then
because we have a quorum, we'll,
uh, prove the minutes.
Senator Brandt
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
be here probably half the day
today, just, you know.
it's the first committee I've
been at in about 3 weeks. So I,
I've been in the ER 3 times in
the last 2 weeks, so, um
I, I appreciate, uh, everyone's
prayers and, and, you know,
hopefully I'll, I'll get well
soon. Thank you.
And Representative Apita
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yat A,
good morning, everyone. My name
is Representative Michelle
Abeda. I'm from District 69, and
it's great to be here with you
all today on this beautiful
piece of property. Thank you.
And we're going to stop for a
moment. Uh, we have our minutes.
I want to thank everybody, our
voting members for being here.
We have a quorum
sometimes in the past that's
been difficult, but we're here.
Uh, can I have a motion to
approve the minutes.
OK, we have a motion from
Representative Barrego a second
from Senator Padilla, are there
any objections
Kate, our minutes are approved
for my meeting of July 9th and
10th.
And with that, we're going to
have
this is one of those unsexy,
vital presentations that I don't
know about anybody else on the
committee, but I continually
have to learn more. This is bond
101. It's an overview of the
bonding process that's vital to
the work of the New Mexico
Finance Authority and we will
have Lawrence Chip Pierce, our
chief financial strategist with
NMFA Mark Shaiken, the general
counsel, and our executive, our
chief executive Officer,
Marquita Russell. And with that
proceed. Thank you
Good morning, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
really happy to be here today,
mostly because the people to the
left of me will be doing
virtually all of the talking, so
I can sit and enjoy with the
rest of you. Um, my job today,
uh, largely is to introduce the
folks next to you, uh, next to
me. Um, Chip Pierce, I think,
presented to you last year when
we were in Gallup and then his,
uh, periodically presented to
you over the course of, um, 30
or 35 years. He has been with
the finance Authority first as a
consultant.
um, helped hire our first
executive director and it's
really the architect of the
PPRF. Um, he's been with us as a
staff member for 3 years, uh,
coming up on 3 years, um, and
then Mark Chaikin, all the way
to the left, you all know, uh,
was formerly with, uh, New
Mexico Taxation and Revenue
Department, um, but has served
in the finance authority's legal
department before and was a
contractor to the NMFA, uh, way
back when, um, and we were able
to lure him back to the finance
authority when, um, our chief
legal
officer, uh, retired or, or
moved on at the end of last
year. So we're really excited to
have both of these guys. They,
uh, between them have years and
years of experience and, um, I
think you'll learn quite a bit.
So with that, I will turn it
over. I think we're starting
with Mark.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, good morning. My
name is Mark Chaikin, general
counsel at the NMFA. You should
have a handout in front of you,
uh, which is our presentation
for you today. Uh, I'm gonna get
us started as uh Marquita said,
and then Chip is going to take
over. So, uh, on slide number 2,
you just have, it's an overview
of the presentation. Uh, I'm
gonna just skip over that very
quickly, but I'm going to give
you some very, very basic
background about uh municipal
bo nd s and uh the mic and how
uh different aspects of them and
then, uh Mr. Pierce is going to
give you a lot more detail
about, uh, the PRF program in
particular.
Uh, so I'm gonna give you the
40,000 ft overview and then he's
going to fill in lots of very
important and interesting
detail.
So if I could ask you to please
turn to slide number 3
Um, so what is a municipal bond?
Well, bonds are a form of debt
security issued by both public
and private entities. And I
should say, if you want to stop
me at any time, uh please
interrupt me and I'll answer any
questions to the best of my
ability.
Um, municipal bonds are, uh,
particular type of bonds, and
they are bonds issued by states,
counties, municipalities, and
other political subdivisions of
the state, which we're all
calling issuers and also by
Indian nations and pueblos, uh,
so they're called municipal
bonds, but they're, they're
issued by the state, counties
and everything. So, uh, all
political subdivisions don't let
the name, uh, mislead you. It's
not just municipalities that
issue these.
Um, they issue these bonds to
finance projects throughout the
state. Our projects can be
public or in some cases,
private, and uh for us, the vast
majority are going to be a
public that we're talking today.
And almost all bonds are issued
to finance capital projects. So
that's generally infrastructure,
uh, stuff with a long life, uh,
or things big physical things.
They are not often used to
finance operations and
maintenance or O&M, um, and
there are many
restrictions on issuing bonds to
fund operation and maintenance.
Um, our Constitution also
contains many restrictions on
the issuance of debt. I'm not
gonna go through them all. A lot
of them mainly apply to, uh,
debt that is paid back with
property taxes, uh, and you'll
find those, uh, in Article 8 and
especially Article 9 of our
Constitution. I'm not again
going to go through them all. I
want to draw your attention, uh,
just to one or two in
particular, uh, Article 9,
Section 8B of the Constitution
was amended
in 2006, and that allows uh
lease purchase agreements, which
are sort of a new thing and
which we do a lot more of now
than we ever did. So that
required a constitutional
amendment that, uh, took place
in 2006. Uh, the other thing
that, um, I want to refer you to
is Article 9, Section 14, the
so-called anti-donation clause
that affects a lot of what we
do, um, it restricts the ability
of the state to, uh, uh, either
lend its credit or give aid to
private industry as the
text. Um, it's a real constraint
that uh recently has been
amended in 1994, 2002, 2006,
2010, and 2022. Uh, all to try
to get around some of these
restrictions that were really
stopping um the legislature from
trying to take action to improve
uh economic development in the
state, especially and other
things like that. So, um, the
there's a lot of talk generally
about the anti-generation
clause. It's been amended a lot
to
try to make it uh less
restrictive over the years.
Um, I'd like you to turn to
slide 4, please. Uh, so again,
issuers sell bonds to raise
money for capital projects, and
they promised to repay the
interest, uh, the principal from
a specific revenue source, and
we'll talk a little bit more
about that in just a second.
Uh, bonds can have different
maturities. That's a word you'll
hear a lot. A maturity is the
date, a specific amount of a
principal is to be paid on a
bond. So say you have a $20
million bond, it may have a
whole number of maturities that
come due at different times that
will collectively add up to $20
million in principle, but it's
not all going to be due for
usually on the same date.
Issuers pay interest on the
outstanding bonds, usually semi
semi-annually. Uh, and that,
that the interest payments will
come usually uh almost always
really from the same source of
revenues as the principal
payments come from.
Bonds may be issued with fixed
or floating interest rates, uh,
fixed rate bonds carry an
interest rate that is locked at
purchase and doesn't change
regardless of market
fluctuations and there are a lot
of market fluctuations right
now. Uh, and Chip is gonna
definitely talk to you more
about that. Floating interest
rate bonds, sometimes called
variable rate demand
obligations, carrying interest
rate that is reset at regular
intervals, daily, weekly,
monthly, um, it'll be
set out in the bond documents
and tied to an agreed upon
benchmark, a common one you'll
hear about maybe called LIBOR,
which is the London Interbank
Offered Rate. We live in a world
of many acronyms. Uh, but
because the NMFA doesn't issue
variable rate bonds, you're not
gonna hear much about it at all.
So, uh, we only do fixed rate
bonds, and there are very good
reasons for that that Chip will
also tell you about.
Turning to slide 5, there are
financial constraints on the
issuance of debt and bonds. An
issuer must have funds available
to pay principal and interest on
the bonds for the term or the
life of the bonds. Again, we
talked about all those
maturities. So through the life
of the bonds means through the
final maturity of the bongs.
Um, there are legal constraints,
bond issuance must be authorized
by law.
and sometimes may need voter
approval for certain types of
projects or pledges of certain
types of revenues.
Uh, state and federal laws also
limit the term repayment source
and use of bond proceeds,
especially when we start to talk
about tax exempt bonds, which
I'll talk about in just a little
bit.
Uh, federal law also applies to
municipal bonds primarily with
respect to disclosure and tax
exemption. So when we talk about
municipal bonds, we're talking
about a very highly regulated
market, uh, both by the federal
government and by the state
government. So, um, there's you,
you, you're gonna hear a lot
about all the lawyers that are
involved in all these
transactions, you know, so
guilty is charged, uh, you need
a lot of us, I'm afraid, uh,
when, when the issuers start
issuing these bonds.
So there are high costs
associated with bond issuance,
as issuers have to entertain
lawyers and financial advisors
to assist with structuring and
selling the bonds and with legal
compliance.
Um, turning to slide 6.
So this is a very important
distinction. Uh, municipal bonds
can be divided up and
categorized in many ways.
But two of the most important
are between taxable and
tax-exempt bonds. Um, there are
other types of bonds. There are
private activity bonds which are
uh very special kind of bond,
conduit revenue bonds issued by
state and local governments and
including the NMFA which has
specific statutory authority to
issue those bonds, uh, through
the statewide Economic
Development Finance Act or
SWEFA.
and certain projects that uh
have to mainly benefit private
enterprises, but usually have
some sort of public benefit as
well. So they go to things like
hospitals, airports,
universities, uh, affordable
housing, uh, which is where the
NMFA is involved. Uh, so they're
done, uh, their bonds issued to
aid private economic development
or, or private businesses, but
private businesses that have an
identifiable public good, like
universities or for public
education, hospitals for
public health and so forth
Um, uh, we are, uh, the NMFA
does issue some affordable
housing housing bonds.
A bank qualified bonds are
another type of special public
purpose bond issued by small
issuers, believe it's still less
than $10 million in the calendar
year that they have to issue to
be able to take advantage of
that. They're sold directly to
banks, which save some issuance
costs about 50 basis points.
You'll be hearing about basis
points, which are, uh, a part of
a basis point is a 1000% is
100%. Thank you.
So
right, my wife, thank you, yes,
um, so you can save some money
on a $10 million issue, uh, 25
basis point reduction in your
interest rate can actually mean
hundreds of thousands of dollars
a year. Um, so, but, uh, we're
not going to talk much more
about those today. Uh, they're
very specialized. There are lots
of additional legal constraints
on issuing those. So we, we
don't really get into that.
Now interest paid on bonds,
again, you'll remember if I, uh,
I'm a local government and I
issue bonds. I pay principal,
and I also pay interest. That's
why people would buy them
because they get some interest
on them, they get some income.
Um, I'm sure everyone here has
heard about the bond market, um.
so, uh, interest paid on bonds
is usually considered to be
taxable income to the holder of
the bond and is subject to both
federal and state income taxes,
but federal law allows issuers
to issue debt. The interest on
which is not subject to federal
income tax. And uh that's
contained in some special parts
of the Internal Revenue Code,
um, sections 103 and 141 through
150. And there's a very special
bar that, uh, I'll be going to a
conference later. We
all talk about this thing, but
it's like a, there's only about
1000 people in the country who
do this, uh, because it's so
specialized. Um, state law also
allows much debt issued by
issuers um in New Mexico to be
exempt from state income tax.
So, uh, if I'm a purchaser, uh,
you know, why issue tax-exempt
debt because um
they are subject to very
complicated federal tax rules.
Uh, the rules are designed to
prevent abuse of the tax
exemption called tax arbitrage,
and the simplest example I can
give you of tax arbitrage. If
I'm issuing tax exempt debt, and
I can get 4% interest on that,
but I can get 6% if I invest it,
like, why wouldn't I just issue
all this money
and uh the tax arbitrage is the
difference between the 6% that
I'm receiving and the 4% I'm
paying. Well, the federal
government doesn't like you to
do that if you're a public body,
if you're a political
subdivision. And so the rules
are there, uh, and again,
they're very complicated and so
you have to make uh retain
highly trained tax professionals
to ensure compliance, not just
lawyers, but also, um, financial
analysts because there's all
things that we're not going to
get to in cold yield
restrictions and such, but just
11 comment. So the reason the
federal government doesn't want
a lot of tax-exempt debt out
there is because it reduces the
revenue that goes to the federal
government. If you're issuing
corporate debt, that's taxable.
The federal government gets to
earn, uh, tax revenues from,
from that interest with
tax-exempt debt, that is not the
case. So they like to kind of
put the thumb on when, when an
issuer can, uh, sell tax exempt
debt.
Yeah, I think, uh, every year
the federal government puts out
a tax expenditure report, which
shows how much they give up
through various tax breaks and
exemptions. I think it's over
$400 billion is the value of
that tax exemption. Um, so
there's a lot of money at stake
there and uh that's why uh we
have to have these very highly
trained professionals. So it
does increase the cost of
issuance, so why do it? Well,
interest cost savings is the big
one. interest rates on tax
exempt debt
are lower because the bondholder
doesn't need to pay tax on the
interest that they receive. And
they're therefore accept a lower
rate. If you figure uh maximum
marginal tax rate, for example,
of 33%. Well, if I were to
accept a 6% taxable uh debt, all
except a 4% tax exempt debt
because that's the difference in
my tax liability.
Um, a little more complicated
than that, of course, but, uh,
again, Mr. Pierce is gonna tell
you about it. Um, so for larger
issues, the savings from the
lower interest rate will
outweigh the cost of hiring
professionals to ensure
compliance with the tax-exempt
rules.
Um, and that's, uh, again, Mr.
Pierce is gonna talk about that
a lot because that's one of the
big services we provide to our
local communities in terms of
cost savings and the ability to
issue tax-exempt debt.
Pardon me
Uh, turning to slide 8. So I
issues usually pledge one of two
types of revenue to pay the
principal and interest on bonds.
And the source of repayment is
commonly referred to as the
pledged revenues. Uh, so there
are tax back tax backed bonds,
uh, which are secured by and
repaid solely from a tax or a
government fee. Um, that could
be property taxes or GRT most
commonly, uh, but there are
other taxes that can apply.
And then there are system or
project revenue bonds, which are
bonds issued to fund specific
projects that generate revenues,
and those revenues could be in
turn pledged to repayment of the
bonds. Uh, we call those often
net system revenue bonds.
Um
as a note, there's a special
type of bond financing called
pool financing, special rules
under the federal tax code. Uh,
and that is what the Public
Project revolving Fund is. We
are a pooled financing program,
which means we issue the bonds,
then we use the proceeds of
those bonds to either purchase
bonds from smaller issuers or to
make loan agreements to them.
And uh then we use the receipts
that we get from those smaller
borrowers to then pay back RPPRF
bonds. So, you know, we'll issue
$25 to $40 million depending and
uh then we'll loan those
proceeds out,
Slide 9
I issuers can pledge different
types of tax revenue in New
Mexico. So property tax
revenues, um, there are
significant constitutional
restraints around those in our
New Mexico constitution, uh, GRT
revenues and uh most of the
constraints there come from
statute, not from the
Constitution. Mill levies for,
uh, political subdivisions that
are allowed to impose mill
levies, uh, severance tax
revenues, uh, we issue a large
amount of severance tax bonds
every year, but that will not,
that
' s not an NMFA function. That's
the state board of finance
function, so, uh, but that is
another type of revenue that we
use. And uh other special excise
tax revenues, uh, for example,
cigarette tax revenue, some
other revenues like that.
Um, issues must have specific
statutory authority to pledge
tax revenues to bond repayment.
Um, the statutes for, uh,
municipalities are set out at
3-31-1 and following and for
counties at 4-62-1 and
following,
um, some pledges of those GRT
revenues do require voter
approval, um, and some of those
revenues can only be used to
finance certain types of
projects. That's been simplified
by the legislature recently, but
again, like certain health tax
revenues can only be used to
fund hospitals, and so forth. So
uh there are some constraints.
Um, for System revenues, uh some
examples are water and
wastewater systems, hospitals,
universities, electricity
generation transmission.
Uh, and some private businesses
may be financed with municipal
bonds, um, again, that's not
something we do a whole lot of,
uh, with tax exempt bonds, but
um it is, uh, it is part of our,
uh, program and part of our
statutory authority.
Um
so on slide 10, uh, uh, I'm not
going to go through that too
much, but those are the geo
bonds, the state issues, geo
bonds every other year to fund
projects. Uh those are backed by
tax, uh, property tax revenues
again, constitutional
constraints apply, uh, severance
tax bonds are also issued based
on several taxes from, uh,
severing oil and minerals and
other things from the ground.
Um, and, uh, some of that does
fund our clonius infrastructures
fund and water
Trust Fund. Uh, but it doesn't
have anything really to do with
the PRF. It's a totally separate
program from the PRF, a PPRF.
Um, Madam Chair, I wanted to
mention just sort of at the
bottom of that page on, on slide
10, we hear a lot in New Mexico
about sponge bonds and it's
frequently a question that's
asked. So I just wanted to touch
on it briefly, which is that the
law that dedicates severance tax
dedicates it for bonds,
dedicates it to a debt service
fund. And so in order to move
the money from the debt service
fund and use it. You either
issue long-term debt, and if
there's excess proceeds that's
not needed to repay that
long-term debt. You can issue a
short term
note 1 to 3 days, but usually
less than 30 for sure. And
that'll just soak up that
capacity so that then you can
use it on as pay you go basis.
So that's why they're called
Sponge bonds. They're not really
a technical term outside of New
Mexico. It's really just used to
soak up excess capacity, um, and
so wanted to just touch on that
since that's, I think the most
frequently asked question I get
about bonds.
Um
uh, turning to slide 11, I'm
just going to tell you a little
bit more about some laws. So,
uh, we've discussed about, uh,
tax law, um, other important
federal laws apply to
disclosure. So if I'm an
investor choosing whether to buy
a bond, I need to know about the
risk I'm taking by buying this
bond, you know, where's the,
where's it, the repayment coming
from? Is there any chance that
they're going to go belly up and
I'm not going to get repaid, uh,
stuff like that.
Um
so, uh, those, there are rules
applying to disclosure. So
although municipal bonds are
considered to be securities.
They are exempt from most
securities laws that come out of
the SEC, but laws requiring
disclosure about the financial
condition and other material
facts about the issue or apply.
Material is a term of art, um,
but it means that, is it
something that someone buying
this bond would probably want to
know. That's the best way to
think about it.
Um, Issures must produce an
official statement or OS that
contains information material to
bond purchasers, and they must
continue to supply some
information during the term of
the bonds. You may occasionally
hear something called a
continuing disclosure
undertaking or a CDU, and that
is a pledge by the issuer to
keep supplying information
during the life of the bonds.
Uh, municipal bonds issues must
post that continuing disclosure
to something called EMA, which
is the electronic municipal
Market Access website, and
that's also where all these OSs
by every issuer throughout the
nation are filed. Uh, we can go
look at them anytime. There's a
huge database up there.
And the NMFA also posts
information to the market on its
own website, on its bond
investor relation websites. The
links are there for you in this
presentation.
And um I think we're very proud,
it's fair to say that in uh NFA
was one of two recipients of the
2022 Best Investor Relations
website Award by Bond Link,
which is a municipal disclosure
and communications company. Um,
transparency is really
important. We don't want to
overwhelm people with material
that, uh, that isn't material,
But, um, we do like to be as
transparent as possible, and so
awards like that
let us know that we're doing our
job
Uh, with that, I'm gonna turn it
over now to Mr. Pierce. Thank
you, Mark. Madam Chair, and
committee members, um, one, just
stepping back a little bit,
when, when Mark's talking about
the official statement. Another
word for that that you would
probably be more familiar with
as prospectus. So all of the,
every time you issue a municipal
bond publicly, you produce a
prospectus called an official
statement.
OK. Um
when I think about, OK, what is
the point of the PPRF program.
Fundamentally, it's to provide
low cost financing to uh
municipalities in New Mexico. So
how do we do that? There are a
number of ways we do that. One
of them is through the investor
information. Um, as Marquita
said, I was, uh, financial
advisor to the NMFA I guess now
it's called municipal Advisor,
um, from the early 90s until
2019
During that time, I had 5 state
pooled loan, uh, program
clients.
And the biggest, uh, criticism
that I heard about pooled loan
programs is that from the
investor's perspective, they're
a black box. It's not like
you're buying a bond of the
state of New Mexico, where you
can look at the state of New
Mexico's financials or the
Albuquerque, Bernna Leo County
Water Utility Authority, which
is, you know, again, they have
their own uh audits and whatnot
with a pool loan program.
you're basically buying a basket
of
payments from a whole bunch of
different.
communities, and we'll get into
sort of how broad that that
group is, but, um, from an
investor's perspective, it's
tough to sort of get the
granular data so that you can
make an assessment. The rating
agencies certainly help. I mean,
uh, our AAA S&P rating and AA1
rating for Moody's is a signal
to the investors that these,
that this is a very strong
credit, but
you know, the uh municipal
analysts are tend to be very
detail-focused and so as Mark
said that we, we've been sort of
recognized for our websites
where, um
an investor can get really down
into the granularity of what
makes up the security of the
PPRF in addition to the
governmental grocer seeds tax,
but fundamentally the security
at this point is
payments from hundreds of our
underlying communities. So
that's one way that that I think
that the NMFA and the PPRF
program provide benefit to local
governments is by allowing
investors to get into the, you
know, the very, very detailed
level of analysis. Um
we also have uh
as Mark said, we do, we do issue
on behalf of the DOT, um
it's a less active program. We
did do a refunding for the DOT
last year. Uh, I don't believe
DOT has any legislative
authorization at this point for
additional debts. So, um, but
nonetheless, the investor
website is up there and
available. And it, you know, I'd
encourage any of you to, to get
into this. One of the folks at
the NMFA, uh, Brad Flitch, who
was our
uh, I think his title is Data
Guru, Director of financial
planning. Exactly, it's just
what I said. Um, he, he
produces a lot of the data
that's in, in our websites. And
again, it's just, it's, it's
sort of a, a model for what a
pooled program wants, uh, to
demonstrate.
On, uh, page 13, we just have a
list of the
of the folks who were involved
in the financing, the one, I
mean, obviously one that
we care about most is the NMFA,
the issuer, but in addition to
the issue where there are all
sorts of other folks that are
involved in the transaction. We
mentioned the municipal advisor,
uh, that was, yeah, what I used
to be bond counsel's a lawyer,
um, underwriters. I'll, I'll get
into these, uh, in a little bit
more detail and subsequent
pages. Um, so on page 14, the
musical advisor
uh, when I started in the
business in the late 80s, um
we were not, uh, really
regulated and subsequent to
2008, uh, municipal advisors,
you know, prior to that, their
financial advisors, they did
become a regulated entity, and
so, um
the uh municipal securities
rulemaking board now tests
people to make sure that they're
qualified and most importantly,
uh, municipal advisors are
fiduciaries for their clients.
Um, so the, you know, their
relationship is, is very clear
that uh there's no sort of
second dealing going on that the
interests of the municipal
advisor and the client are
linked together.
Um,
and what the municipal advisor
does is they help structure the
transaction. They help with the
rating agency presentation. They
helped to set up the schedule
for the financing, um,
and it's, it should be ideally,
it's a, a very collaborative
effort between the issuer and
the advisor. That's probably the
closest relationship that I
have, uh, among all the folks in
the working group is with, with
our municipal advisor.
Um, the underwriters
are the entities, the Bank of
America Securities uh should be
ofA Securities now, um.
Morgan Stanley, Stiefel, RBC.
Those are all the underwriting
firms and, uh, they, they will
basically take the bonds and
market them to
under, you know, the ultimate uh
investors, be they BlackRock,
uh, State Farm Insurance, um,
you know, individual high net
worth individuals, uh, so
they're, they're essentially
taking the bonds in and then
remarketing them, uh, for
obviously for a, a, a small
portion of the overall
transaction. Um, there are two
ways that we sell bonds. Most of
the bonds we sell are through a
negotiated process where we hire
the underwriter well in
advance and then work with them
throughout the transaction.
Occasionally we will, uh, issue
bonds competitively where the
underwriter doesn't really show
up until the day of the sale.
We'll talk about, uh, our latest
effort to do a competitive sale
in the face of, uh, liberation
Day. Yeah, it did not go well.
Um.
the, uh, on page 15,
I'm gonna let the lawyer talk
about the lawyers.
Thank you. Um, so yes, so as I
said, there are lots and lots of
lawyers involved in all these
transactions. Uh, and so bond
council is the lead counsel in
the transaction. They draft most
of the bond documents, uh,
unless some of the special
counsel listed below are
retained, and they supplied the
bondholders with the opinion
that the issuer met all legal
and procedural requirements to
issue bonds.
Uh, we have disclosure counsel.
Uh, again, that's the person
responsible for drafting the
prospectus or OS.
um issuer counsel represents the
interests of the issuer, uh,
often an in-house attorney. I am
the issuer counsel for the NMFA.
Uh, and, um, sometimes that
spawn council too. They, they
bond council can, uh, issue, um,
fulfill multiple roles as your
account, so I'm just giving a
very limited opinion that the
NMFA is who they say they are
and that they can do the things
they say that they're doing. Um,
and I'm confident of that. Uh,
sometimes we have special tax
council.
uh for complicated tax exempt
deals. Uh, the PPRF, I should
have said this earlier, does
mainly issue tax-exempt debt.
Most of our debt is done on a
tax exempt basis. Our bond
council also acts as our special
tax council. Uh, but sometimes
in some transactions you can see
those roles separated.
And finally, underwriters
counsel, uh, in some deals and
in most of our deals, uh, for
the PPRF underwriters may elect
to have their own council. Uh,
those are lawyers draft what's
called the bond purchase
agreement, which is the
agreement between the NMFA and
the underwriter to purchase and
market the bonds, and uh they
also review the OS.
Let's talk about the trustee
too.
Oh, OK. Um, how do you do that?
So, uh, the trustee, uh, every
transaction like this will have
a trustee. All their bonds are
issued pursuant to a big
document called an indenture or
a master indenture in this case.
That sets the broad parameters
and then each issuance will have
its own supplemental indenture
that addresses the particular
terms of that issuance of bonds.
Um, so a trustee is involved in
all of this, uh, trustee serves
under the master and denture is
identified in the master. And,
uh, it's a financial institution
uh or other entity with trust
powers that acts as a fiduciary
for the benefit of the
bondholders. Uh, so the
trustee's gonna have two main
roles. One is, uh, financial,
they're accepting payments,
making payments, uh, to the
bondholders of the principal and
interest as they come due. Uh,
but the bondholders have certain
rights under the master
indenture and the supplemental
indenture, and the trustee is
going to enforce those. So
they're gonna be basically the
bondholder representative to
make sure that the issuers do
everything
that they promised to do
Um, do you want to talk about
rating agencies? That was.
Oh, thank you. Um, so the rating
agencies, uh, you've, you've
heard the names, Moody's,
Standard and Poor's, uh,
Bitch, which, uh, maybe doesn't
have quite as big a uh
footprint and then roll is, uh,
sort of the up and comer, but
we, we get ratings from Standard
and Poor's and Moody's, uh,
where AAA rate rated highest
rating by S&P, um, for both the
senior and the subordinate lean
of the BPRF, uh, we're AA1,
which is one notch below the
highest rating for Moody's for
the uh senior and subordinate
lane.
Um
and I, I think you can think of
the rating agencies as just sort
of the
like um
the crib notes or uh cliff notes
for an investor rather than
having to read through the whole
thing and understand everything
about the credit. The rating
agencies act as
an entity that, uh, you know,
well, relatively well uh
regarded as, you know, providing
the
assessment of a of an issuer
like the NMFA, um, some of that
credibility was damaged, I think
in 2008 when they had a whole
bunch of AAA rated mortgage
bonds, which proved to be not
AAA, but I think the, the, you
know, as far as municipal
ratings, they've been um pretty
accurate and the, uh, you know,
something we should mention the,
the rate of default in the
municipal sector for investment
grade bonds, that is,
well below inimFA, the PPRF, you
know, we're, we're AAA. It goes
all the way down for S&PAA,
single A, triple B, and then
within each of those rating
levels, there are 3 gradations,
so there's AA plus, A, minus,
and that happens all the way
down to Triple B. Triple B minus
is the lowest investment grade
rating.
The the default rate among
municipal issuers within that
investment grade rating is less
than 0.3% year over year. So,
you know, very, very highly, uh,
secure, uh, credits in the NMFA
is at the top of, of that list.
Um, so fundamentally the, the
better your rating, the lower
the interest rates that you're
able to capture in the market
and um as I said, we are, uh,
pleased to be at, at the top or
near the top with one of our
agencies and we keep
going to Moody's to try to
convince them and, you know, we,
we always think we're close, and
then Lucy pulls the football
away right at the last second.
You might mention that they use
different models to
determine that rating.
That's why. Yeah, that's true.
The, the, so the two different
agencies do use different, um,
different approaches to, uh, how
they rate
um, the, the, I think the issue
we have with Moody's right now
is that, uh, we are.
somehow being linked uh more
closely to the state's rating,
and the state, I believe, is 882
with a potential upgrade. So
we're hoping that if this, if
Moody's does upgrade the state
to AA1, that releases some of
the tension of our Lincage to it
and we could at that point
potentially get up to, um, a
AAA, but
uh, we'll, we'll keep, keep at
it. Is there anything else you
wanted?
Um, so the different kinds of
security pledges, the NMFA has,
uh, a number, basically
every type of security pledge
that a municipality can offer,
the NMFA does have within the
PRF program, the strongest
pledge is the general
obligation, which is
fundamentally a, an unlimited
pledge to raise property taxes
sufficient to pay debt service.
Um, we have a number of school
districts with general
obligation pledges, in addition
to the GEO pledges of those
school districts. We also have a
state, uh, backstop on school
district
lo an s So those are, those are
very solid credits. Um, we have
a number of tax pledges that is
gross receipts, tax pledges, uh,
um, and there are a number of
different uh uh sort of
I don't know, sections of the
GGRT or the GRT that can be
pledged, um
the um
net system revenue is
typically water or sewer
pledges. We have a, uh, for
example, the Albuquerque,
Bertoleo County Water Utility
Authority is coming to the NMFA
for a very large loan, our
largest loan ever. Um, and that
will be secured by their pledge
of net system revenues, that is
gross revenues coming in.
paying off operations and
maintenance and then the excess
is pledged to, uh, our
bondholders.
And then we have, uh, a whole
range of other pledges, uh, fire
protection funds, law
enforcement protection funds,
different, uh, special tax sort
of pledges, um, and then, uh,
we, we have some special
assessment loans, which is a
pledge of, of assessments on
benefiting property owners
within a particular district.
Um, we're, we're hoping to, uh,
activate a third lien to
the PPRF in the next
year, 6 months, um, just to have
availability for some of these,
what you would call uh
less secure maybe credits. I
mean, the, a, uh, uh, uh, uh,
special assessment district is
not as strong a credit as, for
example, a GEO or a net system
revenue or a GRT so rather than
diluting the security of the
senior and the subordinate lien,
um, we've talked to the rating
agencies about a third lien that
will be still fairly well rated
and certainly bring a lot of
benefit to some of those more
challenged credits. So, uh, we
are working on that, uh, even
now.
So,
yeah, the, the, the work that
the NMFA that the regional finan
finance, uh
RFM is a regional finance
managers work on. They're the
ones who do, they're sort of the
intake for the applications, um,
they work with the credit team
at the NMFA to assess, uh, each
borrower's, each applicant's,
uh, creditworthiness and that
there are a number of things
that they look at. The economy
and the market, uh, what's going
on with the um whatever the, the
pledge is, is it, is the economy
of the community improving?
What's the
population trends, um, you know,
is it being impacted by
external, uh, indus industry
industry impacts, um,
specifically to the credit,
financial capacity.
What are the operating results?
Are revenues going up? Are they
flat? Are they declining? Are,
are expenses remaining in stable
situation? Are they going up,
um, and if so,
you know, what's causing it? So
I, I'd say that the, the both
the RFMs and the credit folks at
the NI if they do a terrific
job, and that can be
I guess underscored by the fact
that we've never had a default.
I mean, we've made thousands of
loans over the last 30 years,
and we've, we've had a few that
have expressed some, uh, concern
about, you know, the structure
of their loan. We've had to do
some loan restructions, but
we've never had a, a borrower
failed to pay us. And again, I
think that's a credit to the,
the team at the NMFA.
Um
ability to pay again, I think
these are all uh
security issues that are looked
at. How much debt do they have
outstanding? Uh, what's the
do, do they have under uh
underlying limits on how much
debt they can issue are those
kind of within comfort levels of
with, within the NIFA's PPRF
lending policy
Do they have reserves? We
require for uh certain
net system revenue pledges that
they have a, a debt service
reserve fund that has to be
funded at closing. That's in the
event that they do have a
shortfall of revenue, we can tap
into the reserve to make, make
payments until they kind of get
the economic house in order.
Um
again, limitations on additional
debt, that's typically an
additional bonds test under
what, under what circumstances
will we allow that borrower to
go to the market again, either
through or not through the NMFA
so we keep a fairly, uh, a close
tie on that.
Um
and then I guess ultimately
like, you know, what we have to
think of is, OK, what, you know,
worst case scenario, who ends up
holding the bag and so for an
issuer, for a borrower, one of
our communities, if they've got,
for example, a uh an intercept
situation. If we have the
ability to intercept revenue,
uh, in the event that they're
not making debt service, that
can impact the local government
pretty profoundly, um, so that's
one situation
Secondarily, if, if the NMFA has
to report that it's got
borrowers that are in default.
um
it, it does impact the way the
rating agencies view us because
we have said for again 30 years,
never had a default, never had a
default, and that's, you know,
that's a credit strength that we
now have to say what we did. It
doesn't reflect terrifically on
the NMFA um
whether it would actually have a
rating impact. It's hard to say,
but I don't really ever want to
find out. And then ultimately,
um
the bondholder, I mean, is it,
is it, what's the likelihood
that the bondholder actually
ends up holding a devalued bond
or a defaulted bond in the case
of this program.
um
it would be, I mean, I do, I
don't want to live in that
world. I mean, in order for the
NMFA to default on its debt,
really bad stuff has to happen
for a long time, and uh it's
almost inconceivable, but, you
know, basically all the excess
revenue that we have coming into
the program, plus the GGRT is
insufficient, plus the reserve
funds that we have are tapped
and empty and so anyway, so like
I said, it's a sort of a
nightmare scenario.
Uh.
Um, I just wanted to add one
thing. Uh, you will see there it
says borrower pledge of
interceptible revenue, pursuant
to law, the New Mexico Finance
Authority can actually intercept
revenue before it gets to the
political subdivision and use it
for debt service so that it, it
doesn't go into their fund and
back out to us, and that is an
additional security that we have
for repayment of our bones.
And Madam Chair, that's for
taxes. So we can't intercept,
for instance, their, um, net
system revenue if clients are
paying their water utility
bills, they still will go there.
But for certain governmental
grocery for uh gross receipts
tax, we can have tax and rev pay
us directly, which is quite
helpful, um, and the state fire
marshal directs the fire
marshal, uh, the law enforcement
protection funds from DFA
directly to us as well. So
that's really very helpful. Um,
I just wanted to mention Chips
sort of, uh
talked about these last two
pages regarding financial
analysis and credit review from
the finance authority's
perspective. Should a small
community or any community move
forward and issue bonds on their
own. These are the same
considerations that the
bondholders are ultimately going
to have to make, right? So
they're gonna have to get
comfortable with the same things
we've just discussed. And as a
result, you end up having some
bondholders who only buy certain
kinds of bonds because they've
developed that expertise. So
when we issue bonds, for
instance, for the Department of
Transportation
Um, we monitor who buys those
bonds, and you'll, we know it
almost every time there's very
little crossover, if any, with
the bondholders of the Public
Project Revolving Fund, right?
So they, they like
transportation debt, they
understand transportation debt
they buy transportation debt.
Um, one of the things that we're
able to do is to bring a larger
investor base to New Mexico
credits because we have these
different pledges that Chip
talked about that Marcus talked
about, are, I don't wanna.
entirely blow the lead, but we
have 11 different pledges very
broadly in the public project
revolving fund. And with the
governmental gross receipts tax
that allows bond purchasers to
get very comfortable with the
variety of things in that basket
of bond payments that, that Chip
described earlier. So it's the
same process. What we do is take
a little bit of the homework
away from our, um, uh, the bond
investors by doing the analysis
and upfront work. We've been
doing it for a long time and
they trust our
name and then also offering that
additional pledge of
governmental s gross receipts
tax. We'll spend more time on
the kind of underpinnings of the
uh the public project revolving
fund, how that works a little
bit later, but I just wanted to
mention that these are the
factors that bondholders are
going to go into, particularly
institutional ones when they um
buy those bonds. It's, it can be
an in-depth, um, review process.
Thanks.
So, uh, the timing of a bondage
this is on page 19.
is ideally, you would like about
3 months to, from the moment we
decide we're gonna go forward
with the bond issue to the point
that we closed the bond issue
and get the money. Um, it's a
you know, there's a lot of
legal documents that have to be
prepared and it's just, and,
and, you know, one of the first
things we do is decide what,
what is this bond issue gonna
look like? OK, if we're gonna
target October 15th as a date
that we're going to close a bond
issue, um, we start looking at,
OK, what loans have we made out
of the PPRF out of cash, because
the PPRF has, it starts the
fiscal year with, you know, some
amount of money this year, I
think it started with
uh over $90 million. We can make
loans out of that and uh we make
loans at a weekly rate.
uh, that, uh, is based on an
index that, that sort of tracks
municipal uh interest rates. So
every week we have a new rate,
um, and bonds that close, uh,
near that date, get the rate.
So, uh, that's for loans of less
than $10 million. For any loan
that's gonna be more than $10
million we call those
simultaneous loans, and we,
because the, the, the risk is,
and this has happened and it
happened, I remember in 2
004 pretty dramatically where we
were setting interest rates like
this and then interest rates
went like this, and we had a
bunch of borrowers that, that
were here and we're issuing
bonds up here, which means that
we're not getting nearly the
return on the amount of money
that we lent. So to address
that, we introduced this notion
of a simultaneous loan. So those
loans used to be $25 million was
the limit. We've reduced that
down
to 10 million, so that they, and
then the next bond issue, we
have 3 simultaneous loans. They
will get the exact same rate as
our bonds, so we won't have any
rate risk for the other
borrowers, the smaller loans,
we're willing to accept that
when rates go up, we aren't able
to fully reimburse what we've
lent.
When rates go down from where
they, they borrow their money to
where the rates are if, if rates
have gone down, we limit the
amount of bonds we issue to the
amount that we lent.
Theoretically we could actually
get more out of those cash
flows, but we're not gonna do
that. We've always told the
rating agencies basically just
it enhances the program, uh, the
debt service coverage on both
programs.
So that process is, you know,
the, the, the structuring is, is
part of it. We try to identify
who the simultaneous borrowers
are gonna be work very closely
with them because we want to
make sure that they're fully
aware that the rates they get
are not set until we actually go
to the market, and they have to
understand that for the for the
reimbursement loans, the less
than $10 million dollar loans,
they've got their money, they've
got their loan agreement.
Nothing's gonna change. The,
the, whatever we do with
the bonds is well downstream
from where they got their money.
Um
Mark's talked about the, the
preliminary official statement,
the prospectus that I mentioned
earlier, that goes through
several drafts, um, and about a
month
well, actually 2 weeks before
the sale, we put that to the
market. It's been finalized
after, like I said, at least 3
or 4 drafts. Um, rating
presentations generally occur
about a month, uh, before the
sale. So for example, the 25,
the 2025 CE bonds that we're
gonna be selling on around
October 1st, we'll have rating
presentations on that next week.
Um, so that gives
them plenty of time to evaluate,
get our, get the rating back. We
have to have the ratings on the
prospectus before that gets
distributed.
And then, uh, the bond pricing
occurs uh on a specific day or
two days, um, we typically will
have
a call the week before the sale,
talk about where the rates are,
and then uh
you know, it's a, it's a couple
of 3-day process leading up the
actual sale.
and then uh we'll close the
bonds afterwards.
One thing I guess to talk about,
you know, how the bond, how the
pricing process works. Um
generally what we're trying to
do, particularly on a negotiated
sale, and this is a, oh, OK, is
it? Oh, look at that. All right.
Um, so on the next page, she she
doesn't have a, a
page number, but it's the one
after the one, it's the one
after 19.
Um
so there are 22 ways to sell the
bonds. You can sell them, uh,
through
well, public, public sale or
private placement. We do just
public sales. We don't really do
private placements. Um, private
placements are sort of a, a
niche for, uh, smaller loans,
kind of maybe uh less
creditworthy loans, but NMFA we,
we do all of our debt publicly.
There are two ways to issue
publicly marketed debt. There's
a competitive sale and a
negotiated sale. Um
the negotiated sale is what we
have generally done. We just
went through the process of
hiring our underwriter pool for
the 20 fiscal year 2025, 2026,
2027.
Um
and
so in this case, the our lead
underwriter for the 25 Cs is B
of A Securities, the old Bank of
America Merrill Lynch, um
and what we will do the day,
the, the week of the sale, we
will meet with them.
um, our municipal advisor and us
will discuss the, the, the rates
that those bonds should be sold
at the uh underwriter, BFA
Securities will agree, disagree,
you know, this is where the
negotiating, the negotiated term
comes with the negotiated sale.
Um
and then we'll come to an
agreement about what the scale
should be on the bonds, that's
the interest rates and so the
morning that the bonds go into
the market, um, it's typically
about a 2-hour order period
beginning, let's say at 10
o'clock, uh, East Coast time
until noon. During that two hour
order period, we've got a, um,
and sometimes it, uh you'd all
be welcome to come to a, to a,
a, a sale because it is sort of
interesting, you're getting a
screen
that shows
who's putting orders in and uh
kind of what the interest is at
that scale and so you're, you're
getting feedback in real time
from the market as to whether
you have priced the bonds
appropriately or not. If you
have a bond, let's say a $50
million and you get orders for
500 million, you didn't price
them right. You priced them as
they described too cheaply, so
in a market that would have been
willing to accept
a 375 yield, you marketed them
at 390 or something, so
alternatively, you have a $50
million sale
You got no orders, you have the
reverse problem. The market
wanted a 375, you put the bonds
out at a 360. Nobody's
interested, so ideally, in the
NMFA has been issuing debt long
enough that we have a pretty
good idea in a stable market of
where the bonds should price
within 5 basis points, you know,
plus or minus, um, so that's,
that's a negotiated sale, the
competitive sale is we submit
the the official statement to
the market
and we say
you know, in, in the, in the
official statement, there is
something called the notice of
sale that just says the NMFA is
gonna sell $50 million of bonds
on October 1st at 10:00 a.m.
you know, uh, send us, send us
your best bid, and so there's,
we have the software that uh at
10 a.m. we'll get, and this
drives me crazy because you can
allow people to bid between say
9:45 and 10, inevitably
everybody bids at 9:59 and 50
seconds and you're just, you
know, you're sitting around
looking like, are we gonna get
any bids and we always get bids.
Never a problem, but they all
wait till the last minute
because they're talking to
potential
investors, um
but that is, you know, we, we
tried to do that, uh, uh, we had
a sale set for, I think April
9th, April 2nd, uh, uh, the
president came out with his, his
liberation Day announcement. You
know, and I think I'll talk a
little bit more about this
later, but it was, we, we had to
shift
from a competitive sale to a
negotiated sale, and you know,
happily we do have this pool of
underwriters that are, are kind
of ready at a moment's notice,
so we only delayed a week and,
you know, the sale went fine.
Um, it was unfortunate though
because we hadn't issued a
competitive deal until, uh,
since 2018, I believe. So we'll,
we'll give it another shot,
hopefully in the next year.
Madam Chair,
I just wanted to mention the
state as we talked about
earlier, issues those general
obligation bonds and severance
tax bonds, they do theirs, um,
through competitive deals.
There's single credits, so, um,
they're well understood by the
investors that are taking those
on, ours being that basket of uh
bond payments that Chip
described earlier with the 11
different pledges. Those are,
they tend to do better with
negotiated sales, um, and as
you've known in this very last
bullet, about 75% of the bonds
that are issued in the municipal
market
pla ce are done through those
negotiated sales. Uh, one of the
benefits that we bring as a
result of having a fairly deep
professional staff that does
bond issuances that we're able
to track who our bondholders
are. And so if we feel like it's
going to be a tough market,
we're able and even when we
don't, we're able to provide
those underwriters, those
traders, the actual names of the
bondholders. We can tell them
when they've purchased bonds
before where they like to
purchase their bonds? Are they
tend to be a 10-year, a 5 year,
a 13-year, um, but we, they
have specialties, so we see
trends in our data that we're
able to then provide to the
underwriters to help make that
deal more marketable and so
that's one of the other benefits
that we bring most communities,
even large issuers um aren't
able to have that kind of
specialized staff aren't able to
track that data as closely as we
do. Um, but, you know, it's not
just Chip that sits there as
part of the bond issuing team.
We are, you know, we have to
make certain we're bulletproof
and
so we do ensure that we have
other very talented individuals
that help track all of that
data. Um, so
that's one of the reasons our
bonds continue to sell as well
as they do, and in tough
markets, which we've seen a lot
of over the last 5 years. We're
able to get ready access to the
market as a result of having
some of that data and knowing,
you know, who's going to be
interested in a transaction like
ours.
And that's an excellent segue
into page 21, um, some of the
factors that do impact municipal
rates, uh, are
national trends, um, uh, federal
legislation, um
the sort of the supply of debt
that's out there, um, supply of
debt that's out there that's
specific to maybe your region
um
entity, uh, different types of
credits that are having trouble,
you know, we're going to be
seeing
uh, I believe some real
challenges for healthcare. Uh,
there's, there's a lot of
concern about rural healthcare,
um, credits, uh, with the impact
of the, of the recent, uh,
legislation that passed. So
that's something that we have to
be aware of and um, and just,
you know, the, the, the fact is
we can, we can absorb even
troubled credits just because of
the overall strength of the, of
the PPRF but
there is a limit to how much,
for example, rural healthcare,
uh, hospitals, we'd be able to
do now just because there's a
lot of uncertainty about how
they're going to weather the,
the cuts to Medicaid, uh, and
Medicare. um
so, you know, the, the, it, it
has been a very volatile time.
The, the
um,
at the same time, it's been last
year there was more than 500
billion
municipal municipal debt issue.
That's the first time we've
ever, uh, broken the 500 billion
mark, and we are on pace to do
uh, jeez, I don't know, more,
maybe 6600, 650 billion this
year. So there is a, a massive
amount of municipal debt that's
being issued, but there's a,
there's a high demand for it
because it really is, besides
like the mortgage interest
deduction, tax exempt debt is
one of the last sort of, uh,
safe harbors for sheltering
income and there are a lot of
people with a lot of money right
now who are looking to shelter
income and so the,
the demand seems to uh keep pace
with the, the supply which is um
a good thing.
Um
and again, uh, you know, with,
with the NMFA being triple AAA1,
we get
put into a different, we're sort
of what's known as a gilt-edged
issuer, the, the, where, you
know, a creamy credit. They've
got all sorts of terms for it,
but it's, it's a, it's the kind
of credit that we can go to the
market and access it, uh,
without any problem, even in
volatile times because of the
reputation of the program, the
ratings, the, the management,
you know, one of the things the
rating agencies focus on is
management, and I think the NMFA
has demonstrated over
the years that the management is
solid and that's also reflected
in the lack of, of loan
defaults. Um, and so, again,
getting back to my original
point that the fundamental
uh objective of the PPRF program
is to provide low-cost
funding for capital projects in
New Mexico and so all of these
things come together to allow us
to access capital markets at the
lowest available rates.
um
yeah, I got the NMFA conduit
borrowers, um, you know, to the
extent that we have any, we, we
haven't seen a lot. We did have
one issue last year that, uh,
was um
oh, OK. Is that on 22? OK, yeah,
right. Um, I'll, I'll talk
really briefly about that. It
was a, uh, on the bottom page
22, the um enchantment water
project, which was the, the
intention of the project and
it's, it has not died, it's
still, there's, there's still
some likelihood that that's
gonna come forward, but it was
to take the produced water
from the oil fields in uh
Southeast New Mexico, uh, and
basically, you know, clean it up
and re-inject it, um, they, the,
the company that came to us were
using the NMFA as a conduit.
There was no pledge of the PPRF,
uh, no pledge of the GGRT. This
was basically the NMFA just
acting as a conduit so that they
could access tax exempt rates.
Um, so we, we do do that and we,
you know, are likely to see that
happening in the future, but
it's almost the same, well, not
really, but it, the, the, the
DOT debt and this conduit debt
is sort of a, a separate and
apart from our PPRF
program. DOT debt is very solid.
It's AA rated, secured by gas
taxes, registration fees, all
the things that, that the DOT
folks get. So that's one set of
debt that we do.
unlikely to see any until they
get some legislative
authorization on the conduit
side, you know, we may see the
enchantment of water folks come
back. I spoke to the lead
underwriter, uh, a week or two
ago, and he said that they um
you know, for no fault of their
own, the, the project, we sold
the debt. The debt was issued
and then it sort of had to
collapse about two months later,
so they, they're interested in
uh coming back to the program.
Um
I think um.
page
Um, so and Madam Chair, just to
get back to the Department of
Transportation, they issued
their own bonds for years. It
wasn't until 2003 where we began
to issue their bonds on behalf
of the Transportation
commission, and one of the
reasons we did is because we can
then have a dedicated bond staff
for the Department of
Transportation to have a
dedicated bond staff and ensure
that they could keep that person
well trained or find another
person in the event that person
left, it became, I think, a more
difficult task for them. So, uh
we were asked
to start issuing their debt.
We've been doing so, uh, since
2020, uh, since 2003, so for,
um, you know, for 22 years here,
we've been issuing their bonds,
and we were able to then oversee
them, help with the reporting,
making sure that they are taking
care of everything that's
necessary for part of a, for a
tax exempt transaction, making
sure that their disclosures are
posted as they're supposed to be
posted, making sure bondholders
get paid. We do a similar thing
for a conduit transactions, and
then like, you know, as
as we talked about earlier, um,
and I'll just go to this next
page. We do that for your
community. So when they issue
through the finance authority,
whether they are large or small,
Albuquerque, Bernallio water
utilityities, one of the largest
issuers in the state. They still
find there's benefit, uh, to
them by issuing through the PPRF
so they will, uh, we'll make a
loan to them technically and uh
then package their loan with the
rest of our, uh, basket of bond
payments as Chip calls them, and
take that to the market. Um, but
large entities, small entities,
they get the benefit of our
reporting they get the benefit
of, um, if they're IRS ever
comes knocking to find out where
all the bond payments went. We
have records that show where
those dollar, where the dollars
were dispersed to, we can keep
those records. So there are some
significant reporting benefits
and compliance benefits outside
of just the lower interest rate
that they'll get that, that
communities and the Department
of Transport
ation benefit from. So I wanted
to just highlight that it's more
than just being able to reduce
their bond payments and allow
for, um, more affordable
financing. It is to help provide
that post debt compliance, um,
it's very difficult,
particularly the smaller the
community, the harder it is to
find someone that can do that
for them and then to make
certain it gets done year after
year as it's supposed to happen?
You do not want to go sideways
with the IRS. It's
not a recommended course. So we
are, we, we have a lot of
records related to how each of
the underlying borrowers spent
their bond proceeds. So with the
IRS comes, we don't have to even
knock on the doors of the
smaller communities. We've
already got that information in
hand, and that is a significant
benefit that, that, uh, rarely
gets talked about, but I wanted
to mention a smaller communities
these days are having a harder
and harder time staying staffed.
Um, and so that, you know, that
just
would add to their, uh,
significant woes sometimes when
they lose, uh, tenured staff.
So that's really what we wanted
to stop at. This is a good
stopping point, um, from pages
24 on that really gets into the
how our PPRF bond program works
specifically with more data. It
gets into our, our required
securities disclosure, which we
were required under law to
provide to you annually, and
then we'll be going over our
draft rules which are attached
to this document, um, those are
the rules that we need to make
some minor amendments to our
PPRF rules and you all are the
uh proof
ers of those, um, we are asking
you to approve them at the next
meeting, but wanted to go
through them today since we had
the experts here and then we can
just take a vote on them, uh,
next month in Demming. So this
would be a great stopping place,
Madam Chair, if there are any
questions on the stuff that we
have covered thus far.
Thank you very much, um, as you
guys know that's a pretty thick
topic. Uh, we're gonna start
with uh Representative Herrera.
and then, uh, rep uh, Senator
O'Malley, Representative
Chapfield, and Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your, uh, presentation
as always, very, uh, very
helpful, and, uh, uh, deeply
appreciate your work.
and the Nimathy too. I, I guess
I had about 3 questions and, uh,
uh, one was, um, on page.
10
Uh, geobond capacity is equal to
1% of statewide assessed
property tax. What is that
amount in money in dollars?
I do not know that answer, Madam
Chair. We can get that to you
though. That, that's the state
board of Finance issuance, but
I, I don't track that. I
apologize. Oh no, no problem.
I'm just curious what we're kind
of money we're talking about.
And then, um, oh, I was curious,
Madam Chair, um,
why, uh, the Moody's, uh, the
Moody's uh rate is lower for the
state than it is for AMFA. I'm
assuming that's because of our
pension, but I don't know that.
Can you tell me why, why the,
uh, state rate is lower than the
NMFA rate? Um, I think I,
I'm guessing, I think that the,
um, there's some concern at
Moody's, uh, the, the
concentration of, uh, industry
in New Mexico is not as
broad as some states that have,
you know, the oil and gas is a
very profound importance to the
state. And one of the things
that they do look for is
diversity of the economic
activity. So that has been a bit
of a, an anchor, I think on the
state's rating. And the NMFA
well, you know, we, we do
benefit from the fact that we've
got this very broad diversity
of, of credits. Um, so,
that's my best guess. I, I
Madam Chair, I would also add to
that that, um, the state has a
budget issue that gets addressed
and that they look at. And so
the, the, the volatility of some
of the revenues that, that feed
the budget are always an issue
for state issuers generally
speaking. That's not New Mexico
focused every state will have
their budget looked at because
of the volatility of some of the
things that feed our budget,
though that's additional
pleasure. So I know that you've
been looking at increasing
reserves to help make that much,
uh, to,
to kind of smooth out some of
those edges. Um, and I think
that's gonna have a positive
effect, at least that's
certainly the hope is that those
additional revenues, uh,
reserves will, will help with
your bond rating.
Uh, thank, thank you for that.
And Madam Chair, I'm also
curious, and I, I think you
alluded it, I, I know you
answered the question, but I
would just like to ask, reask it
again to make sure that I
totally understand what the
effects of, uh, Trump's tariff
rates are on the future of our
bond markets in this country.
Um, I think that the
uh
the initial impact was just, uh,
equity markets, bond markets, a
fixed income. Every everybody
freaked out because it was so
unexpected and the, the market
is generally risk averse, and so
if you introduce a lot of
uncertainty, the market is going
to respond negatively. Um, so
that was the initial reaction.
It wasn't, I don't think it was
anybody's sort of analysis that
this is gonna do X, Y, or Z. I
think that it, um
you know,
to the extent that the
economy slows down because of
the tariffs.
you know, historically a slower
economy is good for bonds. It's
like, you know, the, the best
day in the bond market is a bad
day for everybody else. And so,
you know, if, if that were to
come, we have seen the like the
10 year US Treasury bond, which
is sort of the big benchmark has
dropped 25 or 30 basis points
since that initial sort of
fluctuation, so the, the impact
on the bond market has been
generally positive, and I think
that is
in anticipation of a slowdown of
the economy and potentially the,
the offset to that though is
that if the economy is slowing
down because of higher
inflation, that is not good for
bonds, because obviously people
are going to demand higher
yields. So, um, we're, I think
the CPI comes out tomorrow. It
will, it will, uh, inform us all
about where, where this is
going, but it's really difficult
to say. It's got, it's the sort
of Harry Truman's one-armed
economist on the one hand,
inflation is bad. On the other
hand, a slowdown economy is good
for the bond market where that
settles out. I'm
I haven't got the good enough
crystal ball.
the federal
did.
Well, yeah, the other that's the
other thing is the, the, the
bond market does have a limited
capacity for
um
absorbing
$2 trillion deficits. So to the
extent that the US government is
issuing
you know, trillions of dollars
of additional debt every year.
Um, there does come a time when
A, you reach sort of a
saturation point potentially and
be um the interest on that debt
becomes so burdensome that it
requires
you know,
dramatic changes to the way the
federal government spends money,
that those are sort of longer
term problems so far that the,
the, the impact of the sort of
exploding debt hasn't really
come
hasn't settled in yet, but it is
out there. I mean, it is a
terrifying long-term prospect
that, you know, that they
predict, I think in
uh, 25 years that um in these
current trends continue that
basically the only thing that
your taxes will be going to is
paying interest on the federal
debt.
So that's uh
that little day brighter. I'm
gonna turn it over to Marquita.
I don't have anything to add.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I guess, uh, my other question,
I know we, we included, um
wastewater treatment. Now, in
our, in our, um, in our, uh,
water trust board, uh, account
and, um
I, I know that Albuquerque is
going for, uh, a big, uh, a big
portion there. And, uh, you
know, that's a great thing, but
I just want to know how much
money will be left for all these
smaller communities that don't
have year-round full-time staff.
I'm, uh, you know, how, how are
we going to handle serving rural
wastewater systems if, if all
the money is, is soaked up by
one entity. I guess that's my
question. I, and that may not be
true. I, I may be totally off,
but I'm just asking.
Um, Madam Chair, so that really
isn't, that's outside of the
PPRF, but I can say that we did
receive our notices of interest
for the Water Trust port's
upcoming cycle and upcoming
being, we award them next June.
Um, and there is about, I think
we received approximately
between 115 and 120 notices of
intent, some of them from
multiple, uh, some like a couple
of municipalities submitted more
than one request. Um, and the to
tal requests were about 600
million. Um, we have 350 million
available for next year because
the 200 that was made available
by the legislature was not
utilized this year and we're
expecting about 150 million in
severance tax bond, uh,
capacity. So, um, I would say
that at this point, typically,
uh, larger communities may ask
for what I'll call a multi-phase
project. It could be 2 or 3
different phases, $20 million
and they end up getting $8
because that's
what they can reasonably expect
to spend. So once we've
haircutted some of those bigger
projects, it's very likely that
there won't be that wastewater
won't have the impact that I
think you're that you've alluded
to. Um, I'll just, one other
caveat there is that you can't
really phase a wastewater
project. It's very difficult to
face, so you tend to have to
fund the entire project because
it just doesn't have useful
stand-alone elements otherwise,
um, for new wastewater systems.
So we don't know yet, but we'll
have more information for you
after we start to see the
applications come in. So we'll
know more indemning.
Uh, thank you for that. We, and
we do need your direction on
that, both on the, you know, the
federal funding stabilization
committee as well as
appropriations so that when
we're putting these budgets
together now and trying times,
uh, and also, also trying to up
that reserve and protect
Medicaid at the, I mean, you
know, this we're all going a
little
crazy right now trying to figure
out what this impact of federal
legislation is going to do to
our state. And I think
I have to give our legislature
credit because I think in
building a $3 billion reserve,
we've we've done a lot. Uh, I
don't know how other states are,
are going to handle it that are
in severe debt already.
And, uh, and it's just gonna go
south. So I, Madam Chair,
that's, I'm just trying to
figure out being a member of,
uh, you know, the, uh,
finance committee and federal
stabilization Committee, how,
how we're going to adjust and
how much we need your help in,
uh, kind of figuring that out.
Like what, what are the water
needs gonna be a year from now,
2 years from now, 3 years from
now, that, that you can kind of
figure out so that we can, we do
need infrastructure. I mean, uh
there's, you know, some people
say are, are, uh,
infrastructure, um, deficit in
water infrastructure is about $8
billion just in this state
alone.
So, uh, not gonna be solved
anytime soon, but we still have
to keep working at it. Thank
you, Madam Chair. That's all I
have.
Thank you. Uh, Senator O'Malley
and then reps Chatfield,
Barrego, and Lord, and I will
say we really need that national
infrastructure bank, my little
personal plug, OK, Senator
O'Malley, thank you, Madam
Chair. Well, first of all, I,
you've answered part of my
question, Ms. Russell, and this
is having to do with the
Albuquerque water utility
Authority, of course, Bernna Leo
County. Um,
and, uh, so I had the question
is, you know, why would they go
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority. They have the ability
to issue their own bonds, um,
but, you know, you explained
that. Is there a concern about
capacity? So, for example, water
utility authority. Of course,
you know, we are highly
populated. We have a lot of
infrastructure in Berlingo
County, uh, and I certainly, you
know, I understand the needs of
the rural communities. I mean, I
understand why, you know,
there's concern. Is there a
capacity issue, for example, uh,
you know, they're coming for you
for a loan, of course,
you know, they have to, of
course, uh, uh, you know, pledge
their revenues to to, to pay it
off.
That's the question I have
Madam Chair, um, I would start
by saying that, you know, we
look at the underlying capacity
that financial analysis section
that Chip went over. We do a
thorough review of their
financial statements. We look at
what we think they're projected
revenues are going to look like.
Um, so we don't make a loan
where we don't believe we'll
have capacity to be repaid over
the term of the loan. OK, I'm
sorry, I guess I misunderstood.
Concentration issues under the
under our program, um, no, I
guess what I'm asking is this
because I'm assuming that yeah,
that you would certainly do your
due diligence in terms of like
their ability to, to, to, uh, to
pay the, the question I have is
is is is it's like, well, is
there a limitation
on what you can issue
What is it, for example, if, you
know, you make the loan, it's,
it's significant for, for
Albuquerque.
Is there a concern now that
there, you don't, you have the,
uh, limited capacity to issue
bonds for other smaller
communities. I mean, is that, is
that a concern? So, Madam Chair,
there is a capacity issue. I
don't know what that answer is
because our tech, our technical
capacity is based largely on the
underlying credit quality of the
portfolio. Um, so a highly rated
entity like Albuquerque,
Bernallio County in larger
amounts has less of an issue on
our capacity, then, uh, one that
has, uh, a less attractive
rating. So the, the underlying
credit quality is an important
element in our capacity model.
Um, but we also have some
concentration issues because
that, that
basket of bondholders, we want
to make sure that we have, um
limited the impact of one of, of
a difficult, of a difficult
period for one of our borrowers,
uh, limited the impact to our be
able to make those payments on
our, on our bonds. Um, CIP, uh,
we'll go over, um, a little
graphic that sits here on page
uh,
sorry
but, uh, do you want to peek at
it while I'm talking on page
32, we have 3 indentures that
are drafted. So the indenture is
that bond program and our senior
capacity, um, gets the first
crack at the governmental gross
receipts tax that's available.
And then what's not needed
uh, to pay bondholders then
moves down to the subordinate
lien, and then those bondholders
of our subordinately bonds are
able to, um, access that
governmental gross receipts tax.
And I mentioned that because now
those programs, as Chip
mentioned, are rated the same.
Moody's thinks our senior lean
and our subordinate lean are the
same quality and same with S&P,
they're both AAA from S&P's
perspective. So that gives us
the ability to kind of, um
artfully arrange our portfolio.
So the bonds that we're gonna
issue for Burnley Al ABC, uh,
we're gonna have to put in our
subordinately so that we can
lessen the impact. So there is
an art element of that capacity
conversation. Um, so I, I, I
apologize for having gone into a
very technical answer. There is
capacity constraints. We can't
tell you right now what those
are, except as a specific issue
comes up. So I, I would just,
um,
but generally speaking, you
know, the governmental gross
receipts tax, which hasn't been
used to make payments for
bondholders, allows us a great
deal of leverage on that.
OK. And then just, just to
clarifying thing, we talked
about, um,
the, uh, conduit financing, uh,
the state just to, you know, to
understand for the public, we is
not responsible for paying back
those funds.
Madam Chair, that's correct. So
the state NMFA, there's no
pledge on any of our assets.
Should there be a default?
Correct. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Chapfield and
Representative Barrego and
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair
The first thing I want to do is
thank Michaelaya for making an
almost impossible job. Look
easy. She, she'd been doing it
for a while and I'm always
impressed, always impressed with
her knowledge of the numbers.
And so I'm gonna test them a
little bit,
uh, Madam Chair, do we know who
owns our bonds, uh, primarily, I
mean,
uh, at the 50,000 ft level.
Yeah, that, uh, we have a pretty
good idea to the extent that,
um,
the, that information is
available. We have, you know, we
know that, uh, BlackRock is a
big investor in our debt. Um, I
wish I had, I wish I'd printed
this out, but yeah, we, we have
a list of, of like the top 15
borrows. So we have very good
information about is who has put
in orders for our debt, and
we've been keeping that since
2013. Um, so we've got that and
we, we provide as Marquina said,
we provide that information to
our, our, uh, investment bank
underwriters every deal just to
say make sure that you
you know, shake, shake the, the
bushes to see if these folks are
interested. Um, but yeah, we've
got, we have a pretty good idea
of both who puts in our puts in
orders and who actually holds
the debt right now. Some of the
debt, once it goes into
individual accounts or what they
call, uh, uh, separately managed
accounts. They've become this
huge part of the investor
community and they're basically
again really high net worth
individuals. We don't have very
good information
on that because it's not really
publicly available, but to the
extent that an insurance company
or uh a mutual fund, uh, owns
the bonds. We have a pretty good
idea about that.
So, Madam Chair, probably where
I was going a little bit with
that, are we able to pull some
international money into the
state to fund our little
projects here in New Mexico, uh,
surely, surely National, uh,
organizations are funding our
projects, uh, uh, how does that
work?
We have international, we don't,
yeah, we don't, in terms of the
investors and the bonds, we do
not really have the, um, you
know, the benefit of the tax
exemption is not available to a
foreign investor, um, but that,
yeah, as far as foreign
investment in the state, I, uh,
I have,
uh
last question
These projects submit a drawdown
schedule
Uh,
oftentimes
it's hard to predict exactly
when you're going to get all the
permits through and the
everything up and rolling, and I
know as legislators we're
always, uh, getting stepped on a
little bit about our capital
outlay money, the bonds having
been issued and the project not
being spent, uh, can you just
make the mechanics of the, of
the issuance of bonds for any
given project, uh, you sell
them, you hold the money in a
tell us about it.
Um, certainly, uh, so it's a
little different than the Water
Trust board where we require
certain amounts of information
before we'll make the loan. Um,
we do ask for the information.
We monitor the spend-down
schedules, um, uh, but it is a
little different. For instance,
when your school issues a bond,
they go out for a voter
referendum, and they'll have a
list of projects that those bomb
proceeds can be used for. Um,
and so when we buy that school
district's bond, they've issued
it, and we've purchased it and,
and
held it in the PPRF. That's our
way of making a loan to the
school district. Um, they may
not know at the time that they,
that they, uh, asked us to.
They'll give us a laundry list
of the things that they're going
to do. And some of them may
happen out of order. So we can't
really track at the school
district level to the same
extent we can with a water
project because there's going to
be a laundry list of items. So
they may actually, um, work on
their gym because the HVAC
system got delayed a year, um,
or they may take on
the HVAC system because, uh, you
know, a secondary one broke. Um,
so it's hard to tell for sure.
And that's about 1/3 of our
portfolio are those geo bonds.
Um, so those are harder to
track, uh, but the others we do
ask for, we monitor it. We have
a program, um, oversight group
or a project oversight group
that's just getting started to
actually go out and if someone's
significantly delayed, they'll
be out on the ground actually,
um, looking to see what's going
on. Right now, um, until they
got really
operational. They're a new group
within our agency. We were just
left with phone calls to the
entity to find out where they
were. Um, they have 3 years to
spend the bomb proceeds. We, we
look to see that they get that
done in, um, about 18 months is
our goal.
So, Madam Chair
I think it would be great if our
capital outlay process became
more like New Mexico Finance
Authorities process, uh, with
smooth things out a lot. Thank
you.
Representative Chapman, maybe
you should draft a bill
Here I sit. I couldn't draft it,
but I would push it forward.
Uh, next is Representative
Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm, I'm
gonna start with my easiest
question. Um, so is there any
other State Department that
issues bonds besides DOT.
uh, State Board of Finance
uh, the mortgage Finance
Authority or any of those? No?
OK, that was my easy answer, um,
and that's what I thought, but
um, OK, so with the various bond
types that you have, um, who
sets the fee structures?
Are they set by, by project.
Madam Chair, the fee structure
for our loans for our public
project revolving fund loans.
Um, we eliminated our fees for
that program in, uh, uh, 2020.
So in January 2020, we, we used
to have an underwriting fee, uh,
and an ongoing administration
fee and we cut all of those
fees. May I ask why?
Um, it was the thinking of the
new board that the governmental
gross receipts tax built the
public project revolving fund
and to charge communities to use
those dollars, um, was absurd. I
think that was really the
concept there. So, uh, we had
had fees in place because it was
seemingly unfair because, um,
investment banks and other kinds
of individuals that made loans
or bought bonds from
bondholders, had fee schedules
that they had to adhere to and
we didn't have, you know, so
they wanted a more even playing
field, so we implemented a fee,
um, but ultimately, our board
said that they didn't, they
wanted to get rid of that fee to
provide lower financing to our
borrowers across the board.
So didn't
manager just on that point,
didn't that fee
help with overhead of uh
you know
I mean watching that that bond
and securing
Medisure being adhered to and so
on. Yes, Madam Chair, so our
fees for the oversight of the
projects are, um, we track all
of our time and charge those
projects, uh, ret those programs
accordingly. So if it's a water
trust board, our staff is
tracking their time as Water
Trust board after we've paid the
bills, we go out and find out
which portion was directly, was
related to the Water Trust
board, which part was related to
the PPRF and our fees always
were more than our expenses. So
we were getting excess revenue
without really anything to do
with it. So right now, we just,
um, we just charged the program
for its actual fees, for the
actual costs, um.
that's very interesting. Um, my
last question, Madam Chair,
since I, those are like my two
easy questions, I guess. Um, so
the tax exempt and the taxable
bonds that you talked about
earlier, um
I'm just wondering about uh the
tax structure for the taxable
um
what percentage of
of that goes to the feds.
Oh
or what, what percentage are
they gaining from our work.
in issuing these bonds.
I'm sure Representative, uh,
that will depend on who the
owner of the bonds is. They'll
pay whatever their rate is. So,
um, you know, if you're, uh
if you're in a higher income tax
bracket, you're going to pay it,
it'll be treated like ordinary
income and you'll pay whatever
rate on that income that you
would pay on all your other
income. So, uh,
uh, how it works out, uh,
generally, we look at the, I
mean, the market looks at a lot
of different conditions to
determine what the differential
between a taxable rate and a tax
exempt rate. The example I gave
was highly simplified, um, and
maybe Mr. Pierce can talk a
little bit more about that, but,
uh, that's, that's the, the
difference is that uh, the tax
that you will pay on your income
is the same as you'll pay it on
any other type of income,
including the interest income.
I hope that answers your
question.
Not quite, actually.
I'm, I'm asking, so when we do a
taxable bond
and there, and we are dealing
with the federal government at
that level. Um, I'm asking what
percent of the interest is the
the federal government taking or
is there any, or is there any
interest that's going to the
feds?
Oh, I, I understand. Uh, Madam
Chair, Representative, no, they,
the federal government doesn't
take anything from the NMFA.
It's only the bondholders who
are receiving the interest who
will pay tax on that. Who and
the bondholders who are gaining
from the bond, I mean, who are
actually, um
you know, gaining something
back, that's my question is like
what and I'm, it's, I know it's
a very detailed question, and it
may be by project by project,
but I just wanna know like,
are the feds receiving anything
from the state? Are they taking
anything back from the state on
that particular bond? No, if for
example, if you were a, an
investor, let's just say you're
a high net worth individual and
you buy a million dollars worth
of a taxable bond issued by
somebody, you know, some entity
in New Mexico and the interest
rate on those bonds is 6%. Um,
so you're getting there, so
there's $60,000 a year that
you're gonna be getting in
interest from the
the issuer of those bonds, you
have to declare that $60,000 in
your federal tax forms. So the,
the, the federal government, the
IRS will take, you know, let's
say you're 30% tax bracket,
they'll take 100 or
18,000 of that.
money as, as revenue to the IRS,
but the bondholder, yeah, yeah,
exactly. So the bondholder is
paying that to the federal
government, but there's no, um,
when inanity in the US or in New
Mexico issues taxable debt.
There is no
no other sort of relationship
between the state and the and
the IRS in that transaction. The
only relationship is the
ultimate investors who are
getting that interest, they have
to pay tax on it. OK, and they
are also receiving probably a
very low interest rate.
in addition to that. If it's a,
I mean, if it's taxable bond
right now, um, I think the
30-year US
Treasury rates about a 425. And
so that's the, the lowest
interest rate that's out there
available. So if you're a
corporate issuer, you're
probably gonna be issuing closer
to 6.5% um
you know, just depending, so
it's, it's, it, it, it all
depends on the security that's
being being provided.
So the US government is the, the
lowest, you know, the, the most
gilt edge and then everybody
issuing taxable debt is
somewhere above that.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair
OK. Next Representative Lord and
then Representative Block.
And then just a note that we
hope to start lunch at 12:30.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just gonna say, I know it's a
And I probably already know the
answer's going to be a big firm
no.
Um, what I'm asking you is I'm,
I'm working with 2 Democrats, 2
Republicans, who're trying to
solve a problem. And there was
something in here that perked my
interest because I don't know if
you know this, in the 70s and
80s, a lot of land was bought by
developers who then developed
and then made private wells or
they make co op wells, which I
can't help them. We have a well
that's run dry in my community.
It is dry, dry.
Right now, I think the answer to
my question is that even though
they're private
uh, it said, and I was looking
at Patriots says some cases
private, um, and then on page 9,
it's a water issue. Some private
business may be financed by
municipal bonds. However, what I
see on page 5 is they don't have
anything to offer in return. I
don't, I don't think they own
the land out there necessarily,
or really the water rights are
just running the well. So I'm
going to guess that the answer
is no, they wouldn't be eligible
for any bonds. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, experts
Um, Madam Chair, I think that,
uh, I, I'd have a follow-up
question first on the
eligibility. Are they a co op?
Are they any sort of formal
entity
So here lies the problem, um,
and insurance experts. So I've
looked them up and they are a
501C
12 or something. There wasn't a
3 or 4, it was a 12, I think.
They call themselves a private
entity, but I'm looking up their
filing in 990, which they're
saying there are nonprofits. So
I could not tell you what they
are because it's not been
very clear, if that makes sense.
So, Madam Chair, I, I'd love to
talk to you offline. It's very
possible, um, community water
systems, broadly described, are
able to access the public
project revolving fund because
they're not qualified for
tax-exempt debt. They'd get our
taxable rates. That's the
instances in which we would make
loans, um, for, uh, taxable
loans, for instance, and then
it's also possible that they
might qualify for the federal
funds, um, which also describe
water systems very broadly
You have to serve a certain
number of entities regularly,
uh, in order to be eligible
under that program. So it's
possible that there are ways in
which we could help make loans,
can't make grants, but we could
make loans potentially. OK. And
thank you, uh, mentor and
experts. It also looks like I've
got PRC involved in it, and
they're doing the oversight on
it and it looks like another
EMWT I think is her name, might
take them over, but the problem
is, even if they took it over
tomorrow, they have no way of
how we're going to drill the
well and do the infrastructure.
There's a huge gap because
there's no money
So great, they took it over.
Great. There's no way to get the
water people, but I'll talk to
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys. Appreciate you. Uh, I
have questions about the rules,
and I'm just gonna go through
the, oh, we are. OK, then I
guess I have no questions, Madam
Chair. Let's go to lunch. Let's
go to lunch. Goodbye. I'm, I'm
confident you will have
questions at that time. Um, I
just have one question, and
that's, there's a lot of talk
about rural hospitals. It's
estimated that 8 hospitals may
not be able to function, have,
has NFA been in any talks yet
about funding bond funding
in that situation
I don't know what I did. OK,
Madam Chair, so, um, we have a
couple of, uh, community or
rural hospitals as borrowers,
and we're obviously keeping an
eye on them because those
revenues that they had in place
are required to, to pay those
loans. Um, so we've been taking
a close look, but as Mark
mentioned earlier, bonds are
used for capital for not
operations. So we can't really
fund, um, a lifeline, if you
will, as a result of decreased
revenues because that's not what
bomb proceeds are used for.
They're used to
you know, build hospital wings
or buy specialized equipment. So
we wouldn't be in a place to
help fund them as a result of a
decrease of funding elsewhere.
Thank you. Unless, like a state
entity purchased the hospital
or something like that. And, and
that's fine. You don't have to
go into detail. Thanks for
reminding me of that
Um, with that
uh, we will have lunch reminder
that it's the New Mexico, the
Museum of New Mexico Foundation
is sponsoring our lunch and
you'll see a former
representative Roger Montoya out
there who has brought uh the
espanola movie arts culinary
arts program will be preparing
the lunch today and I saw the
menu and I would say everything
on it looked delicious. And
please be back promptly at
12:30. We will start prompt
ly at 12:30 with the details now
on the public project revolving
fund and the rules. Excuse me,
Madam Chair, you were just,
let's get on it. I'm
on it. I'm on a very strict diet
