highlands has a great program
we're excited to work with them
but it takes a long time to get
the designation so
with that that's my report I am
I I just want to say again the
work is finance authority folks
were really awesome they were
amazing they're very
knowledgeable and very helpful
and we would not have been
nearly a successful in getting
this accomplished without their
help so super crudos to them
from the folks in my table work
with them.
With that military outstand for
questions and think you talked
about before we take questions
submitted needs to make a
technical announcement.
Madam chair for those of you
that are watching the webcast
the webcast videos currently
down or it was for like ten
minutes but the sound should be
stopped functioning and the full
recording will be posted later
today
and you could also watch the
zoom web in our which is posted
on the committee's web h instead
of watching webcast walts now
thank you
so everybody in our listening
audience the thousands of people
spread over the state that are
watching the support committee
meeting there is the zoom lake
it's at www dot and m legislator
of you go to the committees you
go to new mexico finance
authority oversight and it will
tell you how to get on the zoom
since currently you can't watch
on the webcats and with that
representative
and thank you madame chair and
and think you sold much doctor
for your presentation I have a
so much respect for
the f a choose that the
federally qualified medical
plans I mean that is the back on
of providing medical attention
in the standing new mexico
and I very much appreciate your
mission
work in your commitment to it
can't just to clarify a couple
things you said you ten thousand
visitors were seen at the school
based health clinic is this into
compare no this is a throughout
northeast new mexico door at
said again throughout northeast
new mexico we have school base
health connects in now i'll do
my best river by its mountain
pickers and have been weather I
think we have eight in the at
west last big school district
san rose
and sorry manager it's eight
health clinics that that ten
thousand is coming from and is
that over a twelve month period
it's eight.
It's over twelve months period
we see some rights clinic sees
about twenty five percent of all
the school based of clinics in
new mexico I thank you I am so
impressed with the numbers for
the school based health clinics
there are only four school
districts in the state who are
not allowing school based health
clinics came on them and and I
hope numbers are interested in
or opportunities there
I want to also ask you so you
talked about the
your ptsd from your patience I
will say in in for two can carry
in february twenty twenty five
there's simple to be definitely
an increase amount of patience
that month is bad in invent is
there an event oriented that i'm
looking at to them carried
numbers for it to february
twenty five you need in june
twenty five there seems to be an
ad normally low amount of
patience do you know of an
environmental reason for either
no but I could certainly tell
you june it's not a good month
everybody's on vacation this
year we took an extra day off
because of two tenth holiday are
june numbers are always tough
but no I can't
we we
don't have the specific on that
so thank you thank you very much
madame share I am so happy that
you brought up the **** with
recruitment retaining medical
providers in all medical
providers i'm certainly in the
huge fan here it highlands the
the the turn out a class a
social worker don't think that
and I am happy to hear that they
are increasing those programs
around the state and out of
cricket.
But if you're right it's it's a
it's a long plan and we need a
short plan which means going out
of state so given that the madam
chair and and and presenter
what are your recommendations so
just for the listeners I want to
go through a couple of things
we do offer some funding for
bricks and mortar for medical
clinics for equipment does those
need to be increased we are
offering educational forgiveness
I know we've increased that
funding through the
appropriations over the years I
know that there's a couple of
bills that myself and
representative and I have been
training percent but mine is a
profile housing incentives for
medical providers and hers is to
provide help like immense the
administrative you could be a
brilliant doctor but not
necessarily business person and
the administration of getting
your license transferred from
one due to another finding the
right home maybe your teenage
son is in competitive level
baseball you want to find you
know what all those things are
so nice bill will help work with
that we are trying to come up
with innovative ideas to recruit
and retain
medical providers I will say I
was in later as a couple weeks
ago we received national numbers
that go by county by county
throughout the united states so
even though it's a national
medical organized providingness
they are
we actually
there's a bigger shorter edge of
medical providers and taxes
which is a huge medical hub then
there is in new mexico right now
but nonetheless it is shockingly
high were at like forty eight
percent that we need for medical
providers across the board and
they break down the numbers and
occupations and things like that
why do you would you want.
Funding in existing programs you
had a sense of home I mean i've
always jokingly said do we need
to have mixers and medical
providers in san diego labs
people to make them stay here
to get the labs in less you have
to stay here what what else
would you recommend to be able
to recruit and routine medical
providers for our state thank
you madame chair for my long
winded question thank you
mediterranean representative
caters well at sir
one of the where we have been
extremely successful in
recruiting providers to
northeast new mexico
particularly and run the county
where we're on the hospital as
well one of the
real successful programs is that
we could we with in conjunction
with the university of mexico
family practice program we
precept their second year
residents in san rose for one
month each president comes for a
month and spend a month and they
stay in my guest house and I
have for dinner every night and
we talked medicine
and
they fall in love with being
able to practice rural medicine
and I have had enormous success
in recruiting those providers to
santa rose if you can believe
that now that's only part of the
story
that the second part of the
story is the so
I have to structure and I and
i'm not unique
if you want providers in rural
new mexico these are young
people coming out of the system
who want lifestyle
so most of my providers work a
week on in a week off
i'm so that they can have and
sometimes they double up and see
what i'll work two weeks and
then i'll take two weeks off
it's important to structure.
The
lifestyle because that is
extremely appealing even though
we're in santa rosa they're
happy to come there and then the
third part is a well there's a
couple more points one is we pay
our providers and enormous
amount money and that's just
reality we are in competition
with the albuquerque
and los crucials and texas are
provider pay rates and we pay
more than they do and that's
just part of the trick
I think the other issue that is
obviously a significant problem
in new mexico is malpractice in
your guys don't need me to tell
you about that and I think they
think new mexico program that
take came out with was brilliant
i'm
somewhat frustrated that that
got hung up in committee and
didn't make it out if we're
going to have providers stay in
new mexico and we as the
employers are going to be able
to afford them
we're gonna have to have some
changes in the mail practice
slower which is just going south
day by day I can tell you we
have had a couple of malpractice
claims over the many years i've
been there and it is
it just makes me shake my head
i'm so sorry thank thank you
management chair and and thank
you presenter so I I will see
one of the things they did cling
to is increased residency slots
we have only unamazed a teaching
hospital for medical providers
and they have
shameful I mean just I can't
believe how few residency slots
there are and then I would say
supplementally
medical organizations that will
provide supervisory hours for
social workers and other kinds
of medical providers.
If we can because I know as I
run programs before i've had
most with highland you know is I
I can my person is providing
supervisory hours is not
building for a patient so that's
a finance or risk of my own to
be able so if there was some
sort of financial incentive so
that my experience providers
could provide that supervisory
hours to help keep residency I
am a believer in people the
stainer business for
environmental reasons i'm glad
you mentioned that and roses a
lot prettier than our recruiting
so thank you
represented medicare I could
just address a couple of those
issues one when the residents
come to san rosa I provide their
housing we're working on program
to expand residents here in san
migo county but
I don't have a house up here I
can put them in
I think being able to cover the
housing component of that would
be important from my perspective
i'm willing to invest my
providers time in
in mentoring those residents
because it increases the
likelihood I might be able to
recruit them so I I don't know
that I would say oh we need
money to precept residents btw
the other thing is health care
will be provided by no
spectations and pays in the
future there will be fewer and
fewer primary characters
the residency slots that you and
them are religious are regulated
by both a little bit of the
amazed influence but also by the
medicare
program that that funds
residencies so as an until the
graduate metal come education
funding in gets increased your
name will have a limitation on
their residency.
And slots and actually
interesting the graduate medical
education does not pay the
residence when they are away
from you and m so when they come
to santa rosa I pay their salary
right because graduate medical
education does not so we
actually pay the resident's
salaries and they provide some
level of of work for us as well
but
the number of slots is I think
strict is is a function of
graduate medical education plus
what the ama restricts
but we were very supportive of
new spectation and pa programs
and
we work with pilots it's married
practice hired three other
graduates.
Think it representative robot
cover you know
madam chair and think your
doctor for your presentation
just wanted I wasn't intending
to but because of the discussion
around housing and might minor
make a suggestion it's one that
I made we were with the economic
rule development and policy
committee the last couple of
days and we had similar
discussions about how we can
address
housing needs on a affordable
basis but also in remote areas
and as an enticement obviously
to be able to recruit and retain
our professional help so one of
the suggestions I need was that
and I think this has been in in
in housing development for many
many years for some reason where
we're late in it and accepting a
concepts here in new mexico but
the arm there is a modular form
of
housing that is environmentally
friendly
that is easy to
build
or build however waiting put him
together but what
is more interesting than than
anything is the fact that they
are easily equipped i'll for
solar engineer thermal
on the sites where they will be
situated so this is one of those
are situations madam chair that
it be hooves out of public
institutions to work with local
governments in terms of
identifying the site
developments and then working
with a team to attract the home
developers the housing
developers and these are in the
green energy arena.
So they're not commonly they're
not your regular
housing developers or
construction people they're
specialist but because of their
specialization and because they
are committed to addressing
madame chair
the impact of climate change the
work with public entities on a
very are discounted basis so
your service with your local
communities wherever they're
located and I forgot the list
but it's mostly northeast new
mexico I think would be perfect
partners for this type of policy
so I that's a suggestion
that
you might want to pursue and
it's it's not a difficult
process it won't take your
sneers to develop but it will
take real good planning that's
my suggestion on housing to my
question though reference to
your presentation has to do with
I know it is sent under your
school based
and the number of visits that
you are indicated
and I wanted i'm curious about
what are the particular services
that are offered or sight
up in at the school based level
thank you representative madam
chair
so we
there's a lot of
through the
school based program as search
two components one of miss
screening component where
we attempt to screen every kid
in the school for
second social issues and medical
issues so
we so part of our encounter with
the students is to see are you
having in any
second social problems any
problems at home food and
security housing issues
transportation problems.
And that's where we use the
um community health workers that
we're funded by the legislature
for through the road healthcare
delivery to fix their housing or
food issues we give food away
with mortonic with food banks we
give up with food give away
every friday depending on who
these we also do primary care
right that includes everything
from vaccinations to I have a
cold or a black infection or i'm
whatever other primary care
issues are involved and then be
able to health care for those
kids who screen out and the
screening program is having
potentially be able health care
issues then we bring them in and
have a a formal encounter with
them related to that issue that
they brought up in that in the
screen so we provide primary
care be able to health care and
then second social or or
committee needs right family
needs housing
food and security that that's
our total program to package
think you madam chair that's a
very holders tick approach and
it's I really appreciate the
screening
in screening you can make a lot
of determinations whether
they're offered or not offered
but you can do that in the
screening process so that follow
up question to that would be in
the primary care arena
how do you manage referrals out
for specialized care or
something that you obviously is
outside of the realm of primary
care how do you where do you go
to
representative medicare we have
three dedicated referral people
in our insurance clinics
so depending on where the
patient is at right because we
do most of northeast new mexico
if they're let's say for example
in.
Vin weber there will be referred
back through our las vegas
office because we know what
providers are available from a
travel standpoint for those
there and to come carry the
might end up going to amarello
because they use those so we try
to use our regional referral
specialists and then yeah we
will
it's a process to do or furl you
have to make sure that the
insurance that the provider
takes the insurance that you're
patient has we have some kids
who don't have insurance where
we would then use you and m as
in whipper source so finding you
know working out what the issue
is what their insurance status
is transportation availability
transportation is a huge
disaster in northeast new mexico
for health care medicaid and the
safe right programs address that
to some extent but if they don't
have insurance then they don't
and we actually have trained
medicaid in rolling people in
our practice to try to find
those folks who probably are or
were at least reportedly less
than a hundred percent of
poverty and get them enrolled in
medicaid so they can access the
transport
but we we would we have people
in our practice who arranged for
those are referrals depending
it's largely depends on where
they are and what services are
available representative
thank you madame chair and think
a doctor with for purposes of
this committee I would say that
we may have to look at if they
come to us and even if they
don't come to us we have to make
it available but I think that if
you're increasing your numbers
which is very apparent that you
are given the and also given the
state of our
federal government and cut
accent reference to medicaid
medicare and other services I
think that these regional areas.
Are going to be in diane
expanding either
all their facilities and their
services so I would say that we
need to be looking at how we
might be able to empower that
through our financing funding
mechanisms of the state that we
can help leverage these rural
communities that are going to be
faced with I believe that crisis
so thank you madame chair and
think a doctor represented the
bike just comment on that
because of the medicaid cut back
set our currently been signed
into la
we anticipate that about twenty
percent of our patience will
lose medicaid coverage and they
would then fall into the
category of
either no charge or ten dollars
for a visit which is anticipated
in in our practice to cost us
somewhere in neighborhood of
four hundred thousand dollars in
decrease revenue from lost
medicare thank you
actually
thank you doctor brown because
that is huge elephant which we
may end up addressing in the
special session I want to thank
you for making such
a chase for the value tell a
health
for the small communities that
can't possibly support their own
clinic thank you for mentioning
that and because school
absentees are huge problem I
know that the school based
clinics and also the telehealth
are helping our kids to be in
the classroom instead of taking
off the data travel so thank you
for that
and then also thank you for
pointing out the pts the issue
because we think about loss of
house scene and things like that
but the interest
that is still so much with us
i'm losing everything to fire
and then.
Which happened in read also just
a year ago they had these
horrendous splits and now their
backs and so many new mexicans
need to behave your health
service for these unexpected
tragedies and their family and
the impact on their mental and
emotional well being so thank
you for really continuing that
they can better
thank you for being here today
it really was meaningful to see
the powerful impact that in a
method financing has and then
seen the devotion thank you for
coming out of retirement
when last question do you work
with a hundred percent send me a
county at all yes memory work
with percent quite lucky county
percent same again county and
we're trying to expand that into
red tone as well into a confacts
counting thank you so much for
doing that and thank for being
with us today
check and what that
we're going to move to our next
presentation
most of the rest of the
afternoon not all it's going to
be developed focused on water so
we're going to do overview
support water needs with allison
nichols the deputy director of
new mexico
minister colleague and shape
work who's executive director.
And while they come up
we need to approve the minutes
from our first meeting do I have
emotion to approve the minutes
of madam chair second
okay we have a motion from
representative block a second by
representative of beta any
objection to approving the
minutes
they are approved thank you.
So
morning that if you're good
morning again thanks for being
with this
you all just give me today else
and had to state to deal with
some of our insurance issues
obviously regarding
and for everybody who isn't
familiar with the municipal
league they are an amazing
recommend amazing group she just
briefly let everybody know what
the municipal
and and I know you wanted to
touch on our resources what do
we do so i'll start with that
you'll see that the presentation
and you know my presentation
market is the two they go hand
in we work so closely and are so
dependent on m a water trustport
so many pieces right before site
is created it's just
instrumental in vocal government
operations.
Is that better okay so fay water
trustport
it's such a critical operation
for local governments right it
gives us access to capital it
gives us access to the
distribution for water trustport
what water trust board does
right and I wear two hats today
right yes i'm either of the
minister lee and run the self
insurers fund but i'm also vice
chair water trustport and so
this process is critical to make
insured new mexicans have
drinking water soon to be wasted
water right you all authorized
wastewater for water trust board
which the needs in the cost as
you will see through these
presentations it's serious
so I want to start with what do
we do who are we and what do we
do and I think reado so it's
probably the the best example of
the resources that we offer our
members so we have two sides of
the shop we have the municipal
league which we represent all
hundred and sixth city towns and
villages where their advocate
were their lobbyists for
anything they need public safety
tax policy you name it great
many of you have been sponsors
on bills and we we've worked
with you to get certain pieces
of legislation through based on
what our membership tells us
they need
then you have the self insurance
fund ninety five cities came
together to say we want to pull
our insurance and ensure
ourselves and so we run the pool
to make sure that our members
have coverage it's all risk
management human capital
financial assets just glasses
so our job is to make sure it's
protected so when you have an
event last year and read us we
had the fire our job is to make
sure the city has everything
they need immediately so we knew
the power was out when the
powers out gas stations don't
work can't fill it the car can
fill it police cars to cancel
the fire trucks.
So what we do is we are already
set up in contracted with
distributors to where we were
sending twenty five hundred
gallons of gas in diesel every
day so public safety was fully
operational
we we sent our staff down with
starling satellites generators
to make sure since we have no
power we have no funds
but we set up starlings at the
chiefs house the least you've
mayor manager any critical
person to operations the eoc has
starling satellite so the
immediately have communication
communication does not go down
if we have those in place so
that was our immediate job then
we assess any damage to the
public infrastructure we ensure
it or reinsure it to make sure
whatever is damaged we can give
them the resources to get a
fixed immediate so that's what
we do in the immediate aftermath
of an event then you have the
people component the mental
health was just mentioned so we
have a contract with the mental
health provider
we originally started this for
public safety right what public
safety has to deal with we want
to make sure mental health is
always addressed so we have a
program where it's unlimited
mental health for public safety
also everyone in their homes for
as long as they need it when we
have these type of events where
there's a fire or a flood or a
public safety event we do after
action we send up public
services psychology group we do
round tables to make sure that
we discuss it as a group on what
worked what didn't work and then
we do the individual counseling
as needed with any member of the
community
or city staff
you fast forward to what
happened yesterday and read us
right we have staff on the
ground now working with the city
to make sure we are assessing
what we need to replace from an
insurance perspective we have a
serious concern about waste
water right and
of all of our cities that we
insure what I lose sleep about.
Is water and wastewater if we
don't have those we don't have a
city and we can't rebuild those
overnight right vegas is another
perfect example of that when you
have these flood these big rain
events it runs into wastewater
we have a real problem
are our systems were never
designed for twenty feet of
water in two hours so then we
have to come up with how do we
properly secure manhole covers
so we don't suck in the water
and get the silk then the rocks
in the mark in two our waste
water systems and that is going
to be an ongoing battle
we've now had to do is
outside of the box that he what
do we do
when it is so regular that we
have flood we have to do swift
water rescues as heart of our
normal jobs so now we're looking
at instead of having fire trucks
to do these rescues because we
have lost five fire trucks in a
year from swift water rescues
that's between eight hundred
thousand and two million dollars
that we are now
right so merging to rescue
people right they're going down
the right way but it still means
we are down at two million
dollars of equipment with the
two two and a half your rebuild
time and as the insurer that
just means our experience goes
up or exposure goes up when our
premiums go up which affects all
ninety four cities in our pool
so now we're looking at
purchasing high water rescue
vehicles for members that are
most effective reado so
obviously top the list and it's
cheaper for us to buy two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
high water rescue vehicle that
replaced two million dollars
fire trucks and again to circles
back to animal fee we get these
fire trucks because you guys
have the ability you give us the
ability to bond for these fire
trucks which makes them
at least more affordable and we
can spread that cost out over
time obviously that fire
protection fund revenue this
legislature
gives everybody that's what we
utilize through and a mefa to
get these very expensive pieces
of equipment.
It's not just fire trucks now
right you all authorize the use
of.
The ems fund distribution right
two years ago you increase that
from two point eight million
dollars you added five percent
to the health insurance premium
tax so now we have around
fifteen million dollars going
into the ems distribution right
are ms departments now have the
ability through animated to bond
that revenue to get ambulances
most of our communities and i'm
gonna skip around a little bit
on the slides
and I think this is the most
useful slide of all but it shows
the grt per city.
When you think about an
ambulance at four hundred and
fifty thousand you think about a
fire truck at eight hundred to
two million dollars and you look
at that far right column
how can they afford it
it can afford it because you all
set aside fire protection fonder
law enforcement protection
fonder now emspond distribution
coupled with the finance
authority to give us the ability
to bond for these assets that
are critical for public safety
public health in our communities
and you see that most of our
members just don't have the
revenue to support what the cost
of the equipment is
where there it's a water
wastewater system we don't have
it the system do you all have in
place through water trustport
give us that ability
to get these projects going and
again we take small bites out of
it and the water trust board has
been phenomenal about listening
to the needs in the communities
and funding the most critical
best bang for the buck break to
serve the population when I look
at per tallis that's another
example of a critical need
they're forty eight wells those
forty eight wells at a sixty
percent drop off in production
so you have a community that
could run out of water if you
doesn't come online
you you all have been for now
about finding the pipeline
that's going to serve multiple
communities
they're putting pipe in the
ground right this has been a
multi decade project and water
trustport has been for none of
when they have the resources
they dedicated funds to you
cause they know the critical
need to those communities right
that archifer keeps receipting
there's too many straws in the
ground and if you doesn't come
online in twenty thirty ish we
have a problem in those
communities
so that example of what we do is
really summarized in read there
on the ground helping them and
everything we can provide.
To make sure operationally they
have what they need
when you look at the resource
page this is a good summary and
this is something that you all
can keep in when you get a call
from a city you you can direct
them to us right every mayor
counselor manager clerk has my
cell number and they use it
regularly as they should that's
why we are here you all can
direct them to us as well when
they have a question for grant
writing right when they say hey
give me calculately for a water
project called the week we will
dedicate a contractor to help
them fill out their applications
identify what their water waste
water needs are and we will walk
them through the process where
we believe water trash board is
the best mechanism to get water
projects funded
right it's just so different
than capital outlet there they
have such a good process they
don't for process
sure there's improvements that
can be made and will get there
later in the presentation I know
market is going to touch on this
but the system works it's just
making sure that we
we get enough money into the
program right we have our
satisfactory car about which has
been phenomenal rate in twenty
seventeen we had no money zero
that slowly has ratcheted up and
you all last year per two
hundred million dollars
additional into water trustport
that is incredibly meaningful
for water and all of our
communities
so it's everything from
legislative advocacy grant
writing
public safety support right tim
johnson is our public safety
director he will be on side when
any event happens whether it's a
fire a flood of public safety if
you we are there to coordinate
between state police local
police on wednesday
our resources are pretty much
endless if we get a call asking
for help the answer is going to
be yes someone within our
operation will have the answer
if we don't have that we will
provide those resources view of
a contract.
Right my job is to get to yes
every day every question.
So then we get to
water trustport specifically
and like I said we went from a
time period of having no money
going into water trust board to
this year had an additional two
hundred million dollars going
into water trust for
it's more than we've ever
received but it's still not
enough and we can only track
what members submit for so when
you look at page six
we know the cities that have the
engineers that apply we know
what the need is those
communities that have never
applied the water trustport and
there are many we don't know
what the needs are in those
costs are only going up every
single year so a big ask that we
have is how can we short in the
time period to allocate that
capital knowing that every day
we we things will get more
expensive contractors right we
want the ability to lock them up
and get and get them to work we
want the ability to deploy the
capital that you all give us
immediately and that's where the
legislative authorization slows
us down a little bit and is
there a solution to speeding up
that process that's the big
request for most of it right
there's a big thank you for many
pieces fire protection law
enforcement protection by an ems
by distribution the ability to
bond about the random effect
the big question though is how
can we speed up allocating the
resources to these water
projects because of the end
right then when we get to this
resource page we just don't have
enough money in the majority of
the communities to fund it
ourselves that's where we need
to hand up from the state.
So the big question and in this
I think is where market is
presentation comes in market I
don't know if you want to join
it
what is the solution for
allocating the capital student
what is the solution for the
legislative authorization how
can we do it either on a multi
year or give us a a window
knowing that you have allocated
so much money to this program
can we extend the period in
which we can allocate the
capital and not have the
legislative authorization for a
period of time I think the
checks and balances are this
oversight committee right we can
always present on what projects
even
allocated
what new award cycles we can ask
for given the amount of capital
we have
if we have more flexibility we
could get more resources out
there
and the unknown is was hard for
us right two days ago I did not
think read those who would have
a wastewater problem
today I don't know if they can
turn it back on
I don't know what the cost is
right as an insurer we are going
to cover that cost so as an
insurer we have structured
reinsurance policies to protect
the physical assets we insure
forty three hundred assets
throughout the state so we have
our rein our insurance that we
cover up to our limits we call
it an sir self insured retention
everything above that we farm
out to berkshire lloyds the big
reinsurers cover that
extraordinary risk but they're
still a time delay right I can't
allocate capital today
we can front it and get
reimbursed from the reinsurers
but the long term fixes to these
systems is going to have to come
with support from the state and
that's water trustpoint.
Thank you madam chair I do have
in my hand out a little picture
here that might give you some
sense so in the color person you
know we like color on page seven
you'll see a timeline I don't
know what you know I passed the
rest of the important pretext of
that conversation which you can
see that that takes
approximately
three hundred and nine and a
half months ten months to get a
water project from the point at
which they apply start the
application process to the award
from that point after they've
been awarded funds by the end of
a fair there are things they
have to do to you know submit
their readiness to ensure that
they are actually ready to
invest their the proceeds of the
award they've then have to close
the transaction and start the
project initiation so there are
timelines after our award that
add to how long it takes before
they can start spending money
but if you just look at the
application process the things
that we can control I have
identified on page seven the
steps that we could eliminate on
a pilot project basis for
instance that could shorten the
process by about six months
right because what we have to do
as a result of the multiphase of
the long period of time between
giving you a fully better list
which we have been doing since
two thousand and eighteen since
that period for two thousand and
eighteen application from that
period on you have received a
fully bedded and prioritized
list prior to that that did not
happen you just got a list of
applicants that it applied in a
general prioritization but not a
veteran prioritization we didn't
look to see how ready they
really were to go
so we have been starting our
application process earlier in
earlier so you'll note we start
this year on july fourteenth so
that's next week we will be
starting our application process
by an issuing a notice of intent
and two weeks later or three
weeks later will then actually
open the applications a very
early time.
Start to consider that we don't
actually approve the thing until
next the end of the next number
of may so because they start
early and we have to then go
back and double check the
project we end up touching this
project two or three times
administratively we go back and
we update the budget to make
sure they've got the most recent
budget numbers that time period
that six to nine months can
actually change the estimated
cost of a project so we're
seeing these days that what we
saw at the middle in august and
what we're seeing when they get
ready to go to work both of
those boards in may are too
different project costs because
the world has changed in that in
that eight months period so we'd
note that these this little
steps in between
the time between when you see
that authorized list which this
year will be november second and
when the water trust board makes
it the new mexico finance
authority makes it approval
which next year will be at the
end of may so basically till may
first all of that could be
eliminated and shorten the time
period between when an applicant
starts its process and ends its
process it's not only a help to
the finance authority in terms
of the oversight and burden of
administratively working through
these applications more than one
time but it's a huge hardship on
some of the small clients in
your communities the smaller the
water system the more difficult
this process is and they have
been relying more and more on
engineers and others that have a
real stake in the game because
they're going to get the client
they're going to get the
contract and so you don't really
have a
you have to have one of those
contractors at you already if
you're going to be applying for
this process or you have to be a
larger community that's got a
grant writing program in there
so we think that this is worth
looking at we think it offers a
couple of benefits we'll talk
later about our technical
assistance keep abilities now
under the water trustport and
but we think that we could then.
Did he up the application and
have large system financing
application we could have a
small system application we
could separate waste water we
could have we could fit the
timing needs of the application
so that we could do them very
efficiently we'd know up front
how much money we'd have we can
identify those funds split up
the parts and let people know up
front with how much money would
be available for their project
type and shortly application
period for them to review it so
we think administratively it
would string my processes for
your clients it would be a lot
more certainty as to whether or
not bill it's worth their
applying for the funding because
we'll have a much better sense
of how much money is going to be
allocated to their project type
which right now is still kind of
a black box for many of your
community so just wanted to draw
your attention to this one slide
and understand that we could
pull a hundred eight hundred and
sixty hundred and eighty days
very easily out of the process
and short in the timeline
between when they apply and when
they can start actually using
the dollars allocated to them
in in madame chair you know
the efficiency of this is
important because we are going
into a bit of an unknown right
now that wastewater is an option
how many you're going to apply
right on water we know local
government cities are served
seventy percent of the
population in new mexico or ten
percent of the systems but we
serve seventy percent of the
population so on wastewater how
many you're going to apply we
don't know
obviously we are doing
everything we can to provide
resources to committee
communities for a mind them of
the value of water trust or but
until the applications come in
we won't know what that true
needed I wish they would all
apply because then we could make
the case all of you here's the
number that would be needed to
get these systems up and running
and you can see an
we know it's in the billions you
know some are a big cities santa
fe has been in the news a lot
right they need us.
To to have a new waste water
treatment facility that's six
hundred million dollars even
with the revenue of the sanity
has a can afford that right and
it just scales up when you look
at our bigger systems we want
regionalization I think that's
the only way to go in the future
given the cost of these systems
the lack of of staff to actually
run them so that's something
that we encourage on a regular
basis our problem is we're a big
steep and that point eight point
be in a lot of our communities
is just too far so the
efficiency really is what is
what we're asking for how do we
get there.
Thank you and thank you for
especially the the timeline on
page seven
and the
march northern cake questions
from the committee
a senator
thank you very much manager I
just want one see thank you for
the presentation timelines are
so important I know you'll
you'll have to
for the
big program that we have down in
in grand county we have the big
loop system we're working on
yellow been wonderful we
appreciate you but timelines
would always be so much better
right if we can shurt him down
it just would be so much a so
much help waste water my gosh
same thing in the in beard we
are our plant is really really
needing some big upgrades we're
looking at about fifteen million
dollars and i'm sure that's
happening throughout the state
and and
so hopefully we can we can make
sure that there's more money is
available for the smaller
communities and especially for
the communities that are
incorporated in and and are
helping their neighbors you know
with with their facility so
think you all very much for what
you do and I really don't have a
question I just want to see if
we could cut those timelines I
think it'd be so arcent so much
senator owe malley and then
representative berego and the
representative mobile coverage
I just sort of a quick question
on the list of so clients is the
second assuming their secure
associations could you
give us an example of what
you funded for the under that
manager you're speaking from my
presentation yeah this is the
water person
there are several seconds that
have received funding
a second that you slapped in
mode county for instances
received funding for its water
storage project.
So there have been several
seconds not
only the larger ones typically
because they often don't have
the internal resources to go
through the application process
but a couple of the larger uh a
seconds have access to funding
and I was just wondering because
there is a second association in
the north belly and alba kirky
and they had asked for funding I
think they're looking at about
half a million dollars to
upgrade the I think it's the
gates and things like that it is
a community a second obviously
looking at the can accept state
funds would this be something
that they would be able to apply
manager
yes technically they can apply I
would just note that the smaller
a secure tend to not have the
sort of organizational readiness
to go through the rigorous
application process and so often
the interest extreme
commission's programs where some
that are offered by the
environment department are
better suited to smaller asset
yes in in you know we we'd like
to be all things to all systems
we simply can't given the number
of kinds of qualified entities
and projects that exist here so
the process is not set up for
really smaller seconds whereas
the interstate stream permission
funding typically is okay well
that's good to know
so so you're saying it too apply
you really have to have the
capacity to apply and this is
larger typically
cities and towns at about three
to to make that manager yes and
i'd say a lot of mutual
domestics that have engineers in
other contractors on
that are part of their kind of
team if you will that are
willing to go through the
process on behalf of the client
so often it's lead either by
staff or by a contractor we see
a number in the fault one of the
we have a two day presentation
from applicants they're all
given an opportunity to to make
their pitch to the water
trustport directly not through a
written process but.
Really don't show pictures tell
them what's going on annual it's
you'll often see it one or two
maybe three engineers at the
table representing ten or fifty
different projects because I
know once they understand the
process they've got at narrow
down it's not very cost costly
for them to then go through the
application process and so
they'll do it on behalf of a
number of small mutual domestics
in particular so we'll see some
of those
engineers several times in one
day okay so the conservative
district then would probably be
maybe the agency that would
likely apply on behalf of the
secure association
I would recommend that the
second association contact the
interest extreme commission
about their funding programs
i'll get to the best way to go
for the actual associate a
second association is a
nonprofit they're not qualified
but a secure
qualified for the funding
but they often like that
capacity so you know states
I think
representative robot career.
Thank you madam chair and think
you both have a I think my
category members me asking since
the day one about technical
assistance and capacity building
and thirteen years later you've
been making tremendous progress
so I went to commend you both
because this is exactly an area
that we had determined very
early on that it was needed in
order to effectively distribute
the financing and funding that
we have in place and get it out
on a timely basis so thank you
for the time frame as well I
wanted to ask about specifically
arm whenever we talk about
waste water
and just water in general
we're also talking about how um
claim it changes impact
these systems for lack of a
better way of putting it and
what we do to help medicate them
in an environmentally friendly
way
but one that can be sustained
because the whole idea is for
these systems to
last for a long long time be
easily sustainable cost
effectively sustainable and so
i'm I remember asking this
question while back to and it
was how or we tapping in two
systems
this type of systems I know
missionary groups for example
madam chair around the world and
specially in
very oppressed
locations in africa southeast
asia places
missionary groups have partnered
with
engineering groups have
partnered with specialist groups
to bring affordable systems
mobile and fact systems to these
very remote areas.
It seems to me that if we're
going to address things so that
they can be sustainable and
affordable for our ruled
communities in particular and
that we don't have to be
replacing
for a particular life spam and
was these systems that we would
be looking into these types of
successful
they've been very successful and
they you know I want it I want
to say the carter foundation was
one of those that have used them
together with their housing
programs but I was getting ready
to look up the names of all the
groups but we need to be
exploring these types of
systems
and tie them in to our technical
assistance at capacity building
and part of the grant long
programs that we have maybe one
of those questions that we ask
during the request for proposal
in terms of trying to determine
the needs and madam chair you
know how you go in and you do a
needs assessment and sign um and
and while you're looking at the
capacity of these local
communities determined whether
these systems would be a good
fit
and how do we then put
those groups together with
those that are distributing
these systems similar to what I
was talking about in terms of
the mondealour homes
there are multitude of groups
that are addressing
the environment and
sustainability so I don't know
if you've done that
error maybe that's the start
question and if you haven't
whether it's the plan to do so
thank you madam chair.
So manager
representative it from a city
perspective they're all
different
and what I mean by that is the
effort the age of the
infrastructure is very different
the type of systems they have on
wastewater are very similar
but what they do with the water
is different
if you look at rear and true
they do a great job at direct
injection into the akover right
they're doing their best to
recharge that awkward for with
the water that they use right
from a sustainability
perspective we love to see that
you have communities but nor a
thread return
they have plenty of water I mean
it
I mean they'll hit water at a
few feet so they don't have a a
lack of water what they have a
lack of resources to protect
their water so like maloy right
that's a very very old down
right it's been on the state
engineers list for a long time
that it needs serious help but
reto needs thirty million
dollars to get like my life that
is water storage that is
prevention right they will apply
to water trust board so that's
an example of their doing what
they can to protect the water
they have they have it you don't
have a water need they just have
a need to protect what they have
yes the further self you get
there's a lot less water if
you're down in jail you're going
down eight hundred feet to find
water they're right in the jail
water reason so yeah it's a
different issue when you get
down south and what do we do to
make sure it's sustainable I
think the best example we have
from a sustainability is what
was done decades ago with you
right they realized back then
that they're going to run out of
water but at all argue is going
to continue to shrink and the
fact that they thought of you
will make sure that those
communities have water.
You know post twenty thirty
twenty thirty two.
It still comes to cost a
wastewater system right senator
mentioned barred
what they have one point two one
point four million and g r t
that's seventy five percent of
our revenue generally for cities
they need a fifteen million
dollars system
so the infrastructure is aging
right within our communities and
as an ages we have no choice by
two to improve these systems but
if a fifteen million dollars
price take for bared
they'll never be able to afford
that the rate payers right there
it's not like they can even
shift it to the rate pairs and
bond it repairs can never afford
that big ticket item that's
where we have to have the state
support to get these systems
updated
so madam chair thank you for
that I am I finally got it
so there are we're looking also
at the affordability for for the
people for the residents for the
consumer sets the major issue
also it might just because the
installers obviously have to
have
affordabilities well because
we're looking at these set
significant changes in how we
treat wastewater
so there there's for example i'm
just going to give you an
example
they have the four
environmentally friendly a
systems that are most commonly
being used and looked into by
municipalities around the world
actually a nation so one is bill
sound filters and it's actually
a way for households to filter
their systems that uses layers
of sand and gravel to remove the
impurities and it's a
sophisticated system but it's
also very low cost and easy to
maintain by the homeowners or
home renters
matter is in the whole and it
what it does is it relies on
natural.
Biological processes for lack of
a way of describing it that's
just one example then we have
the constructive wetlands which
are systems that memic natural
wetlands in order to treat
wastewater by combining physical
chemical and biological
processes so all these are
natural to what we're already
are faced with and this in this
type of system wastewater flows
through a series of
this is really cool plant it
basins were plants in microbes
and natural for filtration
mechanisms actually remove the
pollute so we're using the very
natural resource not resources
in terms of money but natural
resources to filter so mother
earth has a wonderful way madam
chair of regenerating it's been
regenerating life despite um
global climate changes so
there's a motor
these four there's also one
that's called solar disinfection
and it's another method of
disinfecting water by using
sunlight and then the last one
is what they call the
decentralised wastewater
treatment system and bring it up
madam chair because there are
systems out there that are
already being used not just in
other countries but in our
nation that we can tap into to
make what you just describe is
the challenge of sustainability
but also we have the challenge
of protecting our planet for a
future generations not the here
and now but for a future
generation so I would suggest
that we look into these
as we're looking into what type
of technical assistance and
capacity building we're going to
be providing
instead of trying to put a stop
gap later that we do it upfront
so I just suggest that we
explore this and perhaps this
would be a major um.
Research
area for the minister league and
others that are involved and
then for my kid and your area
may be a checklist added on
maybe you get points if you're
going to use these kind of stuff
stops or something thank you
manager thank you
we have reps are borrego
sarniana and kits
thank you madame chair
just introduced myself district
seventeen cartoon while I just
wanted to mention that I was
listening to you guys online
driving up here and just a east
of roll I lost you guys for a
while so until I saw a cell
tower that
re re introduced you again
so I just thought i'd mention
that because there's an area and
there were where there's not any
reception
and I wanted to mention madame
chair that
so i'm just still all confused
and maybe it's just because
at the city we did a differently
I mean the process was on the
staff is this process in our
legislation is that why you guys
are coming to us regarding
changing the process
i'm i'm a little confused yeah
matter
like state of authorization yes
we have to come ever the process
is outlined in the legislation
but in in manager members read
it's a procedural piece it's
unanimous every year I believe I
said the finance who is dropped
chairman dropped it from
committee so it doesn't even
generally go to committee to
just go straight to the floor
it's procedural but it really
does create any inefficiency and
manage your item just have to
mention that because sometimes
you know like at the city when I
work there the process was on
the staff and the staff was
responsible for that so for
efficiency purposes it just
seems like a lot of time to have
to come back and forth two.
The legislature to change small
process changes I just want to
mention that manager because I
think it's an important point is
that you know sometimes a state
is its own worst enemy by
including those details in the
legislation
so I just wanted to bring up the
word mancher
with regard and and the reason I
say that is because we really
need to learn to trust our staff
with those my new details
I wanted to bring up the word
sustainability and what that
really means because it all we
are living in error state and
unfortunately unfortunately I
don't know I mean six and one
hand half a dozen and the other
what is sustainability mean to
me it means long term
production of water for
all sorts of needs and you know
with it when we're thinking
about that sustainability
of that term it's really
important in providing that for
the long term for our kids
and just you know how we attract
new industry
housing build housing just
general growth manager
it just seems to me like I mean
this is such I mean what osvida
I mean water is life and you
know I would just like to
suggest matter of chair that may
be this committee might in the
future and thank you for putting
the sun the agenda this is such
an important issue
and I support anything that
makes
your job easier and more
efficient especially for small
municipalities
I was going to see just mountain
sure that maybe we do a tour of
the water utility authority and
also.
And i'd be happy to help arrange
that because I think that these
smaller utility must
municipalities that deal with
water if they could see that
larger process that we have in
albuquerque it might spurs some
you know I mean that whole
process in alba kirky with abecu
and storage of our water and
then regenerating that water
you know cleaning the water and
I was glad to hear what
representative patterns they are
covered at all um I do sell
mobile coming at all was talking
about because there are there is
a whole process involved in how
they how albuquerque cleans its
water and that includes our
storm water so I just
I would really like to help set
up out tour madam chair if I
could I think that would be a
really good thing for all of us
to see how that whole system
works and and I know that
smaller systems aren't going to
be able to model that but there
are parts of it think they can
take from that cell thank you
representatives on the on it and
then kits
thank you i'm thinking for
manager thank for the
presentation minds questions is
long kind of the same
long the same routers these two
so in the in the
application process
when you're doing the water
projects for a different
projects is resiliency and of
the infrastructure
is it a important part of what
what you're looking at because
you know as we continue to earn
faster fuel and the extraction
price of gas and oil we're going
to continue to warm earth and
we're going to continue with
this extreme fires and flood so
will this.
Infrastructure that's being
built with stand those fires and
those floods the extra
extremists of them is that makes
sense
manshare is an excellent
question I can tell you that the
one of the requirements set in
mark is that we that the the
project must incorporate
the most resent technologies for
water and so sort of cutting
edge design is to be looked at
so I think to a certain except
that might be captured there or
it might be captioned in the
sustainability that was as to
previously
but I don't know the answer in
terms of result resiliency
relative to things like fire and
the durability of those things
are environment department
partners the construction
programs were they do look at
those elements but I don't think
that the actual criteria really
zeros in at this time on those
activities we look at whether at
the project will help mitigate a
potential wildfire or potential
you know in pending cataps
catastrophe of some sort or
whether it'll help sort of
rebuild systems after one of
those things that occurred so
we've looked at the event but
not at the infrastructure that
might support or
in particular support the the
mitigation of those events
thank you for them thinking
between chairs I just think it's
something we have to really look
at because this isn't going to
get better it's only gonna get
worse off it's it's important
but thank you for your answer
thank you
representative of kits thank you
madame chair thank you very much
for your presentation i'm just
well please recharge me i'm a
morange i'm very much interested
in the pool insurance but I want
to get down into the weeds of it
so maybe we can need a another
time on that as well
and and so I just want to
clarify a couple of things
first thing with the metro era
that the city of albert keys way
street.
So that's her largest population
in the state the treated water
is going it is not being
injected into the aqua for like
in rent show it's been
distraction the river is that
cracked.
Madam chair that's my
understanding yes I thank you
thank you and so or another
thing I want to I I really
appreciate the grt slide that
was great I think I want to
slide on property taxes now the
same breakdown
thank you
just because that was great to
have and so I want to
just reconfirm that when people
retain about a capacity building
and needing technical assistant
or turn in at a night maybe
having the resources to do that
it's because
fa has the higher standard of
lending and it requires a up to
date
and make insurer that you have
shop already estimates from
licensed insured contractors and
that sort of lot that sort of
professionalism may be difficult
in a smart eighty
volunteer water system is that
in accurate replace of what we
have heard about capacity
building
manager would say it is somewhat
as a result of animal face and
the water trustport standards
and some of this is being into
the statute that we've been
given to operate the program
under so it's a combination of
events the statute requires that
the finance allows the finance
authority to make grants and
loans to projects that are
recommended by the water trust
board and approved by the
legislature that's the language
that we work around and for many
years there was a list and we
called through it a little bit
at the water trustport level and
after authorization then we do
the the rest of the betting and
about two thousand fourteen and
fifteen that changed the desires
of this committee at that time
we're see a fully vetted list
not what look to be a laundry
list of projects and so we had
to change the product the.
The process substantially to
meet the requirements of this
endorsing body this this
particular committee and so we
put in place the things that
were necessary to ensure that
projects funds could be
allocated efficiently based on
technical merit and that they
would you know have the
likelihood of being invested
over time you know efficiently
over time so those standards
were set largely by the water
trust board
we did go out for public comment
on all the standards that we
promotated but it's a
combination of things so what
you need in order to apply and I
don't want to entirely disrupt
my left afternoon presentation
but what you need to apply is an
what's called an appropriate
planning document and so for
most water projects that's going
to be a preliminary engineering
report or some sort of technical
memorandum if you're if you're a
small system just getting that
document done can be the
challenge to actually applying
so thank you madame chair so and
we have put some although we
could probably improve it we
have put some processes and
funny in place for technical
assistance to help these areas
to be able to receive that
capacity I am just reconfirming
you are asking this committee at
this time for consideration on
being able to shorten the
timeline a six months on having
legislative approval so it is my
understanding that you are
showing although I would need
more detailed information that
it's not just a rule that can be
changed but that it is begged
that we already have a very
strange it as you said you
touched the project at least
three times vetting process to
ensure that the projects are
meeting our standards that the
actual.
Asking legislative approval is
causing a six month delay so you
are asking for consideration
that we present policy change
that maybe we request a detailed
report I project cause I will
say the legislators like to have
that
but not approval with that be an
adequate
reflection of what you were
asking this committee today.
Yes madam chair I think which
will hear is that the process is
in the reporting frankly that we
already have in place we have an
annual report that's due to the
legislature in the governor on
december first and that outlines
the projects we've gone through
we've taken out the black box
that was associated with funding
water projects people would
apply and out of the other and
through this black box would
come projects that were approved
and it was very difficult for
clients to understand how those
decisions were made if you look
at our roughly forty five page
set of comprehensive policies
and evaluation criteria you can
tell specifically how they were
signed the points and when we do
the approvals at the water trust
board level you can see the
scores by the by the evaluators
on what they received so it is
it has become incredibly
transparent about how these
decisions are made there is the
there is a there is no black box
associated with its all done
under a lot of great sunshine so
we are asking for us to be for
that system to be trusted and
for the reporting that's already
currently in place to this
committee and to others to um to
trust that at least for a
temporary period of time so that
we can officially and
effectively utilize the large
sums of money that you've made
available for these projects
thank you madame chair and think
you mark it so I respectfully
ask the chair in this committee
that we put that on our short
list of things we review at the
end of this intermed committee
period of work kind of up going
in legislation we may want to
review that thank you and I will
and i've already asked a subin
again to open a file for the
legislation so will it'll be
more something that will look
for endorsement.
And i'm representative.
Think you made and chair
I just had a question is no
there that I come that I
represent let me go into instant
and we have a large amount of
water need as many else do in
the state I was looking through
the different numbers the
projects that we have you know
and this distracted in summarize
and is there a place that just
maybe i'm just not aware of yet
is to to find out some of the
details on some of the words and
maybe status on some of those a
words
i'm in the process right now
we've seen where we're to assist
right where to help entities go
to get to their next steps and
it's interesting to see
somebody's done the list that I
didn't realize I really had
projects in in motion so just
trying to get a grasp on
yeah some of the entities
dollars where they're at you
know what the plans are for some
of those dollars and then I
guess maybe the second part to
that is there were some awards
that were returned granted many
years ago but what would be a
reason that in the word would be
returned being you know we never
want to see any of those unions
dollars um trying to put
everything back into your
projects thank you for thinking
about it
madam to the reasons that
rewards have been returned and
as you know that this is a
twenty five year list right this
billion dollars a funding is
from two thousand and one until
this this year and we have one
more award to make
they are typically returned
because the project case have
increased and there wasn't a way
for them to bridge the gap
between what they applied for
and what the ultimate project
costs we've taken some steps to
mitigate their to close that a
little bit but that's a huge
issue for a lot of projects
particularly early on in the
in the water trustport history
so we've learned from our
mistakes here after year learn
from our experiences
so that's one others have been
that they received funding from
capital outlay or they received
funding from another source like
the drinking water state
revolving fund.
That allowed them to move faster
so there were there there are
other reasons but I think the
largest reason is that the
that they the project costs of
of increased
and they they can't make the the
camperage back up and I want to
remind everybody that one
o'clock will have a more
detailed water trust forward.
Big thinking madame chair and
thank you for that and and I
guess it may be if that's coming
later than that's fine but just
pointing in the right direction
as to where I can investigate
further some of these awards
would also be helpful thank you
send her rumor manager thank you
thank you both for your
presentation and that was going
to be my question on the year on
the uh wards return to date
that's really concerned for me
because there's three entities
on there that we belong to my
district but I did one **** or
see madame chair that when we go
to luna county they have a
really good process for their
wastewater treatment plant there
you don't even have a lake
that's there for regulation they
even have a swimming
kind of like a poor leak for
swimming in and recreation for
their children over there so I
have a really good program there
that hopefully we can make some
time to go visit when when we're
down and ended me so thank you
very much and again thank you
for your presentation
and we will be in gaming in
september
senator rama suggestion we tried
to get it as close as possible
representative here
thank you madame share thank you
the percentage thank you for the
presentation but I have a quick
question do you guys have a
checklist or is steps to start
applying for this water project
the you guys can provide us
man
thank you madam chair we do have
we provide annual training as
well so there are resources on
our website to help folks get
started we do annual trainings
before application start if you
are one of the projects that is
moved forward for legislative
authorization that second phase
of applications also get the
training and then lastly if
you're actually awarded funds we
do a third set of training for
how to meet the readiness to
proceed then we haven't really
changed the process that's
helped quite a bit so.
Communities have been able to
learn that we've been able to
provide them as a result of the
very transparent process of the
evaluations we've been able to
tell them where they've fallen
short where they can improve
their application the end of the
get good feedback as a result of
that but there are systems in
place and the largest you know
big upfront item is actually
having a planning document that
I outlined to the solution and
gives some sense of the cost of
the project
thank you thank you appreciate
that
industry minded to everybody and
am finance dot com is an
incredible resource that you can
spend hours studying all of this
stuff.
I wouldn't thank you
I have to just really compliment
the new mexico municipally the
new mexico finance authority are
both incredibly well organized
well run well staffed
organizations and the fact that
they've already been
collaborating on the need for
this really speaks to government
entities causing government
entities really working
listening to people all over the
state to produce good policies
and good legislation so I want
to thank you both indicate will
be hearing more for marquida
as I said
so been a gainer will be
starting to work on that
legislative proposed or so if
you can let us know your point
person for each organization
that we can include in our file
thank you thank you very much
if there's no more questions a
luncheous served over
on that wall
and will be back at one o'clock
for those who were late we will
have dinner at six pm at the
plaza hotel on the plaza in the
newly opened grill restaurant
says grill and have been the
tarrants not open quite yet but
it's it's you walk in and the
restaurants right there okay
