Let's make sure we answer that
representative.
Thank you point of this slide is
just to show we have.
25
Um, standalone programs here
that are a lot of different
things, but really we only have
a few that you know one time
funding and some haven't been
funded since, so there's only a
few of them that have that, so
some of these like, you know,
for instance, like this take the
energy efficiency and renewable
cap you know energy division at
energy minerals and some of
these are not active, and I
think that's just the point of
the active and funded or active,
but you know, hasn't had
funding, but we still, you know.
Fed recently.
Um, that, that's really the with
me so.
About 8 or 9 down child revolt
care revolving. OK. Well, I'm
gonna be getting to that in a
presentation later this about
some of the, the funding
legislation so I can
address. Ah, I see, and, and I
So
So some of these, yeah, on, on
purpose, I will have opportunity
to address them.
Thank you. We normally don't go
until after. Well, I'll just
move on to slide 4 things that
I, I would like to just
emphasize is that.
You know, the New Mexico Finance
Authority programs have impact.
And we have the ability to
really work in various sectors
of think from from agricultural,
we have this ability to measure.
we have a lot of efforts and
integrated business or
automating to the extent that we
can uh report on, on the various
metrics that would interest you
all in order for you to set the
policies that you work so hard
on setting these metrics whether
it's in the financial services,
energy, climate, um, we have
that ability to measure the
impact is just go on to slide
number 6 and.
Pulled out some select pro
various areas and sectors that
that focus a little bit here on
on energy projects and, you
know, the public project
revolving fund the local
government credits the state
small business credit initiative
that Mr. Brooks talk the
challenges there's we're gonna
be looking at bigger projects
we're we're.
Underway and and that way we can
shorten that time frame, you
know, like maybe if we determine
it's ineligible entity, super
helpful.
Um, sure it was set up that way
for some of these projects.
And Spot and and since you are
you have all of this works under
PPRF. It is our, our flagship
revolving fund that we've been
working with and so, uh, you
know, there's a lot of that.
Um,
On slide number 8 I did include
the fund as well.
Um, and, and that again is, is
going to this package of access
to infantry in Mexico need and
and one of these things is if
when you come to New Mexic.
Um, right off the bat for you,
so anything that we and my next
presentation later this
afternoon is, you know, the
state leverages tens of millions
of dollars more, you know,
that's, that's really actually
the the first opportunity I had
when I was chief of drinking
water many because they were the
grantee, we were the subgal
aspects of it.
Um, on slide 9, I'll end here as
well again.
Um, this is also super important
for us to be able to do to have
wastewater in there that.
Traditionally hadn't, but this
allows opportunity again to
treat some water and takes.
And so there's areas um on slide
10, I bring in the and again,
there are a lot of areas within
150 miles of colonia.
Um, and if it's going to be for
companies to another reliable
standard, and this is super
important because you know,
doing your preliminary
engineering reports, your
feasibility studies, asset are
are super important in order to
have quality projects that are
real thoughtful in the short,
medium and long terms. And, and
that's really what we're we're
trying to so we've been
funding um investing in
infrastructure, it's so
important that you look at
another piece of legislation on,
on slide.
12, which is um super helpful
again here, and this is one
thing that I found that was uh
an issue when we had wind farms
out in central New Mexico, like
say around Corona back in
Albuquerque, they're working way
out here. Um, so the housing.
It's really gonna allow us to
make loans for profit or
nonprofit housing affordable
housing, so I think that's
another area that's gonna be
super helpful.
Um, we had Miss Deck own fund
again, these are facilities and
whether you're expanding them or
maybe you're you can account for
And that's just, you know, this
is improving capital for the
private sector businesses in
areas of low and that really
supports our economic new market
tax credits since about run
through that program, you know,
slide 16, we had the stateis,
which I think.
Complicate what he did, and I
want to move to slide 7.
And again, this is just an
opportunity for communities to
real estate projects.
Um, to really support and
attract this economy.
So I think that's available.
Um, this is the access to
investment capital for startup
Um
Sectors of the New Mexico and so
with that, that's that's what
that was potential for building
infrastructure that would really
support that effort. Pentation
um.
I just had a, we had a
presentation here not that long
ago.
Um, act and the funding per se.
And there is a lot of.
Dangerous
And need infrastructure around
the state regarding water we've
seen.
One of the things that uh occurs
clear to us in the last meeting
is that um.
We are funding these projects to
bring in this into the small or
small towns and cities around
the state.
But are, are, are these funds
also eligible for GIS mapping
because we heard clearly from at
least the town of the
consequences that they're
continued delays on
infrastructure.
Um, investments were doing to
kept hitting pipes that they
didn't know existed.
So, um, this is an ongoing issue
and so I would want to make sure
that this fund is also eligible
for GIS mapping as well as the
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is uh.
I think you know, under various
programs that.
things you can use medium
between 80% of media even worse
than that, um, so I think we use
that a lot in various federal
programs, um, like let's say new
market tax credit program, um,
in that case, you do have, you
know, the, the feds do set set
those um parameters and those
criteria.
I don't know if we have.
Uh
Representative Garcia, yeah, as
Fernando alluded to on the, on
the new markets program, for
example, uh, the, you'll see
designated census tracts that
are designated as those are the
guidelines when we're doing the
new markets program, so you
have, uh, as, as Fernando
mentioned, uh.
Uh, so I, I did have one, so
when I look at the topic title.
New Mexican MFA green energy
projects. I guess I'm trying to
think where's the list of the
green energy projects in this
deck? Is it, are they all
considered green somehow green
energy or?
Uh, I'm just trying to figure
out what's, what's where the
green energy projects and the
deck that you presented to us
here.
the
Uh, on specific green energy
projects, I can get you a list
of that. It's, it's not in here.
We didn't include that this
presentation was more about like
talking about the expand the
green energy projects. There are
many like under like for
instance, energy efficiency,
renewable energy bonding Act
that that we've solar panels at
certain projects and things like
that that we would do facilities
or, you know, do things or just
install renewable energy at
their facilities. So there is a,
there's a great number of those.
I just didn't list that here.
This, this one was more about
like how we go forward and
expand on on what's been done
using the available tools now
that we have so many now at
Finance Authority since we've
expanded in scope.
Tremendously in the last several
years and really the trends with
the energy transition Act from
the Clean Energy and really put
these businesses that wanting to
locate here want in terms of
infrastructure and you know, if
you wouldn't mind just sending
it I know I would like to see
like what are the Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, it's sort
of.
Along those same lines, I was um
wondering.
Um, other states sort of for
best practices with I always
sort of worry about the siloing.
I'm just curious if that's OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Dixon, yeah, that's actually a
great point and, and one of the
things that we do to address
that issue is we enter into.
MO on a number of things we're
gonna continue and so we're in
constant communication
environment department's been uh
a partner as well on many
programs for many years. So we
try and do that and
Sometimes it makes sense to have
it siloed, um, just because they
have an area of general and,
and, you know, it can, it can be
consolidated, so I, I think it's
really on you for allowing me.
Yeah, and, and I completely
agree with this one service.
It's not one, there's a lot, lot
to it, obviously all three and I
know that's not NF NMFA's
charter, but, but maybe you've
all taken and anything you can
do to avoid duplication or
conflicting requirements.
Yeah, I mean, we'd we'd be happy
to do the extent we can by court
stent that we can and we'd like
to be that one agency that or
send them if we don't know.
One on green, that's not just
about energy. There's other
generation, but it might be
efficiency. Right, well, good
deal. I'm sorry, Senator
Rodriguez.
How will we get Mr. Chairman,
representing Chatfield, that's
an excellent question. I think,
you know, because when you see.
When these sites are being
planned because they don't just
take as many people to operate
and maintain them, you, you get
a lot less.
Permanent jobs.
Um, but that's signs and wind
farms and soil facturing you can
get the the so you have
opportunities um to do that, but
one other thing that I think
that um is not.
Thought of a lot is that just.
improving our grid.
You're in New Mexico, you, you
get uh more reliable grid, so
really sometimes when the power
structure upgrades, um, but
you're right, there's, there's a
difference in projects there's
some.
AC lines where you can use the
power in state.
And then, like the one you
mentioned, direct converter
station where the wind farm is
and went to New Mexico as well.
And then there's some other
projects where they'll have a
converter station in New Mexico
and one in Arizona.
Sold out of state, so, so you
get a real mix of projects that
are for in-state and out of
state use, but.
I would say that, um, you know,
it's.
It's just a different industry
in terms of of of profit margins
as compared to oil and gas and
so like anything you can you do
there to really hit them hard,
they'll just go to another
state, so it's really difficult,
but what you do get are the
benefits are those tens of
billions of dollars.
That that come from that and
things like that. So you do get
a lot of other benefits. I
don't.
I think it'll ever be a.
Um, but it can still
significantly contribute to the
diversification of the economy,
in particular, if we can build
out the infrastructure and get
more investments because of our
research universities and
national labs in the state and
the infrastructure that we the
other businesses that are clean
energy related and we get money
that way, but I think it's
really important though to keep
in mind that we're getting at,
which does.
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair
Garrett, um, I would suggest,
and this is just a suggestion is
This, but probably not all of
it.
Wanted to ask about um.
Well, let me start by saying
that I recently rather.
Conference
And one of the topics of
discussions, uh, is there some
way NMFA and I'm looking at
slide uh green energy projects
and it says they, uh, toward a
safer moral.
Mr. Chairman represented I
attended.
Representative Dixon's
conference for two years in a
row this time I was on a panel
on the amazing conference, has a
great turnout and everybody
learns a lot there. Mr. Chair,
right? Yeah.
That's awesome, but that's OK.
Um, but anyways, uh, Mr. Chen,
you know, the regional
transmission organism of energy,
minerals, natural resource. It's
really about working, you know,
both in in state with the
utilities to get buy in out of
state entities, um, when.
And others, so it's, it's more
of a, a regional.
effort that would really be
outside the scope of NMFA maybe
with.
Some
Funding from some of the think
about that because it's it, but
we do need one there Mr.
Martinez, so I, I'm thinking a
solar farm small in comparison
for transmission.
So it's um
Grant money or
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Tara Lujan.
Thank you very much,
Representative. Welcome. Um, all
right, so we're gonna move,
managing director, public front
of us here.
The New Mexico fan and I'm sure
that was approved by the ADG,
the acronym Development Group
did not sign off on that. You
guys might want to work on that,
um, are we in the right, we're
on the right deck. Let's go
ahead and uh.
Good afternoon.
Department
2018, America's water
infrastructure, some changes to
Uh, financial assistance that we
Project
Um, and then on the last slide,
Mr. Chairman of the committee,
no, no, it is essentially.
Going through the, you know,
changes that were done at the
federal level, make those
changes in statute, the bullet
points you have on pages.
They just literally carry over
directly, uh, very minimally in
the red line it's important the
administrative.
allows
Across the program when folks
are asking, you know, well the
federal says, you know, and so,
uh, I think Michael's right.
Thank you very much,
Representative Wuhan.
um
Thank you for bringing up uh.
These amendments, uh.
Just a question by adding grants
into.
Madam Vice Chair, so my own um
socializing this, these changes
with other committees as well.
It will have members that have,
you know, an interest in this
topic.
You had a
You know, half of us serve on
that committee.
I, I don't actually, but the
other half does. So, uh, so are
you meeting with any others to
just discuss you're in the
headlights with a bunch of
members who have no idea
and so we've we've dialed that
back just for the.
And I appreciate that socialize
this with.
You know, multiple
We're gonna now go guys to the
last item, number 6, that says
overview of proposed
legislation. Hey, it all worked
out.
Right
Uh, go ahead and take it away,
Mr. Martinez. Um, you're gonna
find in this slide is really.
Some standard things that you're
used to seeing everyization.
And then to just say that the
language you're seeing on slide
revolving fund is when you get
to the middle here, you'll see
that uh that takes the
introduction and has sent, but
otherwise standard language on
that one.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I don't, you know,
what you see on the voiding of
the the authorization if you
remember.
Very standard language that
you're gonna see on the top
there and and really the.
We're not gonna exceed 35% of
the previous year's governmental
grocery seats tax, um, about $38
million so 30.
13.3.
Uh, $1 million and then this
goes to 3 administered.
By NMFA, which is the drinking
water state revolving loan fund,
which we talked about the 20%
match.
And then then the water and
wastewater project grant fund.
Um, there's also 3 funds
administered by the New Mexico
Environmental Wastewater
facility construction loan fund,
which is otherwise the rural
infrastructure revolving loan
fund and the solid waste
facility have the one
administered by the Department
of Cultural Affairs. Um, so what
we're asking for here is to
request transfer of.
revolving fund to the NMFA fun
match in an amount of 6.25
million.
Um, the allocation for the
direction fund of $500.
And the NMFA 20, we did not
receive a request from NM.
ED for the clean water state
this year and last year's match
came as Fernando alluded to,
this is the standard provision
that you see about this already,
the proposed legislation.
Again, we had 84 38 million. Um,
this gives you just some of a
breakdown of the 4 project types
and the list of applicants and
how that compared to last year.
Um, we did have 14 applicants
that were granted waivers for
preliminary expansion signing
documents and then it's as far
as the four project types we had
63 of them were.
13 were for flood control
projects, 6 were frustration and
management projects. Um, I'll, I
won't go through each of these,
uh, the variety of more
municipalities applied this year
over last year and and um the
other ones didn't cheteer.
Um, but we won't to that. Mr.
Chairman, members of the
Um, our last slide is number 5,
that's request is a primary
care.
Capital fund behavioral health
capital fund and the child.
Uh, car rewinding is needed. I
thought his prison um for these
requests in terms of fun we have
a $25 million and you can see
from, from the slide here.
Uh, it's had very little general
funder association is reporting
that its member clinic sites in
in 90 you mates are located in
rural out of one stop shops.
Uh, requesting this Twitter.
Uh, for behavioral health care
we're requesting 250.
One time capitalization of.
A 2.5 million from this from the
sale of bonds, but there was a
change made in 2019 to allow
county owned clinics have
increased demand for programs as
counties work to establish
substance abuse facilities
repartnered again with ECECD on
this and there's just a great
need for.
Or this, um, to increase the
amount here, we did have a a one
time net capitalization of
federal experience with ECCECD's
recent completed 13. new and
expanding childcare more than
2500 slots are expected to be
created through that program.
So you see ECD as we've um been
working with them, they've
reported 15,000 new child
members of the community. I
You know, they're not structured
to get those dollars. You know,
we definitely identified, we
already knew, but it it was
pretty eye opening to see the
industry uh and how we can help,
so I think, you know, these,
these funds and to go back, Mr.
Chairman, if you will, um, to
Fernando's.
I think maybe a little bit like
in the childcare revolving loan
fund, it has active but it
doesn't have a loan before my
I've been here for it off.
Um, but now with the need and so
with the with, so I think funded
in that respect when you see a
check mark why we're requesting
the money. So I wanted to make
sure I tied in, you know, they,
Thank you, um
Senator, and you're absolutely
right. I mean, your work.
or one to set the work you've
done, so thank you.
Um,
Do you have any comments on
that? Thank you.
Mr. Chair, um.
So
Back to page 5, we can go.
So
have to
I guess I'll just, uh.
So
The one time capitalization
sales, OK, so I don't have the
slides, thank you, um.
So
With the behavioral health
amount of money that we already
have in our budget but already
vice vice chairs at one point.
Right, so
That we have in different
programs and one.
Part of this that you're asking
for is to establish how are you
working with the harm reduction
program with uh departments type
of um legislation, Mr. Chair, if
at all.
You said with ECECD on third
part.
John Brooks had a.
agencies that are tied in to
have those conversations, so you
know, we're not, we're not
flying out there we're having
those those conversation.
And our request for to program
that is is set up.
And um so, but definitely we
will be working with with the
sister agencies. And also with
the we got.
For the state as well is that, I
mean, there's there's so much
money that that there's been
discussion around our local
governments to kind of.
Create a plan because we don't
opioid settlement funds and
other news completely, um, that
we've, we put out there. So I
guess my question maybe we have
a deeper conversation, but.
What exactly is the substance
abuse facility can be defined
because and I'm bringing this
up, Mr. Chair, uh, because I've
had legislation that is looking
at safe use sites, if you will,
and, and it actually defines a
lot of what the the centers
would look like or what the.
You know, background is this
when I don't see that, you know,
in the town that when you're
working with the. Mr. Chairman,
Representative Liu on it, I, I
agree take place outside of this
meeting. I surely today, um.
You know, it's um.
I think to keep in mind.
Right, the, the behavioral
health capital fund is in one
respect, right? So it's, it's
how to help communities find and
other staff getting in the
communities, doing outreach
programs so that we can, to be
honest again, I don't know
anything about the. We would be
tied to them and we can do that.
Yeah, and Mr. also add that, um,
you know, like earlier in the
the slide there at the sites for
primary care frontier areas.
But that these clinics are, are
using the ones you go.
Mr. Chair, I can't you like for,
for really zeroing in on this,
but I think there's some, there
are some other pieces that are
that you haven't, or maybe you
just don't know about, but are
you part of the behavior health
collaborative for the state.
John Brooks right now, our CEO.
Um, yeah, these are, these are a
couple of areas I haven't worked
in yet.
Right, so, Mr. Chair, there are
gonna be some other pieces of
legis and it's just, it's just
because it's a, it's a very
focused place of.
Legislation and policy that I
work in, um, and stay focused
on, and so I'm wondering um if
we can have an on this because I
know that.
Representative Saansky is also
gonna be bringing forward some
um funding that we got from from
the sound so grouts for
specifically for New Mexico to
look at regionalization and I
think that we need to really get
together so that we're not.
You know, having money asked
here and there and everywhere
that that we run you state is
already meeting the health, so
I'm a bit concerned. There's
not, and maybe this is just an
extra piece that we need that
would help these other programs.
I'm not sure, but I'd like to
investigate that with you. The
third part, the other part is
with the ECECD, um, and you said
you had an MO with them and
filling in the gap that they
need conversations with the
secretary, but too much time,
Mr. Chair, but I'd like to have
some other conversations about
that too, because when they come
in front of us, there's a.
On the finance we're starting
this this month on those budget
hearings. What they're gonna be
asking and to make sure that
they're gonna be, that's gonna
be part of the question we're.
Talking about. OK, thank you,
uh, Representative
Representative Dixon.
Mr. Chair, thanks for the
presentation, um, and the, um.
Early heads up on the Capitol,
From
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Rodriguez, I, I think we're
Contemplating so that borrowers
can come to us and we can,
right, that they don't have
because in.
April.
They've missed the session,
they're not on the list, then
then it goes through the
process, then the closing
process and due diligence and so
if we could if we could
streamline that. I think this is
a topic that's been brought up a
couple of times over the, uh,
many years and
Chairman, Senator Rodriguez,
courthouse on that point,
Representative Garrett, I'm
sorry. Oh joy.
At that point, Mr. Chair, can
you bring us. We're gonna talk
about that here in just a
little. OK, thank you.
So and So, um, for, for my own,
you know, are there merchants,
right, and say you, you wind up
and it is what it is, whatever
happened.
So you cycle by going to some
sort of. So, you know, I, I am,
I am not of the belief I maybe
when I first.
A little concerned about taking
oversight of that stuff and
specific things so that, but
maybe there's a sure on that
point,
Representative Len effective to
maybe have the language role
project started, then it's, it's
guarantees the next phases. I'm
just.
I think you representative. So.
Questions I want, OK. All right,
I was like so on page 4, the 84
applicants.
238 million. What direction is
that?
I heard you say that it's an
increased, an increase of
applicants on the municipal
level, but is that number going
up steadily every year, do you
know?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I and members
of the committee, I don't have
that information to gather and
get to you
probably.
You want to come on up or so
when when you get that
information, can you and also
the legislative Finance
Committee, so that's turning
into a very sizable wherever
they're coming from and all.
And then also on page 4 in the
middle of the 22.
Who is that two counties.
I don't know the county on the
way. I'm not aware of multiple
counting.
Span two counties or something I
don't know.
So maybe we can, so we know what
we're dealing with this much
oversizes and all that. Um, OK,
well, that's pretty much all I
had there, um.
Thank you very much. Excellent
comments from the committee
here.
Uh, thank you for your
presentations, everybody, and
you guys did a wonderful today.
I want to hand over to Sabina
for a little bit, our committee
director to talk about the next
meeting and also um. Um, it that
Yeah, it'll allow me to. Well,
thank you, uh, Sabina, and that
doesn't know um.
But, but, uh, when Sabina says
October 18th, I just kind of
know how we operate around here,
everybody, our SAP, so if you
want to get this committee and
the standard traditional bills
that.
I know I do one of them every 2
years on some of um.
Trust funds or whatever. So
yeah, so, so can you make sure
that those reach Sabina also.
Let's make sure those get there.
I think I have one of the, she
has one, I believe, and then
there's like another one or
something. So we can make sure
that those get in by the 18th
also.
So anything else and we're
meeting next month and it's on
November 12th. Is that a one
burning question.
Talk about them for 5 or 6 hours
to know what they're about. I
don't want to do that. That's
why we want them in early.
Thank, thank you for that point,
uh, Representative Block. That's
why we want them to get them
back to us to look at before we
come in.
Develop some questions each
proposal.
