Name and
two minute warning we're going
to get started in two minutes.
One minute morning legislators
legislators please return to
your communities.
Welcome back everybody part two
of today's agenda we're going to
hear from the water trust
support overview and status
update from ceo of a market or
russell and then we'll hear
about the implementation of
house build to eleven uh twenty
twenty four changes and we hope
to finish these two
presentations by two thirty when
we'll head out for
our incredible visit to a water
trust board project
which I understand from
representative consolidates who
lives here is actually quite
amazing so with no further ado
will have our in mfaceo marketer
russell hit us off with the
water trustport overview and you
already have a hand if you're in
the room the colored hand out.
The.
I'm sorry we have so okay go
ahead yeah we have to do a quick
reduce of the minutes a
representative book if you can
move the approval again
i'm move approval of the minutes
madam tear for the last
committee meeting
the second assected keep we are
the motion from representative
back a second by representative
for beta is there anybody
opposed of course not thank you
the minutes are approved and
with that will head to market
russell.
Thank you madame chair and
members of the committee i'm
going to take you back a little
bit we jumped ahead a little bit
in our presentation today and
with your permission i'll take
you back just a little bit for
us those of you that are new
you'll see in our presentations
the statutory authority on page
three and I we provide pages two
and three on the oversight and
who animal is simply for your
reference I won't spend any time
going through it I will note
that we recently approved our
fiscal year twenty six budget
which included funding for three
more employees so that takes us
to a total of eighty
so that's I think that the only
change that I would mention
there so i'll start you on page
four of this and just to give
you an over an idea of who's on
the water trustport of the group
that we keep talking about on
the left hand side you'll see
the members of the water
trustport I have underlined for
you the members that are also on
the finance authority or who are
on that board and I include
myself but I guess i'm not on my
board but we have the vice chair
of the municipal league the
victor of the water trustport is
the municipality executive
director forty from before and
prior to him billful to that so
since inception the water
trustports by chair has always
been from the municipal vehicle
and i've note that they've
always held a leadership
position and the finance
authority board so going back to
nineteen ninety four they've
either been vice chair or
secretary of that board
joyous person from new mexico
counties sit on that boat in the
water trust board in on the
finance authority secretary
kinney from the environment
department secretary probs from
the department of finance and
administration so in addition to
those members there are also a
wide use of wide variety of
water users from the state so we
have a second members that are
slaughtered for here that's an
open position currently
sort of water conservation
districts ah surface water users
ground waters.
So that's the board the primary
purpose of the board it's duties
are to authorize animal fee to
make loans and grants from the
water project fund and that
water project fund comes from
two different sources
the majority of the money comes
the water project fund comes
from severance tax bonds we
receive a nine percent earmark
of severance tax bonds and then
ten percent of that has been
shaved off and sent over to the
office of the state engineer and
then further to the
administrative officers in the
courts to help deal with
adjudication so the project fund
itself receives eight point one
percent of the senior severance
tax bonds available for water
projects so that is the primary
driver of the funding that you
see and you'll see a huge
increase in funding from the
water project from from the
water project fund and that is
directly as a real they should
to to the severance tax blood
capacity going up so
substantially the second source
of funding is from the water
trust fund so there's a
constitutionally protected trust
fund that sits and is managed by
the state investment council
they received a major
distribution last year of fifty
million dollars and so I think
it's now over a hundred million
dollars a hundred and fifty
million I think at this point
and we'll start seeing more than
currently we receive four
million dollars annually and
again ten percent of that goes
off to
the office of the state engineer
and further then to
administrative officers of the
courts but that money from net
three point six will increase in
the next in the next few years
as a result of that dollar
amount going up so those dollars
come to the finance authority
annually the water trustpoat
helps select the projects that
we recommend currently to the
legislature once the legislature
authorizes them the water trust
board sends a final list of the
finance authority and we fund
grants and loans.
Based on terms that we have
established so that's the
primary purpose that really
hasn't changed
since about for about twenty
five years honestly that's been
the price is generally in place
we'll talk about little bit
later in the presentation about
the implementation of house bill
to eleven that's from the twenty
twenty four session and that
cleaned up some kind of older
portions of the water project
finance act and expanded the
capacity of the program to
include technical assistance and
funding for we swatter projects
I will allow you to page five
because again the water
trustport primary activity is to
evaluate projects and recommend
them to the legislature into the
finance authority and so I want
to just give you some sense of
how we do that we have since the
two thousand and seventeen we
have had a comprehensive uhm set
of policies that have been
utilized by the water trust
board and its project management
team that evaluate these
projects that I mentioned
earlier prior to that there
seemed to be some kind of it
seemed like a black box because
applicants were applying and
they did not know at the time
that they applied what their
real chances were what kind of
score they were going to get
from the application process it
was far more
um subjective than it needed to
be and so we added very explicit
criteria into the policies you
can go to the end there are six
kind of attachments or
exhibits to it and those are the
the full set of criteria that
the projects are evaluated
against by project type so
wastewater projects are going to
be evaluated against other
wastewater projects not against
water conservation not against
water storage and conveyance the
each have their own set of
criteria and they are evaluated
against their own peers if you
will in that sense that same
policy will tell take you to
what they required
elements are for an application.
What's a reasonable planning
document what what do you need
in order to
really demonstrate that you know
how this project is going to
move forward that will vary by
project if you are watershed
project it's going to look much
different than if you were uh a
water treatment project those
are very different kinds of
animals so again by category we
have the um in that set of
policies we tell you what you're
going to need to have in place
and what some of the conditions
of funding are so it's a big
document but it does go through
how the water trustport makes
its decisions how the criteria
works at how they evaluation
team evaluates these
applications and I you know I
could spend an entire day on
that I won't but I could then
the six agency it used to be
seven it's not down to six
agency review team uses that
application criteria and
evaluation to the projects and
recommends to the water trust
board
a prioritization
and the the water should
projects currently are reviewed
by each application as a
reviewed in its entirety by
three agencies and that's
a emnerge
frankly from game in fish from
the environment department from
their surface water and from the
department of agriculture so
they all all three agencies will
review the entirety of each of
the applications submitted for
water sheds
and they will also look at the
endangered species act projects
of those occur
all the other ones all the other
five types are reviewed by
either the environment
department or the face and there
are questions that are given to
animal for things like
leveraging security securing a
funds that sort of thing the
rest of the the really little
lion share of the work on the
majority of projects that we see
is done by the construction
program spirit with the
environment department they do a
very heavy left.
They review preliminary
engineering reports they look at
technical memoranda to make sure
that they are adequate to to
address the project at hand so
they are really the engines
behind this evaluation process
and then the water trustport
projects of the water process
trust board policies have in
place you know what get you'll
have different lists priorities
to projects within each category
type the policies then targeted
general amount of funding that
should be made available for
each kind of project right
because the majority of the
projects you'll see as we get
into later come in the place of
water storage delivery and
conveyance those are your basic
pipe projects they represent
frequently seventy five eighty
percent of the applications that
we receive and so you know do
you each year split it up based
on the percentage of
applications received what's the
fairest way the water transport
settled on a general guideline
that's in policy a policy target
that sets out in some instances
of maximum and and some
instances a minimum of funding
for each project type that was
amended just just a two weeks
ago at the water transport june
twenty fifth meeting those
policies were updated in their
entirely to include wastewater
and other things for hospital to
eleven but because we had to
make room for the wastewater
collection and treatment watched
restoration and management which
had been between ten percent and
twenty percent of the funds was
moved to up to five percent
and waste water collection a
treatment which is the new
category was given a policy
target of a minimum of fifteen
percent and a maximum of thirty
so it's being seen very much
like the water conservation
so we're going to see you know
in a lot of instances based on
demand
more closer to the minimums of
each of these areas if they if
there's a minimum insolicitor I
would not on the rep rate.
Bottom right hand side of page
five you'll see over twenty
three twenty four and twenty
five the percentage of
applications that were received
by those categories so obviously
waste what a treatment that that
application doesn't become
available for which water
projects until next week so
those are nas we haven't seen an
endangered species act project
for quite some time so those are
zeroes but water sheds because
the dollar amounts have gone up
so much in the separate from the
seventh tax bonds then because
there's generally the kind of a
static number of applications
that come in we dropped from
five percent and twenty twenty
three down to one percent in
twenty twenty five then so it's
not necessarily that we funded
many fewer projects it's the
frankly we just had that much
more money so that's just a kind
of a massive uh
storage convenience as I said we
frequently receive about seventy
five percent of our applications
from water storage projects
flood prevention that has gone
up and down this flood
prevention projects are
typically roadways and storm
water
we envisioned I think at the
time that most of these policies
were done that we would see more
damn projects if the project is
being of a damn project as being
used primarily for water storage
it would fall into that other
category but if it's not being
used for it and there's a
impending danger of a breach
they can apply to the water
trust board for money to help
fix that for flood control
purposes
and then lastly conservation
treatment and reuse those are
tend to be relatively small
numbers of projects that apply
but they have the tend to have
bigger price tax associated with
it so ten percent eighteen
percent and nine percent over
the last three years so just
wanted to give you some sense of
how we end up you know funding
these things once we have
prioritizations in place so
there's a sort of a scientific
part of it we apply criteria to
the application against
primarily a technical document
that's been provided.
And then we have to go back in
the spring and there's a little
more art involved in terms of
how much can really be spent by
each of these underlying
projects they may ask for twenty
million so they can design a big
project and constructed but
maybe they really can't get that
done in the time period that
they're asking for so we have to
really apply some common sense
sizing resizing of this projects
so on page
six we talked earlier about this
but I just wanted to make sure
we touch base on what the actual
phases of an annual application
look like because they are
different
and I would note I think we're
really proud that we've had
basically the same personnel
reviewing these applications for
the last
boy almost fifteen years
the primary person's brilliant
professional name to angel
looking time up and she's now
got with her sharing or american
many of you may have known who
was at the state where to
finance for many many years
overseeing similar kinds of
projects but that two person
team there are dynamo per a long
with the partner agencies from
in the environment department
and others really are the
backbone of this evaluation
process in the oversight of
these product projects
and the policies really haven't
changed again that criteria has
been in place for a while we
refined it annually there are
some adjustments made we have
expanded to make more generous
the funding packages
particularly for small systems
so we've done some things to
make it easier for some kinds of
projects to access the fund but
the valuation criteria has
basically stayed the same
but it's two person team they do
colonials and water trustport so
that's all in the last couple of
years that's a pretty big left
how she stays saying I do not
know so are annual application
process and i'll say that
generally speaking it's about
eighteen to twenty four months
and I say that in the sense that
it takes a while for a project
to get initiated that's really
not a part.
Of our funding process that
there are things that we control
because they are part of the
policies there are things that
are unplayed because they're
part of the statute and then
there are things that are in
play because a local government
or someone else has to abide by
certain rules can't just close
alone overnight you have to opt
you know uh enter into an
ordinance there publication
requirements and timelines
associated with that going out
for rfp for contractors takes a
certain amount of time so there
are some things that just come
and play regardless of where the
projects funded from sub again
about eighteen to twenty four
months from the point at which
they start to the point at which
they're actually starting to
spend money
the notice of intent is the
first phase that's the thing
that opens on monday we use that
for two purposes currently we
want to know about how many
applications were going to
receive because in the fall we
will have presentations will
invite each of these applicants
to make presentations to the
complete water trustport not the
evaluation team and they'll do
face presentations they can tell
the board in their own words
what the project means to them
give it some three dimensional
element and allow the water
trustport and understanding of
the project directly from the
proponents themselves rather
than from the technical team so
there's no translation needed
they they provide those
questions sometimes that's a two
day process depending on the
number of applications we
receive some days it's a one day
project it's a long day but it
can be a one day up meeting so
but we need to know that in
advance so that we can do the
scheduling and and put out
notices for public meetings and
things like that so that's the
first reason we do the notices
of internet the second is a
technical one we need to
authorize um and give access to
applications to the online
system so we we give them a
password and we understand who
they're authorized user is if
they've got an engineer working
with them will provide access to
the engineer as well they can't
submit the application but they
can comp.
Pleaded so that the the actual
applicant can come in and hit
submit later on so if they are
relying on some sort of
technical assistant whether
there are contractor or someone
else there ups councils of
government for instance to a lot
of these applications
that that technical assistant as
we call them is able to really
do a lion share of the actual
application so that the client
who may or may not have the time
to do that is able to then go in
and hit the submit button
project application that soft
takes about thirty days we give
about twenty eight days thirty
days for an application to be
submitted most of the questions
will reference but an actual
place in the document that
describes the impact of the
project it describes maybe the
license of the permits needed
readiness so it really does
refer back to the technical
document you're able to describe
it generally and then provide
them a place in the document
where that information exists
that project application as they
mentioned earlier is reviewed by
the team it's then sent to the
water trust board and they make
they approve a list to then move
forward to this body for
consideration of endorsement
that's um that hasn't always
been the case over twenty five
years there in some years in
which this body's endorsement
this committee's endorsed it in
some years they haven't but I
think fairly consistently for
the last fifteen
you will have considered
endorsement that legislation
so you all will look at that on
november second we'll give you
an update as to who applied
prior to that but you we won't
really know which projects how
they were prioritized until
actually that november meeting
then we wait for a while because
it we then wait for the
legislature to begin that
endorsed bill will get
introduced in generally as a
mentioned earlier there's very
little change to that bill we
haven't had anything amended or
taken off in years so it
typically goes through.
Without any change and and moves
forward to the board sometimes
there's drama just because it's
so routine that it kind of gets
lost in some committees during
particular during sixty day
sessions
but it it always gets done and
it's better while since we've
had any drama associated with
that so it's usually two to
three months before we can
actually start that process and
as you well know legislative
process is thirty or sixty days
governor signs it so that
process in there there's a
fairly significant waiting time
between when the water trustport
has done its work and when it
can pick up its work again and
that really is that time period
that's an easy place where we
could cut back some time
but then in january we will
typically open what we call the
reading this application and
that gets to again updating the
particular numbers
for construction costs permits
anything else that's come up new
with the project will want to
know about that because we'll be
evaluated against it will ask
them for make certain that they
are comply with their of the
audit requirements because by
this point they should have
submitted their audits will ask
them if they're comply with the
state engineers what a rates
issues with drinking water
bureaus regulations any
regulation that they are
required by lot to comply with
we're going to verify that that
is in place for that project so
it's a waste one project we're
not checking their water rates
but if it's a water project we
are checking their water rights
we want to make sure that we're
supporting a project that's
currently
in compliance with all
regulations will of the check to
see that they spent prior water
trustport awards so we will look
to see if there are two years
are older we're gonna look at
those and say how much money you
haven't spent relative to the
amount you were awarded and will
look at percentages we have been
less fussy about that over the
last couple of years because of
the high amount of money that's
available and because it has
delayed had the latent number of
projects.
So we've been a little more
leading it about some of those
deadlines but we are serious
about making certain that they
they
with purpose take on the project
that they've been funded and we
don't want to see that
languishing the required to give
us quarterly reports if they
don't give us quarterly reports
and they ask for an extension of
time the answers like they're
going to be no because they
haven't done what they said they
were going to do in a good faith
I haven't been trying
but all that comes to the water
transport for review
after that the water trust board
will look at the projects those
they'll be in the same way they
were prioritized in the fall but
we made by pass them but in fact
they don't meet the regulatory
compliance where they don't need
an element and policy that the
water trustport believes it's
important for them to comply
with but so they're only by
passed for those reasons or if
they if we run out of money for
that category so it may be that
they're third on the list but
they have a twenty million
dollars project and by the time
you get to number three we've
only got two million left if you
can be phased we will recommend
a facing if a cat then we'll go
to the next one on the list
that's just the process that's
the art part of what we do
thank us to the water the
finance authority are team by
this point is looked at it we
have a couple of different teams
that review this are legal team
reviews them as well as our
credit team and they do a
comprehensive review of the
financials of that particular
entity so we know at the time we
make a loan the likelihood of
them needing to raise their
rates to take on all of them
nope for most of them these are
going to be ten percent loans
so these are not major loans
there at zero percent interest
and if they run into some sort
of financial burden they haven't
there well breaks late their
pump breaks and they didn't
expect it now blown their budget
they can come and tell us about
that and we can forgive that any
payment so we'll look at their
financial situation at that time
and make a determination as to
whether or not.
To forgive that payment but we
know that it's time we make the
loans we know kind of where they
sit in terms of capacity to
repay that
after the approval by the end of
a fair they have read in the
proceed items that they've asked
for construction we want to see
their specs the plans inspects
that sort of thing and then
right after they've met that
this year they'll have it till
september thirty and then after
that we start the closing
process as I said earlier ninety
two hundred and twenty days is
probably average but something
go up to six months depending on
just on their processes and if
they have us d a in place it
could take more than twenty four
months the US d eight debt will
be a major impatient to the
ability to close alone
on pick seven we talked about
this earlier I don't know that I
have anything else to add other
than
right now I don't have nothing
else to edit if you talk about
some detail
that move you on to just the
overs- the highlights of the
twenty twenty five cycle which
we just completed
the total amount of money that
was made available just from the
separate tax bonds and the water
trust fund distribution on the
top of page eight is about a
hundred and fifty seven point
eight million dollars
of significant amount of funding
the legislature awesome
appropriate you all appropriate
and additional two hundred
million dollars that can be used
but this year's authorization
authorized projects and next
year's
and so at this point
in april the water trust board
recommended and in may the
finance authority approved sixty
of the applications that were
sent forward totalling a hundred
and forty six million there are
a number of more time
application entities that were
not able to be considered in may
because they had outstanding on
it issues so at the time I think
the city of best manial I had
three projects and they were not
yet complaint with the state
auto rule city of damning had
three different kinds of
projects.
Flood conservation they weren't
yet
at that point they were not
compliant citibank border for
towers all had a couple of
projects in there so they were
about
we think we'll see
about another thirty five to
forty million dollars forty five
million dollars that will be
recommended in august by the
water transport so they're going
to do for the third or fourth
year in a row they will make a
second set of recommendations
because the amount of funding is
so great that we'll have an
opportunity to allow these
entities to cut their audit
issues and come back and still
be considered that really is not
about generosity be about the
amount of money in that fund so
we're hopeful that we'll be able
to get approved and then the
water transport would then send
them over to finance authority
for four september funding
there were a couple of projects
that were not recommended or
recommended for scott smaller
scopes just because they were
ready for it on the one which is
in this community the story
water uses association they
requested eighteen million
dollars for designing
construction
we approved two point three five
million for the design only face
make sure they had everything in
place they can come back and and
request the money once they've
got that done but it's a major
design project we didn't think
they could really efficiently
spend
eighteen million dollars in the
next two to three years so we
ask them to face that project
out and then plus get gardens we
did a similar thing they asked
for three point two million
dollars and we recommended just
over five hundred and fifty
thousand for their design money
so that's the funding cycle
page nine is the twenty twenty
sixth funding cycle it's the
same thing you saw in that chart
on page seven
that barchard on the bottom but
with the actual dates so you can
look back for your reference I
will go through them but that's
that's what that.
That line short representative
are these states here
and then
but again to mention the
administration this is an
important part the what the
water transport has done over
the last several years since
about two thousand and seventeen
is put up front of the things
that often will stop a project
for proceeding so if they
haven't gotten the planned if
they really don't know the costs
don't give them money because
they still have to make that
determination regardless of
where you give them funding
whether it's before they've done
planning or after they've done
planning they still have to plan
you can't do a water project
without plans with that designs
and spacs so that has to happen
and what the water transport is
done is to take care for
to look carefully at the things
that could be impediments to the
investment of funding and try to
get rid of as much as possible
by requiring that it used to be
an after approval item and some
of those projects went for five
years before they could start
really spending those dollars so
that was one thing we did the
others we put that team that I
talked about earlier about two
percent team that reviews not
only the application process
that they oversee that all the
applications are being reviewed
fairly provide the information
to the board and can answer your
questions at a moment's notice
they do that for both of water
trustport and the colonial sport
but then they also review every
reposition as it comes through
so when a reposition comes into
and i'm afa one of our teams are
our client services team which
is basically the folks that deal
with the with our entities after
we've closed alone as part of
the closing process and after
they do the first review of the
request it's sense up for a
technical review that's usually
back contractor and then lastly
it goes to one of those two
members to sign off on the use
of the funds and to make sure
we're pulling from the right
potential funds so it touches
three hands before go store
finance department.
To send out
I would not that this bullet
here on page ten that
legislative authorization of
water trustport projects
constraints for the capacity of
the team that's in reference I
was asked month or two ago by
the lfc very specifically how
much more money could we oversee
in the water trustport and the
answer there is really it
depends on what we're willing to
give up because right now we are
stretched that two percent team
with the amount of things that
they're doing for water
transportation is we can't push
them any further they are at
capacity for the applications
are currently receiving if we
want to get more money through
the water trustport process
because you like it you trust it
then what we have to do is make
some accommodations and I think
that was the one that each and I
were talking about the four we
think that reducing it by six
months well three of our staff
to do to administer the
application process is
differently to make sure that we
could get more money on the door
so that was the reason I made
that comment and I had still
have a come up with a number
about how much time and money we
could say but because the
projects are getting larger we
could spend the significant
amount of money it used to be
that an average project was
probably too million dollars and
it's now probably six million so
you know it the dollars are
getting bigger because the
projects are costing more
they also collect all the
readings to proceed they
determine whether or not you've
got your plans inspects ready to
go whether all the things
whether you've met everything
you need to meet in terms of
ready to move forward and then
they work with a construction
technical assistant either
environment departments
construction programs bureau or
the e r g which is an
engineering firm to help us
provide actional engineering and
construction oversight we're not
engineers we don't pretend to be
so we make sure that we have
someone on board that
understands the underlying
project that frankly reviews the
plans inspects of the bids can
then well trouble shoot the you
know any kinds of issues that
come up during the construction
project.
We have since added a project
management team to help trouble
shoot some of that on iran
because we have known that our
department are partners of the
environment department don't
always have the flexibility or
the capacity to help us with the
wire trustpilot we pay them but
they still need the staff to do
the work and they they also have
had an increase in their
activity levels so we've added a
team as well done a king tonight
who's with us today as our
project manage ah project
oversight manager we've hired a
new person to help him who
started yesterday or two days
ago and he'll be primarily
working with some of our like
opportunity and our price
projects to make sure
construction that's happening
that you know but they are where
they say they are in terms of
completion you don't want to
send out more money than they
completed in terms of progress
so those are the kinds of things
that the look at the look at
milestones
will also review their budget
make sure that they that they
say they're contributing money
to the project and that they're
going to pay for the plans
inspects that we're not the
funding plans inspects so we do
what the accountable for the
things they said they were going
to do with the money we look at
their change orders and we have
proposed
and we review their quarterly
reports so it's a fairly
comprehensive team again we can
we can add some word changing
our technology to make some of
this easier less manual but
ultimately we have to have the
staff to look at them
so pages and a couple of these
next pages are all just the
historic look so we've operated
the water project finance act
was created in two thousand and
one we know twenty five years of
applications through the system
nearly a billion dollars has
been spent and I just want to
give you some very big
highlights a look at the ten
years because I think that's the
most relevant the early years
there was maybe five or ten
million dollars that was being
provided but you can see on that
first blue bar the light blue
bar in each of these years
interest that we receive from
the notices of interest
so those tend to be higher we
get a little drop afte.
At the point at which the
applications come in that's very
common both in terms of the
mountain they've asked for or in
terms of the numbers of
applications you can see that
are actual authorizations are
very they're the same for twenty
twenty five the same for twenty
twenty four twenty twenty three
twenty twenty two we have
authorized we have recommended
that the legislature authorities
every eligible project since
twenty twenty two and that's
when we started to see that
major increase in funding
although that fifty percent of
the funding that billion dollars
that we funded since twenty two
thousand one fifty percent of
it's come since twenty twenty
two so we've done a half a
billion dollars in the last four
years
awards and then that last part
the actual funding manager i'm
nearly done we see a similar
thing on page twelve which is by
project is supposed to by dollar
amount so you just get a
snapshot of what we've looked at
there on page thirteen the next
several pages are just slices of
the same data and I won't spend
too much time other than to say
that municipalities are starting
to pick up in their applications
when our maximum amount was four
million dollars it would take
cities a long time to a mass and
enough money and then for those
rewards to actually complete a
project and so we've lost
interest from a lot of those
means of polities
so we were to a smaller projects
fifteen years ago we're now
seeing major cities bigger
cities with their projects come
forward and ask for assistance I
think more towers was one of the
ones that was a mentioned before
cities last biggest for instance
hasn't had a water trust for
project in the number of years
they used another one of our
programs offer similar terms and
doesn't have a your one process
for them to wait so they've been
decided to go with federal
dollars in order to get their
projects done
but there has not been very many
sake your projects to the
question earlier by sending her
own valley we've also not seen
very many projects by
both.
Endangered species act all of
them have happened by sd agency
those three
for you know the average reward
is just under a million
so you'll see that the majority
of the money goes to
municipalities mutual domestics
make up twenty five percent of
the
funding
and then seventy three but
thirty six percent of the actual
entities so just not very many
dollars end up going out to them
i'll skip it tired of these I I
like to see you know what
american tribes have asked for
what we plastic asked for which
all the seventy five percent of
our money goes to water storage
and so you'll see break blue and
almost all of these categories
if you look on page fifteen of
the funding by project type
from from inception two thousand
two to two thousand twenty five
again seventy percent of the
money
to watch storage and convey it's
nearly seven hundred million
dollars
almost nothing for the end
injured to be seen
what should restoration the
management's an interesting one
because most of those projects
are quite small the last for
less than the million we have
one client that clunched pizza
water and soil conservation
district that is received thirty
one awards since the inception
of the program and they're all
at six hundred thousand dollars
and many of those have I think
they drop forty five to sixty
times from each of those awards
so six hundred thousand dollars
and they may submit as many as
sixty requisitions so they're
tiny awards they take a lot of
oversight from the finance
authority staff
so it you know it doesn't rebel
representative large amount of
money nor is it a large amount
of projects but because the
intensity of the project is so
significant if a lot of our
time.
And then lastly I will not on
page seventeen the nearly
billion dollars if I buy august
we will hit that billion dollar
target that we're just right
under it kind of where you see
those awards of by county we've
listed
the number of recipients and
awards and the total received
since two thousand and one
so six hundred and thirty eight
awards made to two hundred and
eight entities and then for the
first time we have started
providing you just the history
and I think you also that are
earlier I don't have here noted
anything about which ones are
active or not active i'll
provide that at a different time
it was a really great question
but I just wanted to let you
know who has asked for money to
so that you can see their reward
total amount of words over time
there's a couple interesting
things that I would that I found
interesting that I make no doubt
i'm only nine of these entities
received more than ten boards
and I I think it just noted
thirty one for peter with the
largest one I think they've
received an award every year
there were very if you wanted to
teach that have received more
than twenty million and only
nineteen nineties that have
received more than ten million
so most of this money has been
dispersed for one time water
projects and you'll see that
representative failure so you'll
see everything that's been
awarded to date
there have been entities that
have resended their return the
money
one of them said you know at
this point we don't think it's
worth our time others as I
mentioned earlier the vast
majority of them simply don't
have the funding to complete it
I mean so all of those are
before you on page twenty we
have real board every fund that
came back to us so it's not like
we lose the dollar if they if
they haven't spent it we can
make we can reauthorize those
funds
and then there are two projects
that we could not make the award
on and so
that was went back to the state
and it was appropriate and those
are for the navigation they went
back to the energy.
The environment department and
sent over so that's the staff
shot of the billion dollars
you've been trusted with the
water transport in the finance
authority give you a broad view
of who takes advantage of it and
and the process is that goes
through you'll noted it's
rigorous a lot of small systems
cannot
undertake that kind of
application process we have need
the water transport policies far
friendly here for small systems
we there's a a match required
for applications we want to see
that entities have to get in the
game so there's both of cash
matched as part of it and then
we ask some applicants those
that are supported by right
paying constituents to actually
have
a small lump component and for
most of those really small
beautiful domestics they kept
meet the cash match so many
years ago six or eight we
allowed for
them to borrow in little that
cast match that they could
increase their loan which is at
zero percent and re available
over twenty years they could
then borrow for that similarly
if they don't if they're not
supported by right paying
constitution if they can get out
of the cash they can get up a
long component by increasing
their cash match so those of the
two things that were stopping a
lot of projects not actually
applying or moving forward with
the water transport we took care
of those we've taken additional
care for very small systems to
make sure as we as we have
required them to face up their
projects if in fact it's one
project supported by one
technical document for instance
the first one will have that
cash match and the second one
will have that long component in
the second one while so will
only ask them to contribute
alone for one part one fees at
that project so that we're not
having you know one small system
with four faces have four
different loans so we've taken
care to do that this last.
Hospital to eleven and the
policy changes we made clean
that up a little further even
though i'll talk about that in
the minute but we've done what
we can to reduce the barriers to
access we haven't been able to
figure out a way to produce the
need for leadership at the local
community local levels to get
their planning documents done
and make sure that they have in
place the kind of team that's
necessary to support a major
power project in regardless of
it sized they're all major water
projects maybe the same permits
they need to get contractors in
the same way and procurement for
small systems can be a real bear
so we've got a couple of other
things that were allowed under
hospital to eleven and I don't
know if you want to stop and ask
questions here before we go to
two eleven colleagues will do
most of the talking for two
eleven
questions otherwise we'll move
on
that's a lot so the question of
breakfast
thank you chair
thank you for your presentation
or amazing
I just want to know why the
flood control authority is not
part of this group because in
your presentation that talks
about on page five you're
responsibilities of flood
prevention and endangered
species at can I say that five
times
they deal with all of that so I
just don't understand why
they're not part of or
have they been considered a lot
at all sure
I do not recall it time in which
they were that they submitted
applications the donate county
flood commission has
the flood authority this helps
county
scafga has.
And they've been awarded all of
those have been awarded but I do
not recall the time and which
early of counties has managed
her and
market
I would love to have a
conversation with you about this
if we
The office of the state engineer
have had difficulty hiring
engineers we are not seeing as
many engineers and new mexico as
we need for the projects that
were were considering so we just
seem to not have enough
engineers to really serve some
of the smaller needs I would
also not
major part of those small
systems or volunteers and so
when a contractor joins a small
system project they are likely
going to be providing really
administrative support to the
project as well they're not just
doing a preliminary engineering
report they're likely doing a
lot of administrative work to
help get that application
started so they are having to do
ansolatory services in order to
secure the ultimate funding and
I think what we lack at a lot of
the small systems because they
simply don't make enough money
is to hire and have
professional staff it makes the
difference but you have to have
a critical mass and so some of
the things that the water
transports been supporting
regionalization as a major one
it really is to try to figure
out how to make these small
water systems more sustainable
over time it's one thing to have
water but if you don't have a
staff that can actually you
maintain the system it doesn't
really it doesn't matter and
those volunteer systems are
getting greater and grayer they
are they are aging out and so
you're also seeing just a lack
of leadership at some of these
small systems you've had people
on the board for twenty thirty
forty years in some instances
with no successor in mind so the
policies that the water
transports taken on the work of
the technical assistance team
some of it is really directed
out trying to encourage and make
available ways to regionalize
projects to reduce the number
gave you a stunning statistic
earlier about
you know ten percent of the
systems provide seventy percent.
Of the water right municipal
systems there's a almost eleven
hundred public water systems and
so you're talking about more
than a thousand small water
systems the majority of which
don't have vast majority of
which don't have professional
staffs and will have the problem
of leadership level so that's I
think that the two the capacity
issues that we see are at the
local levels in terms of the
leadership and the ability to
take on a major infrastructure
project and
engineers who would otherwise
you know store that up that
would be the other area which
we're seeing and again we've
taken some steps I don't still
all have done expender but we
have taken some steps as a
result of the expansion of a
house of our capacity and our
hospital to eleven so there are
some things that were trying to
do to to help facilitate
regionalization
but the water transports and
taking a larger steps lately to
the last five years
to try to get that to get
regionalization to be a much
easier thing for community so
that we can insure them what are
going forward.
Okay we will now move to the
second part of this which is the
implement implementation of
house build to eleven
which had to do
with other water transport and
authorizations.
And mountain chair if I haven't
before make sure you all know of
not a martinez or deputy
director he's been with us since
last april
so about fifteen months sixteen
months and done a king tonight
who joined just a month before
any of you know done from a
number of different places but
he has I know him from economic
development years ago as well as
local government division
veterans affairs fast amount of
experience and he overseas the
new established program
oversight team at the end of it
and I will turn it to them
good afternoon madam chair and
committee members
thank you for having us here
today and make this
and and make in the time for us
today it's always a pleasure and
honor to be here so appreciate
having us here
just want to start off with the
house bill to eleven
amendments and and as you are
well where it amends the water
project finance act.
To include waste water into
allowed in mexico finance
authority to set the financial
standard of and it is receiving
loans and I can report now that
both of the water trust board in
the finance of authority of
updated the rules and the
policies for these changes
the water trust board in in its
aminments to its rules they are
commented these changes and
they did remove certain criteria
that used to be and there that
aren't any more but I really
think that the pick item was
that we added wastewater is an
eligible water project
on june twenty fifth the water
trustport also uh updated the
project management policies to
incorporate all these changes in
into eleven and that the big one
was as I mentioned adding
wastewaters and eligible entity
and so the investment finance
authority did work with the new
mexico environment department in
in.
Inclusion of of the waste water
and all these changes and what
we did come up with wizard
defining appropriate planning
documents in the definition of
scope of eligible projects and
the key thing here is now we
have a evaluation in a project
criteria that we can now
priorities these projects by so
that's a real big thing that
that has happened since then and
wastewater is now going to be an
eligible price of category in
the twenty twenty sixth water
trust for
application cycle it's albany on
july fourteenth so market is
monday and market I spent five
hundred times this morning
discussing the the timelines for
how this happens.
Um but the key things here is
that really waste water is is in
such a huge issue in their state
it's number one because we don't
really understand that the
mandates out there right now for
wastewater but we also do know
that for the projects that are
out there there's a whole range
of costs associated with
wastewater facilities and it
could be anything I was speaking
with executive director forty of
minister police and just with
some of the ones he's familiar
with you are saying that you can
arrange anywhere from twenty
million at a real tiny place
like bared although we have to
six hundred million for the city
a standard fee
so these are tremendous the
expensive projects that the
can't be fees then they have to
be built it on time you can't
take an existing facility and
put bandits on it either
so I think until we can
understand what the demand is
going to be we're going to be in
a very difficult situation and
then at that these are going to
be massive projects and and so I
think right now we need to work
with a lot of the stakeholders
you know primarily i'm initial
the because they do have a a
great understanding of what the
demand is out there.
And hopefully we can come to a
point or maybe we can start
pulling resources I mean you you
can't regionalize water
wastewater systems very easily
but which you can't do it to
share resources like engineering
firms and supplies and other
things like that so hopefully we
can start working on some of
those issues don't just really
get the unit costs down it's
it's really a value of
proposation these systems are
virtually the same whether
you're bigger small it's just a
matter of volume and so though
those are the major things and
and I think the changes made in
two eleven and twenty twenty
four were really forward
thinking and their address in a
huge need out there there's a
lot of wastewater systems in and
disrepaired as you know in this
state it really comes down to
the basics if you can't drink
the water you have a problem if
you don't have waste water you
have a problem even had access
to education or.
Health care or low classroom
reliable energy there's it's no
way we can compete we can't get
businesses and at the state we
can get businesses to expand in
the states that's really basic
needs and and water and
wastewater going to play real
key roles and that and with that
I think I can turn it over now
to dinie to
outline some of the things that
we're doing that with regards to
the technical assistance good
deal I I recognize
person standing between us on
the tour so i'll be very
succeeded
good afternoon again criminal
retired donna
with a new mexico finance
authority it's great to see you
all
I would be remiss if I can take
this opportunity to acknowledge
this this body the legislature
the board of new mexico finance
authority the water trustport
are senior leadership within the
organization to have the four
side and the vision as our
deputy just alluded to to
recognize not only the need but
more importantly the opportunity
but this water trustpoat
technical assistance program you
know kind of looking at it from
a more macro strategic level I
know a lot of conversation today
focused on the tactical on how
we do things but strategically I
think the
essence of this program and the
ultimate goal is really to
establish a framework within the
state of new mexico that
delivers water and a more
efficient effective way and in
order to do that we can start
somewhere in this water
transport technical assistance
programs gives us the ability to
do better planning to be
visionary so that we don't we
balance the needs of today with
the opportunities to ensure that
we're successful twenty years
into the future or so this is
kind of a prepare sir and I
think it really is built in a
couple of key pillars.
And those key pillars are
planning right planning leach to
piss poor performance as I would
say in the military so if we
don't plan you're definitely
going to not achieve what you're
striving for so this program
allows those smaller and the
director of our co
head you know we got
seven hundred or more systems
throughout new mexico and we all
recognize the vast rural most of
our state and the great
distances between our residents
in our constituents with them a
system so it's not as simple as
building a system within a
couple of miles you may be water
running water line for twenty
miles from one house to the next
so that
complicates and bringing some
unforeseen challenges and issues
so the rural mess
was mentioned earlier the fact
that we have are most precious
combodity
distribution system staff by
volunteers.
I'm amazed with that you know I
I served a year and afternoon
and I could tell you
the most precious commodity we
ensured soldiers had in the
barrel field wasn't bullets
anymore beans who was water
because you can live before
twenty seven days a guy should
be like me may be able to go
forty five days without eating
but I can go three days without
water so are most specialist
commodity and that's what we're
trying to really address the
question is how do we ensure a
better delivery system and I
think we got to be forward
thinking and we got to be able
to answer recognize that balance
in between the today and now
needs with building the
framework into the future I
really like to concept getting
to a point where maybe we had
seven eight nine whatever that
magical number is in regards to
regional systems that were
efficient and effective so that
everything that we did today is
building towards that effort and
I think that's kind of what
we're looking at with the
leadership but the finance
authority is everything that we
do today let's make sure that it
supports the ultimate goal of
regionalization and building
effective delivery systems
throughout the the state of new
mexico and with that being said
I do want to acknowledge that we
have partnered a lot we are
collaborating in coordinating
with the state environment
department to ensure no
duplication of efforts and more
importantly as we look across
the line either access of the
whole comprehensive system
what can we do to leverage what
they are doing and so forth so
that resources are maximized and
the effort definitely is
efficient but ultimately you can
see an unslide twenty three
years of general characteristics
of the program it's getting
started I am pleased to say that
although we just recently opened
up the application process we
currently have five applications
that we are reviewing.
I'd like to share those names
with you because they may be out
of your respect of communities I
apologize in advance of
say some of the names and
correctly but i'll do my best
the first one is we have
northwest new mexico utilities
we have the america michael
water and sanitation district we
have the young water and
sanitation district we have a
single mutual domestic water
sociation and where I have the
panel mutual domestic water
consumers so currently those the
five applications that have
submitted
a request for assistance I saw
their setting challenges all to
go out there and ensure that we
maximize the the information so
that we can maximise those three
point five million dollars and
funds and
start building that delivery
system so again I applaud your
efforts and thank you and look
forward to building that water
system and so at some point it's
not staff by volunteers and we
actually have a very good
technical work for southern
thank you
madame charles just add a couple
of more points and they've been
covered really the spirit of
what we're doing but technically
the water trustport is
authorized that the finance
authority to go for and provide
technical assistance to
community water systems that
would like to regionalize after
already done the work we're not
going to convince anybody that
they need to register the to
come forward they need to have
identified as they did with
penyants go a lead a successor
entity that would ultimately run
the water system so as these
neighboring water systems are
really seeing the realities that
they can't have or five systems
within near proximity that
that's just not going to be
workable if they come forward
we're going to provide this team
of contractors to help them
actually.
Facility that regionalisation
you all took a major step with
senate bill one a couple of
years ago that provided a
legislative framework for that
that was a key piece but that's
not enough for many of these
small systems again mostly staff
by volunteers what they needed
our actional attorneys and
financial planners and
accountants to to to take all
these technical things and make
them work so we regularly look
at the lower rio grand water
works authority water or waste
water works authority is one of
the crime regionalization
projects in the state it was
that very thing I think they
started with seven mutual
domestics down and lowered
donate county created a major
authority they had to get
legislative by the recession on
their own
but ultimately the thing that
made that work was that at the
time local government although
department of financial
administration had funding from
governor richardson that just
said just make it happen and so
what they needed were attorneys
they needed accountants they
needed people to figure out
technically how to make this
work they could provide the
leadership but not the you know
it's those are big price tax for
community war systems to come
together so that's what we're
doing here with some of the
money facilitating that regional
station and taking advantage of
the work that the legislature
did and passing the senate bill
one several years ago that
provided that framework for
regionalisation so that's key
and that's really in keeping
with the water trustport's goal
of making water systems more
sustainable over time the second
is done and talked about and
what we're seeing as a planning
again we talked earlier based on
representative kids questions
what stopping these folks lost
more systems aren't in the
position to do this rfp to get
an engineer in so we've hired
engineers and done his
overseeing a project this is we
will then will not provide them
funds to higher and engineer but
we use the water trustport
money's to hire an engineer and
the beneficiaries will be these
local governments so we can get
the right size document for them
we can do the front end.
Part of kind of the efficiencies
of scale because contractors
know they're going to get a
certain amount of activity from
us and they won't get a you know
both plated pr they just need a
regular PE r and if they do need
a call played AP r will also
have the resources to do that so
bright size the planning
document for the projected hand
and make sure that they get a
planning document in their hands
soon enough that they can start
applying for the dollars that
are available either through the
federal funds or through the
water trustport so if those two
pieces of facilitation is more
system planning and
and regionalization are really
key and one thing we kind of
lost over and I I would just
drive your item on page twenty
two one of the changes be made
to the water transport policies
is in support of that regional
station I mentioned earlier that
we have to
that you take on a ten percent
loan if you have a rate paint
constituency which they small
mutual domestics do
up until very recently every
phase that they entered into
they had a ten percent long
component it wasn't until just a
couple of years ago that we
eliminated the second bite at
the apple didn't require
didn't require another long
component but so for a lot of
these small systems there is
actually four loans for one
major project we took on four
phases they have four loans and
those four loans with each other
are really making it almost
impossible for some systems to
come together so if they are
regionalizing there's
consolidation of systems if
they're expanding the unserved
areas where there's physical
inner connections we will then
forgive the existing loan
finance authority well
has the capacity to under the
water transport can forgive
their outstanding depth to
facilitate the regionalization
because after the attorneys have
gotten in after a financial
planners have gotten in they
can't raise the rates enough to
make all these things work if
there's some of these loans like
this.
Place so that's a really
important peace again towards
the goal of as regionalizing and
and making our water systems
more sustainable over time so
I just wanted to highlight that
could be talked about some of it
but I didn't I didn't do the
follow up earlier in my
apologies for that but that's
the last part of it is we're
taking steps to make these
easier and if the water
transports debt is it standing
in the way then the finance
authority will take steps to
eliminate that barrier by extra
giving the remainder of the long
and that we're happy to stand
for questions.
Thank you
our first representative royal
ball coverage and senator
thinking about insurance thank
you all for your presentation so
picky backing off of what I said
earlier and I think you all were
here when I made these
upservations and proposed
some some ways in which we can
assist our local communities I
think all in all it takes a
change of mind sept in order to
change your approaches that's a
bottom line we can't continue
business that usual because
we're familiar with engineering
specs in this way or whatever
you know we have to think
outside and the innovative are
thinking and examine madame
chair systems that have been
working in other places that we
can institute
because again
we just can afford it but can't
afford it time wise we can
afford it money wise so you
taking the regional approach is
actually the best approach
because as an economic developer
communicator with developer
we've always proposed and been
strong opponents of
regionalization because it's
cost effective
and it teaches people madam care
to share share resources share
everything and and thereby
cut back on on everything a man
person our and
money in time which time is many
so I I just don't know how to
emphasize enough the fact that
we need to provide that
direction and the items to our
local community so it brings me
to my question and that is
one of the questions and that is
right now within your staffy
marketed do you have the
capacity
to assign a team or someone to
looking at it at research and
development plane.
Plain in simple rnd in this area
because we're talking waste
water here and water system so I
know it's you have a lot of
charge but in this particular
area
that they can do the research
and assist in the development in
proposing such systems through
their t a through the technical
assistance part of it.
Motion unfortunately I think the
answer to no that's not the kind
of staff when you have and and
and and they're all really
other hands for with the project
loads they have an in place but
I would say that you've sparked
a lot of interest and and
curiosity for my perspective
about waiting which we might
consider what it what a and
adequate document looks like and
that concept of right sizing so
we can add elements to the
required scope of work by the
engineers for waste water to
consider these some of these
other systems that you've talked
about so that's obviously the
colonels perfect but I think we
can start to talk to engineers
talk to environment department
about where that might be
appropriate because again you're
not engineers he's a project
implementation by as you can
tell and we're finance people
but but we do have we have
friends that are engineers will
call on them and see if there
are ways in which we can but
utilize their experience to see
how how we might implement some
of the ideas you brought up
and in you struck the point
right there and that is sharing
they can you will talk into what
we already have existing in
terms of expertise madame chair
and listed their help and
assistance because I think the
top four that I gave you earlier
they are one environmentally
friendly lease water systems
their practical their
sustainable they offer water
quality
and sanitation and reduce the
degree of contamination because
as you know matter as our
systems are working through
various water sources
we are faced with contamination
during human factor
contamination injury due to just
with sword negligence and then
contamination just do lose
systems all systems can
emanating
for other contaminating
ourselves.
That in their
products and ultimately what we
want to do is improve the
public's health and and well
being and I think it's very very
double obviously their success
that's not what we're in the
country so I look forward I know
that everything that i've
suggested throughout the year so
what hasn't just been nice
adjusting but we've suggested
marketer has done an excellent
hub of looking into it and
coming back and reporting and in
fact instituting
many changes so I look forward
to how
this gets reported back and I
think we're bringing I will
certainly bring it back to the
water natural resources
committee into other pertinent
committees as well are being on
this getting into this new white
mindset so that we can
build concerned about the future
population thank you madame.
Senator mentally and then
represented a break.
Thank you very much
so how do you vision you mention
you know that the efficiency for
having a regional water system
I guess the water authority
berlin accounting stephanie is
is a you know it's close to
regional as you can get I mean I
guess it could include it
more of a larger metal area
so of course it's an authority
so you would see that
these other communities would
create these authorities I
imagine and then that would be
the management and basically the
structure to oversee and manage
an omens to stumbles that what
you're
matter sure yes they could come
create authority they can just
have a successor mutual domestic
it really depends on kind of how
much they're corporating what
kind of powers they think they
might need but generally
speaking you identify a success
around whether it's an existing
lot of the existent you know
legacy partners or whether or
not you create a new entity from
all the partners in the table
that you know there may be a
different
solution depending on the kind
of thing that they're doing so
what do you see the challenges
to to doing that I mean I can
see set challenges to doing that
having served you on the local
level but what what do you see
if the challenges in that that
maybe there would be some
hesitancy to do that
leadership
metal character simple girl male
great great points and you know
one of the things
have the opportunity is the
local government division
director was recognized in fact
a diverse are status not only
with our people but just our
communities are cultures and
geographical locations and so
for so I would propose to that
question that when we look at
regionalization that would
recognize and take advantage of
the local regional.
Aspects of a community and
developed models that are
tailored to port
but works and maybe in the
southeast may not work in the
north place to vice versa but be
able to recognize the people the
resources the culture you know
all of those aspects they would
allow for the development and
creation of an entity and it may
come in different forms for
different models but I think the
more we look at our state
regionally then we acknowledge
the fact that we see the
differences the similarities but
we also take advantage of the
differences if that makes sense
no I think that doesn't think
that it's important because of
course we all have different
views on growth and development
for example and that we have
control over our own zoning for
example in the land you'll send
me definitely have different use
on that even in the in earlier
counting there's visa different
use on that
so I know that that about the
regionalization i've I just
thought about how
that could be
really challenging to do and
some communities of particular
and it wasn't an easy thing to
do
in fact we're still we still
have a challenge isn't round
out.
Thank you
I could just say one more thing
I think when you said that we
all jump for the the microphone
because this is really an area
that will experience in a
passion about the leadership is
you know you get to local
leadership that's going to do
that and seize the long term the
bigger picture they can convince
their neighbors that this is in
the best interest you have
issues of different water
quality within the particular
community and someone who's got
great water and they've got a
good system but they are going
to take on the more and older in
each system that may not happen
to go to water all of those
or challenges they'll have to
overcome at a local level that
we have community facilitators
and project managers on our team
to help them work through some
of those issues as long as
they've established you know
from each of the boards of these
legacy groups that they've
established that they they want
to go for it with this but the
peace of the water transport can
help with an addition to hiring
this folks and and using our
experienced staff to help lead
that effort is that taken
together but changes that
they've been made by the water
trust board in its policies have
insanitized
given a lot of incentive to this
process so you can take on you
can as a regional project again
that physical interconnection or
expansion to under unserved
areas you can do that without
match and without a loan so you
can get a hundred percent grant
to complete the infrastructure
that might be necessary for that
to interconnect to expander
services so that is you know
when you're talking about large
projects fifteen sometimes
fifteen million dollars without
a one without match there's some
major consent there for that
kind of activity in the policies
you know also support
regionalization and now with
this new peace that we've just
added that said in addition to
the fact that you could get this
new infrastructure that without
a loan without a match now
there's the capacity to
potentially unburden some of the
smaller communities of their
existing debt.
So it makes it much more
powerless to some of the
residents who are paying their
current water bill and so we're
hoping that these things taken
together will help overcome some
of the issues that that come as
a result of being from different
parts of the water basin or
different communities or
different culture so you know
there's only so much we can do
but we're trying to use the
money in a way that in
saturvices
that that activity example I
think of that working out really
well it's it's getting the
transmission line due to hardly
which the water or did
contribute to that particular
project are processed under way
now just really good and that
was a collaboration by many
agencies
it's just a transportation line
to get to their system but and
then of course they had to get
the water from another entity
altogether and of course the
challenge is there were you know
the the the the rate they were
like what does this mean to us
as repair so i'm not just think
was an easy thing but I think
that's a good example something
working out really well for for
their neighboring community to
urgently also for the city about
okay seven million dollar
project funded by the water
transport.
With a lot more than that we had
a lot of money to thanks
and then we will break for our
tour
thank you very much
and I just want to think
then the commissioner valley for
her work and that expansion of
the water system to partially
because she was very
instrumental
wow
you guys are working so far
I would your
defined role and I give you
those so much credit for what
you're doing.
The.
I mean
you're operational capacity and
my mind that you are doing all
of the things that we're talking
about here
the planning
working with small communities
are the conceptual design
soon probably you're working
with the state engineer these
small communities I mean beyond
the scope of what it is that you
were your agencies supposed to
do.
And matter chair
this is one of the reasons that
I proposed her before ninety two
which is creating a state
planning department because
there is such a need especially
when you start looking at cross
interdisciplines and how are
these discounts should be in her
relating with each other
but my question is though is and
i'm just going to i'll bring the
bringing that bill up again
probably until I leave the
legislature hopefully we get it
before then because this is the
exact reason why we need a
planning department that works
across the disciplines
so
and I
remember i'm a planner and
that's how I think sometimes
kind of nerdy guys and if I get
into the weeds manager you're
welcome to start me when I think
these systems are very expensive
based on the information that
you've given us and and my
knowledge of water systems is
there a model like like a
interactive model that you guys
use and I know the answer is
going to be no but i'm going to
ask the question in any way
because I think we need to put
it on the table is there a model
that you that I don't know state
engineer uses are you guys used
to create sort of a hybrid that
can be used in different areas
based on
the environment the hiddeology
the terrain geography etcetera
that could be adjusted or every
time you do this we create it
from scratch
I just want to think the colonel
for his service thank you so
much for
our freedom thinking.
Well madam chair represent her
important I mean those are all
great questions and I think that
that's really for the the
difficulty license and the
diversity of water systems
across the state day I grew up
in a family of water system
operators we operated water
systems out my father and
grandfather do that worked at
the drinking water bureau as a
technical person as a capacity
to government person and also as
the bureau chief so have
actually been to the vast
majority of the water systems
across the state and there are a
lot of geographical
differences there are automation
logical differences there are a
lot of cultural differences and
and you see that all over the
place but I think it really for
it has to start a small
it could be just a matter of
pulling resources you don't
always have to physically can
access dumpster pulled resources
to to get a lot of these things
done a lot of times it's sharing
engineers hytrologist lawyers
attorneys project managers
financial people all that sort
of thing that that that's a
start ultimately we do want to
get to where we have those
models for a week can reduce the
number of systems and I think
you know executive director
forty earlier you know just
really stated
big fact ten percent of of the
water systems serve seventy
percent of the population and
and so there is all this excess
of several hundred more water
systems out there that are
operating independently and I
think that the biggest problem
that there is really lack of
technical experience that people
that were wanting to do this
type of work before or of the
needs where they can do it
anymore there's no better to
take their place there's nobody
going for water wastewater
certifications at the one two
three or four levels anymore and
and that's the problem you don't
have these technical expertise
in the communities and they're
willing to hire these expertise
of these big engineering firms
out of albert you that are
costing a lot more money than
having then paying people
appropriately in the
communities.
And so I really think that the
model passed has to do more with
with starting with that getting
the technical expertise at the
local levels that can be sure
resources between the
communities or it's not possible
to to physically located in
regionalised that way but you
can regionalize and other weeks
by sharing those resources if
you can set models for that
across the state and and our ceo
mentioned you know one great
example of counting the ultimate
regionalization effort
that that's worked well that's
that's one model and and it
worked there just because
a lot of factors but it won't
work everywhere and so it's
really difficult to just create
one model that's going to apply
across the state this big that's
as fifth largest geographically
in the us it's it's huge and
there are differences but there
are things as you mentioned that
you can plan those documents you
can plan models and and you can
apply them there's a lot of
things that haven't been done
that can be done and madam chair
just raising this issue I I
raise this issue because I think
it points out the need
and things that we need to be
looking at and to the future
report sustainability for
efficiency
and you know we have a lot of
computer.
Generation
models that could be applied
here but we don't have the
capacity it seems to me and you
guys are trying to fill that
that gap but
it stretches so far beyond your
capacity of what what your
police were your agency and I
just applied you guys for what
you what you're doing what
you're trying to do but I think
that this really brings the need
to ask
as the things that we're going
to be meeting in the future in
order to serve the small
communities and you know in
order to create this
regionalization and provide the
service that a water which is
what I said earlier about you
know water as visa and been
an especially in an air state so
I don't know I mean I think I
hope that I know this to read
some of the folks here are on
lfc I think that we need to be
looking into those futures as to
you know and identifying some of
those uhm some of those things
that we're going to need to
legislate and appropriate
funding for so that we can
continue to you know survive so
thank you for that manager I
know I I get like I said I get a
little passionate about this
because the system this is the
work that I do and you know I
just want to see
new mexico become more of
effective and efficient in terms
of how we provide our citizens
thank you
just because I think it's
important but as we have this
conversation something that king
of my mind was being able to
incorporate and representative
gates you said something earlier
that.
Trigger this as well as being
able to bring in are you
our college students the fact
that we now have a engineers to
be part of this solution you
know because ultimately this is
going to be there thursday and
being able to get their mindset
is the representative alluded to
I think there's plenty of
opportunity it just takes a lot
of collaboration coordination
but it would break to get some
open mindedness and and some
ideas from some of these other
folks and take advantage of the
fact that we have kids that are
going to school to become an
engineer maybe they can kick on
as a project preliminary
engineering report for a small
community and that would be
there contribution so thank you.
Representatives
so I think that she knew the
committee I just want to make it
clear
what you talk about wastewater
we're not talking about about
produced water at all no
produced water okay that's it
make sure things.
And just a point of request I
know that there have been
efforts around the state to make
some kind of sort of vacation
for people running small systems
and if if you have a record of
that and the future meeting if
you report as kind of audit of
the programs out there that to
train people not necessarily an
eighty eight degree or degree
but some of them those programs
and then i'll treat the
certification program i'd like
to hear about that in the future
because.
Um we actually have to get
started on her tour but any
final comments before we close
madam sure it would just would
not one thing a lot of the
questions that came up today and
a lot of them
conversations that we're gonna
have in the future I think will
be shaped largely by the
regional planning efforts that
was required from the resiliency
act moderately and see so I
think in the security act I
think that those regional plans
are going to be
kind of spurring on more
conversations with partners and
neighbors it's going to speak on
these models that we've talked
about I think that this
conversation that's going to
expand tremendously we took the
sign sort of as a pilot project
the uh
state engineer make hammer heads
let a large water group I think
some of it still exists as water
ambassadors but there was an
entire group set up to figure
out how to get infrastructure
done more effectively and we had
lots of great ideas coming out
of that group and none of them
got as far as a piece of
legislation and so with the lfc
the end state engineer hammond
worked with representative at a
two yet some of the key pieces
of one of those work groups and
that's what this effort is the
technical assistance that's in
there we can only hire
contractors that's really pilot
this to see if in fact it could
work on a larger scale so i'd
like to say that it was a result
of all the initiative of the
finance authority but it really
is the leadership that was
provided the group effort that
where we identify the resources
and listen ultimately thinking
that we should probably you know
try to pill it this before we
create an entire entity which
was the recommendation of that
group so i'd love to take as
much credit as possible but I
was just one of about fifteen
people on a committee that made
this recommendation and then
ultimately was the one that
could pile at the project so
thank you for your time today we
appreciate it
they always feel like we should
give around the.
But thank you all three of you
and with that everybody should
have a google
of how to get to the next thing
I live senator valley are going
to be traveling with
representative
to
stop that representative has to
do
yeah
sorry it seems like madam chair
there is the I they need as
directions he guess that's what
they were double checking they
may take us a little bit further
than we need to we're going to
bradner damn which is not this
bar so we're gonna double check
on our direction and then we'll
get them out to you but I am
welcome to can follow me follow
me out it's actually kind of a
straight shot
direction going to be given
please rather is br a d n e r
and if you they keep a google
brander reservoir runner down
but it's if you just go out on
hotsprings it's just not as far
this address takes you way up
has to appointment it takes the
takes you pretty part so but I
can take a lead car not even
compared to up and I can try to
do a pin and all send it out
rather than
should we put rental bar or down
okay so google is recognizing
reservoir
spelled I forgot
rather the dr.
Okay and then a reminder we have
a sponsored dinner by public
charter school of new mexico act
on hotels
at six pm
in less we get back at some of
the hour which I think we hope
so six pm
it's right at the front of the
hotel right on the plaza.
