One minute morning.
Okay good morning everybody were
here for day two of the new
mexico finance oversight
committee.
Once again I want a compliment
on the legislators that are here
we do have a corrupt and I want
to think
representative to russia in our
vice chair michael padia senator
padea they couldn't make it
yesterday even though today is
not a full day they are here so
very grateful we're going to
start today with
the report from the cultural
affairs department they are
required to report to us and so
they're here with democracy
great secretary and they will
all introduce themselves take it
away and you are have a handle
already in front of you
bank you madam chairman members
of the committee it's a pleasure
to be here appreciate the time
even though it sounds like I
have to be here but I appreciate
the opportunity
I have with me today I have a r
c f o create guys though to my
rate to my left I have a deputy
director of our facilities
management bureau marco silly
and are behind me a face that
it's familiar to all of you just
a green span are legislative
liaison
deputy secretary galager roberts
isn't able to be here today and
she's really disappointed she
loves being in front of this
committee and talking about all
the green facility work we've
done so she sends her regrets
but the american alliance of
museums actually ask her to be a
real creditor for the ohio state
museum system and their
credition so I think that's a
real compliment to her expertise
to actually be asked to do that
from there as the chairs noted
you have in front of you my
presentation and moving to the
first page our mandate I always
like to start by reminding you
that our job is to preserve
protect and present new mexico's
unique cultural resources for
the education of on the
mexicans.
But especially are you so
everything we do is drive and
buy that mandate
i'm h two
you will see our overview about
our facilities again for those
who have served on this
committee before this will be a
repetition but I know that
you've got some new new members
that I wanted to make sure you
were grounded in some important
box so really are our facilities
are unique facilities that are
designed and specifically built
um to house new mexico's
cultural assets we have at a
national level a truly
exceptional portfolio of
cultural resources we are the
largest and broadest state
cultural agency and we run the
largest museum system in the
country
are facilities are maintained by
us we are not under the gst
umbrella and that is because we
have the expertise and the
knowledge to run those
facilities that maintain these
unique structures
we have over two hundred and
forty structures around the
state and I used the word
structures because keep in mind
some are historic ruins so they
may not be exactly buildings
they may be the footprint of
safe port sell them
nearly half of our facilities
are on a state and or federal
historic registry we have over
one point three million interior
score feet that we maintain on
over a thousand acres and as you
all know we have eight museums
and cultural facilities in all
the macor though uh albequirky
last cruises and santa fe as
well as eight historic sites as
far south as the soon to be open
taylor message historic site in
message all the way up to low
slow sarah senate holiday we
also maintain the new mexico
center for a archeology as well
as the stewart you'd all
building those are both in santa
fe and our facilities and our
collection is valuated over a
billion dollars and that is from
a.
Two thousand and seventeen
report by rld
so it is probably actually a
increased in a significantly
higher at this point
so i'm here to be the
specifically talk about the
cultural affairs infastrate i'm
sorry cultural affairs
facilities infrastructure fund
which really does play a pivotal
role in the preservation and an
enhancement of our cultural
resources it was established by
legislation are in twenty twenty
it is funded annually with an
appropriation from the public
project revolving fun
that is after other costs are
subtracted from it we coordinate
through the department of
finance and administration for
the annual ask because there are
several as you know so the other
agencies that pull from that
funds so we do coordinate with
them
it is used for planning
engineering design construction
renovation and repairs
what is critical about it is
that it is the only source of
regular maintenance fund the
department has otherwise we rely
entirely on capital outlay to
fund basic repairs and
maintenance of our building so
where I say gsd and state parks
have annual recurring funds to
keep those facilities up we do
not so this fund is really
critical in being able to
maintain long term planning for
basic maintenance
and repairs as well as
significant infrastructure
improvements and i'll talk about
one we're very proud of right
now
we administer the fund working
with the face it is non revodent
which allows us um to have that
longer term planning and
strategic preservation bent
since its inception three
million dollars has been
appropriate to the fund and of
those collective appropriations
at this point eighty three
percent is encumbered and
expendit we do maintain a
balance and not fun for
unanticipated repairs and
maintenance.
It's so that remaining
percentage is consciously
maintained so that we can handle
unexpected things and this would
include some recharge recent
each back repairs at a space
history and upcoming repairs
that need to be happened that
natural history and I can talk
more about those if you're
interested
in so maybe not
how we approach our facilities
planning and maintenance overall
we really
are proud we pride ourselves on
having a reputation for a fact
of well planned projects with
tangible outcomes
um the process of doing ongoing
assessment prioritization and
planning is ongoing it happens
throughout the year twice a year
we visit every facility to talk
about major upcoming means and
every division meets with the
facilities bureau monthly if not
in some cases even weekly to
talk about the status of
projects and how they are moving
along
we really focus on critical
needs because we don't have the
funding to do you know to really
focus on big new projects but we
do that as well
we believe in being very prudent
and our investments and we
always use multiple even when
we're using statewide price
agreements we get multiple
quotes to make sure that we're
getting the best value for a
dollar and frankly I think I am
very powered of my team's work
because we do have a reputation
for expending all of our capital
funds any timely fashion with
projects that come in on time
and on budget
come
just to give some contacts in
terms of economic and
community impact about your
cultural resources and
maintaining them are important
um using numbers from twenty
twenty two
the non profit arts and culture
sector in new mexico generated
seven hundred and.
Forty million dollars in the
economic benefit it spent two
hundred and sixty seven million
dollars it supported over four
thousand jobs and it contributed
more than forty five million
dollars to local state and
federal government and and a
survey that was done by
americans for the arts around
arts and economic impact a
ninety nearly ninety percent of
restaurants responded said that
they believe arts and cultural
events and venues inspire a
sense of community pride
so I wanted to give
a timely and very real example
of the impact that this fund has
not only on the department but
on communities
and so if you turn to page six
you'll see some photographs of a
recent fire at the fort stanton
historic site as recently as
yesterday this fire was reported
on in the news
so starting in
three years ago two years ago we
committed to the largest
investment in infrastructure in
fort cents since the p a
that includes a one point one
million from calf one point one
million dollars investment in
upgraded water infrastructure in
may uh the twenty fifth of may a
fire broke out a jason to the
historic site started to move
rather quickly across the
northern part of the state never
the part of the site by the
river and
fire crews were on site
immediately and
we were able to contain the fire
but we were able to do it as
effectively as we did because of
that investment seventy five
percent of the fire hydrants in
that district are at the fort
standing historic site
having those available having
those ready
fire crews were able to contain
that fire and keep it from
spreading further so we did lose
a couple of structures and we
didn't.
Incurs some damage to if you're
familiar with forec standards
that german internal count
portion of the same however as
ern green wall who is the
director of the linking county
emergency services the fire
would have spread much further
and much more quickly had had
not been for the new water
infrastructure additionally this
new water infrastructure
resulted in and improved
insurance services office rating
uh the county went from a six to
i'm sorry there's a type of
social six to a five but
actually went from a six to a
four so a two point improvement
and what that has done is that
it's resulted in linking county
receiving more investment from
the state firemarket as well as
it has actually reduced home
owner premiums across the
county.
This is lincoln county where
there has been significant buyer
damage and we through this
investment actually have managed
to lower home owner insurance
premiums
the fire chief says fort
standings are largest water
system and the improvements made
there since twenty two thousand
and twenty two have made at the
**** in lincoln county so this
is a really I think important
example of why it is important
that the department has the
funds to make these kind of
investments and these aren't
about exhibit I mean we may use
it for exhibits we may use it
for each back systems but we do
use it for critical
infrastructure investments and
specifically water investments
so I just really want to
highlight that um because it is
so timely I mean it's less than
thirty days since this has
happened
quickly I wanted to tell you a
little bit about how we have
spent and will be spending the
money we have already received
in the past and current fiscal
year we were able to put it new
member in roof at the corner to
historic site we did additional
refloring and paint repairs at
fort stand historic site if you
have not been to for itself in
the past I would say twenty four
months it is worth going back
for a visit there's the site is
being transformed new buildings
are being opened by a readings
are increased include improving
we also put a new fireproof roof
on the main building at the
historic site and how plans to
do more so really go back
forgive the scousine that's just
more works and product progress
but it's it's been a
substantive change there would
you replace the roof on the
history and literary arts
building at the national
hispanic cultural center and
that is the historic building
that is on the property at the
cultural center
we did so a loan replacement or
will be doing so line
replacement comp.
To comply with
environmental regulations that's
going to be across the state we
also have plans to use one point
three million dollars of this
fine as marching funds for a few
more ground that looks like it
is going to proceed for it
that'll be
fire mitigation across the state
including boscarodondo again
fort somewhere and also at least
lusaros
and we are also this last one is
an interesting we are going to
use some of the money to demon
uh demolish non contributing
buildings apart stanton so while
that seems a little odd
maintaining buildings that are
not considered historical
contributing to the property
will reduce fire risk if you
leave them there they're not
used
they fall into disrepair and in
the event of a fire some of
these buildings are real tender
box so we've worked with the
historic preservation officer to
get clearance to demolish a few
of these buildings were also
doing a huge project to remove
trees and replace trees and
again we've worked with historic
preservation and steep forestry
and determining how to do the
strategically a lot of the trees
there are dead and dying there
at the end of the life cycle so
more that kind of real world
impact
looking forward if we are um
able to maintain funds for this
year and get another
appropriation we're going to do
things like replace each back
units at the bosco redonder
memorial of for it some of their
we're gonna upgrade the
sprinkler system in the tombar
building at the uh space history
museum
that is the
education building and the
planetarian so very important
that we have that good fire
sprinklers there
were going to do the second
phase of theater upgrades at the
new mexico farm and ranch museum
that i'll include the fire
curtain that all theaters are
required to have and have a
limit in life span fire
detection at the historic
hosient and.
A victory of victorian cottage
at losley sarah's
at the hosienda we received a
federal grant of almost a half
million dollars so we're doing
the first major renovation and
preservation work on that
incredibly important structure
and so we're gonna
when that is done obviously
we're going to want to make sure
we have a good fire system in
there
more roof replacements at uh the
tonstel store
water drain edge around the old
church at the heme's historic
site and then also preservation
and a rehabilitation of the
chavers library building that
the new mexico history museum
which is also part of the
historic structure of that site
so that's just a very brief
overview of why we why this one
is so critical for us how we use
that how we plan our projects
and with that madam chair we're
happy to answer questions
thank you madame secretary and
thank you for the real nets in
bolts explanation I think that
really benefited us that it will
now open for questions
representative kits
I think you madam chair and and
I want to thank you as well this
was a great presentation
showing where investments are
for the historical inner
practical and um and I very much
appreciate also the
prioritisation of water making
sure these historical sites is
cultural areas have access to
the the best sewage and and as
well as poor potable water so
thank you
I had a couple of questions
I o o one a brag that i've been
to almost every single one of
these sites and I love them so
thank you as well I am a proud
sponsor of this bill um
is the funding.
For the maintenance of all these
facilities
only come from capital outlay
the public projects do we have
anything as a rear cream general
funner do you have to go in
negotiate for a budget every
year
manager representative cates
members of the committee
beyond buried very very basic
maintenance things like um you
know putting a new
soap dispenser in a bathroom no
we do not have a significant
source of recurring funding for
maintenance and operation as all
capital outlay and this one
that is surprising to me
especially since as we try to
diversify our revenue streams in
the state and uh so adequately
showed that we did these sites
who have generated it about
seven hundred and forty million
dollars here that's very
impressive
um
I don't have a number I see her
how many sites are underneath
the cultural affairs
so we have eight museums it
historic sites and then ah the
you'd all building in the center
for archeology so that's
eighteen
thank you I just didn't see the
magical number okay now I have
line request
I appreciate and I understand
the emergency of addressing the
the water system
in the museum and natural
history located in our turkey um
I do feel like we have lost
opportunity in the
aa I hate to call it landscaping
cause it is not landscaping it
is part of the educational
museum to showing the
environment and it's the museum
itself and so I hope that why I
am i'm interested in future
plans.
As we address the premier museum
and our state for this subject
matter to be able to have an
outdoor environmental that it's
reflected of of what you in
regional ten west
madame chair if I may
represent and accades members of
the committee yeah that
that issue has a popped up
increasingly on my radar over
the past thirty forty five days
so I appreciate you bringing it
up
and I think we're going to
probably look at doing
see if we can find the money to
do some landscape improvements
as part of um
as part of those renovations
one of the issues is that
educational garden that you were
talking about is intended to
represent all of the different
environments across the state of
new mexico which is a lofty
ideal but in fact very hard
given that you know really it's
down to microclimate so I think
that we can work on a way that
may be addresses um
albair or the different
environments in and around
albuquerque we're definitely
going to have to work with
somebody that has a sense of
what can actually be achieved
but III hear and impact agree
with your statement that on
landscape being around that
museum is entirely an adequate
and that's currently there's a
lost opportunity to educate
around natural history so I
appreciate you bring in that up
it confirms it should absolutely
be on my rate and thank you
manager and thank you very much
for your time in a very thorough
presentation.
Next we have senator on malley
the representative block
representative break out
representatives
thank you madame chair
secretary will so i'm new to the
standard so I hope that you will
forgive me if I ask questions
that maybe seem obvious and to
the answer seem obvious so we're
looking I mean this is about the
infrastructure fund which my
understanding is it's just for
maintenance but not for
operations is that correct okay
so the operations for these
facilities what is that money
come
madam chair senator malley
members of the committee
operation of my agency comes
through a combination of general
fund appropriations federal
funding and revenue generated
from admissions as well as
grounds and some private
planning through our partner
foundations so the um structure
of my agency has
and want to be careful not a
formal public permit partnership
but in spirit of public private
partnership um is that the state
takes care of a facilities
operations and personal and we
work with our private funders to
find education and exhibit
programs
do you do you have any
agreements for example just use
bob since it was brought up the
new mexico natural history
museum so um you know that's an
area that you know is there's a
lot that's going on their
redevelopment efforts and so you
have been involved in that
and
so I guess my question is what
have you do you have any
agreements with let's say a city
or county to
to do joint operations for
anything or there was any
partnerships like that
madam chair repairs senator
members of the committee yes so
to start with your specific
example of the natural history
museum we have a long standing
and very successf.
Full partnership with aps two to
educational programming
specifically through the send
the amount in the center
we also have a partnership in
macea with the town of mcf or
maintenance of the historic
message plaza that is an
extremely valuable partnership
for us because the city does
maintain the plaza
we work closely with the city of
alberty and have been working
with them as you know on all the
everything this happened in
right now around that mountain
regent the street construction
were also working with them on
the rail trail at natural
history and and conversations
about uh in acc
beyond that we don't have direct
relationships for operation of
these sites.
I think
that is a pretty heavy
ambustment in my experience most
local governments are struggling
to take care of their own
museums or on cultural
facilities are on libraries and
often times actually look to us
to help do that okay
and so it's up just to bring
this back to the natural history
museum so I don't know how to
see it but over the years it's
looked kind of shabby how does
and so this is suspension this
is a premier museum I mean it
has some other while it
certainly was at one time and it
was top of you know believe
how do they get
money for their exhibits
madam chair senator members of
the committee through a variety
of
of mechanisms so some recent
examples specific to the natural
history museum
two years two sessions ago use
appropriators we're very
generous and improving the six
million dollars special
appropriation for exhibits
natural history was on top of
that and where's that the the
division that spent the most out
of that fund to do renovations a
ended up pulling almost a
million dollars and from that
fund so almost a six of it and
you see that reflected and the
new hall that they just opened
up the first for innovation on
the
um additionally the foundation
the museum in new mexico
foundation has been an
outstanding partner and helping
to fund
renovations and including
these are contractor from.
Bradberry stem just made a
significant investment I think
it was a half million dollar
investment that will find future
exhibit renovations
additionally we do utilize
capital outlay
to help do exhibit those are
usually taken from the
individual capital outlay
appropriations
those we tend to want to use for
things like exhibits and do our
best to take care of operation
needs out of this fund and
capital outlay so those are some
examples of how we find new
exhibits and speak into the
larger topic
tony fear all of the executive
director he's been in the
position for a little over two
years with categorically agree
with you that that museum is in
need of a significant update to
its permanent example in his
stop has a multi year plan to
get there
you will see as part of you know
the closure and the reopening
they are going through and
they're going to do some very
basic cleaning and that's our
most traffic exhibit rate so or
museum so they're gonna do some
very basic cleaning to the
exhibits which is hard to do
when you have you know visitors
coming through they're also
going to do some label updates
and basic technology upgrades so
while it's not going to be quite
where people want on social
media in terms of a major
overhaul you should see some
significant improvements and the
existing exhibits and know that
there is a long term plan that
we will very much be relying
upon individual capital outlay
and the private sector to help
them forward okay good to hear
thank you madame secretary thank
you
representative like
thinking madame thinking of
secretary
sorry about the back and forth
so most of my questions actually
were answered which is good I
just had one question.
Pertaining to how you guys
recruit.
Such as a curator for example
because I know it's a field
where it's very expensive and I
just wanted to maybe get your
insight on what you guys do when
it comes to salary when it comes
to getting these people tune to
mexico because i've been to all
of our exhibits all of all
across the sea I don't know if I
beat representative cades but
i've been to pretty much
everything in the whole state
regarding your department so I
just want to make sure that
we're adequately putting that in
our budgets because it's not
capital I wish it was because
i'd give you more capital but
could you just open on that for
me madam chair adam secretary.
Madame chair representative
members of the committee
it is it is a challenge to
attract top town in those
curatorial fields at the
salaries we are able to offer
last session
I did spend a lot of time
talking about the fact that we
are underfunded in our general
fund for personnel and we are
maintaining a fairly are you
going to see our vacancy rate go
up because we've had to
implement a soft hiring views to
stay with and are appropriations
to even fund the positions that
we have at the p rates that we
are able to pay so you have
identified a critical name that
moving forward should really
help the department move to the
knox level if we were able to
increase the general fund
appropriation to the two
hundreds and move folks up on
those pay skills uh it would
help a lot and since it's and
and that would also apply to our
museum directors
I
we we are not necessarily we are
in no way competitive with a
private museum executive
director but that is a
difference at a duties and that
that often includes raising not
only your salary but the entire
salary of your staff as well as
all your operating so that's a
fundamentally different equation
and and I acknowledge that
better our museum directors are
really
under market rate too and it
does represent recruiting
tallenges in in your district
the space history museum has
been without a permanent and
director for over a year and
offer was made to account it and
the canada turned it down in
part because of the pay rate so
it applies to our classified
south and tour got back stuff
and it is a critical need
thank you madame chair and thank
you for that madam secretarian
and that's kind of where I was
coming from with it because they
definitely want to get good
people to our different sites
across our state.
And we'd spend so much money to
maintain these sites right like
you talked about and all the
actual revenue that's coming in
we also I guess technically you
guys probably work hand in hand
with the department of tourism
because that's what people come
to see new mexico our sites are
arts etc so yeah I mean I I just
hope the finance department and
other people on the finance
committee are listening to this
because this is a huge key to
keeping our state.
Well how maybe not keeping our
statement is pretty low and all
the metrics but in this
department i'm sure it's higher
than that so hopefully we keep
on raising it and uh yeah I just
hope they put the money
necessary in your budget for
next fiscal year but yeah keep
up keep up the pressure
if you need me to like publicly
say I would please don't give
them money just that you
actually get money i'll be happy
to do it thank you madam chair
represented a break of
thinking out of chair thinking
madame secretary is really great
to to meet you this morning
I had a really nice conversation
this morning with some of your
staff.
And um just wanted to mention
i've worked with your department
in the past quite significantly
when we were locating that the
spanish cultural center and and
actually when we were building
it and also the natural his
history museum in my work that I
did as a city planner
I wanted to mention
and I and I have spoken man of
chair with the director so I
want to say that
i'm not exactly sure what has
been done about this but not I
think you're like two years ago
maybe I took my mom who's ninety
now she's choose then like
ninety six
two performance at the hispanic
cultural center and by the way
if you find a diamond bracelet
on the grounds it happens to be
my him
yeah when we broke ground on
that property I lost my time
ex husband gave me
just a four
but anyway took my mom to a
performance for my little heart
will great granddaughter who was
dancing and
there is that area where you
drive up in its clothes and
I tried to get a wheel chair for
her and there was only one in
the whole facility and it was
already been used so walking
here in was quite a nightmare
I talked to zack about it
because I was really really
upset about it
and I am bringing these issues
up because eighty eight to me is
very important
you know and I just want to make
sure and I haven't done what
representative of case is done I
don't know where for its stanton
I have never that's one place I
need to go but I just want to
make sure that we are.
Accommodating
people who are handy capped and
that we have the needs to be
able to accommodate them I mean
were more standard being at the
capital bringing my mom to
opening day that door was so
heavy it was just really hard to
you know maneuver but I mean
these are real issues for new
mexicans that you know
what to visit these locations so
I just want to be sure that you
guys have the
necessary equipment to be able
to accommodate
you know r disabled new mexicans
and chairs so I just bring that
up I hope that you could take a
look at that and
do you have any comment
regarding the yes madam chair
representative members of the
committee first I apologize i'm
sorry that you and your mother
had that experience that's an
acceptable and really clouded
what should have been a joyful
experience of seeing a ground
child um so i'm sorry that's
happening I will follow up was I
can see if his uh staff have
ordered additional wheel chairs
additionally we are you know
eighty eight compliance is eight
ongoing issue right it's never
done
so each division has a debt mine
of I believe a year from now to
update their eighty eight plans
update their eighty priorities
we do have a member of our
facilities team who is very well
first in eighty eight
requirements you did serve um he
worked for the governor's
commission
and advises of us gives us very
good advice on how to do that we
also have um an accessibility
committee um that means monthly
to talk about accessibility and
all sorts of ways so it's
facilities expossibility
websites accessibility language
accessibility
in it sounds like I agree with
you that his manicultural center
thank you for all of your
working giving us that beautiful
center.
It is a very large countries and
the park game for a variety of
reasons that you know as well as
I do are you know is that the
foreign that the site yeah moved
and we did have to put the gate
up
not that that does you any good
because it's still what forty
fifty feet to the to the
performing art center for a
period of time stuff was using a
golf current to help people but
that has risk management has
concerns about people writing in
a vehicle so I will ask mark go
to work with his staff and then
his manner cultural staff to see
if there is a way
you know off hand it seems like
we have folks who park in the
back and and there is loading
talking about a house stuff but
that is much closer and maybe we
could increase the number of
eighty eight spaces in the back
of the building it's not the
best entrance but it is a
shorter entrance and not and
start to figure out how we can
do it because those distances
between buildings are
significant and if you don't
have a wheel terror it's even
it's it's near impossible there
are other people who would have
turned around the mountain
secretary I very much appreciate
your taking a look at that I
know that there was when I
talked to zack
director can tettle he said that
the fire chief for some reason
or fire marshall for some reason
closed off that little drop off
area and I can understand you
know with sort of all of the
situations that we've had with
public buildings kind of why
that might have happened but
if you just will take a look at
that the other thing man chair
was in talking to your staff
this morning they mentioned
about a huge infrastructure need
that you're going to be having
are you are having at the
natural history museum and
having done redevelopment for
downtown I understand how old
the infrastructure is um but you
didn't mention any of that in
your presentation so.
I missed i'm gonna put that on
the table kind of cause I think
that's an important point that
all of us need to know about.
Think you madam chair
representative members of the
committee yeah I I wanted to
focus on ford stanton but
we are using a portion of this
one to find some really critical
uh sewer needs at the natural
history museum so the store line
at the natural history museum is
over fifty years old at this
point
through a series of interesting
and probably very logical at the
time decisions successive bases
of the building have placed this
remind directly under the center
of the building so if you put in
the front of the building and
walk all the way through the
lobby and go out through the
education fight you're walking
over the summer mean and marco
has spent hours upon hours
looking at solutions and the
reality as we need to tear up
the entire floor replace the
site sewer of mine and move on
so we are taking that obviously
is a massive loud and unpleasant
process so we
decided that it was in
everybody's best and trust our
stops on safety visitor
experience contractor safety to
close the building to do that
we were able to find funds to
then do some much needed lobby
renovations and the front of the
lobby if you've been there
recently you know it's really
not well designed people get
kind of caught up and and you
know it's confusing where to go
to take it in um the sharp
sitting right in the middle of
where it could be right at the
front and the store in front so
we're doing a pretty significant
lobby renovation
we're also going to go ahead and
replace the skylights in the
main atra which have needed to
be replaced for some time
we're looking at adding the
landscape in project and we're
also doing the
exhibit upgrades that we talked
about that project is funded in
part with this and part with
some state wide capital outlay
so I don't at this moment have a
capital need not gone plastic
table.
We won't find anything when we
start breaking ground but that
is funded but that is a huge
act and it's not going to be a
diamond bracelet unfortunately
we're taking in the wrong site
so it's it's a significant
undertaking it was it was a
shock in discovery but honestly
I think we've done the best we
can to create an opportunity out
of the challenge and and again
this funding is critical and
being able to make that
opportunity out of the challenge
because the worst thing we could
have done but have been to shut
that museum for six months and
people walk back and and it
looks the same and they're like
why were you close like well go
use the restroom you'll notice
it goes down butter I I mean you
can't do that we can't do that
to our visitors so
and it will see during the
closure we are working with
stuff to do education and
outreach programs so we recently
replaced our main mobile exhibit
you know the we call it the wow
down wonders on wheels to be we
replaced if we have a brand new
one the older one is still
usable for regional travel so
we're gonna load in an example
from the natural history museum
that will be able to go to
schools and the opportunity
greater burmalio area will be
able to go to senior centers
other events were developing a
traveling exhibit that we will
circulate with our other
troubling exhibits through the
state library will be continuing
to do the programming at sending
a mountain center so we're
really trying to find ways to
continue to serve the public
while we're close so thank you
for bringing that up it is a a
big issue in my department right
now I I and I think you for
expanding on that I think it
just highlights the need that
these basic services like
infrastructure are very
expensive and you know sometimes
that reflects on our landscaping
and just one final comment
manager while I have the
secretary here is when you look
at the landscaping sure and look
at zero scape.
Thank you thank you manager
representative shorossa and then
represented a royal ball
cupboard thank you madame chair
thank you madame secretary so
i'm supposed to reintroduce
myself on representative that
are says we start us and from
either on catherine county and
i'm just a local business
mandate it's over city
technically we had I guess they
had a debate of what I really do
whether it's a mortition and
undertaker or a funeral director
I answered all three but fuel
directors kind of the new york
chat so but it's a beautiful
place i've married have five
kids
through them are no longer free
loaders they're productive
people and society and two more
in high school so where were we
were joined sover city we had a
big fires you know
thank the lord we we we are we
made it through that and looks
like these are going to be okay
thank the lord
I was looking madam chair and
member secretary I understand
that if I twenty five twenty six
all those capitally
projects are funded is that
right and so then I was looking
at you fy twenty seven and it
seems to be about two and a half
million dollars is that of asks
as that sound about rate I just
can added a quick manager of
representative members of the
committee those are highlights
off of our capital and private
plans so yes it does add up to
that amount but our upway twenty
four twenty seven I can pays
about twenty five million total
okay so many chair I think but I
was one of those and and men of
secretary is you have about a
billion dollars and assets I
heard a lot of things here one
of them was maintenance another
one was as was payroll our
issues right and
and so i'll start with a
maintenance is there is there.
Do you have at least if you went
back in history and looked to
see manager amount of secretary
how much you're average costs
over the last five years were
for maintenance would you happen
maybe no roughly with that
numbers running
madam chair representative
members of the committee
it would be difficult to give
you a number with any specific
amount what I will say is we
been running between ten and
twelve million and i'm tenant
twenty million in uh capital
projects
this physical year between
capital outlay and half we had
about ten million the prior year
the part two years I was about
fourteen and after twenty two
which included you know that was
a good year for a capital outlay
that was about seventeen million
so that's what we've been
getting to maintain
are current level minimum
manager model secretary but some
of that is is is not only is
that all meat themselves or was
that capital that live where
you're expanding our purchasing
new equipment or or just you
know it i'm talking about
general maintenance if I
understood your your concern
representative i'm and so madam
chair representative members of
the committee
I could give you a number that
we have in our general funder or
specifically great could give
you that number
it's it's insufficient
we are keeping the buildings
running
for instance a track units win
the natural history museum needs
new age back you know we go in
and we put in our icip and we
put them out year after year
after here and we literally go
through and replace one unit at
a time to fees things nhc needs
to be restocked it's coming up
on twenty five years old we do
that.
One building on one place at a
time so i'm really proud of my
teams ability to adopt and to
phase projects and to get
meaningful work done with the
resources they have but it is a
peace mail approach that
probably at the end of the day
and cost in the state more right
to bring a contractor out once
and replace all your age back
units is much more efficient
than doing them over a time the
other thing is the cost and you
know escalation and inflammation
that ever are inflation that
everybody has seen those dollars
are going
reach in a shorter and charter
differenc.
All of your projects over five
year period which i'm sure you
guys have a plan but they have
AAA running fund you have a find
of
five million dollars for you
able to five ten million
whatever that number is that
magic number so that you're not
waiting for capital outlet to
replace and their conditioner
voucher they should have a they
should have a fund and then the
fund then we as a legislature
then we plenish the fine based
on need rather than the other
way around
and I think that's that would
make you
plan your planning your
estimates would be better
because you're getting estimates
but they're not going to work
madam chair because if I go
there and I I want to build a
new house right now and they
tell me they give me the price
it doesn't work for funerals
honestly you come today and you
see me in five years it's not
going to be the same price it's
just the way it works the way of
the world so it's important
manager for them to have that
fund to make more I think it
would make you more number and
then after that then we back
fill what you lost and keep and
then work on every once every
three to five years look to see
where that were that average is
running and depending on what
your future plans are if we want
people to enjoy the the the art
and the americans that new
mexico has its beautiful
we need to be
operating on it and a nimble
basis the other thing manager is
I was listening this is
something that I think the whole
entire state of new mexico has
you know sometimes.
Private business i'm trying to
think of how to see it nice
private businesses at this point
to that that we're not paying a
good fun you know pain or wages
and salaries properly but the
truth of it is in the business
in the business world
if i'm not taking care of my
employees manager they're gonna
go work for someone else
and and and I need him to be
happy I I like they tell my
staff and i'm sure manner sector
if you want I want to walk in
this building with a good happy
I want my replace to walking
happy and I want to spoke to
work together in its work for me
really well but we but that's an
important part is is being able
to stay in your family and your
needs and I think madam chair
that does all we need to really
look at not just your department
right but the entire structure
of of pay through state jobs
because I think what happens I I
don't know this for a fact but
i'm going to throw this out
there you're probably training
madam chair and our secretary
people in your in your in your
business part right in your
department and then they get
changed just enough to go work
for someone else and so we've we
find that we spend the money to
train people who cannot at that
here
we educate them to go work for
somebody else and instead of
investing for long term
relationship I I think that's
something that we should really
look at
since we're on that point i'm
just going to throw out i'm on a
role here but i'm sure
I make it something that we
should really look at on our
honor on the youth on where
we were educated in a new mexico
and when they graduate to leave
us
we need to find a way to keep
i'm here and one of those things
as to in my opinion would be to
ask him to stay two years and
give back to new mexico the.
The the the people who educated
but those are just some might
thoughts and and you know when
you have a billion dollars in
assets you're struggling to just
maintain regular things that's
kind of shocking
I hope that we would check those
starts and and maybe do
something with them in the next
day but it's just thank you very
much manager
man of chair representative
members of the committee thank
you for all your points and and
I can current with them I will
say that one of part of what
makes this fun critical is that
that is a little bit how we use
there so I noted that were
eighty three percent committed
are expendite at twelve percent
we really do hold back four
things like sure lines each back
so we are between that and some
statewide capital outlay that we
hold in for emergencies we've
created that system but it's not
funded in the way account so we
we proven that that works that
if you give us a part of money
that we can draw from a news and
plan with we can do that right
now we're having to use this
fund in capital to do that some
manager to say can finish that
point what are you how much
would you like for that I don't
stop precedent twelve thirty
percent of of what is that a
number and what should the real
number be existing person is
just tell me how much you think
you should have an excess in in
in dollars manager
representative members of the
committee given
given the cost escalation that
we're seeing I I think to be
meaningful that fund would have
to set it fifteen to twenty
million I believe that thank you
manager and then in terms of
employees I do I I hear what
you're saying and I agree and I
one of the things that has been
the greatest pleasure of having
this job has been working I i'm
thirty years in government has
been working with some of the
most dedicated passionate
government employees that I have
ever had the privilege to work
with people work in this
department it is not about.
The paycheck although we all
need the paycheck might be a
little bit about the health care
we all need health care pension
definitely but there is a
passion there is an interest
there is a vocation and an out
vocation and that keeps people
here and I think that is a
greatest asset in terms of
retaining employees
it in return it would be nice to
be able to pay them more and it
would be nice to be able to keep
some I have always believed you
want to employ people that other
people want to tick from you
that is the highest compliment
to you as an employer that
somebody else wants your
employee
and I will save generally when
we see people move we see them
moving to other museums in sort
of the state I just
found out one of our deputies is
going to be moving on to a
museum and it kind of hurts but
i'm glad cheeks it's going to be
saying in the state
and I and since we are out
highlands I do want to say we
have a great relationship with
highlands and their internship
program and we use a lot of the
internships from their museum
etcetera program in our division
and I think that to your point
that's critical i'm i'm foreign
raised thirteen generation new
mexican I had to go away to get
my education but I came back the
soonest opportunity I can't I
could there are so many careers
related to cultural assets
including accounts right there
are so many ways you don't have
to be creative to work in this
department to be around it that
we really do need to to help new
mexican see those opportunities
growing up and now that you can
work even if you don't work for
the state you can work for the
opera even if you're not a
singer so thank you for putting
a point on that
thank you manager thank you
madame sixty representative
cabinet
think you madam chair and
thinking about secretary and
panel for being here this
morning I have just AAA couple
of questions in and a comment
i'm going to start with I
remember he.
Um why is global leader once
stating that sharing our culture
is one of the best ways to unify
people's overcomplex so if you
want to talk about how we're
going to negotiate a conflict
let's go watch a cultural
presentation or visit a museum
and will speak and so that that
always resonates with me because
this is an important
department and
critical fire state of new
mexico especially because of
strong cultural traditions we
have in the state so I wanted to
state that also i'm looking at
your page on value of cultural
resources and i'm just curious
this has in twenty twenty two do
you have any updated or what is
the most updated
data that you have
managed her representative
members of the mini twenty
twenty two is the most updated
information we have it was part
of a nationwide survey that
americans for the art
dead
so this is the most updated
number
thank you madame chairman thank
you madame secretary because the
numbers that you have here are
extremely impressive and
important for us to to look at
because of in particular
the bullet it says contribute at
forty five point three million
and local state and peter
government revenue I think
that's an important point to
note and it goes back to what
this wise go leader mentioned
that
anyway so question on the third
bullet supported four thousand
three hundred and thirteen new
mexico jobs
madam chairman secretary with
you are these long term or are
the long term jobs or are they
career
positions or are they project
driven.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee I would
want to go back to the study to
answer that questions
specifically however the study
itself looked at
both direct employment as well
as ansalary benefit so somebody
working at the cultural center
but also the restaurant down
from the cultural center and the
the you know the waitress that
has employed there
thank you madam chairman and
thank you madame secretary our
look this may be the direct this
may be direct numbers as it
given the size of it forgive me
for interrupting this maybe the
direct number but i'll get you
the answer okay that would be
helpful again to help support
the growth and recurring funds
that we need to look at sold my
final question has to do with
language and arm
i'm curious as to how many
languages d all of the entire
all of the facilities are
equipped to
serve the public that comes
through from different countries
can you answer that one question
madam chair representative
members of the committee all of
our facilities can assist uh
spanish language visitors
the ability to help other
languages varies depending upon
the location so for instance we
have a customer service
representative who works at the
space history museum that is
able to
communicate with german visitors
which is actually a fairly
common
visitors from germany at space
history and lincoln historic
site are it's a barely high
percentage but it really varies
from location to location
at some of our historic sites we
do have individuals who can
speak to visitors in
indigenous languages
particularly those that are
spoken by.
The community is being
represented
not to thank you madame chairman
madame secretary so way to gauge
based on the visitor
blogs and other type of
information that we gather how
many other countries or
languages visit our facilities
yes madame chair representative
we can do that and I can tell
you that the spanish language is
is the highest it's thank you
madame chair i'm i'm a little
bit surprised because i've been
to a number of the facilities
and I could other
visitors speaking either
a variation of chinese languages
french italian
I can't remember all of the
languages but there and I can
understand that predominantly
would be spanish and and why I
also suppression is because
it's really important to be able
to increase our numbers by
offering
language arm accessibility for
lack of another word
to our general public visitors
so I would definitely be
interested in looking into how
we might increase that and I
think it should be part of the
operational funds as well to be
able to offer
increased services as per what
we what the data shows obviously
in the languages and then I also
I think it's important because
this is the secondary part of a
madam chair the question and
that is that we did pass a
language access act and each
department was too comply with
that language access act so that
it's not just for meant for
employees with the public but
it's meant horror your
department in particular.
Say just an example of how we're
outreaching to the general
public because anything that can
increase tropic increases
revenue and actually make sure
department stronger sold madame
chair and and madam secretary
i'll look forward to looking in
visiting with you more on this
thank you very much
I have a few questions I think
what kept shop on our agenda
timing with the next two
just so people know also want to
mention that they're gonna
prepare a light lunch for us
that will be takable I think
madam secretary thank you I
really like the netson bolts and
i've some nets and bots
questions many of us here are
would like to be at our
legislative finance committee
meetings but because overlap
being
meetings we may not hear the
presentations you give several
of us are on site senate finance
or house appropriations so some
of these things i'm not
expecting you to answer now but
the interest may one is as you
look at the funding of the
public private reporting fund
and I always come glad to hear
that we're getting increased
money for specialized caretakers
when I see you that's my first
thing I think about
but
what i'm interested in is the
breakdown of
the money from the fund that
gets distributed then money from
state capital outlay that
doesn't go through individual
legislators and then the money
that we give specifically to our
own projects I don't know if
there is a chart for that and
then the federal funding I don't
know how much federal funding
you get for which projects
you've referred to some of them
but how federal financial
budgets are going to affect that
is even a source that can be
considered.
So I don't know if there's a way
to charge that
probably you have a lot of that
data but it's not like on a
chart where when you come to
house appropriations we can
understand that so that's a
request and then a second
request is to chart the highest
to the lowest public visitors
especially student groups
eternally per natural history
history museum for me as a
parent of a taller it's it's the
diagnosis and they ever remove
the wooden eggs from the sand I
will be very upset
anyway
there knows that i'm talking
about
but i'd be interested because
obviously the wear and tear on
places like that it's going to
be much more than maybe outdoor
facility that needs good past
ways accessible to real chairs
and stuff like that but doesn't
have thousands of school
children handling everything
breaking things accidentally
whatever so it be interesting to
see that the bar you but was
special attention to the fact
that these are incredible
educational facilities so that's
a question I have and then
see
my last question is just a short
question and that's the same I
know the rules will art museum
is basically been destroyed the
art from the flooding recent
plugs they've talked about
having to build a whole new
museum does the cultural bearish
department have consulting with
those museums that are not under
its auspices
thank you madame terr excellent
questions all of them so yes we
can get you a current breaking
down the various years as I I
have it here but to read it to
you will be nonsense took all so
I will get to a breakdown of
what that looks like.
Regarding the federal funds the
majority of the federal funds
that come directly to the state
are used to support the state
library the historic
preservation division and new
mexico arts so three divisions
that do not have capital
state library we've used capital
replace the the windows on
wheelbass
federal cuts are going to have
an impact on those it will be a
matter of where I am currently
in the prior process of
prioritising those funds so that
I can enter into conversations
with both the executive and the
legislature about
recommendations about where we
might need to do some back
phillies and right now i'm
looking at where statutory and
regulatory authority as the
primary one and then ripple down
impacts into what it will do to
local communities so I will have
that and and will be prepared
during the session to talk about
that and what that looks like
but in terms of facilities
finding we really don't use
fabrograms funds for that where
those mostly come into play and
where we have hot impacts is the
removal of discretionary funds
from the institute of museum on
library studies and the national
endowment for the humanities we
have had grounds that are
through or if foundations and up
to us pulled back from those
funding sources and those will
result and exhibits not getting
done so it does have an impact
it is indirector or foundations
to your last oh we will be able
I I would be able to get you a
chart of use and use by
population for me when we're
looking at a facility that is
heavily trafficked by young
people
it is it is not only wearing
tara but also the prioritization
of things like fight basic life
and ncf
you know a fire at the natural
history museum we will have a
lot of little bodies that we
need to get out of the building
very quickly and do we have
systems that will give us
sufficient time do we have
pathways that will get us out so
that is.
Of responsibility that keeps me
up at night to be honest with
you and I am sorry refresh my
memory on your last question
rather well rise well yes so yes
absolutely we do have capacity
and we have been working with
the roswell art museum so the
night of the flood I got three
calls immediately from a couple
legislators and from the
governor and me and my deputy as
well as or had a conservation
and one of our registrators were
on the ground and rose while the
next day and I will say
collectively I think we figured
out we had over a hundred and
twenty five years of experience
in museums to of us have
experience in florida and he
stood so places that blood and
we have number seen anything
like that it was catastrophic
incomprehensible and something
you could not possibly plan for
we were on the ground for a
probably six weeks pretty
continuously we let staff to
just help with the work of
moving objects out
give consultation
we brought supplies museums keep
supplies for this sort of thing
but they don't anticipate that
every area is going to be
flooded some cases six feed up
so even the supplies that they
had cap we got supplies we
actually worked with dot to get
some bands to coordinate moving
art so did a lot of buried like
immediate incident and then
initial recovery we continue to
be involved with them
my deputy service on the idhm
task force that has been set up
to specifically deal with the
roswell museum I also recently
connected that my
a group and santa fe offers a
retreat space
for cultural leaders and they
said you know we've got this
period that's began could you or
your department use that I
suppose sure we could use it but
you know who really needs a
retreat to go away and think
about things and get some
species raswell.
And that group actually
connected them with some
strategic planning consultant
and some other things so we're
very much involved and we are
available to any community that
got for bed suffer anything near
that
I think also there is some work
to be done I should also mention
that the georgia keep museum
immediately also jumped on and
has been super helpful they had
a no keep that was impacted and
they sent their conservator down
you know we'd long term have
offered where we can to help
with storage because it is going
to take a long time but I need
that became very clear is that
we as the new mexico museum
community need to develop a
resource map so that if again
the scott forbid happened
somewhere else or when it does
happen to a lesser extent
somewhere else we know who has a
man we know who has which
storage facilities we know who
has which materials and we can
just start immediately calling
because we were kind of building
that infrastructure as we went
so it is
it is a huge loss and I will say
in my assessment if that were a
private museum this would be an
extessional issue I am hopeful
because it is a governmental
entity even given the colossal
needs that that city has right
now that there is a chance that
it will come back but
it's
there's a lot of emotion and my
department and in the museum
community over what happened to
not community so thank you for
asking and yes please most of
you have my cell phone number if
you don't you're free to get it
from me the call that night from
again three legislators and the
governor saying they needed help
was really important and we will
literally get the car and go the
next day even if we don't know
what we're walking into so
please if something like that
happens you're in the community
or if it's something small were
always happy to come on we have
the largest conservation loud in
the southwest we've learned that
from raswell because they
actually had to bring a
conservation lot from chicago.
We were the largest so we're
happy to help where that's what
we're here for
thank you very much for that and
I think we're all gonna go to
fort and i'm sitting here where
is sports
and for anyone who hasn't been
to dondo this is really tracks
the long walk of the naval host
another tribes it's a deeply
moving
place to be indoor and outdoor
meditative and reflective area
so i'm glad to hear you're doing
the three
and madam chair we would be
happy to host you next year and
we could actually show you all
of the great work we're doing at
foreign standard it is you go to
carizo a little if you go low
past care of those though and
you take
thank you so much thanks for the
presentation thanks for all of
you on the staff for everything
you do thank you thank you.
And with that will go to our
overview of charter schools
facility needs are with met paul
the executive director of public
charter schools of new mexico
and met we all thank you most of
the people here went to the
dinner response by your
organization and can say that
the stakes at the plaza grill
were pre darned
dead
and before you start if
representative luhan and coach
here michael padia senator pity
if you can just prepare to
reduce yourself well good
morning mountains here
representative terrible honor I
represent house sister forty
eight which is in the capital
city
I have been up here and last
vegas I think five times in the
last week and it's always
beautiful to be up here and I
look forward to this
conversation thank you.
Thank you madame chair senator
michael pathy of serve as vice
chair this year and chair of the
year of this committee also the
senate majority web represent
the southern portion of burning
the county happy to be here
there's so much great work and
i'm looking forward to your
presentation matt thank you
keen with that man please talk
about the overview of the
charter school facility needs
great thank you madam chair and
committee i'll start my
presentation a little
on north odox with an apology I
did not bring a jacket today and
it it it does it it does not
indicate any disrespect for our
legislators we don't allow
people check it's just
check with rick and see if I can
grab his
no I just I I wanted to say that
because I just i've been working
with the legislature in
different capacities over the
last fifteen years and just so
appreciate your work and don't
want want that to be
misconstrued and both getting
older and have two kids under
the age of floor and so that
means I forget things sometimes
so thank you for having me up
here and i'll just echo
representative line it's really
wonderful to be at las vegas
so today
but just returned from vacation
so I don't have any documents
for you but what I wanted to do
is just give you an overview of
how facilities funding works for
charter schools tack a little
bit about some of the the gaps
and challenges we've had and how
each be forty three in the
twenty twenty two session
attempted to solve some of those
problems and where we stand
right now
so real quick and overview of
charter schools I think most of
you have heard this before or
not otherwise know it in new
mexico we've had charter school
since the early nineties as
conversion schools one of those
schools continues to exist at
sterkois trail in santa fe
public school district and and
charter schools as we know them
today really picked up during
the richardson administration.
Where the charter school act was
was established in what you'll
read and statute today it looks
a lot very similar to to that
from the from the early two
thousand and so we are
authorized by a publicly elected
body whether that's the public
education commission or one of
new mexico's eighty nine school
districts and
the charter space what what
we're doing were that trying to
take over public education but
we're here to augment public
education and provide
opportunities that might not
exist with with traditional
district schools and parents
have found that they really like
having those options even if
they don't utilize those nearly
three quarters of families in
new mexico value having public
education choice and want more
of it and that's also shown in
our enrollments about a little
over ten percent of students in
new mexico or attending a public
charter school and
an in our charter movement looks
a little different from other
states some in new mexico when
you start a charter school you
establish a new governmental
entity in other states it's a
nonprofit handling public funds
and what that means for us is
that the oversight is the exact
same as a traditional school
district would be it's far as
finances and academic
achievement we then have the
added layer of an authorizer
overseeing our performance and
operations and so
it's yielded a very different
charter school movement we have
an in many other states charter
schools are are kind of an urban
phenomenon in new mexico we have
them all over the state and sell
from towns to silver city to
rose while we have charter
schools are all over the state
and they are born in bread from
their local communities it's
largely a local educator who
says I see were missing
something here and then they go
through the process to establish
at school or so.
We have charter schools all over
the state that specialize in any
number of programming we have
some wonderful art schools some
of our tribal communities have
used the charter mechanism to
establish schools that addressed
their language and culture in
unique ways compared to the
school district we have
experiencial education going on
and silver city and house and
alba kirky and some schools that
are really beating the odds for
most at at risk students so
we're proud of what the charter
school movement has grown into
in the state and i'm here to
talk about one of our biggest
challenges um which is in
facilities we've had challenges
as far as access to facilities
and facilities funding
consistency in funding for
facilities and figuring out how
we we accomplish securing a long
term facility for our charter
school so
in the lead two thousand I
believe it was two thousand
eight charter schools
or public school capital out
there council established via
the legislature lease assistance
for charter schools charters are
leasing their facilities by and
large they can not carry debt
and sell our main mechanism to
securing a long term facilities
is a lease purchase agreement
and so that's largely the
mechanism by which a charter
school finds their final home or
at least
for the next fifteen years or or
longer and so almost that
funding mechanism really
establishes how we operate as
schools everything's under this
lease banner because the only
kind of funding we get is from
lisa assistance and for a number
of years going back eight years
ago until the last three years
the consistency of receiving
lease assistance funds by that
was not.
There there would be seeningly
random you know threats of
cutting them by fifteen or
twenty percent there was a time
where the psfa was coming to our
schools and measuring square
footage just trained out kind of
nickel and dime the lisa
assistance program and lease
assistance to begin with really
only covers two thirds of our
facility costs the rest is
coming out of operational
dollars from the steve
equalization guaranteed and so
we worked with representative
garage representative dickson
senator hemphill represented
brown representative hernandez
among others some of you are
here to to work on creating some
more consistency for that
funding and provide some some
new avenues for a long term
financing prior to each be forty
three in the twenty twenty two
session charter schools would go
through a number of different
financing mechanisms to fund
their lease purchase agreement
on which they run through their
associated foundations and that
often meant going out to the
broader national bond market
we had several conversations
with n f a with legislators and
that helped craft some new long
term solutions in that bill and
so when each be forty three did
and actually do have one more
point on facilities in general
for traditional district schools
facilities are funded largely
unless it's a large urban area
with high property tax values
they're largely funded through
that public school capital
outlay councils
capital awards program that was
created from the zoony lawsuit
zoony the school district is
wholly on tribal land and thus
has no property tax value and
so.
I don't know I don't know the
whole story of the coats but the
the end result was that new
mexico needs to find a way to
make up for having so much
federal land in our school
districts whether it's tribal
lands f- uh forced
for a service land or bl and so
the PS c o c the capital out
they council public school
capital out they cancel was
formed they're associated
administrative was there and now
that we have these like local
matches so if you have less
property tax value you don't
have to pay as much to build a
brand new facility but if you
have more property tax value
you'll pay more
the rationale behind that which
is suny doesn't have access to
property taxes so we need to
support them that rationale
applies directly to charter
schools as well charter schools
have no bonding capacity yet
we're kind of in this space
where we we have to pay the
local match of our local school
district so it's not something
we're necessarily pursuing right
now trying to get that change so
we don't have to pay anything
for for a brand new facility but
it it is curious that the
rationale that lead to the zoony
lawsuit also applies to charter
schools yet we don't get the
benefits of what was established
as a result of that lawsuit so
each be forty three was designed
to maximize what's possible with
lease assistance it created more
consistency with lease
assistance it said this is in an
optional program anymore you
have to do it every year and
that least assistance should go
up by inflation each year these
would be drawn out battles over
the the past years of we should
they be cut should they be
increased and you know we'd have
schools would rally
that's all taken out of this
it's just it's just listed as we
do this we find it on a purse
student basis and the dollar
amount that we give.
First student will increase by
inflation though I will say this
year we did not get our
inflation increased so we're
currently in conversations with
sfa it's new
the bill also established a
connection with an mfa when
charter schools were going out
to the bond market we were
taking state dollars from lease
assistance and giving it to bond
holders in wisconsin or or a
different state and so the idea
behind creating the revolving
loan fund and providing access
to charter schools into the p p
r f was let's keep new mexico
money in new mexico we get these
public dollars from lisa systems
will let's give it to a public
lender that then allows that
money to go back into the system
and so we created a ten million
dollars
revolving loan funds through
this bill
and we now have access for that
long term financing through the
p p r s this saves the state
money and keeps new mexico money
in new mexico
as we've moved forward so so
least assistance is now more
consistent we have better access
to it and we have these
mechanisms to to to finance via
mma
it's taken some time to get
these things lifted off the
ground we currently don't have
schools that have taken
advantage of p p r f for that
lower financing rate and to do
it through this state though a
number of them are working on on
meeting that objective in the
next few years so I really think
that's one that's going to pay
off in the long term
the revolving loan fund after
several conversations about how
how do we best to use this it's
not part of the p r f their
commit it we can take on
different risks it was decided
by mfa and we supported this
decision that this could be a
construction loan fund that
would keep the revolving nature
happening.
That that we we construct a
building with the revolving loan
fund and ideally after the
buildings built we can refinance
with p r f and now the revolving
fund has that capital to
redistribute amongst charter
schools to build a facility
where I think we've gotten stuck
because it in it and enemy they
will have to provide an overview
of where we're at I know that
that that a number of schools
applied there were some
restrictions that we were in
anticipating from the charter
school side but but we were
learning our new relationship
with mm
this I think this still has the
potential the have great success
though it's taken a couple of
years to get off the ground and
we're still working out okay
who's this a good fit for so
though the those were the
results of uh house bill forty
three the lease assistance has
gotten better it is we have more
consistent access but charter
schools are still in a space
where they have to find ways to
finance their buildings with
that lease assistance and we
haven't leveraged the public
lender in nfa as much as I think
we will in the coming years so
it's just been slow to take off
but I still think these are
valuable solutions that you all
implemented as the legislature
that will yield the fruit in the
near future
I think that's it stand for
questions
questions in just a note that
market russell be following this
uh so some of your questions I
would probably keep them both up
there to answer them
representative look home
up just a point of clarification
matter chair so did would you
like us to hold our questions
for the third presentation or
how should we proceed by
i'm thinking I know that martin
is on site i'm thinking that
that maybe she can present and
then we can answer to.
Oh
I love the windows but I will
get on your two want to come up
architect and do the second part
and then we can do together
thank you manager.
A a lease ramos from and i've
already forgotten your company
named
plan forward her she works with
charter schools and other
schools on their facility needs
and helps plan those and was
formally with a psfa so she
sorts as the technical
consultant to the fee because we
of course are new to charter
schools and the implementation
and oversight requirements
specifically for charter schools
are different than other
constitutional transactions that
we finance so i've got a
presentation I think martin's
got it i'm not sure if he's
he's handing it out now they
all.
Chair
manager
just yes context how many
charter schools are there total
can you clarify that and and
approximately
can you also say how many are
chartered by districts and how
many are chartered by the public
education commission.
I'm not i'm not sure the exact
number is but it's generally I
think it's about fifty five
percent it's over half or with
the pec and then that other
forty five or forty is with
school districts locally
thank you
so start writing down your
questions while we proceed with
our presentation for thank you
so we can skip actually through
a couple of the introductory
sites because I was going to
mention about how spell forty
three and metered a really good
job describing that
the the purpose of that
but I will say that the the
house will forty three required
that we implement rules those
have been implemented we have
policies that govern the use of
the charter school revolving
fund and it requires that we
report to you annually and we
have done that so far on
december first so i'll start on
page four because I think it's
important to know that there are
couple of ways that charter
schools get financed nationally
as um
matt kind of alluded to many
charter schools virtually all
church schools outside of new
mexico or finance using a
foundation so a foundation which
is being a fiber one c three
will raise money on behalf of
that charter school they'll buy
a facility they'll i'd keep the
facility and the lease it down
to the the charter school itself
that's typically the way these
work there either non profit
charters themselves or they're
really supported by a charter
foundation and in those
instances you can make a loan
directly to the foundation or
directly to the nonprofit
charter and they can you know
you can make a loan get security
interest they can have long term
debt as matt mentioned earlier
these are governmental energies
in new mexico that can't
actually
they can't carry debt so they
can't enter into a loan
agreement which really limits
the way in which we can finance
transactions and i'll not that
house bill forty three and our
ppr allow us to do the exact
same thing there is no
difference technically in what
we can do through either fund.
One doesn't call out the ability
to use foundations it's the
exact same instrument what
limits charter school financing
in new mexico really is the
limitations on the charter
schools itself not on the
financing options that are
available to it so if they could
do more we would do more but
they have limitations and so as
a result we have to identical
pieces of legislation in
conversation with
matt and others we chose as a
method of moving forward with
house bill forty three this idea
of construction and i'll go
through why that's important
here in a minute but the concept
here was that the two programs
would very much work together
that neither program would
really serve as much need
individually as they could
jointly so that was the goal
here was to get the highest and
best to use from the ten million
dollars to try to serve the vast
majority of the needs that we
anticipated seeing and again to
use these funds interchangeably
so on page for I want to mention
that in addition to charter
schools we have the public
project revolving fun and that
is the big program that animate
operates we are known primarily
for that program and it is a a
powerful financing engine for
new mexico public projects and
it is funded and you'll hear
more about that in august but
it's funded by government
aggress receipts tax which is a
five percent tax that's levied
on the services that governments
provide goods and services so
water primarily drives a
governmental chris receipts tax
and we use those who make loans
from that and then we replenish
the fund by issuing tax exempt
bonds in the municipal market
place and our program enjoys a
tripley rating from smp so it's
a great really a robust program
and for years since two thousand
nine charter schools have
technically been able to use the
public project revolving fund
the problem is that they're just
an unusual credit and relative
to the rest of our program we
could not find a way.
To make loans or to enter into
these leased purchase agreements
with charter schools without
impacting other potential
projects in the pprf so we
cordoned off the program and
said this really isn't we can't
do charter schools
but we've in a with the power of
the price over the last couple
of years with the increased
government aggressive seats tax
in the conservative nature in
which the way in which we
managed that program we found
additional capacity and we
talked to last year about the
fact that we've created this
additional sort of band program
within the prf so that we're
able to expand the uses of the
program without providing any
new capital to it to the bond
program itself
and that
is a really good way for us to
do the long term financing of
entities that have found their
school it meets the needs
already there's no real
construction that needs to be
done maybe a minor improvement
here are there an upgraded each
back system but doesn't need to
be substantially renovated or
constructed it's a great
mechanism for that it is not
necessarily a mechanism for all
the needs that are out there so
what we're finding was how we
kind of balance those programs
um
one of the things that one of
the risks one of the reasons
that are pprf was not a great
fit before for the for charter
schools was that the lease
purchase agreements have to
provide an annual out to the
charter schools themselves so
after they basically re enter
into a lease or they reobligate
themselves for one year at a
time and if they walk away after
the first year it's not a
default on their side um it is
simply the way the lease has
been structured but we made a
loan or we basically used ppr
funds to to buy that building so
that we could lease it to the
charter schools and our bond
holders need to get repaired and
so there is a difficulty here if
the charter school.
Ups out as the lease provides
they're not and default we have
a building that's now vacant we
used money from bond proceeds
and we expected the repayment
those lease payments to
ultimately make those bands hold
we'd retire the bonds from the
lease payments but the charter
school is taken of you know
potential use of its options or
either voluntarily involuntarily
and now we're left with the
building so we there after put
another building someone in that
building immediately cause we we
need to get lease revenues or we
need to sell it and so those two
constraints in our public
project revolving fund have
created for us and you know more
conservative
lending practices and still
relative to charter schools and
we're finding some troubles or
disconnects between what the
schools need and can provide and
what we are becoming more
comfortable with but we still
have troubles with the charter
schools themselves selling a
charter school in a rural
community it's going to be
difficult it's you know it's got
a single purpose youth you know
it's it's going to have a
difficult resell value so the
option of actually selling this
building for what it cost to
construct or to improve and
purchase is gonna be less likely
it's also less likely that there
will be an immediate opportunity
to release that school
unless there's another charter
school in the wing so again in
the more rural areas that's
going to be a more difficult
task in the more urban areas
that there's a greater
possibility for that so we just
have some challenges in
underwriting those transactions
on page five
I really get to the point of the
one of the bigger difficulties
with improving charter schools
as the amount of construction
that's necessary often for the
building itself to meet the
standards set out by psfa so
though they are you know this is
a building that the finance
authority will own and lease to
the charter schools.
It has to meet the requirements
of psfa for that building in
order for the least purchase
agreement to be approved so
they're very specific
code issues for schools and
since we are the lender we need
to make sure that they are or
where the owner we need to make
sure those are it here to in
respected
if costs go out of control if we
expect it to cost five million
dollars in an ends up costing
seven million dollars as
construction does we now have
structural lease anticipating a
certain amount of revenue to
come in and now the costs are
higher but the revenues that are
going to come in from the school
or the same and so we're going
to be a putting the school in a
position of having to use more
and more of its operating
capitals more the funds that
they use for instruction and
administration towards the lease
of the school and we think on a
long term lease that that's
that's very problematic because
ultimately charter schools will
thrive if they're able to
provide the services and the
education that they set out to
provide if they have to eat into
instructional costs educational
costs
at four to uh support their
facility over time we think
that's going to have an impact
on the care the education they
provide their their students and
so we try to structure these
loans to the greatest extent
possible so that they're relying
solely on at least the lease but
reimbursement so our goal here
is to make sure that perfect
scenario for us is that their
least can be hundred percent
paid from that lease assistance
that's not happening there's not
enough there's not enough lease
assistance coming in they don't
get enough credit for the school
that they have to do a lot of
these that you know if if you've
got a school you need a parking
lot you don't get lease
assistance for a parking lot but
you still have to maintain the
parking lot so they're
significant disconnects between
what they're funded.
To from the lease assistance to
provide and what the true needs
are from a facility perspective
and so we're finding these
challenges out now as we have
gone to get applications from
charter schools we're finding
out exactly what the true
challenges are for
the schools themselves and
though our financing took a big
step forward it hasn't filled
the gap that we had hoped it
would fill
I will just
highlight for you on page six
these are charters school
standards and they're the same
for both the
the charter school facility
revolving fund as they are for
the pprf but again we're looking
at for charter school facilities
we're looking at five million
dollars that's the maximum loan
we'd like to provide out of the
ten million dollars that was
made available we're finding
that lot of these larger schools
need more money than that if
they're doing construction
we are looking at fixed rates
for the charter scores at three
percent ultimately when the
construction is done will will
permit out in the pprf and will
provide it at the lowest
possible rate we can provide.
We're looking at again as I
mentioned earlier to see that
the public school
lease assistance covers a
hundred percent of the debt we
sir hope that happens we know
that isn't happening and so we
want to make sure that if you
take it and hold that we're not
eating a way too much at the
instructional funds needed
our goal is to get seventy five
percent loan to value
if though if we're going through
if they're
charter schools entering into
the lease on their own and
eighty percent loan to value if
they're going through their
chartering authority so for
instance of albert irky public
schools would like to enter into
a lease to us and then lease it
again you're sort of release it
to
one of its charter schools then
we have a little more comfort
that when that the other the
original charter school outgrows
the facility that albecricky per
public schools would have an
ability to put someone else in
there so putting in if it's
santa fe if it's towers putting
in the school district as the
who was the authoriser for that
charter school as the primary
tenant allows us a little more
comfort that they're going to
make best faith efforts to get
someone else in that building
should the first charter school
need to leave again voluntarily
are involved
so we hope to do that that's not
possible through the pc if they
are a state chartered
institution that's not going to
be happening the chart the pec
can't enter into a lease so this
the charter schools that are
that can work with their local
chartering authority their
school district have a little
more room in our program we can
lend more against that debt or
we can take on a bigger chunk of
that building
for the collateral that's
available
and I think that's really what I
would mention on page seven and.
You'll see the charter schools
on seven the charter school
terms financing terms that are
available through the two
programs and then on payg
we have open applications for
this where first random
applications came in and visa
the schools that applied
on the
charter school revolving loan
side the ones that were eligible
we had the five schools east
mountain high school for a new
parking lot as I mentioned
earlier that's a need that
charter schools have
on a sausi
thorough so a nancy intous had
improvements to its facilities
for for just eight hundred
thousand mccurty charter school
needs a new cafeteria for five
point eight cotton would
classics needed a expansion of
its a new building for three
million and the marker meho
charter school was looking to
expand its campus facilities for
six million so several of those
projects exceed that five
million which we were willing to
bend on if we could have made
some of the other credit
considerations work
and on the other side the pp we
had a applications from school
of dreams academy and I believe
you'll hear from them today and
tiero tia indent throw
to refund both in both of those
instances to to do permanent
financing for
foundation debt that they have
so the foundation went out and
got alone
they built the buildings and now
the the banks want the
foundations you know to pay off
the construction loan and
they're hoping to do that by
having the p p r f enter into at
least purchase agreement and buy
that building basically from the
foundation then that foundation
can retire its debt so those are
the goals and again we run into
some credit considerations and
and that's kind of where we've
ended so at this point we've not
taken any of these projects
forward to the board at great
you know there's been some
feelings about that and I and I
understand them.
Um when fortunately we just
haven't fit found so far a
perfect fit for what we thought
we were going to see and I guess
the question to you today is
should we be doing more can we
get more money into that charter
school revolving fun so we can
take on more of this risk there
are going to be some given take
and we're certainly willing to
to listen but we can't sell of
all of the needs and so with
that
madam chair I don't know at
least if you wanted to mention
anything again she's an expert
on charter school facility needs
and on what ps a fee is able to
do answer she's primarily here
to help aunt help answer
questions that you might have.
Yep please either one of you
want to add anything before we
take questions
good morning madam chairing
members I think the only thing
that I would like to add is that
charter schools in facilities
are complicated there are
statutes in place that limit wet
each government entity can do
what the children's schools can
do with the lenders can do the
school districts p c
it makes it very complicated on
terms of facilities and funding
facilities and each energy has
to abide by those guidelines and
and that's why it is so
complicated this does make sense
and something that is needed but
it is tricky to figure out a
path for two make moves when it
is so complicated.
I would just note that we really
appreciate the partnership from
mm you know market a note at
some of the challenges and and
we want these to be successful
rate off the bat so taking our
time to get it right next make
sense even if there's
constraination from from out in
the field from the schools.
Okay with that it will open for
questions a senator on meli
thank you madame chair so i'm
looking at the list of
applications that were received
today and i've just did you know
i'm interested in schools that
of course are in my district
you know can't work classical of
course a very support of market
me how though it's not in my
district and of course yet I
have them through is within the
same district that's a very um
area that is really expanding
it's being redeveloped and of
course it's really associated
with the political school and so
I guess what i'm asking is this
that I i'm asking about you do
what you can to to help these
calls at you know these are
really important to my district
I there there
highly sought after in terms of
like you know wanting books
wanting to to be there so that's
yeah thank you.
Cheese senator ramos nature of a
panel I I just have a few
questions I mean i'm trying to
wrap my head around this as a
business person and
your first of all how many how
many charter schools close in
fail and and I say feel not in a
bad way but just close down
after they're open for a few
years
theory a man i'm chair and
center almost very few in a few
years but over the last decade
would have about seven or eight
schools closed
okay so I was just you know
thinking outside the box you
know I i'm looking at my
distributory charter school
ideally appalled everybody knows
why elderly appalled is it
silver city very good school
they're looking for a place to
hang their hat and you know
we're looking at declining
schools and population of
everybody's aware of that and I
was just thinking
for instance I have silver high
okay they there that are
building is equipped for
thirteen hundred students right
now they have eight hundred and
fifty students why couldn't we
start a pilot program to move
some of these students into a
portion of the current school
which were already painful and
we already have the lights on
for and we're already
spending funds keeping that
building occupied correct so if
for some reason the school does
close down that school is
already fit for that among the
students because that's where
they're getting up anyways
correct and and I know that
we're trying to
separate the charter from the
actual public school and uh
i'm just trying to think outside
the box what how is there
anything that would stop us from
utilizing the existing building
with already existing.
Students with them
madam chairman i'm sure mf will
have some some thoughts on this
but I did want to know center
almost that this was when the hb
forty three there were very few
parameters given to m f a we
wanted to give them the
flexibilities but one of the
named items was renovating a
district facility with this fund
what's happening right now
and it and i'll say it could be
co location this portion of
silver high that you're
proposing something that that
might be more immediately
relevant are elementary school
campuses that are no longer
needed that actually fit the
student population of a charter
school you know one two hundred
seventeen year olds are okay in
that space but they need some
some renovation there's some gap
financing to be done because
more often than not the
facilities that the district is
willing to part with art there
they're worst facilities and
sell
these things are in play and and
something that I think will
happen more in the future but
the locals the charter and the
school district have to agree to
pursue that course mutually but
we did write in for renovation
of district facilities in HB
forty three we have not seen
this yet while we have seen a
crucial fair amount they were
but they were building new
facilities or renovating the
court building
so some of this has happened
that I think they might be able
to fill in
madame chair citaderama's I
would also like to add the per
statute a charter a new charter
school starting in their first
year and existing charger
schools trying to relocate into
a new facility cannot move into
a facility where they waited new
mexico condition index or below
the state white average so all
stools in new mexico have this
forecalculated annually it is in
the psfa.
Ranking that is distributed on a
early basis that ranks also the
schools from number one to seven
hundred and something the
charter schools are within that
unless they are a privately
owned entity or not renewed yet
and the average score of all of
those is kind of that defining
threshold to move into a new
facility that school facility
has to have a score better than
that average meaning that the
facility cannot be in poor
condition it can't be too old
with other the systems getting
ready to fail just condition
issues that need to be addressed
and improved and that's really
to protect both the charter
school from opening into a
facility that they didn't
realize it's going to cost so
much to repair in the state from
having to
provide applications and awards
to potentially improve those
facilities so that is a barrier
for those district schools like
mr paul said if a district often
has it empty school available
because they've consolidated its
often but all this school or the
school that has the most needs
that bars the charter school
from moving into that if there
is a legitimate plan to improve
that in terms of we have an
architecture we have a plan and
we know how much finding it all
cost we need to know that psp
needs to know that plan prior to
approving that potential
facility
madam chair and panel that I
think that's that's my point I
mean I know the elementaries
that are our charge schools
looking into are not in good
shape and rather than utilising
state funding to to upgrade that
school why don't we use it in
the product i'm thinking it cost
a fraction of that amount to
move in it to a school that's
already currently being utilised
and already had the plan to
utilize for more students so I
mean that that's just something
i'm just trying to think outside
the box how can we help this
situation without spending the.
The amount of money that uh that
were considering to spend on
some of these dilapidated
elementaries that are going to
be left over
I I just I just
as a business man I just can't
see myself investing the funds
into something that might feel
you know of course we we know
that schools do fail and end but
when we have our public schools
we know we're going to keep them
going no matter what we're going
to whether we have three hundred
students eight hundred students
or thirteen hundred students
we're going to keep that
building either occupied or
we're going to build a new
school because that ones are
dilapidated enough to
uh to consider building the new
school now
that being said if we have eight
hundred fifty kids because they
are considering building new
school in southern city and we
already know that we have the
charter kids to provide for then
we got it it'd be good to plan
for the group versus the two
separate entities which would
cause us doubling money maybe
you know some
thank you very much manager
next we have a representative
ago and then representative roy
ball cover yet
thank you madam chair thank you
for your all's presentation
and and you know senator romels
had some questions and I am that
I actually had so i'm going to
get back into so the agreements
that this state makes are are
they with private
I mean where where the charter
schools are located are those
private individuals that you
lease from or how does that
I mean are they buildings
throughout the state that are
privately owned and you lease
there's a a lease agreement or
how i'm sorry I
so madam sure there is a
combination there's a there is
the variety where the they've
got some benefactor or they've
just found commercial space.
And there it's an unrelated
entity to the school and they're
leasing from the schools and
then those the foundations that
are you know purpose built for
those they were created to
support the schools themselves
and they're leasing they bought
the building did the renovations
and are leasing into the charter
schools that latter category
that's considered a public
they're already considered a
public facility and there's been
a strong push and i'm not sure
if there's an actual requirement
yet to move to the schools out
of privately on
entities cause that's obviously
going to cost yeah more over
time that that would be my
concern is that you know if if
there's a lease agreement
especially and you have to go
into a lease agreement right so
that rant has to be paid every
month right so like what
percentage would you say of the
hundred charter schools are with
privately owned groups i'm just
curious if you have any idea
while at least get that
information I would just note
that one of the reasons we were
selling interested in helping
provide a solution we haven't
found it yet is because of
course we're not operating on a
profit so the least that comes
into us is just enough to
actually repay the debt we don't
get any fees associated with
this so a hundred percent of the
revenue on that's comes as a
result of the least payment goes
to pay bond holders goes to
repaid alone there's there's no
upcharge for interest rates or
anything else it's it's a match
book what the bond holders need
to make that fund available is
also what we charge in terms of
lease payments so there is
that's the true reason to have
animal faith provide a solution
madam chair representative
unfortunately I I don't have
that number but I believe it's
about twenty percent that are
privately owned there is up a
push in a desire for charter
schools to move in to publicly
owned facilities however that is
often difficult for those
charter schools trying to find a
solutive find a public sp.
Facility the school districts
don't have an empty building for
instance there aren't public
entities with available space so
often a private entity is the
only option but often times over
a time they do move over and
switch it to an l p a at least
purchase agreement and that is
when it becomes considered
public which is when the nmfa
could step in and refund the
project and for that matter for
that
sort of
figure that you said twenty
percent
I imagine there's a lease
agreement is there a any kind of
stipulation in that lease
agreement when that's made that
would allow them to
you know expire the least
agreement within a certain
amount of time if that score is
no longer operating
I mean is that something that we
do as a state
madam chair and represent a
berego the answer to that is yes
the leases are all reviewed by
psfa and PED
and those types of
uh those types of
language are included in in the
agreement so the state does not
o should the score move or close
the state does not owe any
additional funds to the october
well that's that's refreshing to
know thank you mountain.
K next representative royal bar
cover you know in the
representative loo home
thank you madame chair and think
you offer your presentation I
can really understand how this
is challenging um I went back to
your page for one two page six
there just so many obstacles and
and then so many different ways
in which it could throw off um
prf processes and um
get a little concerned about
that so I have a few questions
and they just would like to have
that if you could repeat again I
think I heard you say uh answer
the question about the school
closure is how many school
closures you said something
about seven or eight schools was
that over a span of ten years is
that what I heard and it didn't
matter cheer and representative
robot copy yes over the last
decade so madame charitmat
the sole we still though have
one hundred schools
madam chair and representative
of royal copy this year
three new schools are set to
open and that will bring us to
one hundred and two I believe
it's a hundred to it might be
one hundred and one
thank you madame chair and
thinking that
so then my
I don't even know where to begin
because there are there are a
lot of issues and i'm it brings
a little bit of concern to me I
don't recall madam chairs all of
the discussions or other
questions that were raised in
twenty twenty two around hb
forty three
but I do remember that we had a
lot of discussion and
so can someone explain to me why
it is.
That this effort didn't fall
under the um umbrella
jurisdiction whatever I think
umbrella's better word of the
arm
public school for public school
facilities authority also pap-
uh public schools capital outlay
processes I don't recall that
discussion I think I think we
did have somewhat of a little
bit of a discussion about that
because there was a I recall
about duplication
and then the same question
senator ramos brought up about
the existing facilities I
remember there being a lot in
that committee as well in the
committee and then I remember
also that it caused so many
issues that are represented
former representative pristine
to health myself and others
tried to pause all of this
processes just before yes this
passage to try to get a handle
of what we were facing in terms
of charter schools and general
and this is an example of madam
care of why we wanted a pause
for a number of reasons one we
wanted to visit the statute
again that create it tried to
schools back in the richardson
administration so that we could
see how we could refine
the processes and amplify the
the jurisdictional um
and procedural mechanisms for
the public education commission
I remember all that so can you
explain why it doesn't fall
under why we couldn't put it
under the pfsa thank you.
Madam chair and representative
the reason why is ps coc and and
their staff the psfa recognized
that they didn't have any
programs that were a fit to to
provide what the intent of the
revolving loan fund in the pprf
are and so as they as we
explored this
there was a recognition that
because charter of the weight
schools are financed for
facilities and how they
routinely go about financing
their facilities that enemy
would be a better fit
for for conducting these kinds
of transactions the money itself
for the ten million dollars was
actually a transfer from PS c o
c so it was a recognition that
like these dollars are meant for
public school facilities let's
move them move that over to m fa
so it can work with the
mechanisms that are already in
place for charter schools and so
that's kind of what how we
landed where we were the other
other just element here of how
mfa
ended up being the landing spot
is there's a number of revolving
loan programs throughout the
country and other states for
charter schools most of them are
unsuccessful because they task
in agency who doesn't make loans
with making loans that put many
of them are in a public
education department and they
don't do that kind of work with
having a willing partner like n
m f a where this is their line
of work it made a lot of sense
to have them figure figure this
out because that is their line
of work you have many other
states where when it's operated
out of an education department
that's just not their line of
work and so there's a lot more
to figure out and so in some
ways in uncovering some of the
the challenges with this nmfa
was probably fast tracked
because they know their line of
business already.
Ah thank you madame chair and
thinking about what what says
the public education commission
about all of this and because I
see that there is
we we defer approval somewhere I
saw I can't remember exactly
where I was
signed up to the public
education department.
Ah.
It might help me out here
because I think there's
somewhere in your hand out that
it makes reference to all here
it is applicant academic
performance as assessed by ped
statewide standards so but
charter squalls come under the
pec.
So what is the i'm trying to
figure out.
Two thinks.
The mechanisms that we interest
understandable that we deferred
to public education commission
and reference to all of the
application processes on in
those types of things an
approvals and and all the other
processes for charter schools
fall under pc.
Um
so I I really want to know what
is the position of the pc as it
comes to.
This process that we're hearing
today that's number one question
then all the next
manner chair and representative
robot copy on the pec is
supportive of multiple avenues
for schools to obtain their long
term home they also have a seat
on the public school capital
outlay council and they're
pursuing avenues to enhance
mechanisms for facility
financing there but they are
eager to see this become a
success so they were supportive
of the bill as it went through
the legislature and it's a
routine conversation between
myself and see during their
monthly meetings on how it's
going not every month but you
know it's a recurring
conversation because they're
interested in its success so one
of my concert
one of my concerns let me just
say reference to mounts
response is that.
For the
charter schools that have the.
I don't even
advantage of being supported
financially through private
apartments.
And other type of resources
available to them because of
their boards and all of the
other.
That's different than the
charter schools that I see that
come from a community based
level that do not have the
resources that are not as
equipped that struggle to find
locations that struggle to
supplement existing their
existing programs.
And then
have absolutely little resources
available in terms of facilities
so
at the risk of losing them.
I would.
Be interested in knowing how
we're going to protect the
interests of furthering
the promotion of those schools
because that really is when I
believe.
The community based level
not just the specialist area or
fields but the community based
level of terms of culture
language
all of the relevant
education that we are promoting
at the state level beat me more
how are they prioritized or how
will they be protested within
this process
madam chair and representative
we share that objective because
when you talk about those
charter schools that have access
to community resources that
maybe others don't were tag
about less than a handful of
schools you know in those still
are community
driven new mexico school for
their arts has done wonderful
things the tap into an arts
community in santa fe that the
table to support that it's still
the community that's just a part
of the community that happened
to have some resources but or
turn up the vast majority of
charter schools that do not have
those kind of connections with
their community and if you look
at the list of schools to apply
for this I think it ran the game
as far as largely being schools
that don't
That ranking the systems based
which I believe a lot of charter
schools could use it needs to be
in that top three hundred of the
ranking but the biggest
hick up with the charter schools
is that they need to fund the
local match of any award the pst
funds now the local and state
match is calculated annually
there's a phase who formula
within statute that is
calculated those local matches
are very high but in some
instances the charter schools
need are a supposed to find the
local match for the geographic
district in which they are
located so up until sp one
thirty one which happens I
believe two three years ago um
district such as aps and
actually half of the districts
in the state would be
responsible for paying ninety
four percent of a project
is speed one thirty one reduced
that by one third and one half
for the microdistrict so that
still means sixty seven percent
so if a charter school came to
ps the pay and pcoc requesting
an h v c or a roof project which
might cost one million dollars
they would be responsible for
paying their local match which
could be very significant and it
for charter school is it is very
difficult for them to obtain
that funding and matters what
bars them many times from going
for the psych funding so the fee
loan program would negate that
essentially and that it would
provide them another funding
source that doesn't have them
funding a large portion of the
project it would be a loan and
repaid with funding from the
psucy in terms of list
assistance but again it's it's
all very complicated for charter
schools different rules from the
districts but they're intended
to play the same process and get
thank you madame chair and thank
you then as you can see from the
discussion this entire matter as
complicated and and I feel that
we just continued a compound the
complications and not find a way
to
halt.
Take a look see what's best I
don't know what that means at
this point though because it
seems we are as back would have
been a better better place to be
so i'm going back to just paid I
found the place about the
approval page six
in this whole pages is really
challenging for me because it's
credit standards for charter
schools that goes back to those
who can meet it because of their
stature standing whatever that
is and those that cannot so on
page six it says the final it
says about collateral schools
must meet seventy five percent
of loan to value authorizers
eighty percent month to value
that's when example what i'm
concerned about and then the
other question I found the lpa's
must be approved by ped that's
where I came up with the
question why p d p c if that's
part of the ec's charge and
process
an in when there are assessing a
new school application a
continuing school application
when the reviewing questionable
questions about existing scores
but it also is a big factor I
think in approving you
applications and I think you
said there's a few others so I
i'm don't want to believe there
anymore but this is a create
created a lot of questions i'm I
have some very strong
charter schools in my district
that I whole hotel support
and around the state but i'm
particularly concerned about
those
that do not have the fool that
that have the interest and that
the community is committed
driven but they don't have
necessarily the standing credit
wise or anything else.
But they are absolutely
addressing the public education
needs as heard their communities
and they are the ones that we I
think we should be in powering
and not obstructing their
ability and move forward in our
state gets the critical through
them
so thank you madame chair and
thank you.
Manager representative just any
lease purchase agreement is
reviewed by psfa and approved
it's the it's the stop in the
process before pd so this is
aren't my slides but but to have
a lease purchase agreement both
PED and psfa are involved
but the ps only insurance is
status is met for the facility
thank you
representative in the
representative
thank you matter thank you for
the the discussion again on this
this is not one just
like representative garrett or
chair carrot and others that
have worked on legislation
that's trying to really
problems off and market thank
you so much because you really
illustrated the financial
stresses if you will or
complications I guess is a word
for today regarding this this
topic in this issue so I want to
just kind of you know go back to
senator almost said but
representative a robot work
boring ball copy said this is
such a complicated issue and one
of the things that i've been
really addressing through the
time that I been legislator and
the four hand working in the sun
it would then send how much
alice was the complication of
charter schools
and we are making things more
complicated but because of the
work of entering a failure it
was straight in just how this is
not working in this instance and
we need to think in problems of
so it's upon us as legislators
to do that for it for you for
this this year and I like some
of the things that i'm hearing
today particularly what senator
almost was saying like where's
the hybrid
because we cannot keep splitting
the apple and calling it to you
you know two different things.
It's education it's our
education these are our kids we
have you know a lot of
positive things that we've been
doing madam chair and I
appreciate you allow me the time
but in my school district I have
a school that is now going over
a year where they close the down
it's a a case to school right
not right my next door neighbor
is the school
and the kids from that school
and another public school are
sharing space in a dilap date
school that needs
help in love to say that
so the kids are displaced from
our neighborhood
is down
we are now facing the time when
we have to we could have to
tighten things up even more
and we're still climbing you
know the apple and apple and
orange
cats you can't keep doing that
we just can't amchair
I think we can really because we
have the the brains and the will
particularly in this committee
and those on our education
companies they want to do
something want to do right prior
schools this isn't a right fit
for new mexico we're going to
keep on splitting or trying to
split the out of if you will
socket work this way
I used it on finance committee
along with others here
you know we have
we're gonna have to really be a
just start finances this year
and I just wanna illustrate we
took ten million dollars from
our public school capital outlay
to do this
we can't keep doing that it's
not working it's not fiscally
responsible
we got to look for some other
solutions I don't have the
solution obviously
the day I do have a lot of ideas
I think along with others I
think we don't like to work with
you
you can see my my space is
covered with not as always.
You know one of the things I was
going to want it's bring up with
you know
you also received federal state
federal state grants and new
mexico twenty twenty three
received fifty two million
federal graph dollars over five
years open nine new charters and
expand exists existing ones
with ninety percent allocator
schools
I don't think the state gets
those grounds or other part of
their schools get that money
and just as for expansion what I
don't think it's just like
responsible for charter schools
to continuously expand when they
can't afford what you know what
we're trying to province off
here today I think it's
irresponsible I think that we
need to go back to the table and
figure this out in a better way
and this is not just on this
this issue before us today with
this find we need to go back to
the table really divine to this
issue of what charter schools
are publicly chartered chartered
public schools the whole thing
you hear me saying this over and
over
thank you for buried with me on
that and i'm not going to start
but I think we need to really go
back and say what you do without
fifty two million dollars
manager what are you you know
and I guess my question is how
how many more territories have
you opened and i'm sure.
Chair and representative look on
we do not open schools after
risers do and we have funded
three with the funding in that
that those funds have been long
standing in new mexico this is
the fourth iteration of the
grant this is just the first
year that our non profit is
administering it we partnered
with the p d who was the
previous administrator of it so
it's been an existence at
present in the state for for a
long time thank you and
understood however now you are
you are responsible for
administering but
that those funds are
specifically for charter for the
charge correct i'm sure madam
chairman representative that is
correct and one of the biggest
barriers with these funds is we
can not use them for facilities
we can yet that they're very
limited uses and how we can
support the school that is
something we would love to see
the ability to be able to do at
the federal adam chair I think
we would all like that myself I
have given capital outlet from
my own allocation to
this went to the schools
mentioned today school for the
arts and chatter and
independent i've given i've
given capital dollars to them
because I believe in them in
their mission however I would
have to say that the school for
the art stands along
madame share they are you know
they stand along from all other
schools quite frankly and
they're doing a great job and
other schools are doing a great
job that's not to be in question
the fact that the matter is we
have loan and roman rates we
have low birth rates we have a
lower and we need to be fiscally
responsible and cutting things
up in dividing them and
continuously dividing them is
not physically responsible out
of chair so we need to figure
this out it's gonna go to other
types of policy initiatives that
we need to look at understand
that but that's all i'm gonna
have to see on this today thank
you manager.
Representative.
Thank you madame sure thank you
very much it's an interesting
conversation
I think manager and and and
presenters um
education I think for for
because we have
like center almost in our
district we have we have all the
lead
we know that all kids don't
learn in the same environment
right sometimes they need
something different it's just
the fact that five kids are a
little bit different
one I never have told her once
to study your door homework and
then my son I have to
do did you do homework today so
it's just part of the it's part
of of our children grow up and
stuff but I think for me
where we're talking about this
it's important to have diversity
like that
and so charge schools sometimes
fills that that gap that is is
not available at public schools
for whatever reason that is
not an educator in this car
seeing how why kids I last
around why do they go there what
are the gravitate to the certain
places and stuff and that can be
even between the school
districts manager your school
teacher I mean I you were an
educator i'm just a dad with my
kids a seater from that
perspective but
you don't get even in our own
grand county they go from
corporate a silver sovereignty
cobra to although wherever they
fit the best but I think that
the main thing that we all want
to see I think every every
legislator here wants to see
including yourselves and and and
people everyone want to make
sure these kids have get the
best education that sometimes
means that they have to move
different places that being said
you know I think senator almost
brought up the point that we're
you know he's trying to see it
as as business guys were always
trying to find a way to.
Make things as sufficient as
possible right so that on
weekend phil
that the need with the what the
least expense but still meet the
the requirements that are there
but that also at least some some
issues there in great county
because we've got to small
elementary schools right that
they're talking about closing
and consolidating and all the
stuff
and and so what do we do with
these empty buildings right and
we have another building that's
just sitting there vacant
then you have to protect it from
getting vandalized or just going
you know just still updating
worse to me I think I think I
was talking to center by the end
I said you are I think handsets
twenty twenty dollars and I
think what what we need to
recognize is this is maintenance
we've been talking about
maintenance here maintenance is
number one
in the reason that some of these
schools are in the chip that
they're in is because we don't
keep up with maintenance call
public department whatever it is
a
public schools
didn't have or the excuse me the
up
each country solidarity is
school district in having enough
money to keep up with that for
whatever reasons and I think
what happens is is also you know
basilian answer but yesterday
but I went to school I ended up
better catholic school we didn't
have their conditioning it was
just we went to school and we
just learned and we've got in
trouble but it behave it was
serious business you know in the
catholic school but
what i'm saying is is I think
that the environment is the most
important thing I think if we
get anything out of this and if
we want in the future for us to
to see this not happening where
we're saying that school has to
be replaced.
It's because we keep up with
maintenance we walk into law
form that things like a hundred
and fifty years old and and
and it's still I mean it's still
working over the place right so
my point that i'm making is I
think we need to see how can we
further invest we've got
billions of dollars of excess
money that has come in mostly
from the extraction
services right on gas and stuff
like that that are mainly worth
met to put in these permanent
funds for education and you know
the big challenges but we're
blessed that we have that money
coming
and I know I really think we all
need to embrace
I just was talking to was some
guy yesterday about about one
gas guys I said we have to you
have to recognize as well as
producers you have to stand on
and say look where properties in
the cleanest birl in the world I
just in the country in the world
because we have my environmental
standards that we have and so
and in turn that gives us
funding for our schools for
other things in the state and so
I just think it all of this is a
web connected I mean I can we
could sit here and talk for
hours and hours and hours about
how everything were there so
birthrate that representative on
mentioned
all these other things that have
been mentioned
representative remote control
provided by about colleague who
says sorry my my dongle twisted
i'm about that we want to make
sure but it that's just as
little obstacles as there are
for for charter schools already
any school district so I think I
think for me one of the things
that we need to recognize is is
maybe we need to start investing
more in our schools altogether
so that we don't run it to these
places and so that maybe we can
repurpose them later on for
other.
Places madam chair one of the
other things that we could do
that is a probably a simple fix
as you have this how did you
call the scoring with the score
all these is the
I don't mean to in the spite
outside of politically correct
but maybe we need to read
calibrate that scoring or we can
still use these facilities and
not stifle ourselves
in in you know and it may not be
the perfect place it might not
have all the little bleeding and
all that but it's a still a
place of education and it's a
good place I I really see I mean
that I I sent my kids in the
school the thursday there I want
to that school I think they're
still in I would consider decent
shape they probably need some
work air conditioning the other
things but I wouldn't say it's
up unless I understand you've
been heard something else was
that there are some cancer
causing deal in those batteries
I think it's still fine to put
our kids in there and so I think
the easiest fix that I heard of
all out of the discussion today
is maybe we need to address
maybe some of the scoring there
so that we can possibly is that
you have any answers to it or is
there other obstacles that I
missed manager of presenters
chair representative
I believe in terms of that
funding for capital it's the
fact that charter schools are
expected to
play by the same rules as the
districts they're not the same
as districts the funding that
they receive it's different they
can't go out for jail bonds
funding available to replace
roofs and in simple maintenance
he speak money it's all
different and in the just the
fact that it's assumed the level
playing field isn't correct and
manager that's what I wanted to
hear because the problem is
there all under the pan
the problem is that we're never
made to compete.
So they don't sit on their own
bell of the pan and there so
there because of that
it's it's the rules are here's
my rules and here's your rules
and so they are not me too
they're made to not to struggle
to compete in an importance what
i'm here is that some without
get looking I just look at it
madam chair
this is not political for me i'm
a business guy I just called
things for what I see on black
and white to me that's what I
hear they might say that it
might understand that
correctly
matter representative
in in my opinion
the same playing field is not
the correct way to fund charter
school facilities
at a different mechanism would
be
beneficial to the the charters a
different fund program
chair representative i'll just
note that your your thoughts on
how robust a facility should be
you know when tsfa provider yes
you have seen provides capital
awards to traditional district
schools they have to follow the
falls adequately standards for
charter schools we have a
trimmed down amount of adequate
standards and the the fact of
that is that
fifteen twenty million dollars
still does something when you
when you want to make a building
I believe the dollar amount was
sixty seven million dollars for
for a school and moscow recently
and then we're finding that that
we can have adequate facilities
that might not have everything
now the scope is always going to
be a bit bigger for a
comprehensive high school back
to have more different kinds of
programming but animals wonder
if we're over building and I
think sorry I should say that's
just my I think that's a
conversation happening right now
the are we over building with
these standards that we have and
you have this other structure
with charter schools that are
showing you.
Will be build a new facility it
looks different but I don't
think anybody would say
inadequate and manager that's
that this is this is what I came
up here you know three years ago
in terms of gold I came up here
to be honestly frustrated you
have a lot of people here that
have we have all different
perspectives you're different
strong points we may not agree
on everything our point is
mountain share is that we should
all you shouldn't hesitate to
see what is on your mind only
because I think we should all
throw it on the table ship
through it the best things and
and sometimes we get mixed up
with articles rather than just
saying what we have to see to
come up with a good solution and
I think we we all do that at at
some point or another in the
legislature I like press to be
more open and and honest about
the challenges that we have not
because we want to politically
hurt or help someone else in in
hold someone else down but to be
honest with ourselves in how to
correct
a problem so many channel really
want to go on it on about it I
just the only other thing I
was the the thing that threw me
off was the
was there a construction to to
permit it problem when it went
with a long deal that I heard it
and I just kind of I didn't
quite hear it correctly maybe
madam sure yes we have a an
issue in our profit doing
construction loans to charter
schools because they can't
actually increase their revenue
so we can do a construction for
utility project because
utilities can increase their
rates there are different ways
to increase revenue for other
governmental entities taxes you
know more taxes to be applied to
them with charter schools that
monies are the these assistance
and the only way to increase
those revenues is to take money
from their operating funds in
their instructional f.
And we don't think that's and
then he wants best interest so
the construction risk
particularly because of all
those standards we've just
talked about are greater than
most the schools most of the
things that we see in the p p rf
all the other governmental
purposes and so are our goal
here was again to get more out
of that ten million dollars by
trying to blend the two programs
and so using the charter school
cash funded program to do the
construction and then have them
buy out that loan at the point
at which the constructions
complete and we know what meet
the terms of the parent that we
could just sort of warehouse
them in that pp that was the way
that he looked at this but we
saw though was not a traditional
the what we're seeing leaves on
that clean it's a new building
when someone else owns the rest
of the campus it's a parking lot
improvement it's a new classroom
attached to a building that even
so they're not easy there's
these all have a little bit of
fuz on them there's no clean
project that's been presented to
us
as we had anticipated and so
part of it was our expectations
were a little politiana that we
would find all these nice little
deals that we could take care of
pretty easily and we are
learning that there needs to be
additional
changes either more revenues
made available so that we can
help some of these construction
projects along or even changes
to the statute one of them to
help increase the ways in which
these things can be funded so we
talked earlier that foundations
for instance nationally many
foundations are the ones that
actually take on the loans
because they can enter into debt
so they can actually have a
commitment that is more that
it's a multiple commitment
charter schools can have to be
one year at a time and so that
you know just being able to make
old me talk about making a loan
to which our school we're not
finance authority is buying a
building and entering into a
lease that can be canceled once
a year.
And that is that's a credit
issue that our bond holders who
normally buy bonds because their
tax back or there are water
project the understand this
that's a little unusual so
adding foundations as a five
point three three foundation
short school maybe one option
there are national credit
standards people issue bonds for
these kinds of schools
nationally we don't think
there's a very impact that that
that would change the nature of
the ppr very much but it would
give us a lot more options in
terms of funding these projects
the london value is you could be
addressed differently there many
different ways if we change the
some element we probably have to
do both probably have to capital
on the tourist revolving fund
side and make changes to the
structural stuff
madam chair representative to us
is another just kind of wrinkle
here regarding the capacity of
the fund is you know in the
facilities world for public
schools right now we had a a
major shift with with pandemic
and and copied the the mount
things cost before
versus after that italy
different so we passed the bill
in twenty twenty two asked for
ten million dollars ten million
dollars actually did need
something different at that
point in time and so when you
look at I think what we're
reasonable parameters from the
program that will look
we
you can talk to the intense but
you know having multiple awards
out of a ten million dollars
would probably make sense only
of the five million dollars cap
well you can't do complete
projects for five million
dollars you actually could in
twenty twenty minute and that is
different now if you look at
certain
what classical academy it's a
big campus there they're
educating almost eight hundred
students there that billion was
thirteen million dollars of edit
and that's that's not a lot of
money for what things cost today
and so the capacity of the fund.
It is impacting the kinds of
proposals that they're getting
you know parking lot versus the
whole endeavor of that eastman
high school is is is working on
right now that is impacting the
types of projects that coming
forward manager this is this is
this is what I mean I mean it's
it you have your you're looking
to finance right there just this
is talk about finance but you're
gonna go to permanent you you're
not going to get you're not
going to get permit funny if
they know they're going to
cancel the release in the year
they want long term commitments
I mean a bank will call you out
you know three years on a
commercial note five years one
year they don't even want to
talk if you don't know this
money and only have a when
you're maybe the scary right
it's not it's not practical
that's a problem the other thing
is maybe you'd rather than read
about calibrate the the scoring
maybe that with there just needs
to be some very answers possibly
a very nice right where we have
exemptions exceptions branches
in the the last thing is is
sound obviously what we have to
funds more money but
in a lot of time a lot of things
right now with construction it's
easily forty percent more to
sometimes double
depending on what you're
building right so yeah it's you
got you got some issues or thank
you manager
when
representative briggle for a
second time keep it very very
one more
thank you manager very much
appreciate going for a second
time
and I just I just want to think
all of you because I know you're
sort of in the hot seat today
but I I just want to talk a
little bit about the difference
between evaluating the success
of children and and people young
people who are graduating these
programs which I don't I don't
have heard anything about that
and
you know comparing that to the
success of an infrastructure.
Program those are incomparable
in my mind and I just want to
point that out manager because I
think what we need to when we're
talking about standards we need
to be talking about standards at
a different level here
I think that we are missing
peace in your presentation and
maybe we can have this come back
to us later on madam chair
because when we talk about
business and we talk about the
evaluation of a program
I mean this is a whole different
animal so to speak because we're
talking about kids are
graduating and are successful
and moving on into the future in
their lives and I just wanted to
point this out because it's it's
it's
just it's bothering me because
what it's different when we're
talking about whether or not the
bill park is being successful in
terms of you know the source is
still more still on you can't
compare the two so I just wanted
to bring that up man insurance
the future maybe we can have a
follow up about graduation rates
and and how these charter
schools are being effective
thank you manager
thank you and I might check the
l c schedule because that'll be
honest a lot thank you very much
more revenue ways to change the
bills
happy to work on that so thank
you very much
I do believe that you're staying
up for our final presentation
which is prospective from the
charter schools we're going to
bring up rocker doctor who's
been working with some of our
charters michael august use the
superintendent of the school of
dreams a academy
and we go against constant
students on instructional
compliance at the school out of
me.
So thank you
that we hope to finish this by
twelve thirty four public common
members please try to get your
questions as you have them thank
you.
Thank you madame chair
members of representatives and
centers
i'd like to start off by I think
you know representative welcome
yet for her comments because a
lot of what she said I feel
choose almost talking about our
school we all rate we are a home
grown charter school located the
most new mexico
school dreams academy came as a
result of a dream that my father
in line mother had in around two
thousand six we were found in
two thousand eight opened our
doors in two thousand nine on a
storefront property we have
spent the last seventeen years
trying to navigate the process
of trying to realize the
facility of our own and i'm
happy to talk about that I mean
I could probably do that
afternoon the link to however
whatever questions you have but
I do want to tell you a little
bit about our school okay we are
the only charter school in the
county where stayed off the rise
charter school
we have
tremendous partners and support
from the community the village
of losless is a great partner
they actually in two thousand
fifteen helped us get on to what
is now a twenty account site
originally it was a ten acre
site in the middle of the loss
of this right next to the
railroader
the train station I have listed
a number of our bar of partners
as well as are legislative
continency has always been very
supportive and I feel to mention
them here and I apologize but
they've been very supported in
terms of giving this capital
money we're currently now having
one million dollars for planning
to sign up in your facility but
because of some of the things
going on we're not exactly sure
where to start with it without
you know going getting ahead of
ourselves
we have i'm very big on
processes and I believe in
processes and systems and and
we've tried very hard to follow
those those processed as over
the over the course of bar
seventeen year existence.
We've been reauthorized three
times we're in good standing we
have we are
a credited through called me up
since twenty twelve we don't
want to let me get talk a little
bit about our successes
academically but i'm gonna give
it over to him for just a minute
thank you madame chair thank you
members of committee really
excited to be here speaking with
you today so I mean just cover a
little bit of winds of our
school just for a little bit of
context and we have about five
hundred students every year more
or less that attended school the
dreams we have
staff and contractors somewhere
around a hundred and twenty
people to be work with
throughout the year
I will address that the
graduation rate for us as well
in the second and this is been a
really interesting process the
building camping process but a
little bit about our school so
we are precate through twelve
are pre k program was listed as
example are by the ecd
we are the only early college
high school in valencia county
so there's I think twenty nine
now
we parked her with new mexico
tech mexico state you and mbc
and cnn
we have a really wonderful CTE
program all of our students that
took a concentrator which is the
the second level of the cte
program they took a concentrator
of course a hundred percent of
our students graduated for two
years in a row that participated
in CTE in the concentrator
program
program is naturally recognized
we have national ambassador that
is on our staff for f f a our
graduation rate is last few
years has been good now most of
our cohorts although we do have
about five hundred students most
of our cohorts are somewhere
around.
Well actually the courts a
little bit larger but the kids
we have her great in school at a
single time about thirty forty
kids in each of our greats so
sometimes the graduation right
depending on the year you know
every kid is worth a large
percentage
but the last when the business
scores came out recently we were
at seventy seven percent
graduation rate and the latest
business that are going to come
out
I do know that after our first
ten day count this last school
year we didn't have a single
senior drop out and our testing
scores formative installment of
from elementary through
secondary have shown signs of
improvement so I sell it to say
I want to give a little bit
about us as a school we follow
all the state standards we use
service which is a recommended
state teaching curriculum and we
do the best we can help markets
got good morning madam chair
members my name is roberto
doctor
and consultant for a tired
schools anything any given time
between five seven total schools
and this kind of one you've kind
of brief over beyond this all
you are experiences you know
what with financing trying to
get your funding for retired
schools
but the the school that that my
the icer will have one with with
my daughter they're all
understood communities so
our families are coming so I
have a lot of money to
do is be facilities that can go
but the medical school for the
arts but we're chancelling to
fund raising some of the songs
that you so I will always try to
find ways to
build these facilities in an
efficient manner that they make
sense so just them
we over the last year's we've
been working.
You know when you get the ten
million dollars into the next
plan's authority
we've been working for the past
few years was that trying to get
them to do the
problem either rules for this
for this program
and you know just and right off
the bat for example you get her
but into our school there's done
score
now key for example where we're
just looking at it at a
financial every financing that
participants for example it's a
six point six million dollars
that we're trying to refinance
part of the chance that we have
for example you guys probably
know
the day to let them go goes
here's the chair of the
foundation so he try to retire
but literally the note is in his
name so next year the the no
it's coming due to have a
blooming payment so we're trying
to get this this free finance
because I paid about seven
percent interest rate you know
where the you know the most fine
story will be financed then will
be no probably you know if we
get accidental it's not your
point three quarter or something
like that which would be a huge
savings to them
so that that's just one example
of product that we've been
trying to get refinanced this
program
did a compound
was instantly your last year
because there were really no
options they had a finance to
the
what to organization not
publicly beat and for six
million their pain over eight
percent interest rate I
technology leadership will just
recently close the their notes
now and it's about seven and a
half percent
that sold looking at seven
dollars they're looking at
upwards of about seven percent
more community another project
that need about seven million
that we applied to the new
mexicans authorities.
Uhm
not not to be funded through it
and then the
one one of the school popper
public performance arts who's a
different charter and has a
great reputation pretty outcomes
as well
trying to work with the aps to
try to find a facility that
meets their needs we're looking
anywhere from fifteen
to twenty nine project for one
of their so this is what those
seven alone we're looking at
because in fifty one dollars
with the financing that will be
just for this was the idea of
the obviously that the ten
million dollars was put in there
can only handle a portion of
those amp been doing the
conversations and you know many
business people on this
committee
I mean it's just the same parts
of the search like we'll get
more it's
rather pay for a half percent
first
but because we have no options
we are happy to go to the price
at eight percent rate the tax
better you guys do
theirs
that's money that
because we have a positive plans
authority to allow us to have
its taxes that read
the
I think part of the
well it's been a learning
process and with the new plans
authority and I know it's
kind of
well I think trying to figure
this out
but I think it's
it's been first
older gone
it's on the person for services
with address by and
I believe that we were the first
application to get into the q.
We probably had to use sent ten
different meetings
then you always send we got
notified that could be one one
select because we were
not rural not rural
we're not performing school and
the recovery criteria so
that question with those
rules can that termination came
from but
you know that for the capital
schools and how performing a lot
of my schools
weren't understood community so
that they could be an issue also
with the
with the the refinancing program
the finance authority similar
without this and because lambda
three finance and seven dollars
probably had ten to twelve means
the staff then it came out that
well there's many mental
questions if you guys want to do
this to be that's already again
we can only let you look eighty
percent which
understand that when they look
at the appraisals and I build
them even though it's worth more
than will be looking for there's
no little comps you know in new
mexico because glance on the
buildings
so
I I think it's just a matter of
your I think we need visit some
of the issues with respect to
the least purchase agreements
they their way we can tweak
those to make it a little bit
simplify it obviously that had
possible been more about the uh
the psf and some of those match
requirements that you can use to
be an issue I mean none of my
schools are going to be will
come up with sixty percent match
for any of these funds even if
you were to get on the list of
theirs there's a few things that
i'm i'm hoping that no as let's
there's you can direct you
the title of schools along with
the partners to.
Bring some legislation to you
not to be the interim that makes
sense that we could get the
passengers little session
because I don't for example this
on the
terror then the budget alone
that comes up now I think it's
january next year we don't buy
the solution
to be interested in see how we
approach that so thank you
madame chairman I could just had
a couple of comments about our
situation and it over two amount
we too have experienced the
number of the situations that
the robert was talking about
we have tried very hard to
follow all the processes put
ahead of us reform nonprofit
organization in twenty thirteen
so that that not profit could
incur debt we have turned down
three separate offers of private
landers over the years because
the the terms just were not
conducive and I didn't feel
right spending tax payer dollars
for those types of turbs
they were interested in to say
the least so we turn those down
then with the help of of
reaching started their new more
about you don't get interested
was wrecked on the only and if
the ranking is very high because
we were in a nice door from
facility at racked very high
when the village was good enough
to move this on to some property
we brought in portables from a
ps we brought in portable
through the ps and we we created
thirty five portable campus it's
priced on twenty acres right now
that actually we have a lease
purchased agreement to all those
based upon that during the panda
make we asked up yes if you come
back out of him and revisit our
insight rate can it come to it
you know look at our school but
we will happen with that is for
the nice two years now we've
been right number one on the nfc
iraqi and we because of some of
these things what we're not
exactly sure that I I don't can
be tweaked but we can't.
And get on to the pseus agenda
yet and their schools write
lower than us that are there
actually getting funded next
thing is the fci sport so one of
the reasons that we were turned
down for our art loan
to to due to consolidate some of
our dead is what we ask at the
end of the paperwork was because
of our loan to value great show
rfc sports so once you get sixty
that's kind of like the ratio
that the piece of users say you
might need a new building right
so that those kind of things
have been working yes we've
tried three hard to work within
those parameters to try to get
something but at present we're
still moving forward trying to
figure it out within a way where
kind of stuff the end of the day
route in terms of utilizing a
little interest rate but in
auction certainly was very
appealing to us that we were
going to depend upwards of eight
percent seven years ago and end
up works you know at least
fifteen percent of whatever was
off the top interest by the time
you actually realized to build a
school so ten million dollars
owned by the time was also
probably in a seven million
dollars for building but you're
paid on the ten million dollars
for the next thirty years and I
didn't feel comfortable so
that I just wanted to make sure
that they realize we're a school
that is recovered what i'm the
breakings we followed the rules
we've got to go process but now
we're we're writing it to either
legislative things that that
that might
our match within our local
district is forty one percent we
certainly can't come up with
forty one percent on the kind of
facility we need
but I also know that the
possibility to waive the match
is there if you can get their
negotiate with the ps i've i've
seen that in action actually.
And the lease purchase agreement
statute might need to be worked
on because we currently have a
lease purchase agreement that
has been approved by the pd
problem is it's for a certain
amount we were told that if you
do even if we were to get a
little bit aboard through a
system whatever we could only
get the amount up to that these
purchase agreement in my mind at
least for just agreement could
change because the it was built
on what we have now we're going
to grow that right so anyway
quite
sleep
sure yeah no I I was just gonna
say that the
launch of value becomes a little
bit of an issue especially when
you look at a h two of our hand
out which is our facility and
that's one of the reasons why we
are ringed so high is because
most of those trailers are have
or are are coming close to
outliving their their life cycle
we're spending upwards of two
hundred thousand dollars a year
on maintenance for those
trailers so those traders are
located on the northern ten
acres of the twenty point five
maker property that we have
we're planning on building
probably under southern first
but it's yeah alone to value
becomes an issue because when
your fci score is so high and
when your building is in the
state it's and that's why we got
that ranking in the first place
so effectively the w n m c I
score the way that I read it it
should be helping the schools
that are highest because they
are with the most need for
facility but because of what
we're running into as and maybe
you have a question about this
we are state authorized charter
so that gets a little different
between district charters as
well so what have one working
about three years ago we
received a eight five percent
five million dollar reward for a
pre k facility through the psy
we resended that in order to be
able to qualify to get
positioned to get on the items
the iraqi.
For our entire facility so you
don't that is turns out to be a
little disheartening at this
point you know because they
knowing also that had we built
the precaution facility
I raking would have gone off the
charts and we wouldn't have been
able to qualify for facility for
the rest of the school stop kind
of a catch twenty two
handed over to map but I also
want to say every most of the
questions that we're being asked
earlier to
we've been living at the last
year and it's been an
interesting process excited to
be here so
madam chair thanks to me get
unlike and robert you know when
when HB forty three established
the revolving long fund they ask
was for ten million dollars it
would have been a lot more if we
thought it was the only solution
and what you're hearing from
from so that is that they're
trying to go with the other
viable path right now which is
through a pseoc capital or what
they're trying to exhaust every
ppr the try to do prf through an
mfa we did we looked at the
revolving finding
based off of our conversations
with the s f a we're looking for
more
money than that yeah and it only
in the in the history of pseoc
serving charters calls only one
school as secured capital words
from clc
and that's a nancy and they
built an early child it's like
rome essentially although we
have old at one point qualified
but they didn't move through
with that that was a long time
ago now but what we have is an
overliance on and hope of what
the mfa fund can do and I think
more capacity we're still
figuring out what that can do
but then that's not going to
serve everybody all the way so
through this case study of
sodium your parents why we
establish this in the first
place lower rates and those
dollars states not to a bank or
or different state who puts out
on but we still have.
The out outside of it and the
methods per few but certainly
within each of yours it's a
legislator we we got to figure
out another way to to fund
facilities for charter schools
and I just want to know to
represent a road copy point
about the ninety five percent of
schools who might not who don't
have significant community
dollar investment every one of
our schools as significant
community investment we're not
all of them have dollars charter
schools if your chargeable
student you are getting funded
less than a traditional district
school student does in new
mexico so we're providing value
right there the only way these
guys can save is by taking that
lower amount for a student and
then not offering services to
get
the only way they're going to
get the money is through
operational they might get a
grant here there at the end of
the day for us to save up that
percentage of match we have to
take away from the dollars that
are designed to serve students
and so that takes a long time
and almost always means because
with
the
explain their dollars go towards
people that's just how it works
in schools and so if you can't
spend a certain amount of
dollars you're getting less
people to serve kids and so
that's a real tough
scenario for us where we already
have less funding and then we
have to use that smaller dollar
amount to try and save up for a
down payment whether you go
through the
psfa or through the private
mechanisms that that school
something going through so it's
just a reality about our funding
we talk about you know whether
whether this is a good
investment I think the results
jurors are getting so that they
spend it's pretty it's pretty
amazing what's happening in our
schools but it really could set
a whole kind of trying to figure
out how to get a facility which
the students deserve.
Stability for the building that
there they're going to
thank you with that look turned
to questions a senator
okay thank you madame chair and
thank you centers I had to step
out for just a moment and always
see why stop going on apologize
I miss the rest of marketers
presentation there are the last
panel but managers had a couple
of questions one is on the
selection or the review process
for you know this type of these
type of dollars and and granting
these dollars
who makes is there a board that
reviews those and what they want
the rules come together who
actually does that
not quite sure if I ask someone
if you wouldn't mind market yeah
so
you can have a character so you
can send it
mister chairman I believe what
you're asking is how the rules
and policies for the charter
school were involving fund we're
created and that was done by our
report and incombination with
stay called her involvement and
I would not that you know we
were given ten million dollars
as we talked about earlier that
doesn't that once off too many
problems and we worried about
how we would select a project
given that the statute itself
didn't give any heads about how
we should
it would be best invested from
the perspective of the
legislature so we
devised a program that tried to
maximize that ten million
dollars over a long term to deep
in the impact that it could have
the criteria for priorities
in them
was done by internal step and I
think working with the
association primarily and those
tend to be the things that are
going to be the greatest
indicators of longterm success
these are thirty year leases we
want to see that they're going
to be around
but it didn't really come into
play this time because most of
the projects got by past I mean
they we went through we ended up
touching every one of those
projects so the actual criteria
in reality didn't end up being
the issue it was mostly that are
credit standards aren't.
And the credit terms are meeting
the two needs of the schools and
that's really where we the with
the conflicts occurred i'll
think you matter chair and thank
you market so if you want to
make yourself comfortable I
think I have
yeah so where I was going to go
next method i'm gonna be as
brief as possible to others have
questions I think I was have
questions so i'm glad to hear
that there was stake older
involvement I think that's super
critical I don't know you know
how that felt under stakeholder
part but i'm glad you did that I
agree with you that you have to
really tough task ten million
dollars these days and you know
to us individually break
grandchild money you know or
whatever but it doesn't even get
a side of the school parking lot
in some cases and you saw it
some of the parking lots were
part of the project and stuff so
I I guess i'd like a
recommendation from you at some
point or somebody and maybe map
once to hear this too
now yeah so i'd like a
recommendation from folks on
what should that be said at this
is an educational and education
option for our communities that
we decided to do here in new
mexico it's on the books it's
allowable to nothing wrong with
building a charter school if you
feel like your community needs
it but you're you're subsidiar
community music so i'd like to
know what what are the what
should be be setting that out to
make it meaningful to our can
actually be used
I need to tell me right now but
but but maybe we come back and
charge this at some point and
and have you spent some time and
put some pencil to you know one
of the things that I hear in
this is mainly for the charter
school part of the table of the
presentation panel is that what
you know the salaries at the
teachers and the administrators
and the blahable are are
unusually larger than that the
public schools I again I don't
want to know this right now but
I would like to see this is a
formal request madam chair if
you're alright with this i'd
like to see an average put
together I want to see what that
is if you take all charters and
you take the average salary
there for a level one two three
whatever teacher and
administrator one two three
whatever.
And and then bump that up
against our public schools I
want to make sure that
everybody's been treated fairly
so i'd like to see that may be
an art by the time our next
meeting occurs i'd like to have
that information which gives you
about a month or so or the local
month to do that
and then on the on the buildings
themselves there's always a lot
of question or guys that it's no
public building so we have to do
with this other way
what is what is one of things
that we could do for you is
there's something that's holding
your am cupping you to open
intended or whatever but
handcuffing you to being able to
to find appropriate building for
yourself I know that school of
dreams I toward it I was from
that community III know the
mayor very well I know he's very
supportive and I know that you
guys are working hard down there
market on its graduation almost
every year you know the
supporter of everything you have
to and and in my district a lot
of my children go to that score
what is one thing that we need
to do it at a legislative level
to help you open it seems like
we talk about this every year
and i'm not a fan of talking
about problems over and over I
want to get solved then one of
the next problem what can we do
for you matter benefit chair
what do I I would have to but
wanting would be to take a real
strong look at the match
requirements for charter schools
we are currently looking we're
currently locked into what the
district local school district
is for us that would be forty
one percent it varies across the
state any charter school that I
don't know any charter school at
all they could come up with
forty one percent if it was part
of the psy grand award that's on
the grandward site okay so I
mean I see that so when I asked
for a comparison of salaries I
also want the comparison on the
other side of the coin on what
are you required to do versus
what is the public school
required to do where the
whatever regular and I think
that's only there I got
certainly
see that data as well and then
that the next something talking
to the least purchase agreement
statute that they would allow
for me that I know.
In our current situation if we
were able to consolidate the
debt and then look at created
enough money to look at a
potential match through psyous
you know what that would
automatically raise the least
purchase agreement but we can't
get to that point because are
currently spreadsheets agreement
locks us into certain about that
doesn't from a lot of fun
robert where I want
it for strong
and center I I think the the
other frustration that we've had
from a
perspective you know all the
schools that it meant earlier
that I work with
conversation with its try to
find some solutions and i'm not
sure where to get sleep but like
it on the phone is just to
listen not to help
so I think we also have
a fine solutions to I actually
agree with you madame chair and
robert I don't know why but I
thought somebody and you know we
beat so many people in our
legislative lines I thought
somebody was in the room from
psf that's why I was surprised
that you know many market
marketes carrying as you
normally does she's carrying all
the load for everybody over
there.
Great I know I remember that yet
so then the last thing that
insurance i'll stop talking here
but can scook in charters if
they have a generous benefactor
somebody comes like him they pay
these things off earlier
i'm i'm i'm seeing some knotting
but I want to make sure chairman
yes if there is
any other source of capital with
every long that the finance
authority makes from this fund
could be picked prepaid at any
point and is it is does the
future interest go away when the
early payment occurs
yes mister okay well good I just
want you in government you know
we're not completely satisfied
to your completely dissatisfied
and then we're completely
satisfied I want to make sure
that we're not leaving that on
the table because that would be
there's no incentive to pay off
your longer leave you know so
okay I I do want to see those
two things everybody know that
the salary comparisons to public
schools and then on the other
side the the local of the match
required I think that's very
important that we understand
what that looks like and it
sounds like it's district by
district it's different right so
maybe bring us some sort of an
average of some kind would be
good and i'm trying to think
robert have one more comment
yeah manager I think one other
issue so do the whole capitality
process which goes to help us
with I try to put in the let's
station you know words and then
construct you also p r
probably what that's a council
usually
that's not allowable with
capital money that's it that's
why they do that but I was going
to say you know and and I want
to really excite a bunch of
legislators that are similar and
the table or just so you know if
the school can't do that and we
put my capital money into which
I get into several of the
charters my including market
then suddenly that money is just
parked there and you know we we
get all concerned all the time
about what I see this money
being actioned wisely being
actioned you know it's just
going to continue to grow or
it's going to take state to me
as a legislator i'm not going to
keep putting money into a bucket
it's not going to move
so just i'm glad your bigness
drawn the way that you are but
we need something to happen here
everybody.
Mister chairman and madam chair
if I could just make one of the
comment which is we're not
actually making the loan in this
proposed transaction it when we
enter into a financing with the
charter school we're buying the
building and entering into a
lease so in this particular
scenario you wouldn't be taking
capital at least pay off a loan
be taking it to acquire the
building so you should still
have an ability to pay down
contribute down payment because
you're not actually it's the
building purchase you're not
prepaying the loans of capital
should be able to be a played
here and then some of them share
them that craze other questions
for me and who owns the building
at the end
of during the least purchase
period finance authority owns it
and then we can convey in the
least agreement we can be the
interest over at the term for a
dollar
thank you manager
what more thing as a as a state
charter school
what are the issues but that
local districts can have in
terms of being able to access
the intermediate funds as they
can bond the component to go up
to the public for up upon state
charter schools cannot we do not
have that opportunity.
Manager madam church is to make
sure
there's some alignment here I
would agree and echo what mr
august said about those two
things figuring out the match of
pse making adjustments to lease
the least purchase act to more
readily convey to terms that
make sense to mf and then lastly
just putting some more dollars
than that revolving well it's
fun so we can it can work on
meeting for projects so you ask
for one senator I give three
young
things thank you
thank you madame chair
so i'm a public I was living i'm
tired of public school teacher
twenty years national word
certified all the person one
thing that always bothered me
about charter schools and and I
would like to see your report is
I want to see a statistics on
the kids you lose the grades
they leave with and the public
schools they go to because
overwhelming probably as a
matter teacher I got kids who
we're not passing and as public
school we have to take everyone
and I just thought
there should be some stipulation
that if you have kids that you
should stay the whole year
because they're in your care
instead of kind of dumping up on
public school so I would like
some kind of report that told me
that madam chair represented if
I could just
I agree with you
we are we we followed a lot of
reprocess in terms of of how we
get enrollment as a result are
we have our demographics is is
very high needs in terms of both
economically disadvantaged
almost forty percent of our kids
have ips
yellow type student you know and
then we when you brace them and
we do the best we can we work
very well with all of them
because we have a lot of
expertise in terms of kids we
lose what I see.
Sometimes is the one to spend
that their parents feel more
comfortable what in their
children to be in middle school
with us because they feel it's
safer and then their kids want
my one experience the bigger
high school world you know that
band that rallies and all those
kinds of things so we see some
of that one as well up but also
we see the opposite was the
latic it's coming in from the
public schools and had been a
public school we can't stipulate
that a stay with us the year
their feet to move within
schools if they want the only
stipulation we have as if they
go through our lottery and they
come to us and they leave us if
they want to come back where we
have no obligation equally to
take them back okay because
they've already got to the
process nine times out of time
we will sometimes it might not
happen that way
and chair representatives aren't
gonna you know I think we're
we're likely drastically under
estimating just how much moving
around there is between all
parts of the system
representative rouses mentioned
that moving between districts we
know that interest district
transfers are probably more
likely than we think about it's
a forty fifty percent of
families in our biggest
districts that are choosing
something other than their
locally aside schools and how
long they stay there I don't
think we have to handle one but
but choices here parents
expected students expected but
it creates
new wrinkles for the system to
address
I just want to point out to the
committee that it is work
they're here because of the
relationship and mf eight to the
public school revolving the
charter school so an exhaustive
examination and education takes
place in the legislative
education study committee and
some of the documents some of
you may want you can access
through online or by request
representative representative
trust us briefly.
But i'm sure I was trying to
make up being gone yesterday
I think i've done that now
venture and thank you president
I was told us thank you market
all begins doing great and other
straights with their questions I
just I think it just frustrates
all of us and and she's right we
should be in the education
committee if we're going to do
that I just want to point out I
think it's great to see that you
had a hundred percent graduation
rate
I just shocked so I might see
that right so representative to
us add that is a hundred percent
graduation rate for so we do
career technical education and
the way that that works and new
mexico is there's three there's
an intro course than there's a
concentrator course in there's a
capstone course so when our
students go through the second
course the the concentrator a
hundred percent of them graduate
our graduation rate at the last
this report was seventy seven
percent and to mister paul's
point one of the reasons why the
best discourse takes a long to
come out as because of that
transient nature of the the
students so even if we have
forty kids in a couple work or
forty kids in our in that grade
in our school the corporate
could be seventy so that's
what's kind of hard in difficult
restaurants for sure what our
graduation rate was last year
but last year after the first
ten day account we didn't lose a
single senior
the other thing with regards to
academic rigor I know formative
testing scores in elementary
with ice station I think we
reached our goals with those and
I think they should improve it
from the previous year as far as
the summit of tests go the SAT
scores we had a fourteen point
jump in english and I think a
three point jump in math
and yeah we're working our big
priority this next coming school
years academic rigor
manager just my last thing i'm
traded my son to be a a
business.
Person
I told him son it's important to
have competition
it's healthy I like it and i'm
saying that because I think in
certain things when a person has
to as only one choice and they
all just go to the one choice
even if you're giving them the
best of everything they don't
recognize it because I have
nothing to compare to you and so
I tell my son don't even if you
can don't necessarily tread just
buy out your competition to be
to be the biggest fish in that
in that pond relax do the best
you can if you're doing a good
job they'll come to you if
you're not they're gonna go the
other way that keeps you on your
toes and it won't make you
complace and I think for me I
competition is good III I like
it it's not to heard anybody to
make this all better thank you
manager
thank you I don't see any more
questions I will say
just illustrates that these
topics are covered with multiple
committees it's like we can't
we're here specially to look at
the funding and the changes that
need to be made and I know we're
pursue it off mind an online
but public school capital outlay
oversight committee needs to be
on so this is getting on the
agenda let me know when i'll see
what I can do
but I want to thank you to think
that to have you for the work
that you're doing on credible
school and open madam chair and
follow now that we know that
you're there and who you are
thank you marching thank you
thank you
i'll be really appreciate the
presentation today
thank you manager
would love it yes the incident
yes.
And the last thing just will
quick up
september ninth
please we have a
hundred
and seventy five school for the
kids for
that
so
thank you
we do not is there anybody in
the room the members of this
party want to make public
comment
we have nobody online
nobody audience and so.
I'm going to have our
attorney announced the next
meeting and then I will class.
Madam chair our next meeting is
on august eleven and twelve that
would be an estimate your still
working at securing a location
and at all probably be at
northern new mexico college
thank you
thank you everybody for being
here I want to think everybody
again for make you know our
quarter with you know
people for five minutes you're
all great
