Himself and his own restaurants
and all sorts of things and he's
always been kind of whenever
we're in his neck of the woods I
wanted him to say a few words
about our mule to danger start
uh mister monzano if you can
please tell the apparatus and
the leadership here how grateful
we are always feeding us so well
whenever we're in smaller towns
on these interim committees a
committee I don't know if you've
noticed but the food is just
spectacular so representative
chatfield if you like safety
words thank you miss chair
mister chair I was here earlier
this year with the l c and we
just were fed so well and so
well taken care of i'm back here
again today in the in the food
is awesome I so I don't know
how you guys for do saturday
deal with that but it's so
professional is so good and I
just want to say thank you for
for feeding ursen and a hosting
us and thank you mister
I thank you representative and
again i'll underscore that as
well and please pass a longer
thanks to everybody mister
monzana
is a yet the potatoes were
amazing by the way I i'm a a
cook myself but though someone
will learn a lesson there on the
potatoes so thank you very very
much to the committee for it for
those of you who decided to
rejoin this this afternoon thank
you
we are always excited to hear
from the folks that are joining
us.
On a regular basis here let's
see here so we have
to do to do okay so yeah item
number four okay
annual report from the spaceport
authority scott mclaughlin
mclaughlin guess excuse me
executive director space port
authority you were also very
kind of us every time we show up
at your door step as well thank
you mister mclaughlin francisco
piattas a d e d director of
business development space court
authority and then everybody you
should have a decent frontier
that kind of looks like this
okay so we're gonna turn ten
handed over to you gentlemen if
you want to walk us through your
material
I thank you determined video
appreciate being here or always
happy to give her a little
report um we've had AAA busy
year and I it's always good to
report back to you how things
are going so we have the power
point in front of you just real
quick what you're looking at and
top cover on the left hand side
is it is a company called
intuitive machines and they're
the company that landed on the
moon several months ago as a
actually turned out to be a
little bit of a crash landing
they tipped over but that was
the first us lander of any kind
that had been on the moon since
the late uh early seventies and
anyway they came to the space
port to test their landing
system over parts of the space
port just like it would be over
the moon so that's a good
example the type of people were
starting to attract to the space
port people who hear about us
and who are in the industry the
middle picture is is a is what
it looks like from a flight for
virgin glactic and you probably
see on your schedule that are
mike moses as here and it's
going to speak after me uh which
is great to have urgent like to
care with us so I have a little
section of virginia active but
i'll probably move pretty
quickly over it since since mr
moses is here and then on the
right there you see a picture of
the thunderbirds we've had them
at the space port I think three
or four times and they're not
going to come again and we're
talking to them about being here
for up to five year kind of
agreement with them so very
exciting.
And i'll talk more about that a
minute so
just moving forward i'll give
you a little more on the
activities of the space part
we'll talk about capital
projects a little bit on her
budget and then doctor pay
address is going to talk about
business development so on page
four I know that we get the
flicker gone
sure
and page for just some texts if
some of the things we've been
working on again all that mister
moses talk about virgin glactic
we've ramped up our stem tour so
we've had quiet few students
high school students metal
schools students coming out to
the space part we're still
trying to come up with ideas on
how to get schools that are
further away out to the space
border how to do some sort of
remote a learning one in my ask
that i'll talk about in the
budget is for a stem war forced
coordinator but i'll talk about
that then we've turned out to be
a really good place for a
testing both large medium and
small so I I have some other
pictures of that but for example
we are a lot of small u abuse
are coming out there to do
training or basic testing of
their systems and it asked to do
with our restricted our space
from white since miss orange
with our runway and some of the
other parts of the train we've
had a couple electronic vehicle
I mean electric vehicle
companies come out and that's
ongoing so they come and go for
a month or two at a time they
add to the economic impact of
the area but they're not their
permanently but we are trying to
attract them as a permanent
attendant where continuing to do
photoshoots of various kinds
whether their commercials are
there movies who could people
like the landscape in new mexico
and they like the way the space
part looks so and virgin elected
has been a partner in that
sometimes they want to do shoots
of the gateway to space or or
right up there next to the
building and virgin guy takes
been good on that so we can both
make a little money off the deal
we are in the final stages of a
master plan you might remember
that you know legislature funded
a master plan exercise several
years ago we got that started
over almost a year ago.
Actually over a year ago and
where where in the final draft
of that so maybe by the time I
come back in january february I
can send it to you and we can
talk more specifically about the
recommendations from that
contractor.
Getting back to a we have we've
turned out to be a really good
site for something kind of
called high out to two platform
systems which are really large u
avs and their designed to fight
sixty thousand feet and above
which is part of the air space
that is actually rarely used by
anything except for maybe the
military and science these are
designed to stay up about six
months at a time so they can uh
there are another name for
marsudo satellite so they
actually can satellite and at
first they were focused on
things like uh being a five g
cell phone tower in the sky but
as the military has begun to
think of more and more about
what it means for an adversary
to take out our satellites
these are now looked at as a
satellite replacement something
that could get up very quickly
so two of the three developments
that are at the space part are
funded by the military so it's
this turns out to be a bit of a
partnership of white since miss
orange which is it's kind of fun
the cime skept a little bit so
going down you might remember me
talking about the space valley
this concept that is c- coming
to froation which is tied
together all the way down to all
passo and potentially all the
way to call route springs but
including las almost and santa
fe and our cricket new mexico I
mean you know mexico all the
universities of mexico tech uh
less crucials that if you look
at all the assets that are space
and early space related in the
region we are are actually honor
way to be in a power house if we
can just get ourselves organized
and that means in terms of
deciding what parts of the
ecosystem need the business
ecosystem need to be improved
then what we need to do to work
together so are not acting
competitively and an example is
the n s f grant's national
science foundation grants that
both are coalition and albacork
you went for and a coalition and
opaco went for if we were better
coordinated instead of competing
against each other we might have
been all the work together to
bring that granted technically
i'll also want it and they but
they now have an issue uh and
the kind of an issue with n s
effort me not to get awarded to
them after all.
But anyway that's what space
values focused on trying to get
everybody to work together.
I'll skip ahead
I think i'm going to talk about
most of the other things uh here
so i'll just go ahead and go on
to page five so page five is the
virgin galactic again my most
will talk about it but just a
quickie
august seventy release their
earnings they're quarterly
earnings I always recommend that
you go to the investors site and
you can get straight from
michael cogas or their ceo
what's been going on and but in
the last twelve months I think
it was actually in in the period
of eleven months the spaceship
unity went to space seven times
and I know makes it going to
talk more about that we're going
to have a pause with virgin
glactic they've already started
execute a position operations
while they built two new space
and that is going to affect our
revenue a little bit i'll talk
about that a few minutes
and other video at the very
bottom if you see that business
model video I think that's also
worth you i'll watching if you
have a few minutes to understand
where virgin is headed in terms
of their you know future and
business model for both the
space part even other space
ports so real quick this lower
right hand portion the picture
you see two spaceships and and
white night the carrier craft
that's where they're headed in
about a year to eighteen months
then I wanted you to see the
math right there it's up to a
hundred twenty five space
flights a year with six people
and a potentially on the
spaceship so seven hundred and
fifty customers if you do a
little more math you're why you
wind up in in the thousands of
people thousands and thousands
of room nights in los crucials
interested and and then building
back up there work force so
but might get michael talk about
that so
part of their expansion there in
activities on page six
yeah
you see where we're working with
them on the potential for a
three new hangers right now
discussions with emeralding only
for one hanger the one on the
left most side which will be
their launch hanger for the
carrier craft.
But this is a hanger that they
are going to build with their
own money they're not using
stated in mexico money and it
will increase the lease we have
the sites of the lease so again
mike will talk about that i'm
moving on page seven years of
picture a recent picture of one
of the high out to two platform
systems so the wing span of this
is three hundred feet so giving
idea what lay out on a football
field these guys also built
their own air strip which is
what is at five hundred feet
wide and four thousand feet line
so they built out with their own
money if you years ago and you
can see in the on the bottom
this is their compound below
that they are also a bit with
all there are money so they have
a three hundred foot hanger they
have its limitary system they
have offer space they built they
paid to put electricity and
water into that complex and so
they they did a flicism this
year for the two or three months
they had people out and their
goal was to do an overnight
flight and ah and when they come
back next year there are plans
are to fly for like a week at a
time they've worked very closely
with the f a a and white sense
missile range and their goal is
going to be to do these long
duration flights so actually
take off at the space part
flyaround the restricted our
space for a while they'll then
transition to sixty thousand
feet and go over the black range
by silver city and hover over
the black range for months at a
time and the goal is to get the
fait to approve this aircraft
they're they're final version of
the aircraft once they do that
they're going to be working on
building dozens and and maybe
hundreds of these and so doctor
piotists and I are working on
getting them to manufacturer in
new mexico and las crucials
probably which would make the
most sense or somewhere in the
region so good example of a of a
good long term tenant with a
good long term prospect
moving on that we get the
thunderbirds on payg
course it's always fun to have
the thunderbirds there.
They're going to be there for
almost three weeks the share and
again we're talking to them
about a longer term agreement to
be there every year every winter
they love doing the winner
training there they like the
white scenes air space they like
they've been staying in los
cruces they like the the how are
the people there it's about
seventy people that stay in town
for
about three weeks this
particular picture is from their
instagram website and dessosite
the kind of press we get with
the customers come the white
since because they're basically
telling anybody who follows the
thunderbirds that they're in new
mexico and that they're at space
port america so the free press
for us.
So below that just quickly note
we we applied for and got a low
power effort radio station so
that's sort of like if you go to
the grand candidate says tune
into the station and you can you
can hear about the green candy
what we did that both so we
start talking about space port
america and that are not that of
where though but also it's a
safety feature for us still we
will be able to once we get a
little bit or organized when
we're having virgin electric
missions or anything else going
on the space port we can
actually tell people the tune to
that fm radio station uh to
understand what to do if we have
a safety concern whether it's
weather or anything else
you might have heard several
years back that we were trying
to figure how to get a cell
phone tower there so on page ten
well we are provider showed up
and they built the cell phone
tower we're just waiting now for
them to get providers on that
tower verizon should be on it
later the share and hopefully
mobile next year this is a
really big benefit to the
ranchers and people who live in
in the the basin because there
is only other cell phone
providers verizon and they're up
on the cabil mountains they're
not down in the valley so this
is going to make a big
difference for internet coverage
and for safety for everybody
else.
On page eleven we held the space
port america cup again and that
involved I think we had eighteen
hundred students from all around
the world a seventeen countries
thirty eight states these
there's a picture of right next
to the last crucial convention
center these are all aerospace
engineers programmers
electronics near some of my
marketing majors so they are all
there and again in new mexico
learning about the space part
and learning about space valley
about six thousand participate
worldwide we get an incredible
amount of earned media under
media on this four point eight
million is what we calculated
this year because if you go and
inter space part american cup
and google you will start
getting hits from the
philippines from places around
the world where they sent their
team so is it is brought us
tremendous awareness from all
around the world all around the
country about the space port
and the proof of that is the
next page page twelve you can
look at the sponsors that have
been giving money to the space
part american cup to get their
name up there and they also
recruit students so it's just
been a really big thing for us
and and good for the again good
for the state and good for the
region
okay skipping at a little bit of
page fourteen
we have as you probably remember
we have a tax district
associated with the space port
so the task tax district was
foreign many years ago to help
pay for the bonds so the funding
of the of the space parties kind
of in two third state and one
third the local counties so in
pain after his bonds if there's
any access by revenue through
statute that money can be spin
on infrastructure so we finally
we're able to get the regional
space for districtor let go some
of that money thirteen point
nine million and so here some of
the projects were working on uh
that will use that
infrastructure funding for.
The first one on page fifteen is
the stark the space part
technology in reception center
that's a that's a it center it's
going to be a security center
for us and it's also going to be
room a couple years you'll be
able to hold the committee
hearing there if you like and uh
it's a stem area so it's a a
multipurpose kind of a like a
like a pocket knife multi use
building for us it will be the
first building that the public
will be able to access pretty
easily and we expect also to
lease it out very written out
very regularly we think that
will be a popular place for
local conferences either other
albecuric year osco system do
some of their business so we are
getting started on that but I am
I am asking through the icip for
an additional four million
dollars to kind of take ah
absorb a little bit more than
increased construction cost but
we have eighteen million in hand
and we're getting started on
that building right now.
The next on page sixteen I have
a picture of its sixteen and
seventeen are both for extending
roads in utilities around the
the south and the north into the
runway so for those who have
been out there you kind of
realize that the uh you may not
realize but they're the roads
don't go all the way around the
runway so this is now the
beginning of getting the road
all the way around the runway so
we can
you know attract more of folks
there the the companies we talk
to can't really wait for us to
put in a road or put in a water
or electric electric so this is
asking a little bit ahead of it
and also getting a head to be
able to support virginia active
in terms of their hangers
the final one pay eighteen that
were now getting working on is a
a new hanger so we have
something called a clamshell we
called the climb shell hanger
armadill hanger out there we
least that about ninety percent
of the time and we could call us
all the time you know do you
have additional hangers based
you have additional hanger space
so this is a ten million dollar
hanger it's about two million
for the hanger in about eight
million for all the concrete and
associated infrastructure that
has to go with it even the taxi
way and this is a pretty good
representation of all look like
a hundred fifty six x hundred
fifty six feet it will handle a
seven thirty seven and a little
bit bigger than you I forget so
anyway those are fully funded
and want to give you a quick
update if you go to page
nineteen one of the things i'd
ask for I think two years ago
was a full time equivalent to
only focus on capital
improvements you you guys
approve that and he he has made
a huge difference so on page
nineteen here all the projects
that are currently in process
based on the capital reproven
money whether it's bonds or or
excess pledge to revenue so
we're getting a lot done on the
space port
and then on page twenty
he's also done a very good job
of getting us priorities through
the future projects and looking
how we're going to fund those of
the top five there i'll be
presenting that top five at the
icipi request the capital
hearing.
Then a month.
So looking forward again on page
twenty two uh on the budget
so
I mention that there will be a
of a drop in fees for virginia
acting so we have two uh
agreements with virgin back to
one is basically the lease of
the building and of the area and
the second one is what we call
user fees and the user fees have
to do with our support for them
to use the run way to use their
friend and the basically
complete operations since it's
cutting back on their operations
part of our agreement with them
is that they can cut back on the
user fees so that is happening
and we will have a one point
three million dollars cut back
through this fiscal year the
fiscal year or a currently in
what i'm proposing in the second
boat is that because I have a
fun balance because we're a non
reverting agency that I would
like to kind of split the reduce
fee with a legislature and out
of their fund balance so one of
the things i'll be asking for
later in the fall is six hundred
and seventy five thousand and a
supplemental
and if I could cover it all with
the fund balance but then that
would leave me in a position of
not having money next year if
things are stayed drop back or
we have other issues on site
also and the request is a three
percent escalation which I
understand the the governor is
approving for the agency so I
put that in the request and then
what's really I think important
for f I twenty six as i've asked
for a stem and work force
coordinator so we have been
doing a lot of standard we don't
none of us have a teacher
certificate and that's hard to
kind of maintain that presence
with a local school so this is
another request for a full time
equal line so we can better
coordinate both with with our
companies like virgin glactic
and other people on site who
need
work force and also start
working a little better with
universities in the public
schools and how to make the
space for have a better presence
in terms of those new mexican
state and new mexico.
The.
So twenty page twenty three here
is going back to if I twenty
four actual budget in projected
I think probably the most
notable thing is that if you
look at the operating revenue
that eight point one eight point
one million dollars that is
for a fi twenty six that is the
the money where we expect to get
from customers and if I twenty
six and if you look at the ratio
there were somewhere between
sixteen seventy percent
privately you know funded by our
customers so ever everything
else is the pretty much the same
as it has been over the years
alright i'm gonna hand it over
to doctor quietest to talk about
more about business development.
Thank you very much
and thank you mister chair and
think it's the members of the
committee my name is francisco
by yet is some the director of
business development at space
for america and here I am going
to present as some of the
updates that we have from the
business development site at
this paceport and scott
mentioned we have a lot of
activity going on right we we
have tenants and we have
customers that we serve on a
regular basis and that we have
activity happening at the space
board one of the updates that a
half for you is that we are in
the negotiations at to bring a
solar detail center into this
baseboard ideally there the
production that that this
company is is looking to have is
computing power towards a I but
also it also has a certain uses
for the error space industry and
and that that's the plan that
they have and that's some of the
of the programmatic things that
they have afford the for their
project and additional thing is
that we have an ongoing testing
for a drunk airdashlighter that
operates out of the space for
the actually work out of the
vertical launch area and they
the use it for agricultural
purposes right to it it's quite
interesting because they use it
for
while they test at the space for
to see whether how it flies in
whether effects any of the of
the crops are any of that
production that they have going
on we also have and we're
working for a satellite
communications ground station
and so I communications ground
station that is benny winning
cassie and cancel the
connectivity in the position of
the space port for space related
technologies for we're also in
in good conversations with them
besides this one a good update
that we're going to be having
for you and I actually prefer to
slight for it is is that we're
currently working in our reentry
license at space port america
and i'll have a slide that that
we have prepared for you and
regarding that and in the
possibilities that that means
and some of the actual abuses
that we could count for that in
our state we also continue to
work with the commercial space
five federation the csf we
continue to sight visits for
companies that go to the space
port way are working to to land
a horizontal launch developer
also at the space port.
And we continue to attend
several conferences that are or
trade shows that are relevant
for for our industry trying to
recruit more industry in the
airspace industry in the state
of new mexico so
if we move to the next speech.
There's a quick picture right
there of some of the recent
business development efforts so
the picture on the upper right
portion right there that is one
of the operators of the of the
air lighter at the vertical
lunch area from precision a I so
you can see it right there and
in the vocal industry their
vehicle and you can see their
pressions right there at the
space port on the upper left you
have the picture of of scott
participating with the gsa
capital hot health summit for
some of the space ports and the
picture of the bottom left you
can see the aerospace states
association and national
convention in twenty twenty four
and also having a presence in
there and in the bottom right
one that is the latest picture
that we just took yesterday out
of the open house event that we
had at space for america so that
that picture that we have right
there at I I know that in your
packets it shows me with with
running under we apologize we
just updated that picture
because it happened literally
yesterday
so we we had a a good attendance
approximately about two thousand
people attended in participated
in an in our open house in in
partnership with virginia lack
again we think them very much
for opening date they they they
hanger doors and they actually
got to see the space right so so
the public was was able to go
and see it and and sealed all
the activity that we have going
on at the space for the next
page actually page twenty seven
is the one in which we're
discussing about the orbital
reentry license that we're
currently working with the fa
currently the area space team is
planning on sure meeting to the
fa our reentry are
reinterlicence and what this
would allow the space port to do
I don't know if if you remember
in this last friday there was a
reentry that happened right next
door to us right which was the
the star liner right from from
from
what's a company boy and boin
starliner that that that came in
in two into white sense missile
there has been a growing
interest for companies to bring
things from space specifically
there there's interest in in the
microgravity of manufacturing
that happens in space.
Uh what we're currently working
on in what this license would
allow us to do is to for those
vehicles that are winged or for
those vehicles that have some
type of guided system to be able
to land into space port america
and be able to take advantage of
that opportunity that we have
even though we currently do not
have orbital launches out of the
space port in some of the
orbital launches that happen at
keep going overall or some of
the other space ports those in
some cases may need to return
and what this could allow us to
do is if it's a guide the color
for it's a wing vehicle to
potentially have it come in into
the space port what this means
is that this opens an
opportunity for us to do
processing of the payloads that
they're bringing right to be
able to assist them in whichever
just processes they may need
whenever they're returning into
earth uh may that be for
the microgravity manufacturing
that we keep discussing or some
other types of of projects that
there may have so we're very
excited to this uh right there
you can see that we use a couple
of pictures at the first picture
on the right that's the uh dream
chaser from sarah space which is
a wing vehicle that that
we have animal you with and
looking to to bring them over
the specifically for it for the
inland through for the reentry
and then on on the level of a
picture of the capital that came
back from boy from from the
starlinger the next page you
will be able to see that the
demand for orbit of launches has
continued to increase further
and further I have you see that
and we we collected this
information from bristick and
you can see that in twenty
twenty three world wide they
were close to two hundred and
twenty one or middle launches
out of which the united states
was doing a hundred and fourteen
of those so this is continue to
increase there's an increase
them in in these original
launches but along with this
also the interest of bringing
objects back from space that
with the right vehicle and now
are submitting our license to
the fave for the rental.
Could be a very good potential
opportunity for us on the next
page as you can probably see
we're not the only ones doing
this you can see that there's
other states that are investing
trying to get these types of
activities to their states umber
if you look around in many
economic development beaches
aerospace is a is a key
strategic industry for a lot of
different states including our
neighbors so we are in in that
opportunity because there are
other in the individual states
that are trying to do the same
things that new mexico's trying
to do if we go to the next
speech right there you can see
that even
in in texas governor I would
have put together the air texas
space commission and you can see
some of the eclipse that we were
able to find from the
developments of different space
ports different states and
trying to replicate what we have
been able to do here at the
state of the mexico as well and
I think that the last picture
that we have is just information
for scott in some of the
additional pictures that we had
right there at the at the open
house sorry that's not in your
pact but it's it's on the in on
that other one that you have in
front of you on the on the
screens with that thank you very
much mister chair and we're open
for questions
okay thank you very much
outstanding information just
looking around here I think
representative of alcoholia
thinking mr chair and thank you
very much for the sixteenth of
report
so I cannot remember the name
of what this is called
that I wanted an update on it it
has to do so if you go to page
twenty five
and um
the third bullet on the left
hand side talks about the
satellite communication ground
station
but before we got to this point
several years back there was
we met there at the space point
and they talked to us about this
in and it's an international.
Satellite system that is that
provides internet services but I
don't remember the name of that
and it was reported at that time
that you are were looking in to
d
looking into developing or at
quite I don't know what the word
is acquiring it or somehow
tapping into it would be there
that's why I can refer to it so
that it would provide
internet services not just for
your needs
in the immediate but also for
the communities and general
so i'm wondering if there's i'm
sorry if I sound so but it are
in the word about it but I just
can't remember the actual name
of this system maybe you can
help thank you
i'm trying to remember what that
might be mr chair for me
the we there's a couple things
that might be related that one
is their environment which is
the very large wing perhaps
provider and their business
model has been to this six month
duration allows them to do
internet to provide internet and
any four five years ago or three
years ago when you talked about
that that that might be what
you're referring to in in the
intern what's actually happened
as the space x star link
satellite network has continued
to grow.
And
they and their service says I
think it was doubtful at first
how well their service would be
but has turned out to be very
good and they're they've turned
out to be very competitive so
all over the world you see you
on top of our reviews to remote
cabins in the middle now you'll
see a starling a square starling
it's about not as big as this
piece of paper that contract
satellites and receive
information and it is a good
superseding some of the other
potential providers like air
environment it is true though
that other providers are going
to be launching satellite
networks so blue origin is going
to have their own satellite
network I think there is one
other american based one and
then there's a couple more
internationally unso I know some
of the folks here are probably
interested in and fiber and
other things getting that last
mile and doing those things but
the satellites are coming and
fast we don't have a business
relationship with any of those
other than we are now for the
first time we have one ground
station for satellite and were
hopefully going to have a second
one and will be continuing to
look for other people who can uh
who want installed ground
stations and remote to secure
locations thus turning in in to
be a small but good market for
ourselves I hope that answers
your question representative
mr chair and thank you for it it
was the starling I when you
mentioned it it was the start
link the it is becoming a much
more accessible um especially
for communities and general so
as part of our little side bar
conversation that we had here
about investment
opportunities in this in
whatever states you locate in as
a business or operation
enterprise
it always is best to look at
ways in which you can in the
house the local communities
capacity and or may be enhanced
where they're weekend and you're
strong in.
To help provide quality of life
types of things so I don't know
in your working with other
businesses and all the sub
businesses that you're working
with arm this might be something
that
when you when it was presented
to us that the committee at that
time it was just
it it was overwhelmingly
um
surprising to us that there was
that amount of capacity now
we're seeing vehicles even
vehicles equipped
and and for safety features as
well so i'm
this I know that arm you're
looking at you refer to your
communication ground station
which is much more seasonable
for you
but at any particular point
where you can connect the
regional communities to any of
these that you have a
relationship with our could
establish a relationship I think
it would be worthwhile to
connect the communities with
these
various capacity building uhm
communication links because we
were having also conversation
about how or even our basic nine
one one or other type of
emergency systems for remote
areas are very ill equipped
however this the starling
concept
would would be accessible to
them so anyway is just an idea
that I wanted to follow up on
that we had been very impressed
with when it was first presented
to us so thank you mister chair
no other questions just thank
you for the the detail is very
good report thank you thank you
I representative
at a represent vice chair
garrett
thanks for mister chair I don't
know of the two of your real
life set some of us were here
last week and some of us will be
there next week so I appreciate
the additional slides.
Two questions how many weeks or
months can you not launch at
space for it because of the
white sands testing
and mr chair and a
representative so i'd so that's
a good question we
we have a memorandum of
agreement with white chance that
goes back to the founding of the
space port that memorandum
agreement is partially based on
what's called the commercial
space large act was which is a
federal statute that obligates
federal ranges to work with
space related companies and and
uh commercial space parts like
ourselves that agreement hasn't
been exercised as much in the
past as it has been in the last
few years because of that
greatly increased amount of
activity on site and that
includes virgin glacier includes
the the three happs developers
and include some of our vertical
round launch vertical rocket
launches
it even includes some low u a
v's anything below four hundred
feet and we have to coordinate
with you sense and even below
four hundred feet we often
coordinate with lights and
so the partnership is been of
all the
it's been a little bit
complicated for example that
they they are a test range with
federal employees and some
military employees and so a
previous colon all the director
of of the of the operations
there did not want to have to
operate on weekends or holidays
for example so that presented a
problem for us because that
literally is about twenty
percent of the amount of
available time that we could be
using this incredible resource
which is the air space directly
above ourselves that colonel is
rotated out and we have a new
colonel uh a relatively new
journal general commander of the
base the post that we're working
with so the answer your question
directly I don't have an exact
number for you I can tell you
that there are often times by
prior agreement.
Which has worked out well we
sometimes cannot fly when we
want to fly but they quickly
reschedule us and it's not too
big or problem other times it is
a problem because our customers
are looking for very specific
win conditions and you can't
just say was pushed off a day
that is has been a problem for a
couple of our customers and as
virgin glactic ramps up their
flights we anticipate that the
scheduling will be a bit of an
issue are hope is that the range
has operated and maybe kind of
an older fashion way where they
they had missions that were more
serial and it wasn't that big of
a deal what we we you know to to
not have to deal with outside
people like us well now we have
basically two test ranges
operating next to each other one
known by the state of new mexico
one owned by the federal
government then what we really
need is for uh waiting is to be
a little bit more agile about
movie things around in letting
customers like virgin galactic
saturday and hopefully hold to
that date caused obviously when
a customer like where to go
active has you know sixty are a
hundred people in town ready to
launch on a tuesday morning they
really need the launch that day
so
I don't have a really good
answer for you other than it's
an evolving relationship but
because several of our customers
are dealty funded uh or
otherwise related to the dod
white chances beginning to c s
more as a partner where I can
adjunct to their ability to
operate their test range so
we're hoping that this
relationship will continue to
improve so we can both operate
using the maximum of that we can
have their space so i'm sorry if
that didn't quite answer your
question exactly but mr chair
and and
sir that actually answered it
because you're explaining the
new answers and as always them
for items of actual
relationships so thank you it
must show up on more question
this is maybe towards dr
payada's
I appreciate the addition of
what other states are doing.
Are because again that's also
attention competition especially
i'm seeing that oklahoma and you
I mean I understand when space
forts have water that something
we're never going to have unless
there is a categories we keep
that so have you looked into it
it's as governor kevin stick
announces hundreds of foreign
investment jobs at oklahoma and
space for what kind of jobs are
they and is that something
that's applicable to new mexico
thank you very much thank you
very much mister chair would
your permission manage her to to
respond to your question I I
usually like to put it in
context that nattle space sports
are created equal that they're
they're different space ports
even though the faa has a
category of calling them space
for its because they may have
horizontal capabilities for
lunching something right like it
like a very long wrong way or
thinks of that nature many of
the of the space ports that are
located in other places are
more like
industrial parks they became a
little bit like in thus parks
and and and the reasoning for it
is that the the proximity that
they have to or one center is
very large so if the closer you
are to being in a in an urban
center the less likely you are
to get approved by the fact to
be able to launch a vehicle out
of there especially if it's an
experimental vehicle because of
all the potential dangers that
are that it falls into a an an
urban area and it false on
someone's rule for someone's
garden and with all the
possibilities that that brings
so what a lot of these space
ports even though that they hold
the license having have been
having difficulties in launching
things so most of their focus
has been in either
they design or manufacturing or
behaving a little bit more like
an industrial part rather than a
space port in itself now that's
that's perfectly fine right I
mean it also brings jobs it also
brings through and you it also
brings.
This type of development but
fortunately we are located in an
area that is completely adjacent
to a restricted air and is in a
very remote area what what we
tell when whenever we have
business development meetings
are them by share is that we
tell that we have the fortune of
being in a remote area that has
access to the second largest
city of the state within an hour
away right so you have the
proximity of being able to drive
one hour away and be at less
crucials for instance when event
closer if it's to to their
consequences without the the the
the the problems of of being in
the near a remote for it near an
an orbanized area so they're
able to do their operations
while at the same time being
able to to capture some of the
workers that are necessary for
it only that response your
question vice chair mrperiod
chairen and thank you because
again you're expanding our
deeper understanding of what's
going on out there is so I
appreciate it thank you
thank you very much senator
gagas
thank you mischaron thank you
gentlemen I was going to refer
back to page thirty one a lot
love your presentation i've not
been to your facilities would
like to have none that but they
open house you had up but I am
very impressed with your
presentation I was going to ask
you about space cap in the force
conference now
I live in unis but jal schools
ever rocketry program they've
recently got some kind of war I
know they're already trying to
get to sort of favorite to
show off you know what they can
do they design and then they
I guess they they do the
engineering they scale
everything else they last month
man they picked monthly some
kind of goes out on him to see
how what work what didn't but
from them to I like to idea that
you have the space camp for kids
and also the bridge conference
visit I think it's.
Incredibly you have this but how
do our kids get into these type
programs as if something that's
why your website you guys
publicize with the school
districts how do you get our
kids involved with you what you
do.
A misretair and senator guy goes
so there's there's a lot to to
talk about there so one is the
what you're talking about and
child is I believe a private
range that systems go which is a
foundation that I think
originated in taxes and what
they do is that it's actually
quite impressive they teach high
school science teachers how to
build a rock liquid rocket
and and they then they fly that
rocket the smarter once they fly
in jail other ones they fly in
the middle white house missouri
and up so the the teachers learn
how to build a liquid rocket and
then they use their high school
students then to do that so we
have talked to them several
times we haven't found the right
kind of synergy with them but we
talked to them regularly in fact
we had a had the math at the
open house they came out and
they had little rockets so the
the younger kids could build the
little esti's rockets
the the drew space camp there's
a another one that tesco men do
it a little space camp so we're
always open to you know fiber
one c three and other type
companies I mean organizations
coming out and we try and
support those tours one of the
things i've been trying to get
started is at the national level
there is a high school rocketry
car petition that's actually
sponsored by the national
association of rocketry and so
this is the first year we're
taking a real close look at that
and
if we can get if we can partner
with them then we're going to
start pushing and you meant
there's only a three schools
that participate in this thing
called the american rocket
challenge right now what we're
going to try and you have to
push that out to all the other
high schools in middle schools
in the state and the region so
we're trying to actively get
more and more involved answer
your question and that's
actually the reason I ask for
one more full time equivalent I
want someone to be in charge of
the stem and work force
activities so they can be on it
full time so we can do a better
job of getting the word out.
With with respect to the the
schools that are far away
to be able to forward a bus trip
all the way into the space part
two or three or four or five
hours it's it very expensive and
uh
it is slow at a time away from
the classroom with a student
certain about so we again that
we're trying to figure out how
that we can do some remote
warranty in an education on
those sort of things but again
we're we're spent a lot of time
on it but I think we'd be more
effective if we had another
person and ah we do have the
three four local universities
involved in the space part
american cup I I didn't cover
that very much but I think this
year
you and m one we have a part of
that contest is something we
call the chili cup so of the
four schools and issue new
mexico check you tap and you and
and what that will you where
they compete against themselves
in you and m one this year so
they had the best score so
that's how we've been drawing in
the high at the high school
level but we also want to get
nab check in other schools and
and we haven't been to
successful yet and doing that
but we are we are trying to get
and it it's part of our missions
or thank them as chair and
gentleman I like the ideas
you're already looking at that
because you guys are an asset
but all our kids of we can
combine that it's bear for the
state so thank you are you.
Okay thank you very much anyone
else on the committee here I
will just say thank you very
much for continuing to do the
work that you're doing I do have
you'll see several of us asking
this similar themed question I
think there's happened each time
since i've been here in the in
the twelve years that i've been
here a couple of times but so
once we come to the end of uh an
administration what does that do
for the leadership of your
of your agency and try to find
what's the most ginger way to
put that I mean so can you
continue on with the planning
that the the the the long range
planning that obviously
something is
massively important to the state
you know is needed
where where do you see things
going
well that's an easy question
mister chairman
mister chair
as you may know we have a board
of directors III we have a a new
account we just say mister
director it's very early for
that but you know we all know
that we can blink in a year goes
by so yeah mr chair
you know i'm i'm governors
example but we do have a aborted
directors and who is appointed
by the governor and if the new
governor wanted some changes
they would eventually occur but
we are you know right now like I
said we're getting close to the
end of a master plan that is at
is something we contracted out
we were closely of this company
i'll be able to present that to
you soon we'll integrate that
with our overall feeling and
anything else changed since we
started in the master plan and
then we will have a master plan
that should at least be good for
five years I mean the space
marketplace changes very quickly
but we should have a plan going
forward for a five to ten years
and they're hopefully that is is
able to make up for any changes
and leadership at any level to
space board and and also will be
a vehicle for you all to look at
to understand why we're headed
with that so that's probably the
best I can tell you at the
moment I appreciate that you
know and.
Your perspective is very
important to us
your professional in your team
are all professionals in your
field I just hope that whatever
we do see coming in the next
twenty four it up you know
twenty eight months or would
have you that it's just
continuing on as business as
usual i've never felt that
there's a swing in one direction
of the other with the leadership
within the space part but we
can't slow things down just
cause we don't know what's gonna
this is a massive investment and
massive something for our state
I want to see it continue and I
know a lot of people do and and
we're going to do everything we
can help you so thank you very
much
all right I think that's going
to wrap up this step of the day
thank you very much gentlemen
and I will invite our presenters
for item number five to please
come to the presentation table
update from virgin galactic
mike moses president virgin go
active thank you very much for
being here with us in person and
jason i'm just gonna call your
jackson because I know i'm going
to probably get that wrong new
mexico director for virgin
galactic you're one of our
friends we see you all the time
and I think you once again for
how kind and wonderful you've
been to us along the way every
time we're in your shop thank
you take it away.
All right thank you chairman by
stermon and to the oversight
committee for allowing us to be
here to speak today in case you
don't know let's get to the next
presentation if we can
well i'm going through
introductions I am here
representing virgin galactic I
don't think anybody doesn't know
about us but just to give you
the the quick insight we are a
commercial human space flight
company based here in new mexico
and I think if you summed up our
mission statement in a in a
simple sentence it would be to
give a trace for national life
experiences to people are on a
journey to space right to see
our planet from space so that's
suborable a flight occurs right
here in new mexico down at space
for america focused on private
astronauts as well as science
researchers who want to go to
space and take their experiments
with them and we take off from a
runway at the horizon of lunch
area at space port america uh we
carry our speech ship up with a
motorcycle takes about forty
five minutes or so to get up to
about fifty thousand feet so
already you're higher than
you've ever been in a commercial
airliner we release wider rocket
motor but one minute a burn
you're going mark three through
the speed of sound straight up
and then you get out of your
seat float about the cabinet and
enjoy the views uh you have in
space are and then after we
enter back in the atmosphere you
glide break back and land at the
runway we came from
so I see so for my background
i've had a chance to speak to
fox fair bit over the years i've
been president in a virgin
galactic work and it virgin for
over thirteen years
i've been based out of lost
crisis since twenty nineteen
move down with my family right
before covered it and cannot
hung out in in in my house and
lost christmas for a year while
we went through uh but then
brought in commercial service
and we started operating our
unity prior to that I work for
nasa on the special program for
eighteen years I started off in
houston texas as a flight
director are running human
specified operations out of
johnson space center and an
ended the shuttle program in
florida at the candidate space
center.
Where I was the deputy program
manager responsible for all
shuttered off all speech shuttle
operations are overseeing
everything including launched
decision authority from our
mission management team.
So see
ramma trouble I guess with the
presentation coming up.
Or is there something I need to
do to get the president if not.
Okay do we have the presentation
christina or erica nature who is
gaining that step over
the dack that serving presented
at the moment
what's your budgeting nominated
track that down I think you all
have hard copies so we can we
think we do have those in okay
sounds great
so it's the uh on that first
page it's just a kind of an
overview it's been a long road
for virgin to get to this point
you are significant investment
in time and money and
technological development the
barrier entry in commercial
space flight is quite high and
it's taken as a while and
developed this commercial
reusable human space flight
system special unity is the
demonstration of that investment
you saw in twenty twenty three
six commercial launches in six
months that is a never seen
before rate of human space
flight when I was working at the
peak of the shuttle program I
think at the peak we had twelve
launches a year maybe thirteen
there was one year with thirteen
launches and those were all
different vehicles right so to
have the same space ship go to
space once a month for six
months is a pretty pretty
impressive thing alright there's
the presentation thanks so we
ended up if you count in twenty
twenty three six flights one
more in twenty twenty fourth of
seven commercial space flights
if I go to the next slide this
is just a a picture of the
humans who have gone to space
with us
all came back and talked about
the remarkable life changing
your experiences that they add
and many special moments i'll
just highlight to in the upper
right uh cashier and anna are
two astronauts that actually won
their tickets in a cherry
auction and went with us on our
very first or sorry our second
commercial space flight there
from the caribbean the island
and eventigua and they are the
first astronauts from that iron
the entire island actually got
together for a watch party to
watch them flight a space I
think every single person on the
island gathered to watch their
flight and the remarkable thing
is you know not only them but
their families and the
representatives from antique or
here.
They stayed for about a week and
a half afterwards in toward new
mexico we actually had t mates
run into them up in santa fe and
at local restaurants and hotels
are over the course of the week
afterwards down in the bottom
row is our last flight galactic
seven that was a mixed crew of
uh researchers and scientists
from the turkish government
along with some private
afternoons and two of them
georgia and and basically the
day after they landed for some
move by their experience they
immediately signed up and bought
two more tickets to go again so
they wanted to get right back in
line and fly again so a lot of
remarkable are human experiences
from the folks who flow the
space with us we fly right here
in your backyard at space for
america this is a fantastic shop
we took a couple months ago at
night out there it's an amazing
commercial space port with
capabilities in opportunities
that are unrivaled anywhere else
in the country document emphasis
what scott was just talking
about in some of the questions
the partnership with the white
sands miss or range is one of
the unique attractions to this
commercial space for it as as
you brought up it can sometimes
be a little bit of a detractor
as you compete with the federal
government about the partnership
with the state is what's truly
remarkable there right that the
state gets to help advocate on
the behalf of commercial space
industries to set up really
great access to the ear space
needed to fly so that gateway to
space building is iconic and
unique and has had a big impact
on virtual galactic and I just
wanted to take a moment here
today to highlight back a little
bit of the impact that virgin
galactics been able to have back
on the state of new mexico so
our highlights on the next slide
each of these are internship I
focus on the economy and our
staff for a second we have
currently just shy of two
hundred full time employees in
new mexico today and that
includes myself and jason i've
been here for many years these
folks are extremely busy even
though we're not flying at the
moment or working to prepare for
our new fleet of spaceships are
an additionally out at the space
part itself our mothership is
there and undergoing a little
bit of a modification program to
get it ready for commercial
service.
These are highly skilled jobs
that we pay competitively on the
national front uh to attract
challenge and they are therefore
significantly above the local
salaries being paid and they
have a direct economic impact
home ownership
your revenue through our
community spending taxes we have
put over a hundred million and
payroll and wages since we
started operations here in new
mexico additionally we try very
hard to keep local suppliers in
our business we've had uh about
two hundred plus suppliers over
the course of the last several
years and put about fifty five
million dollars of direct
payment into new mexico based
suppliers this is both basically
hospitality construction
aviation and other support
services out of space port
america and then for the space
port itself the last line there
is that least payments are over
fifty five million so far in
direct payments two msa are that
includes about six million
dollars a year for the last
several years and we've been
making these payments since the
lease went active back in two
thousand eleven
on the tourism side uh we bring
in a fair bit of folks like I
said those seven commercial
space flights that we've had so
far we estimate conservatively
that that's over two thousand
five hundred local hotel rooms
booked just from those seven
flights and that doesn't count
staff and other vips that come
in and doesn't count the
spending that occurs at local
stores and restaurants for the
entire week that those folks are
there plus probably a little bit
of time on either end we're
noticed in a very interesting
effect when when I first joined
the company our business plan
assumed that each person that
flew to space with us would want
to bring about four people with
them close family to connect
enjoy the experience what we're
finding just in this last year
it's much more like your wedding
in fact we've had quite a few
people get off the spaceship and
said it was the best day of
their life and then immediately
in turn and apologised for their
spouse because it overshattered
their wedding but folks are
bringing dozens of people that
last like galactic seven four
after not brought a total of two
hundred and twenty guests with
them are to stay for the week
so.
We're actually piving our
business model to start to take
advantage of that we were
originally sizing to just let a
few people at the space port and
instead we're piving and you're
going to see as part of our
expansion we want to use the
entire gateway to space the
house that commercial footprint
the friends and family who come
to watch not only is that a
great economic impact to the
state but for us it's our
biggest sales model right the
folks who fly and watch flights
immediately want to go fly with
us as well so we saw quite a bit
of demonstrated change just in
the last year from our original
business plan we also you can
see in the pictures down there
and in the left is that
beautiful hotel in conto uh done
in los crucials we host as a
post like ceremony the wings
event where we pin wings on all
the folks who went to space it's
a great group impact and on the
right you can see just a
snapshot of the number of
private jets that are based out
at los crucial storing our
flight week that bringing all
the the guests and their friends
and family so pretty big impact
when we do go flight a space
as it released the outreach
we're also really proud of the
teammates on our team supporting
communities are events like the
space pork up on the left there
is tory one of our employees who
is an enemies you've grad local
los crucial's resident
recordings and last weekend and
she was speaking at I think it
was the closing ceremony of the
space for cup
and she is on our rocket
proposal team so local higher
local grad doing a lot of really
important work for us and giving
right back into the community we
support events and truth or
consequences and in los crucials
local charities like big
brothers big sisters with our
teammates a new space nexus and
the space valley coalition you
can see a picture their
supporting the woman aviation
event out at philosopher's
airport and a lot of work with
the governor's stem program is
well speaking of nmsu and and m
tech we sponsor scholarships and
opportunities and internships
across the state of new mexico
uh probably more predominantly
leaning on mse since it's really
close by but we don't want to
stop there and we want to reach
out to the rest of the new
mexico universities and and tax
calls.
Eastern western new mexico
actually provide a really great
aviation program for us and
we've had a lot of pipeline of
our mechanics coming through
those schools.
So if everything was so
successful why did we stop
flying our first special and
it's because of this special
this is our delta special so if
you go to the next page let me
talk just a little bit about
where we're headed next then
what the future is so unity was
an amazing spaceship for us it
really proved the concept it
proved out the market the
regulatory approvals from the f
a a the safety the reliability
what we needed to do the analogy
we use right if if you're a
start up electric car company
you got a struggle a little bit
to get funding and investors to
come join your company but what
you don't have to do is prove to
the public that you should have
a carp right that's kind of
already been done everybody
knows cars are good you're just
kind of trying to sell them on
the electric car industry versus
the traditional for us we had to
go demonstrate that the market
of space tourism was an actual
market to invest in in the first
place and unity did exactly that
for us it was highly successful
but what it wasn't was a tool
that could fly regularly and
make profit by itself a single
special flying once a month
doesn't make a lot of revenue
and so we focused on the delta
classroomship as that agent of
change for us for the future so
they look exactly the same but
they're designed very
differently higher performance
lighter weight can carry more
people but ideally the two main
variables that are different is
the cost to build and the cost
to operate so we've driven to a
unit costs down in the fifty to
sixty million dollars to make a
special much much less than what
it took about unity so we can
make them faster and and cheaper
but really for us here in new
mexico the big difference is the
cost to operate unity flew every
three to four weeks these
vehicles are designed to fly
every three to four days and we
do that through intentional
design and testing to make sure
that actually happens rate we
built it in from the front end
better materials better
replacement higher reliability
higher durability parts they
need less checking therefore we
can fly them faster
and so it is important to
acknowledge of while they're
flying faster they're not flying
differently.
So when we start flying our
delta vehicles we're not having
to learn from day one we're able
to build on what we learned with
unity and get them in the
contertional service very very
quickly if I go to the next
slide and scott kind of previous
this for me a little bit we're
going to be building two new
delta spaceships here right now
we are building two new delta
spaceships are currently they'll
be able to fly every three days
and using our existing
mothership that gives us a
hundred and twenty five space
flights a year and we've already
knocked down back to the
question about how often can you
fly in new mexico the weather is
fantastic down here but there
are a couple days in months soon
season couple weeks where
there's not a lot of flights so
we have the capacity to fly more
than hundred and twenty five
times a year but we're going to
book on we get to one hundred
and twenty five a year in
revenue that's seven hundred and
fifty customers flying a year
and you do the math that brings
in about four hundred and fifty
million dollars of revenue to
the company just with two
space ships so this is where we
start in twenty twenty six with
this is our business police but
that's just the start we don't
want to stop there our vision is
space for america completely
fall and I guess you could argue
what full means but we kind of
said let's go with a fleet of
four specials and two
motherships and that's about two
hundred and seventy five flights
a year we'd actually like to go
a little more than that so that
we're flying every single day
but we recognize the weather
probably won't let you fly every
single day so as we grow we move
in to a fleet of spaceships with
four spaceships and two
motherships and that starts to
fly two hundred and seventy five
times a year and you can see the
revenue goes from there so
thanks to the amazing facility
here it's based for america we
see this future coming uh coming
pretty soon and as scott hinted
this is stuff that we release
publicly through the new york
stock exchange in the securities
exchange commission at our
quarterly earnings reports.
So how do we get there so we are
currently designing these
specifics out at our design
headquarters in california we
have vendors across the country
predominantly based in texas
building the hardware force and
they'll come together in phoenix
at our final assembly facility
or doing things a little
different this time we're
leveraging what is probably
current modern state of the art
airplane manufacturing
techniques unit was built in
house big ourselves in our own
factory we're having vendors and
major suppliers build components
and major assemblies that are
fully built and stuffed ahead of
time they arrive in phoenix and
their bolted together where we
check him out and then we fly to
new mexico so the facility in
new mex in phoenix is basically
just final assembly pretty low
footprint of employees and again
the delta class ships are
designed to be able to go
together very quickly we then
bring them here to our
operational headquarters it's
based port america where we fly
we're gonna start with flight
tests so in twenty twenty five
twenty twenty sixth are those
space ships will start to arrive
in new mexico and being in
testing and then in twenty
twenty six will start commercial
service right here it's facebook
more specifics means more
customers it means more staff it
means more facilities and
therefore it's more support and
so on the next page is a great
example and scott again
previewed this as well we need
more facilities here in new
mexico at space port america so
this is an example of of what we
call our launch hanger that will
be building you can kind of see
in the back right corner the
gateway to space in the
background so this is built down
at the southern end of the
runway and it's a hanger that
all hold the mothership and all
of the propel loading we need
for our proportion system those
are hazardous activities we want
them to occur away from the
general public so down at the
end of the runway is a great
place to do that today we do
that sitting outside exposed to
the elements right we pulled out
down there a day ahead of time
and so if it rains the day
before we can't go fly the next
day even if the weather is great
to fly so by having a dedicated
anger we can stay inside for all
of those activities that's what
enables us to get to these
flight rates have been able to
fly every single day.
This will be about a thirty
million dollar hanger funded by
virgin galactic the state of new
mexico has the infrastructures
of the roads the utilities for
power and water but the hanger
itself is being funded by our by
by the company are and we're
going to we have a letter of
intent of signed hopefully will
have a lease signed here in the
next couple months and we want
to break ground in january uh to
start constructions of its
facilities online in in twenty
twenty six so that is our
expansion that we have at the
space port obviously more staff
more customers more people
coming in the town as well and
so let me wrap up with this
quote and and this is from
jamiela gilbert who is one of
our local new mexico attracts
born in raised in los went to
mse fluttered space with us back
in twenty twenty three
twenty twenty two sorry and it's
basically saying that new
mexico's even more enchanting
from space and I think that kind
of wraps it up a you know both
are current in our future
potential impact here in the
land of a champ and is amazing
thank you to the state for the
investment you've made into the
space port facility and we're
really excited to be able to
bring our new delta ships here
and continue a continue
operations so with that
alternate over for questions.
Okay well thank you very much
representative luck
thank you mister chairman thank
you gentlemen for being here
very interesting presentation I
I love to hear things growing in
new mexico and that's exactly
what I see with your investment
and I think you both and the of
course your owners and your
shareholders think thank you all
wherever you are so my my one
question I know it's it's
probably a bigger issue than all
of you but in new mexico we
don't have a lot of
manufacturing and that's the you
know it's the bean of my
existence I would like to see
more manufacturing but in
european from what you guys did
to to find manufacturing in
arizona can you tell us what
kinds of laws and things did
their legislative branch do to
make them attractive to you guys
to want to manufacturer in that
state mister chair yep park
missed chairman representative
that's a a great question and so
it was a challenge for us we had
initially had our our
manufacturing base out in
california in the mohavy desert
and it was located there because
it was in proximity to the
contractors who were doing the
initial development work for a
skilled composite and that in
love valley area is home to a
lot of various based
manufacturing and so it's kind
of like if you look at the
numbers of folks we need to
develop a work force who can do
composite manufacturing is a
pretty heavy lift to start from
scratch and I think that is one
of the challenges here in the
state is it's kind of a lift
from scratch for that particular
work force and so that's what
phoenix had to offer it wasn't
so much that the state at
incentive they already had a
composite aircraft manufacturing
based there and so for the forty
year eighty employees we will
need we basically kind of get
that without having to do a lot
of initial creation of that work
force in the first place kind of
why we were in california in the
first place it's actually what
drove our are supply chain model
to move to vendor based supply
chain again and use vendors.
Ah so both belt text run and
curbanero space in dallas are
make parts for boeing for the
air force for the army and so
again they had an existing work
force so I think that was our
biggest challenge we did look
very closely at bringing
manufacturing here to new mexico
and we're not done yet we need
to make rocket motors we need to
fly ah a lot of components a lot
of supply change to sustain
daily flights are and new mexico
would be a great place to base
that so it's not like we've
decided not to invest
manufacturing jobs here but for
this initial get started and get
the fleet into the field quickly
we needed to go someplace that
had an existing work force for
it so I think as you talk to the
future what kind of incentives
for other industries to kind of
bring more of a consortium of
industry rather than a single
supplier we're probably
a pretty small footprint rate a
thousand employees total but if
you could get a consortium of
five or six companies like that
I think that's where you'll be
asked some incentives into the
market so it's a I I would love
to help the state do that right
because the more folks we have
here the better
thank you mister chairman and
thank you for that and I I
appreciate that I really want to
do that so I know with our
education system is probably
primarily there or would get
this skilled work force right
outside of my district we have
harm and air for space so I
would love for retirees from the
base to go work for you guys or
or anyone that you work with so
I just appreciate both of you
and i've been to your functions
in santa fe uh during session
i've learned a lot and I think
it's so great what you're doing
in our state so thank you both
thank you mister chairman mr
permission representative just
want additional their right we
do see a lot of benefit from
that existing work force out at
the air force based on the
missile range and other
industries one of the unique
things here is is I have
basically an engineering design
centered work force which is
based out of state right now and
here we have a much more
comprehensive operational force
which doesn't just cover
engineering and science but also
business and communications and
marketing and hospitality but
having those folks with an
awareness and appreciation of
aviation in our space.
Is huge and so that is a unique
aspect of the new mexico work
force is a a work force that has
exposure to that already so
that's a strong positive for the
state.
The.
Set all representations yes
mister chairman thank you both
percent of you representative
mobile coverage
thank you mister chair and thank
you very much mister moses and.
I'll go with the first thing
thank you ie the so
I
did a pretty thorough job of
showing us the impact on the
economy tourism and outreach
and
the community impact so i'm
interested in knowing because
we're always trying to arm
improve our local communities so
that they can in fact continue
to attract
not only small business
development
but large development so
I don't know if you can answer
this yet but now or maybe
perhaps later but i'm interested
in knowing what you see what you
recommend that local communities
can improve on in order to
support
what you just answered to
represent a block because I had
that question as well I even put
wifinix you know why didn't we
do this here but because
representative already asked
that then I I want to know what
can we do because there's a
state we have an obligation
to make sure that our
communities are prepared and
equipped
with all the necessary
infrastructure on the schools
everything that is enhanced that
is used to attract economic
development in the areas and
region so I don't know if you
can answer that or how you can
direct that at this point thank
you
mister chairman representative I
think it's it's it's a tough
question it's in I think it's
something that not only as a
government but also as a as a as
a business right you always want
to take a look at that local
impact being able to have that
sense of a feeling in home for
your families for those working
there is really really
important.
I will say a not to talk badly
about our former work place out
in my hobby california but it
was also a remote area in the
middle of the desert but there
wasn't a lot of interest for the
rest of your family so we would
attract engineers and high
quality account to the company
but after four or five years
people kind of retired of being
so remote so I think that's a
strength here in new mexico is
there's a lot of other things
for your family whether they're
working in the industry or in
other related fields it's a good
sense of community so I think
that's an important aspect as
you attract new business and
that's not you need to ear space
are that's any business in the
state and so it's nice to see
the diversity of of opportunity
with it with it relating
specifically to error space and
development and back to the
question of why we we based out
a phoenix for that next facility
instead of here that kind of
went with an existing
infrastructure and so I think
continued investment to bring in
new infrastructure in new
manufacturing industries maybe
adjacent I think this is one
area where in error space in an
aviation a trend over the last
five years to
For composite manufacturing
and in fact albert he had some
of that with eclipse there are
space for a while but that
didn't that didn't last rate so
I think that would have been an
example of kind of boot
strapping along to your earlier
question that you're asking
scott mcgoffling you had is how
does that business then help
impact the community itself it's
a little early yet but for me
personally as I talk about the
operations when we start flying
daily we don't want to become a
burden on the local community
the roads the traffic the
security the emergency response
services when I fly every day
i'm gonna need metabac resources
ambulance local community a
hospitals ready for emergencies
and so we want to lift up the
services and the opportunities
provided to the local community
by being able to bring in
companies like around error
medical metabac right we will
put a demand sucks that they
want to then base here for a
community a- and the services
will become kind of corally
rewrite on uh capabilities for
the local surrounding area the
cell tower that we're building
is going to help the local
community as a well right sorry
we are building that the state
is building we certainly are
going to take advantage of that
self service so I I can't really
give specifics because it's kind
of it's a continue of constant
improvement I know for myself
when I look so leave the
government to come work for
virgin galactic one of the
things I looked at is is the
company going to be investing in
its employees and its community
not just a commercial service
that's trying to make money and
that was one of the things that
brought me here was the chance
to be able to return on that
investment we were just down
meeting with the interim provost
in the dean of engineering at
mse talking about how do we get
and help get federal funding
into the state universities and
high schools to become
sponsorship we can fly science
from the space port we need
somebody to help pay for those
students to develop those
experiments so that we can go
fly them for them and I think
there's a nice partnership their
government private partnership
that we can work on so pardon me
for rambling a little bit and
answer to your question but
hopefully i.
Act I tried to take a crack.
You're not round it's absolutely
imperative in my view that this
kind of mainset the when you
just described is one that
continues to move was forward as
a state because we've been
as you know the stats for far
too long at the bottom so we
need to have these public
private partnerships that
actually are moving in a
direction that arm
is more public than private in
the long run we've in a we've
seen partnerships around the
nation fizzling because there's
a lot of um
greed for lack of a better word
associate it with the private
investment in in part in fact
they're not even making private
investments they're actually
looking at ways in which to
enhance their profits and so I
want us to get away from that
because it doesn't do anything
for the quality of life um for a
continuate not just for who
you're bringing with you but the
continuation as you just mention
so partnerships that will go to
our federal
delegations federal departments
bright letters of support a
company in making and giving
testimony on capital hill or at
the round house wherever that
will
ensure that there's a pathway to
success for our children and
that's what we really are
looking at in my view when we're
not only in this committee but
other committees is what are the
pathways to success for our
children because they actually
are who we are legislating for
today
are for the future not for us so
I appreciate that now insert in
that approach and I hope that
you will continue to move in
that direction because after
work on they have to continue so
thank you so much mister chair
thank you.
Okay thank you a representative
and thank you very much for your
responses I am trying to see if
there's any others
so thank you very much I I love
everything that you do and by
the way jason when you're known
by one name you know you've
arrived okay so that's a that's
pretty good stuff
one letter that's even different
you know so will get through
their eventually i'm sure so you
know I I would kind of ask you
the same thing you know we we
are not and i'm a business owner
myself I know that if you'd
already made with the previous
questioning you know digit make
an investment somewhere else and
it made sense to do some of this
work somewhere else totally get
it that that's like that's all
goes
you know but I I hope that
you'll think proactively for us
on what it is that we can do for
you to keep you motivated to
remain on the ground here we've
made this investment we've
decided to do this as a state
would come together as a
community to to make something
happen for our are stayed here
and
you know we've laughed other
industries out of the state
unfortunately and then they've
turned into multiple billion
dollars whatever and providing
jobs and growth and all that
stuff we don't want to see that
happened here after this massive
investment in the middle of our
desert too because it's part of
our landscape here so I hope
that you will I don't really
have a question but I hope that
you'll think about coming to us
with just the recommended steps
the that you need to help you to
continue to succeed here if you
would be willing at you know if
you if you feel like it's
appropriate are there three
things one thing you know no
more than three please a human
being as can think in terms of
three's I know I can
is there something that we need
to know about right now that
would just keep you continuing
to do the work that you're doing
they continue to help you to
continue to succeed or what are
the big three at if you could
lay those out or if you choose
to
for things mister chairman thank
you I think that is it is
important right we are
definitely community and as you
say like sometimes in the
business markets other forces
drive you to make decisions
one of the things we're seeing
right is the challenge of a
distributed work force.
Are being able to collocate is
actually a strength for us right
to have more of the team in the
same state is certainly a
benefit so if I had to if I had
to speak off the carphone on the
top incentives I think for one I
think it's things that are
already happening and that is
the fantastic support are in the
community both locally in the in
the cities in him and and
communities where our teams live
and where we work and where we
drive every day and that's
already here in spates in new
mexico right the sierra county
folks side the dong yanna county
fox introducer consequences when
we go up in and hang out for
happy hour at the at the brewery
or in los cruces fantastic
community support and it makes
all of our t mates feel like
they are home in the moment they
move in and start working for us
right so that's an important
thing in and I I applied with
the the legislature is done to
encourage that in the local
communities and continue to do
so the other side would be for
the business side so as it
relates to it's not back to the
the profit in the green side but
the the
permissive environment which you
can expand rates or whether it's
assisting with infrastructure
development the space party is
kind of in the middle of the
desert it's gorgeous but there's
not much else out there and so
you're building a city in the
desert to get out so assistance
with things that the legislature
was actually well poised to do
as it relates not so much for
capital at least but for
incentives taxes in your
permissive business
environment's helping with
permitting things like that to
allow things to expand in the
future is is probably higher on
the list for us as we grow and
knowing that there's not a road
block to that growth in the
future is probably an important
thing so that's too i'd have to
think maybe a little hard to
come up with three by ten but I
think to date we've been very
very happy very supportive and
it's great to be able to be here
with an m s a kind of in
partnership are talking to you
all together we want to continue
to do that as we go forward and
I can give you a I know jason
and I both will be bright back
and knocking on your doors if we
come up with more to put on
list.
Well thank you very much and and
just when you see things in
around the country or something
that were your operating and
doing things another locations
that you think would help
enhance what we're doing here
obviously we want you to succeed
but we wanted the companies like
yours to succeed as well and you
know if you have those others
here than maybe other vendors
show up that help you to reduce
you know cost by economies of
scale because there's other
couple two three whatever it
seems to me like in your
industry it's gonna take
multiple players to find they
get that real grounding that we
need is there anything going on
in other parts of the country
that you'd like to tell us about
today that you'd like to see
here I think I I think you're
right as it relates you know if
you can probably segregate a we
we like to joke in the new space
world rate of are between space
sex and blue architect virtual
active we have the poorest of
the space billionaires are so
you're those other two companies
are are sinking tons of money
and so they don't need other
people to come with them north
they can build themselves so but
in the rest of the market place
other company smaller companies
astra and terrane and firefly
and folks like virtually
collective I think that
consortium idea will help and so
there is a leverage with space
port america and air space
talking vice chair about the
agreement southern white sands
and some of the impacts of of
how that activity can hurt you
to fly I think it's a a huge
advantage here and making sure
we help support that and have in
the government state government
help broker those deals is is
really important I think in
terms of other things uhm as it
relates to launch services I
think I think actually i'll echo
what NMSA is on orbital reentry
is a big deal and and
manufacturing wanting to bring a
samples back whether it's from
the space station or other
commercial space assets in orbit
having a landing capability will
be huge I it probably doesn't
bring a large work force but it
brings a large spotlight and I
think that's important so not
something that we needed version
galactic but I think you know
every.
Every boat that comes docks at
this harbor raises the tied for
all of us rates so having other
other business communist
baseball america something i'd
love to see either state
continue encourage.
Wonderful well thank you very
much I don't see if there's no
other questions will let you
guys go keep up the great work
when you had the slide up of all
the photos and everything i'm
glad you kept the bottom right
hand corner from my photo
because I will be joining you up
there at some point so myself or
representative garcia in the
reps in garcia probably would be
he's going to be available here
pretty soon have plenty of time
to do that kind of stuff with
you so I don't think you're to
work I said there's all right
thank you very much
okay so now for the committees
benefit we're gonna go now to
public comment we schedule it in
a little bit earlier to see if
we had anybody
and I don't think we have
anybody online to be
okay
are there any boat is there
anybody in the room that wishes
to make
arcade I know you've always got
a lot to say so okay
all right then so you know we're
a little ahead of schedule here
thank you all very much
we are actually about fifty or
so minutes ahead of schedule
that's how you run a meeting I
love it yeah thank you guys you
also been wonderful
so what we're going to just try
to regroup ourselves here I do
believe we have mister fiato
here and his is your co worker
here yet
oh okay
okay would you what what you
don't will do will take just a
little break everybody just a
little one okay let's do about a
ten minute break I know I hate
to do that but want to make sure
that the other individual is
here as well so we'll come back
right at let's just say um
come back in about eight minutes
to fifty two fifty thank you
very much for your patience
where a little header schedule.
