I was working on early education
and got that department created
a whole number of other things
and she made the time to meet
with me in the Senate lounge,
and she was running around like
a just a crazy person that day
with so many things to do, but
she took the time and I didn't
feel rushed. I didn't feel like
we had it. She took all the time
in the world to understand what
I want to talk to her about. So
I love her for that, like a
sister and a mentor and I want
to invite her to introduce
herself first.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I have a pink doughnu nobody
else has a pink one. I got one
this morning. This is great. I
should have announced a long
time ago I got.
Yes, thank you very much. My
name is Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez, 29 years in the
Senate, and as our chair
indicated, I will be retiring
January 1st, so, um, I just want
to say thank you to you, Mr.
Chair, to the committee.
members, my friends, everyone
who has made it possible for me
to serve you for these many
years, and I look forward to
seeing you again. I hope this is
not the last. It's it's like,
oh, I guess I'm retiring. I
haven't, it hasn't hit me yet.
I'm still in committees and
working the way. But thank you
so much and uh I'll be seeing
you around soon.
Thank you very much, Senator,
and we, uh, the vice chair and I
made sure that the senator had a
pink doughnut this morning, so,
all right, we'll start over here
with Representative Wuhan for
introductions, and then we'll go
to the other side.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
vice chair committee members and
all of our audience today, um, I
too have been mentored by
Senator.
Rodriguez probably, I don't know
from a very, very early age.
I've known her. Uh she served
our community here in Santa Fe,
um.
I don't know how many years, but
so many years, you know, you
started, uh,
I think as our county manager or
as a county commissioner as and
as a legislator, but um,
You represent
And will continue to represent
the values of our state, the
values of our community, and
we're very fortunate here in
Santa Fe County, um,
Uh, the county, um, where my
district is to have your
service, but I know it doesn't
end, and your mentorship means
everything and you, um,
You mean a world to many of us,
but your legacy and the things
that you've done in your
commitment, uh,
have ushered uh legislators like
myself and others, um, to, to
continue the work that you've
started and thank you for your
service. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
Vice Chair. My name is Art De la
Cruz. I represent District 12,
which is the middle portion of
the South Valley. It's a
pleasure to be here with
everyone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh John
Blockhouse District 51 in
Alamogordo, Otero County, and
it's great to be here, Mr.
Chairman, and also I do want to
extend thanks to Senator Nancy
Rodriguez for all her years of
service to our state, you know,
I don't know if many people know
this, but when I was a kid, I
was Senator Rodriguez's page on
the Senate floor.
Many years ago. So it's, it's an
honor to serve with her here in
the chamber and uh it's great to
see her and hopefully we see her
many years down the line. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is,
I'm Luis de rasas, uh, District
39, southwest of Mexico, Silver
City. Silver City area, and uh I
got obviously Grant, and Hidalgo
also uh outside of Grant County.
Pleasure to be here and this is
uh Senator Rodriguez. I'm gonna
thank you for your service and,
and I hope you enjoy your
retirement. Sometimes it's more
work to retire. I'm sure you
have a big list of things that
you, you didn't do because you
were busy here serving in the
state, but
Thank you for what you do. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lindstrom.
Good morning, oh wow. Good
morning everyone. I'm Patty
Lindstrom. I represent House
District 9, which is Gallop and
McKinley County, and I'd also
like to um thank Senator Nancy
Rodriguez for all of our work.
Together and her work and
everything that she means to the
state of New Mexico. When you
think about all the housing
programs and all those new funds
so people can can actually get
into a new homes and your work
on this committee, I think
you've served 29 years on this
committee, um, I just want to
thank you and always know that
you have a friend in Gallup,
you're always welcome in Gallup
and just wanted to share a quick
story. Nancy is an expert at
sign sign language.
And at one time she was
volunteering. It was for the uh.
Was it for the police department
or the um because you came out
to Galla and you actually helped
a person who could not speak.
Uh, communicate with our
officers in Gallup because the
person was put in jail, so Nancy
calls me and she said, you never
believe where I'm at. I'm at the
Gallup jail. I said, what are
you doing there? And she says,
I'm actually helping an
incarcerated person, so people
can understand what's really
going on. Thank you, Nancy, and
we love you.
And thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I'm
Representative Kathleen Cates
for District 44, which is all of
Corrales parts of your Rancho,
the unincorporated area of
Alameda and the very northern
end of Albuquerque. And, and I
too will be missing the senator,
um, I was only been able to
serve with her for the last 2
years, um, and she has been such
a champion in all efforts of
housing with so many things, but
housing being a signature, but
another thing that she
may not know is for 18 years
before I was a legislator, I was
up here uh championing and
advocating for individuals with
disabilities rights, and Senator
Rodriguez was always on my short
list of trying to find allies,
so I very much appreciate your
mentorship as a citizen and as a
colleague, thank you.
Good morning, everybody. Good to
be with you all. My name is
Susan Herrera. I'm the
representative for District 41,
which is most of Rio Rita, a
little bit of Sandoval, Santa
Fe, and Taos, and, um, I too am
going to miss Senator
Rodriguez's uh just guidance and
friendship, um, for those of you
who don't know, we met years
ago. I, I would say 2030 years
ago through a mutual friend, uh,
our dear friend Ray Chavez, and
he said, you've got to meet this
woman. She's really
a good person, you've got to
know her, Susan, and, and that
has been true and, and when I
came to the house, she
took time out of her.
busy day to come and say welcome
and let me know if there's
anything I can help you with,
and if you have any bills, let
me help you with them, and I
mean, really.
We, we all need to be uh like
centerator Rodriguez. I, I, uh,
I, uh, I don't do that enough.
Nancy, so thank you so much for
um showing me how to be a 2
representative, a really good
representative, not only for the
people, but also for the
colleagues here in in in the
House and the Senate. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, members of the
audience, and Christina Ortiz, I
represent House District 42,
which is most of Taos County,
um, I don't have a lot of
regrets, but one of my biggest
ones is not getting to know uh
Senator Rodriguez better, but I
will say in the last 4 years
you've always had a smile for
me.
The your conduct, how you
comport yourself in, uh, in
committee with your colleagues
is something that I think we,
um, we should all be emulating,
um, every time that we sat next,
next to each other at an interim
committee. I committee meeting I
have um I've really enjoyed it.
You have educated me and I, I
just wish I had more time in
this, in this venue to spend
with you.
You got all kinds of time, uh,
come, come January, and I, and I
hope that, um, I, I hope that
you visited us as a as a
lobbyist. No, really, I, I hope
that I can see you on a trail.
Maybe bird watching.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
indulgence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair. I'm Representative
Liz Thompson House District 24,
Northeast heights of Albuquerque
and Senator Rodriguez became a
sister to me as soon as I came
into this building. We were
co-disability champions, um,
and, uh, I love her to death.
I'm gonna miss her, and I wish
she would have given me some
warning. She was gonna retire so
I could get used to it, but um I
think we should all strive to be
more like Nancy. I mean, that's
just.
That if we were all more like
Nancy, we'd get more done and
we'd have fewer conflicts, so I
love you, sister, and you'll be
missed.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm say
Rip Joy Garrett, Northwest
Berlio County, home of
Petroglyph National Monument and
lots of roads and lots of land
with cows on it still, um, and
I, I wanna thank Nancy, um,
she's one of those people that
doesn't go around telling you
all the stuff she did.
Um, it's not about her, it's
about how to serve the people of
New Mexico, and I really
appreciate that, you know, we
always hear about the great
divide in politics in this
state, but I never feel like
that here in New Mexico, and
Nancy is one of the reasons
she's civil to everybody, kind
to everybody and genuinely
caring about what we do about
our relationships, about being a
mentor and just being
a human being that cares about
others, and I think that's
helped.
Make this body.
The kind of civil body where
we're friends first and where we
disagree politically.
It doesn't get in the way of our
relationship. So thank you for
being that kind of person.
Thank you. I'm Adam Vice Chair.
I'm gonna ask our committee
director to introduce her name
and the staff that's here.
Hi, I'm Safina Gainer. I'm a
staff attorney with the
Legislative council Service, and
I'm assisted by Clinton Turner
and Charlie Brewer, um, and I
also wanted to thank Senator
Rodriguez for kindness
throughout the years. I don't
want to speak out of turn of
staff member, but
Well, thank you very much, uh,
Sabina, and to the staff, and
nothing happens around here
without this staff working
really, really hard. So we
appreciate all of you. Thank
you. Uh, this is our last
meeting of the year. I'm Senator
Michael Padilla. I do chair this
committee, have uh been chairing
and vice-chairing it for a
little bit. I've been a voting
member the entire time I've been
in the legislature for 12 years.
I do represent the southern
portion of Bernalillo County,
uh, along with Representative de
la Cruz, and I can tell you that
everything you heard about
Senator Rodriguez today is
absolutely true, every bit of
it, um, and
I just can think of about a
little over 100 boards or
commissions or other things that
um now that she's got, you know,
about 10 minutes of time in her
day once she finishes with us,
she's got a whole slew of things
we're going to have her do. So
we're, we are not at all going
to lose your experience and your
wisdom, Senator. We've got a lot
of things for you to do. So
thank you. OK, everybody, so
we're gonna start moving down
the, the list here. We have some
uh legislation that's in your
packet. Uh, we have a quite a
Attendance today, but we're just
trying to make sure that we have
a quorum before we act on the
minutes or anything else. So,
uh, we'll start with uh Sabina,
who will go through the items
that we're gonna, uh, consider
for a proposed legislation.
Mr. Chair, um, usually people
who are proposing the
legislation, if we can just go
ahead and call them, uh, yeah,
whoever we have, so whichever
ones we have. So for, uh, Mr.
Chair members of the committee,
for the 1st 2 pieces of
legislation with a 22 8 number
228981.1 and 228982.2, that will
be a representative Blundstrom
and we'll invite Representative
Lundstrom to come to the
presentation table.
And you do have those in your
packet, everybody.
And just before we get started,
are you seeking an endorsement
or you simply presenting to the
committee today representative.
Yeah, we'll, we'll go ahead and,
and vote even if we don't have,
we'll vote in the subcommittee
if that, if we don't have the
quorum established just yet, OK?
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and good morning,
everyone. Uh, representative
Lundstrom here and I do have 2
bills in front of you. Uh, the
first one I'd like to speak to
is 0228981.1, Mr. Chairman.
Committee and what this is is a
public private partnership bill,
and it creates the
public-private partnership fund
and program.
Um
Many of you have been very
familiar with P3s over the uh
number of years and
I guess over the last 15 years,
I've been involved with P3
legislation and um either
helping to have it, um, drafted
or actually carrying it or
certainly uh working very
closely with the chairman and
the vice chairman over the last
few years on P3 legislation.
And just for the benefit of the
uh audience. This is a economic
development as well as a
community development tool.
What it does is it allows for
some very specific financing
when it comes to infrastructure
projects. And in this case, the
projects include transportation
and broadband.
We have uh many examples of P3
happening in our state today
with very little uh oversight.
Because it's been, it's been
subjected to those people that
actually have control over over
those programs, such as charter
schools. We've seen that a lot
with charter schools.
Um, just like to take you
quickly through the bill, Mr.
Chairman, on page 2 is the
definitions of private partner,
public partner.
On page 3, I draw your attention
to line 7.
Uh, this is a fund is created as
a non-reverting fund in the
state treasury.
But, um, we would like to try to
find out and we, we could
certainly ask Marquita.
What is the net position as of
FY 23 for the governmental gross
receipts tax. In other words, we
need to understand what the cash
basis is that they have now.
unobligated cash because this is
how the fund would work.
Um, page 4.
Just, uh, talks about the need
for doing cost-benefit analysis.
Talking about transportation and
broadband.
You look on page 5, line 9.
We asked the local government
division to promulgate rules for
the P3.
On page 6, we look at uh line
16. That's, that's that section
where 35% of the governmental
gross receipts tax proceeds.
Go to PPRF projects, um, I go to
the water fund and some other
things that you all have been
funding for years.
We're probably gonna have to do
a general fund in fusion in this
because anytime you add another
beneficiary.
It lessens the amount that goes
to the other, other folks, and
they're probably gonna.
Build budgets based on what they
think they're getting. So we
don't want to cut.
If you look at um,
Page 7, line 16, public private
partnership fund. It'd be for
purposes specified in section
one of this 2025 Act.
It would be exempt from the
procurement code.
So that's basically page 89, 10
is all procurement code stuff.
H 1112, and then if you look at
page 13, this is where we add on
online 12.
Double H to the public-private
Partnership Agreement for the
performance of a broadband
project or transportation
project pursuant to Section one,
so that would be an exemption
from the procurement code also.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, not
in a nutshell, is what this
particular P3 bill does.
Um, if you'd like, I can answer
questions on this or move to the
other bill. So we're going to go
one at a time. Thank you very
much for that representative,
and I do want to announce to the
committee that Representative de
la Cruz has been appointed as a
voting member, so we now have a
quorum so we can vote on stuff
now. So, um, I'm gonna open this
to the floor now on um any
debate or discussion on this
proposed piece of legislation.
Representative Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, what, I know
that you've sponsored
legislation in the past. What
has been the roadblock? It seems
like a a good build. Oh, there's
been some roadblocks.
Well, we've had roadblocks, but
primarily I think what what's
happened and it's um we've been
able to get the bill through the
house, RP3 bills go through the
House.
Get through the corporations
committee on the Senate side, we
have not been able to
effectively get through the
judiciary Committee. Uh, we did
one year, but
Things have changed, and I think
honestly it's about timing.
Uh, they have a lot of bills in
that committee. I would suspect
we become a low priority, this
kind of thing.
Um
But that's what we, we haven't
been able to remember correctly.
I got it out one time. We got it
out one time, but.
What, what, what we've had to do
originally with the P3
legislation, it's included all
infrastructure. We whittled that
down to the two priority areas
which were transportation and
broadband, desperately needed
throughout the state.
Desperately needed.
And because we're talking about
horizontal construction.
Easy to talk. It's easy to do.
Broadband can be a companion
whenever we're building roads,
looking at those right ways.
But where we see it in my
opinion, most obviously is with
transportation.
We believe that there are
private sector contractors that
would like to participate. It's
only to everybody's benefit.
And move projects a lot quicker.
I would suspect that's the same
with broadband, but I'd like
Senator Padilla to talk more
about broadband because I'm not
as close to that as that's been
our
our problem. I think part of
it's been timing.
Thank you. OK, thank you,
Representative, uh,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Just a quick question about the
exempting from the procurement
process, uh, I guess what's the
holdup with that currently, and
then with this.
Being part of it, how do you
feel this would streamline those
efforts, Mr. Chairman. I think
the, the easiest one for me to
talk about would be the
broadband piece. I think most
broadband services and
infrastructure happened from the
private sector.
At least I'm not aware of public
sector companies.
That actually build out a
broadband system.
So, they're not gonna follow a
procurement code process,
generally speaking.
And we think because we're
looking at road, like I said,
horizontal construction for
roads.
And is tied to a P3. We feel
like we, uh, it would help
expedite.
By having that exempt from the
procurement process. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and anything that
makes the government work a
little faster, unusually for, so
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, uh, Representative,
and just to add, uh, you know,
just cause the topic that I
focus on one of my primary swim
lanes, don't normally jump in on
the debate until it's my turn at
the end, uh, but on broadband,
uh, the representative is
absolutely right, um, these
projects are so costly that if
we don't move in the direction
of a P3, we may not get some of
these larger middle mile
products.
projects done. And so if you're
gonna do work to the roadways or
you're gonna open up the ground
for whatever reason, why
wouldn't you drop a broadband
project, Mid-mile project into
it. And so that's why this
becomes very critical.
Uh, all right, let's go now to
Representative Herena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Lindstrom. I
have voted for your bill 33
times in a row and uh we
and uh just for the committee to
know, um, I participated in
public private partnerships as a
foundation director with the
Lanel Foundation, where we
partnered with the Smithsonian,
bringing, you know, a 10
million, taking a $10 million
project for public schools up to
20 million. So I strongly
believe in this and and it it it
just, it just sets a
pathway forward for people to
work faster and better.
And in a, in a complimentary uh
fashion, but I'm just curious if
you could just tell me, and I
don't know if this is a question
for you or Marquita, but how
much money when we're talking
about, I'm, I just would like to
get a better handle on how much
35% of the governmental gross
receipts taxes, and then last
year, how much we gave to the
wastewater facility, the rural
infrastructure, the solid waste,
the drinking water, the water
wastewater, and the government
planning fund.
Marquita to answer that. Good
morning, uh, members of the
committee. Last year, the
government of Greece receipts
tax came in at about $38 million
so 13.25% is roughly the 35%
last year, uh, the funding,
which was about 13 million
because we had slightly less in
receipts and governmental gross
receipts tax, the excuse me, the
funding went um 5 million to the
cultural affairs facility funds,
6 million to the
Uh, I'm sorry, the drinking
water, uh, state revolving fund
and 2 million to the local
government planning fund. Uh,
there was not enough money from
that 35% um to cover the
drinking the clean water state
match, so that's that wastewater
facility construction fund. So
for the first time in many
years, we did not have
sufficient funds to make that
state match from the PPRF
appropriation. Um, this year,
you'll get to it later. It's.
It's gonna be a similar story
with slightly more money going
to the drinking water state
revolving fund, and the reason
for that is that the cap grants
from the federal government have
been very large over the last
several years and will continue
to be large for the next, we
expect 4 years.
And Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Lungstrom and
Marquis, um, um, I don't know
what to call you Marquita, um.
CEO, what is your title?
CEO, right? CEO, um.
I, I just want everybody to know
it's really not very much money
that we talk about, and these
are, these are really big needs
in our state. So I think when
we're, we're talking about how
we, how we do this, we really,
we really need to look at it and
we have, you know, I, I keep
telling everybody I'm not gonna
capital outlay my way out of
broadband or uh or water
infrastructure, it's just not
gonna happen. And I, I, I think
when it sounds like a lot, and
it is a lot, obviously, but 13
million separated in all these.
Key infrastructure.
Uh, programs in our state is
probably not enough, and if
we're gonna add in some more, if
we're gonna add public-private,
which is also going to take some
funding. I think we need to
really look at the, the
structure and the amount of
money that we're putting into
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh
thank you, uh, representative,
and again, I'm gonna jump in one
more time. I don't mean to keep
doing that, but, so while it
might be $13 million committee,
uh, that money can easily be
leveraged to a lot more money at
the federal level that brings.
So when we do our part, that's
how we brought that 670 million.
into the state this year because
we did our part of the 20 or 300
million we put into broadband
over the last couple of years,
so, uh, we'll go now to
Representative Cates.
Uh thank you, chair, and, and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill forward and
and champion something that's so
so vital for our state, even
though it may not make the front
page of the news, um, and I'm
sorry that it's not a priority,
it should be a priority, and,
and you most certainly have had
my vote in the previous
sessions. Um, just, uh, just as
an overview for my constituents
on why is a project like this,
um,
Why is the anti-donation clause
not in its way.
I think part of what the reason
is, is that we're talking about
the we're trying to exempt it
from the procurement process.
But in terms of the anti
Excuse me.
So this is a bill that we do
together just so you that's why
I keep jumping in here and I'll
be doing, I'll be doing the
Senate side. I'll be doing the
Senate side of this bill, but
the reason that it can be uh
exempted is because the public
entity always is the owner of
the asset, when it's when it's
all said and done and paid off.
That's one way to overcome the
anti-donation.
You know, if I may, Mr.
Chairman, I, I think the other
thing that's important about
this is I've I've read in the
newspaper recently we've got so
much money that's lingering now
in capital outlay.
That we can't move.
This might be a good source then
to start sending our
constituents too, rather than
asking for $100,000 for a
project that costs 2 million,
happens to be a road project.
Why can't we start sending them
here?
Start looking at this program.
Once again, thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative, um,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Yeah, this concept has been
around for a very long time, uh,
which is why we have the
quasi-governmental entities that
we created from the state. Is
that correct? I'm sure with NMFA
and MFA.
Correct, I think, um, Mr.
Chairman or representative, I've
always seen where I was talking
to another person earlier about
it. I remember the early, early
years of New Mexico Finance
Authority. And in my mind, they
have the premier ability to
evaluate the ability to pay.
They're like the infrastructure
bank for the state of New
Mexico.
So when these contracts are
being developed between the
local government or state
government, public sector, and
the private sector. They have
the ability to do the due
diligence.
That doesn't mean that they
would promulgate all the rules.
We're asking local government
division to do that. And
transportation, obviously
department would have a review
on whether or not the project is
moving and why not have some say
on it.
But they have a very good uh
Well, I mean, they've helped me
draft this over the years.
They've they've been involved.
Dementia, um, so.
What, what would be, uh, the
definitive differences of what
those entities do as opposed to
what this bill will allow it is
um
Mexico Finance Authority would
be working on the due diligence
piece.
Uh, transportation would be
making sure the projects are
viable. I would assume it's do
it that helps us with broadband.
To make sure that we're also,
once the bonding happens for
this fund.
That the matches are
appropriate.
That, uh
Timelines are appropriate,
payback strategies are set up
appropriately and uh most of
all, they're gonna, the whole
reason you do P3s is to ensure
that there's going to be public
benefit.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for, for answering my
questions and I'm quite aware
that, you know, we're, I think
it's a $2 billion gap with the
um with our broadband in the
middle mile. I think that uh if
we're gonna have
We're gonna have assurances in
the public benefit that is why
you're focused on this is how
I'm reading this, um, but I'm
just gonna go to, just for
clarification, um, to share, uh,
Go into
Yes, page 8, where you talked
about the exemptions from the
procurement code to line for,
uh, the, the provisions of the
procurement code shall not apply
to, so this, this is the main
section of where we're going to
see those exceptions where now,
can you clarify what, what that
means with all these exemptions.
These are the current exemptions
determined representative,
everything that is currently
exempted.
OK, so this doesn't change. It
just, it, it just includes us,
it includes our our piece, which
is on page 13, line 12. That's
the
New, new language.
Perfect. Thank you. I'm trying
to read through this as quickly
as I can. I'm trying to
lift to get through all that.
Um, public private partnership
agreement for Mr. Chams reading
this out loud, line 12.
It the Chipoboriartnership
Agreements for the performance
of a broadband project for
transportation project pursuant
to Section 1 of this.
2025 act. I think this is very
specific and I think it's, it's
a, it's, it's diligence of, of
what you've been trying to
accomplish. So is this, um,
Less of what you've tried to
accomplish with the PPP bill
before or is this right online
or how have you changed it? In
other words, Mr. Chair.
Well, um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Representative. We,
we've changed it quite a bit in
terms of, it was a broad
catch-all originally.
And then we've changed it to be
super focused on what we think
the two greatest needs are.
Transportation road networks and
broadband network.
Uh, that's been, I think, the
primary change, but I think the
foundational piece of the bill
has stayed intact.
I mean, it's, it's there, it's
there as an economic development
and community development tool.
Go ahead, Senator. Thank you,
Representative and also another
change is the fund, uh,
previously, we basically, if you
had a project, um, and correct
me if I'm wrong, representative,
but if you had a project, cause
she's right, we definitely
narrowed this thing down to the
highest need areas, but you had
to go out and find your funds,
your money somewhere, whereas
now there's sort of this
potential for a fund here that
can be leveraged, as I mentioned
on the broadband piece for other
dollars.
To make things, which is the
spirit of the legislation to
begin with. So we never had that
in there before. So this is,
this is one huge, this is one
big different thing.
route.
That's, that's great, so I mean.
As far as our infrastructure
needs and what we're trying to
accomplish.
You know, for our states and for
our public, this is, this is
infrastructure that is greatly
needed. I want to commend you.
I'm really narrowing it into
this, the perspective that you
did, because, like I said, it's
a 2, about a $2 billion gap that
we have right now that we, we
just find that funding portion
and how we're going to leverage
those funding, those funds.
Thank you. the time much.
Thank you, Representative, and
again, it doesn't cast that
gigantic net, what if we trip or
make a mistake. This allows us
to focus on the highest needs
area, highest.
areas and then also sort of dip
our whole foot into the water
but not jump in the whole pool
with every everything and all
the above. So, all right,
Representative Terasas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. No, pretty
much the same thing, uh,
represented beautiful
legislation that, and I'm trying
to understand the same thing
from the procurement code.
And, and my only question is
just so that, and I, I think
you've answered a lot of it is,
it's set up so that we can get
several bids, right? So that we
is, is, am I understanding this
right? so that we can just
checks and balances, um, or, you
know, picking a contractor. Can
you just expand on that a little
bit and what those checks and
balances, and maybe I didn't
like what I would anticipate,
um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative is when the rules
are being promulgated by the
local government.
government division.
Inside those rules are going to
be kind of the guard rails of
what we're going to be looking
for, how far it can be taken,
um, but there's gonna be a
repayment process.
There's going to have to be um
just like any other uh
infrastructure contract, the
whole timeline.
Um
Measurable goals.
Probably gonna have to have
public hearings.
You know, the these rules will
be promulgated by.
And obviously it seems, Mr.
Chair, that this will make, make
things a little more nibble
nimble, is, is that the the the
plan, Mr. Chairman, because
currently when you think about
large transportation projects or
even medium sized transportation
and broadband projects.
The private sector wants to see
these done as quickly as the
public does.
I've seen that with um my work
with BNSF as an example on
railroad crossings and road
repairs for railroad crossings.
It's to everybody's benefit that
it gets done. But when you look
at DOT's five-year construction
project, planning process, uh,
waiting 5 years increases the
cost of the project. There's an
opportunity, uh cost associated
with it when it comes to
movement of commerce.
There's also um just a darn
safety issue sometimes with some
of these undersized road
projects. So what we're looking
at is once these projects become
priority and the community knows
that you think about the bridge
in Los Lunas.
Think about railroad crossings
down in the Carlsbad area with
all the growth that's happening.
Uh, we have a project like that
in Gallup now with railroad
crossings. It'd be very good to
be able to get that repaired,
uh, quicker. But if we wait for
the uh typical DOT process and
this isn't a ding on them, it's
just the way they're, their
planning works. It could be out
5 years.
When in fact we need to have
things done immediately. You
know, we're also trying to
respond to uh uh national issues
such as supply chain issues.
At the end of the day, we're
trying to help find ways.
To prevent our supply chain from
being derailed again.
And part of that is build out of
transportation and
communication.
We can't move commerce unless we
have decent communication in
place, and that's broadband.
Uh, in rural areas, it's
Not there. And if it's, and it's
not there at any real capacity.
Gallop is a perfect example. We
have, we don't have redundancy.
So
We, we gotta have those things.
I think it's great. I, I, I, the
only thing that I would
Just so that we can talk about
it or bring it out.
The surfaces, any abuse that you
would see that you think the
rules will, will, uh, address
those possible abuses, but I, I
love the idea. I think it's
great. And we do need to, we
actually had a conversation
coming in today, uh, about
exactly what you're just saying,
Oh, it takes so long for us to,
by the time we put our cap out
or whatever by the time we get
bids and so forth and, and we
know that things are just gonna,
uh, the inflation is just gonna
catch us and then we've got.
that's just sitting there,
stagnant because we don't have
that we're, we're all of a
sudden, we're short, uh, funding
gap. We've got funding gaps and
so forth. So I absolutely
understand what you're saying. I
like the legislation, I was
just, that was the only last
thing, that the last thing I was
gonna ask was um how you uh see
that it could possibly be abused
and what
And I think the rules will
probably handle that, but I, I
just wanted to hear. I, cause
you've been thinking about this
a long time, so a long time, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, and
I like to, well, I'd like to
compliment the chair and vice
chair for your next panel that
are they're the experts in P3 in
New Mexico and helped me with
this bill for years.
Uh, and they're gonna be able to
provide you examples of what's
already happening in New Mexico
and, and how they've been able
to protect the public.
I, I think that'll be an
interesting discussion when once
they come up the next panel.
I trust you very much. I think
you're a great representative
and you're, you're, you're
someone that pays attention to
things. I just needed to process
that in my mind and so thank you
for helping me do that. Of
course. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh thank you, Representative,
and I, you know, again, will say
that the bill when I had it the
directly in the Senate side, it
was probably about a
I think it started out at 180
pages and we started whittling
it down over time, and I think
we're in very good shape with it
now. Uh, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so
the, the one of the first things
that came to my mind, why people
would be against it is getting
rid of the procurement piece. So
it's like a red flag. So
We have had some rogue local
governments. So are you gonna,
are there parameters in here for
what there must be in the
rulemaking.
Now, there were, there are some
very specific standards in
rulemaking and what I'd like to
do, if it's all right with you
representative is when the panel
comes up, they can tell you what
they put in their contracts.
Uh, because they're real life.
Uh, real-time contracts right
now.
I know that uh Mr. Pulley's
going to talk about one at UNM
project there and what they do
in, in terms of of that kind of
protection. All right. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you very much, Vice Chair
Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
Representative, um, for working
on this what seems forever, um,
and just so everybody in the
panel knows, this is always been
a bipartisan effort. It's not
something, it's everybody wants
it for all the reasons that
Representative Lindstrom and
others have remarked.
And um, in, in working on
sponsorship of this bill, when I
realized how many of us even
know what happened in the
procurement process for various
projects. It's like, I never
did, but this, as you're gonna
hear more, it makes it
transparent because it spells
out. You'll probably know more
about
The checks and balances on a P3,
then you know on typical
procurement in state government,
just saying, uh, so I have two
questions, uh, representative,
um, and Mr. Chair, in the past,
we've always said that it didn't
apply to toll roads and
Senator-elect James Townsend in
our last time that we covered
it.
Said
Isn't it time to include them
and, and I just wonder I didn't
see it in here. I don't know if
it's in here or not. Um, I first
became interested in this with
the Southeast roads and oil and
gas country where companies did
want to put money into this. Is
that still in this bill? No, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh,
The vice chairman.
There was a Department of
Transportation study done, I
want to say 8 years, 7 years
ago, and at that point, they
could not identify any road in
the state of New Mexico that
would make sense as a
traditional toll road.
Um
I don't know if that's changed.
I don't think it has, but that
is the reason why we've stayed
away from that. We just don't
even.
I 40 in Albuquerque. It doesn't
make sense.
And we didn't think that um.
With the kind of funding that we
have now in the state of New
Mexico and.
Access to new funds that would
make sense that we're taxing.
It's, it's a form of taxes.
And, um, I didn't feel like it
makes sense.
Thank you, and then my other
question is just, Mr. Chair, um,
in requiring the local
government division, the
Department of Finance and
Administration to be involved.
Have you spoken with them at
this point? I have not spoken to
them directly about this, but um
I think it falls right within
their.
There was their role and
responsibility because they
understand the function of
government. They understand.
Aid agencies, they understand
local government agencies.
Understand how the tax base
works. I mean, just as an
example, unless it's changed.
I know that we did not decrease
the governmental gross receipts
tax amount, we did everything
else on.
Reduction of gross receipts tax,
but we didn't. The GGRT, right?
But we're still at the same
level. So
Albuquerque Water Authority, who
we collect this tax on.
Never got a tax break.
OK, thank you. That's my only
question.
All right. Thank you very much,
Madam Vice Chair. There are no
other questions, um, I commented
all throughout, uh, you know,
and I just want you to know that
this is something that we've
needed for quite some time. If
the procurement process for
Uh, these types of projects was
working for us, we wouldn't be,
we wouldn't have to have this
conversation. Um, so I just want
to let you know that this is
going to move the state in a
direction that gets that makes
us more nimble. I like the word
representative that I used, um,
I think it's going to make us
more uh innovative and give us
the ability to do more creative
things, um, and, and just so
everybody knows, we do private
partnership projects every day
of the week already. This
actually gives us some real
direction and, and a direction
to go in the, the procurement
piece.
Um
was one of the biggest hangups,
I will say, as we went through
the
Built the first couple of times
at a bill uh originally with the
late Representative Laranaga. He
and I attempted it, um,
representative Lundstrom and I
have attempted it before. We
have, have had other bills pop
up even outside of the work
we've done, but we've got to get
this done and then it teaches,
it'll help teach us where to go
from here without sort of
Doing the full-on rollout of it.
So I think we're, we're very
good from that standpoint, you
know,
I am gonna need to probably sit
down. We need to talk a little
bit more about the procurement
piece just to make sure that we,
we feel good about all that. So
I don't have any additional
questions. Thank you,
Representative. We'll move on.
OK. Um, so I'll entertain a
motion to endorse the
legislation by the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee.
Representative had moved. Do you
have a second? It was seconded
by Vice Chair Garrett. All those
in favor say aye. All those
opposed say no.
Motion carries. The bill is
endorsed. We'll go on to your
second bill, Representative. Uh,
this one is similar. It is
another uh P3 bill.
And in the title, what it does
is it's requiring the New Mexico
Finance Authority to promulgate
rules to administer and provide
public project financing from
the public project revolving
fund for the purposes of
financing broadband projects and
transportation. You might recall
last year, I believe it was last
year, um, we had a long
discussion about can't we just?
Add P3s as an eligible activity
of the PPRF program.
That's what this does, and if
you look on page.
8
That is the new language.
Um, no exemption, as we've been
talking about with the previous
bill.
That public private partnership
agreements for performance of
broadband projects or a
transportation project pursuant
to Section one is exempt.
But this is basically asking
Marquita and her staff and her
board.
To look at promulgating rules.
That's what this bill does.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Chair. So, um, I'm
not sure about this, but there
was some federal money that they
said would go to
transportation-related issues,
and now we have a car wash on
every corner in Albuquerque,
literally. So is it gonna be
tailored to just robes and and
that kind of infrastructure, or
will it also include gas
stations or or um car washes or
oil change shops. No.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, it's
Purposes for financing broadband
projects and transportation
projects, um.
I think when you're talking
about car washes and sea stores
and things like that that's
outside of the scope of
something like this, it would
have to be transportation
projects, and if they set the
rules up at the finance
authority sets them up, they can
say very clearly, middle mile
broadband, they can say very
clearly, uh,
Rural road infrastructure or
city uh road infrastructure,
they would set what that is.
Thank you, and I trust NMFA
implicitly, so that makes me
feel better. Thank you. They'll
they'll do a good job.
All right, uh, Vice Chair
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
Representative, the local
government division promulgates
the rules.
For the public private
partnership program and the NMFA
does the rulemaking for the
financing. Is that correct? uh
why we have a separate bill here
because they do two different
things.
Uh, this one that we're talking
about now, basically just puts
P3 into our EPRF fund as an
eligible activity.
Thank you. OK.
Representative Cates.
Uh thank you, Chair, um, and
thank you, Representative for
bringing us on page 6, section U
contracts entered into by local
public bodies for the person
firm organization, it's, it's
pursuant to the special hospital
district, so this funding is
also for
Um, only transportation, but in
the hospital district or
medically, uh,
Facilities. Now, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Representative, this is part
of section 2.
Which ties back to um
Exemptions from the procurement
code.
OK. Yeah. So that unfortunately
we had to have all that language
in there when we drafted the
bill on for, it's confusing. OK,
so it's part of the exemptions,
that's what you're saying. All
right, thank you so much, Mr.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you,
Representative. I see no other
comments. I'll entertain a
motion to endorse.
Representative Dela Cruz moved
to endorse. Do you have a
second? I'll take, uh, seconded
by Representative Therasas. All
those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
The bill is endorsed. Thank you
very much, Representative. Good
job. All right, now we're gonna
invite uh Marquita to come up,
uh, Marquita Russell, chief
executive Officer of the New
Mexico Finance Authority. We
have about 5 lightning round
bills and I think maybe 1 or 2
will have some discussion. We'll
take it away, Marquita.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't
have copies of the bills
themselves.
Well, good. So that's important,
um.
I don't have the 22, I don't
have the 220 numbers. That's my
issue.
I, I don't have any of them. Oh,
thank you.
Thank you. I'm so sorry about
that.
Um, so the first one that is
ahead of you is uh 228999.2SA
and that Mr. Chairman is the uh
PPRF authorization bill, as was
discussed last month. This is
the bill that starts off once
with a number somewhere between,
I don't know, 15 and 150 and is
typically amended once during
the session. This is on the
larger side, so we don't expect
a large amendment during the
session, uh, but
As it stands, it's 150
Sorry about that. 154 projects,
uh, to be authorized to access
the PPRF over a three-year
period.
standard piece of legislation,
Mr. Chairman. Senator Rolidis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Marquita for this
bill. This is a routine annual
bill that we have that truly um
is quite important, very
important. I think it's an
understatement for all these
projects that we have every
year, um, so, um, nothing um in
here should cause any concern
because it merely authorizes the
New Mexico Finance Authority to
continue to vet these
applications, not all of them.
Will qualify, not all of them
will, uh, will apply for the
loans, but those that do usually
under a million dollars or um I
can't remember the exact dollar
amount 11, OK, uh, are the ones
that qualify for this, at least
for the amount, and so, Mr.
Chairman, unless there are other
questions for the sake of time,
I'm gonna move do pass but there
may be others. Thank you,
Senator. I'll come back to you.
No worries.
Uh we have a do pass, OK, and I
will actually be sponsoring this
one. So we'll go first to
represent, I'm sorry, Senator
Rogue to make the motion. Thank
you. I move and do pass, Mr.
Chairman Representativestrom,
all those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
The bill is endorsed. We'll move
on to
229000.2sa.
Mr. Chairman, this is the annual
PPRF appropriation bill, so this
moves money from the PPRF over
to one of 6 identified funds.
I did this one before.
What's the number?
It's the 229000.2 SA. So the law
currently allows for 35% for the
legislature to appropriate up to
35% of the last year's
governmental gross receipts tax,
which, as we mentioned earlier,
was 38 million. So there's 13.25
million that's being requested
to move from the PPRF over to
this year's 3 funds, 6.25% over
to the drinking water State
revolving fund that will serve
as the match for federal grants
that are being
received 2 million to the local
government planning fund. It's a
fund that's um uh uh
administered by the NMFA we are
seeing increased demand for that
because we added last year the
um housing plans under the
Affordable Housing Plan Act, and
then 5 million to the cultural
affairs facility infrastructure
Fund. And who has done this one?
Um, last year, Mr. Chairman, it
was uh Senator Rodriguez and
I
I think it was the water fund
was
Representative Pereira.
You
did the water trusts board bill
OK, so we'll need a chief
sponsor this time for this one,
who would like it? Uh,
Representative Cates, and then
we'll have a uh we'll need a
senator when we get to that
point. Um, I'm happy to do it
with you if you want to do that.
So, uh, Representative Lustrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
wanted to make a couple
comments.
For the bill that we've, that
we've endorsed. This is a
potential funding source is the
governmental gross receipts Tax
at 35%, we get 38 million and
it's up to the legislature to
change that percentage.
So I'd like to know Mr.
Chairman Marquita, what is the
cash net position right now for
that fund. Mr. Chairman, um, as
of the last month, we had $49
million of bond proceeds put
into the um PPRF as at the end
of October, so we are just over
about 50, but almost $60
million. I'd note that last, uh,
the end of October, we also
approved more than $60 million
of public project revolving fund
loans as well.
So the cash balance um ebbs and
flows with demand as we close
the loans, the dollars are drawn
down as we issue bonds to
replenish that, that money goes
up. So we're anticipating a bond
issue in January in order to
have enough money to fund all
the loans that we've approved.
So, Mr. Chairman,
As of right now, what is the
unobligated cash.
that you have available, Mr.
Chairman, so unobligated not
being in a loan agreement, just
under 60 million. There's,
that's the only unobligated
balance we have is that cash
fund balance from which we make
loans.
Everything else in the PPRF is
obligated and under an indenture
of funds.
Does it affect your bonding
capacity, Mr. Chairman, and, and
rep and uh Marquita, if we
increase that percentage. Mr.
Chairman, what it does is it
affects our ability to make
disadvantaged entity loans, so
right now we make subsidized
loans to entities in your
communities that have a median
household income of less than
the state's median household
income, so a portion of the loan
or or all depending on the size
of it, could be made at 0 or 2%
and we fund that subsidy from
The governmental gross receipts
tax blow through. So that's what
it impacts most directly is that
it will also impact potentially
the new junior lean from which
we will do public improvement
districts, charter schools, um,
less traditional credits,
including land grants, all of
those credits are in our
What we call our junior bond
indenture, the junior lean, and
we rely on the flow through from
the governmental gross receipts
tax. So the two potential
impacts are to our ability to
subsidize interest rates for low
income, uh, communities and our
ability to fund non-traditional
projects within the PPRF,
including, frankly, the P3
transactions we've discussed
earlier, Mr. Chairman, and when
we get into this, our bill
moving, we're gonna have to have
this.
to the FIR because if there's a
need for an infusion of general
funds.
We need to know that.
Um, instead of just.
Slicing the pie smaller, we'll
need to know that, and I need to
have a clear understanding of
how that works. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Luhan. Thank you. um along the
same lines of questioning what
that's gonna look like, uh, for
the spender.
For clarification purposes,
we're looking at that 35%.
Uh, increase from the previously
endorsed bill uh for broadband.
Is that correct with the
Mr. Chairman, the current law
provides that 35% of last year's
governmental gross receipts tax
may be um appropriated to one of
currently 6 funds. The bill that
got endorsed should it pass and
get signed into law would make
it 7 or 8. I'm now, now my
numbers are getting a little
sideways, but ultimately it's,
it would add another named fund.
There is a bill annually that
goes before the legislature to
actually make that
appropriation. And that's the
bill we're talking about now.
The 38 35% is that 13.25
million. Thank you. And, and
that's my concern too. We're
gonna add another um section
into the uh into the usage of
this funding and
So I'm in agreement along the
lines of the questioning of
representative Leinster, what
is, what is it gonna take so
that if we're gonna do a big
projects, we get this bill
through, um, the PPP bill that
we just endorsed, we get that
through. Well, what is it gonna
take for us to really have
have it effective.
Um, in funding, and this funding
strategy.
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chairman, I did not see
in the prior legislation, the
maximum amount of grants that
can be made from the fund, so I
can't really speak to how much
money needs to go over and I
don't have a clear understanding
of the kind of the rules around
how many of our communities
would qualify for the grants.
Um, I can say though, if the
PPRF is to be an ultimate source
of funding in keeping the
governmental gross receipts tax
intact will help us fund those
projects because they will
be less traditional credits they
will need more support from the
governmental gross receipts tax
so that we can maintain our AAA
interest rate and pass that
along to the underlying
projects. So it's, I think we're
a little bit at odds with one
another on, on these two bills
trying to achieve the same
thing.
Thank you. Uh, and, and thank
you for that information, uh,
and clarity.
I too, yeah, I have some
questions. I think we need to
iron out some of the, this, this
important piece because we want
to fulfill what obligations
we're going to make if this
piece of this other piece of
legislation, um, is passed, and
it's an important piece of
legislation, as we've been
discussing, so yeah, I'd like to
know more about that and how
we're going to do that as well
because um sitting on house
appropriations and melisal
finance, uh, we need to
understand that a little bit
better. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Any
other comments on this one? Uh,
Senator Rodriguez, Mr. Chairman,
and just to elaborate a little
bit on this one, this is another
bill that that comes up every
year primarily to to situate the
funds in in areas where we can
easily leverage federal funds,
matching funds, otherwise we
would lose millions of dollars
every year for other funds. So,
um, that's one main purpose.
Another thing that I wanted to
elaborate on is that just last
year, uh, on my bill.
amended the public project
revolving fund to um include
housing and nonprofits for
housing developments so that
they would be able to borrow
very low interest loans from the
public project revolving fund in
the past, it's pretty broad as
far as who can apply for for
funds, but housing was not
included, and so last year that
part got in there to allow
housing uh projects to be to be.
eligible to apply. Now, in that,
I noticed in page 2, if you
look, uh, it also provides $2
million in here.
From the public project
revolving fund into the local
government planning fund, and
those are grants. Uh, those are
not loans. This is to help
counties and cities, um, apply
for their uh for housing also
for housing plans to help them
do the plans and, and also for
archaeological studies and
things like that, so, um, I just
wanted to to bring that up. This
$2 million that goes in there
and the language is, is a very
repetitive language that we use.
every year.
Uh, because that's how these
other funds get their funds is
by moving money from the PPRA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Any other comments
on this one. OK? So, on this,
uh, the chief sponsor will be
Representative Cates, and then I
will be the the the uh
co-sponsor on the Senate side,
uh, do we have a motion to adopt
this, uh, for endorsement?
Representative Thompson moves to
endorse. Do you have a second?
Representative Terazas, um, all
those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
The bill is adopted for
endorsement, um, and then I do
want to go back, Marquita and um
Sabina to.
Uh, the previous bill 228999.2
SA.
I'm gonna be the chief sponsor
on that one on the Senate side
and Representative Garrett will
be the House sponsor on that
bill.
OK. All right, let's keep
rolling here. We'll go on to
229001.
Uh representative onstream I was
just pointing at the note I
handed you, Mr. Turner. Oh, I
didn't even thank you. OK.
And
And notes out at school. OK, um,
all right, Marquita, do you have
that 229001.
Uh
No, oh, we just did that 10, I'm
sorry. No, we haven't done that
one. I did in my own mind.
All taken care of. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. So, uh, that bill
is the annual Water Trust board
authorization bill. The reason
we had to hold the meeting again
this late in the interim was the
um Water Trust Board did not
take action to make a
recommendation to the
legislature until the last week
of October. So they've
authorized or they're
recommending that you authorize
all 84 applications that were
submitted. Um, I would notice, I
would note that only 62 projects
appear here and that's because
there are um some overlaps.
There's several entities that
have more than one project
that's being authorized, so
there's 84 um projects being
authorized uh about 39 of them
are from municipalities, uh, 26
of them for mutual domestics and
then a variety from other uh
types of projects. So this is,
we are expecting to see
applications uh or these
represent applications from 25
different counties.
Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to
answer any questions.
OK. Do we have any questions?
We have uh a motion by
Representative Lindstrom for
adoption, uh, I'm sorry, for
endorsement of representative uh
Thompson is the 2nd. All those
in favor say aye. All those
opposed say no.
Bill is endorsed by the
committee, who are the sponsors
here typically we have.
Is that it? OK.
will be the chief sponsor, and
then we will get you somebody on
the Senate side if you choose,
OK?
Thank you. We'll go on now to
229002.
Mr. Chairman, these are the
requested changes to the
drinking water state revolving
Loan Act. This was uh uh my
colleagues, Michael Van der Heit
and Dan Opperman went through
the changes with you in some
detail last month. This is that
same bill. There are no changes
to what you saw last month, um,
and the request is to really
clean up the act. It hasn't seen
anything in the way of uh
changes in more than 20 years,
and the law that we received
down from the federal
government, um, requires us to
do things like provide grants
and
additional subsidy, which we're
not allowed to do under state
law. So we've been making, doing
some back bends and things to
get the funding down as directed
by Congress, but these acts, the
changes to this act would really
substantially help us do that in
a much more efficient way. Thank
you, Marquita. Do we have a
Representative, uh, Toaso.
OK, do we have any comments, any
questions? All right, we have a
motion by Representative Tadasos
to endorse the legislation,
second by Senator Rodriguez. All
those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
Legislation is adopted for
endorsement. Uh, do we have a
chief sponsor, Representative
Herrera, I believe.
OK. And then uh we'll get you a
a Senate sponsor, make sure you
follow up with me on that, uh,
representative Carrera.
OK, we're gonna go now to
229102. Why do I feel like we
just did this one? Or did we
just do no, we didn't. No, Mr.
Chairman, this is the last one.
This is our last one. This came
up at the Sakura meeting, uh,
the request to get additional
funds into our three sort of uh
community facility programs. One
is uh $25 million into the um
behavioral health Capital Fund,
$25 million into the primary
care capital fund and $10
million into the childcare
facility loan fund.
And those 3 programs, it's it's
identical to the legislation you
all endorsed last year. We were
unsuccessful in getting funding
through, um, and this, again,
this was brought up at the
Socorro meeting uh for
endorsement this year.
Uh, Representative Lindstrom.
Mr. Chairman Marquita, what is
the funding source for that is
it general phone. Mr. Chairman,
this, the request here for
general fund, yes, Mr. Chairman,
have we thought about adding
these as a beneficiary to the
early childhood fund. Uh, when
you mentioned that some of those
categories or facilities,
especially for children.
Wouldn't that fit into your
early childhood funds. Mr.
Chairman, there's one program
here dealing with childcare
facilities. Um, we have not had
that conversation with ECECD or
more broadly, the other two are
related to behavioral health and
primary care facilities, the,
the bricks and tar when you
think about the kind of balance
that is in your early childhood
fund.
That should be able to be.
considered a beneficiary.
And, and uh thank you that has
not been debated or discussed
yet, but certainly a topic that
we should.
Any other comments, questions,
Representative Luhan. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I did bring up, um
I'm sorry we're Lustrom,
the only suggestion I would
make, Mr. Chairman, if this bill
is endorsed, is that you look at
more than general fund to pay
these things, and early
childhood fund could pay for one
of them. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, again, I
have, I, I share, um.
Uh, point of view, uh, of
Representative Lundstrom. I
brought up some of these
concerns in Soota when this was
presented, um, one of my
concerns being that, you know,
we have uh spent a billion
dollars in behavioral healthcare
for our state and other
resources and other funds and
other, other sources of funding.
I have.
Um
I have to question how we get
the this.
You know, out of our general
fund right now, um, as a member
of HAFC as yourself on Senate
Finance. I'm sure, uh, Senator
Nancy Rodriguez, um, could give
us some more information as well
on that, uh, and some of the
concerns we have. We're looking
to dive into the general fund
for some of these things and we
do have other uh funds out
there, um.
I commend this that you did the
work and you took the time to
really understand where the
needs are in our communities, in
our states, uh, and I do support
the the funding of these.
These programs, but I just do
feel like this could be
redundant, and I think we need
to do a little bit of a deeper
dive, um, as, as those
appropriations are being and
have been made and haven't been
used even, uh, there's a $20
million fund that hasn't been uh
spent for behavioral health for
the then uh um HSD now the the
the uh HC. So there are a lot of
questions still out there as
where some of the funding is and
where
Uh, we need to get some answers
in some of these programs and
some of these issues. Now, um,
with the, my one question though
is in regards to the
Uh, childcare facility revolving
loan fund, again, I, I guess the
same thing to what
Representative Lundstone was
talking about how we, we can pay
for some of these other existing
programs. So thank you for
bringing this forward. I do have
some concerns about it from um
I'm taking this out of the
general fund, so.
Um, I commend you, again,
commend but have concerns. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions,
comments?
Do we have a motion? Oh,
representative block my par,
pardon me, yeah. worries. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and uh I hate
to like take the same horn as
the the other two
representatives, but I do, I do
feel like that regarding the
childcare facility Loan Act. We
have a multi-billion dollar fund
currently for early childhood,
and that is continually growing,
and I just feel like us having
to go in our budget right now,
which is probably gonna be going
down potentially with declines
of certain kinds of energy.
And things like that that are
put into the fund. I don't
really understand why we would
do that, but Mr. Chairman, I
guess the question I have, this
is a one time appropriation,
just 10 million just this fiscal
year, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairman,
yes, we believe that that
appropriation would take us uh
into quite a couple of years to
get projects done. We just
funded or or just approved one
for about half a million dollars
to add some significant capacity
in a rural clinic out in uh uh
Chian carry. It takes up, you
know,
If you're gonna buy a facility
and get one started, there's
quite some money involved in,
uh, you know, getting that done,
because the, the facility
improvements are very uh
specific in order to be a
licensed facility. This also,
Mr. Chairman, allows for some
startup capital. So if they're
going to expand their facility
and need to hire additional
people before they actually have
the ability to start um caring
for children. This will allow
them to do that as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. And
then current funding, what is
currently being funded and then
how many projects?
are included in that pot of
money from the last time that we
appropriated it. So, Mr.
Chairman, this has received two
appropriations to date. There
was a 200, well, there was a net
$50,000 appropriation back in
2003 and then a $1.75 million
appropriation last year, and as
I mentioned, we've done one
project so far where the um
ECECD has just started
promulgating its updated rules
for this, and so, uh, we did the
last one under the existing set
of rules once.
They are through their
rulemaking process, we intend
to, we expect to see more
applications coming in.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then with the 10 million,
how many projects do you assume
that you would be able to to
fund if let's just say right now
it's 1.75 with the current,
we're doing one project that's
like maybe 6 projects, maybe.
Mr. Chairman, I would expect
that we would be able to do um
10 to 20 projects easily with a
$10 million appropriation again,
depending on the amount of
capacity that's being added. If
it's a minor new renovation in
order to add a wing to allow
for, you know, additional care
that would be a much smaller
appropriation or need loan than
if you were to buy a facility
and renovate it for purposes of
opening a brand new facility. So
that dollar figure
is going to change quite a bit.
Um, I don't anticipate that you
would, we would do any work.
Below 10 projects like the 20,
uh easily maybe up to 30.
Mr. Chairman, this is a loan, so
it will revolve. Yeah, OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair. And then I guess
in the past, you said in 2003,
we put like tiny tiny amount of
seed money. Why is it from 2003
to 2021, was it that we didn't
put any appropriations in the
fund, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know that
I have an answer for that. We
were partnered until ECECD was
created, we were partnered with
CYFD, which had
Bigger fish to fry than helping
to co-administer a loan program
for licensed childcare
facilities. So I think it really
was a bandwidth issue with our
primary policy partner, um,
actually, this was a program we
had slated to get rid of and
conversations and prior
oversight committee meetings, we
said, this is a fund that hasn't
had any activity. It's received
$50,000 net appropriation and we
think it's right for being taken
off the books and.
We heard from ECECD and other
childcare providers that they
were really unaware of this
program and that there was a
significant need and if we would
please not go forward with it
being stricken from the books
and talk about how we could
utilize our partnership, the,
you know, the best resources
that we each bring to the table
and see if we can get more
childcare facilities, uh,
constructed or expanded.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
then I'm sorry for all the
questions. Last question, uh,
currently, do we know if the
current early childhood
And whatever the billion dollar
fund, multi-billion dollar fund
is. Do you know if there are any
mechanisms in there for brick
and mortar projects, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, my
understanding for all three of
these behavioral health primary
care and childcare, that this is
the only brick and mortar
program available to help or new
or expanding facilities. So I
know that there have been major
behavioral healthcare
initiatives. They're not for
brick and mortar. Uh, there have
been major, uh, rule.
Primary care, not for bricks and
mortar. This is, this hits the
fringe of the big issues that
exist, but if you're going to
expand services, you do need a
location to do that.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate it, Mary. Uh thank
you, Representative. It was one
of the reasons I went out to
create that department, by the
way, because it was sort of the
2nd tertiary thought, secondary
tertiary, and nobody was
focusing on it. Um, so, all
right, uh, representative, I'm
sorry, Senator Rodriguez. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Just a little
follow up on that and that this
is a perfect example of the many
times that we establish and
create funds for different
purposes, but then we don't fund
them or we don't provide
sufficient adequate funding.
And they just sit there
stagnant, but the needs continue
to grow, and unless we step up
to the plate and continue to
fund these things, we can
leverage more money for them
and, and do much bigger things.
One last thing, Mr. Chairman, is
that last year or the year
before I sponsored, was it last
year, I sponsored legislation to
amend um the these particular
bills to allow for operational
support, um, also for like uh
primary care or
your health and so on, because
what happened is that when the
legislature created these funds,
when we created these funds, um,
we intended at the time to have
bricks and mortar, leases,
buildings, whatever they needed
to have to provide more um
services, for example,
behavioral health or primary
care, but how can they do that
if they don't have the personnel
and the operational support to
do it, an empty building's not
gonna cut it, so last year, I
amended the bill.
to um include that provision. So
now these um funds can be used
also for operational support,
Mr. Chair, so it'll help create
for staffing and more providers
and behavioral health services.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Senator Representative Cates.
Thank you, Martina, thank you
very much for bringing this
forward. I understand that you
are not in charge of the early
childhood education department,
but um, are you aware that there
is an age range for the.
Services that are under that
trust program.
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm, I don't
really know very much about that
program.
So it's my understanding that
there is an age range for the
early childhood education trust
and the piece of legislation
which Marqui is bringing forward
to us does not have an age
range. So although we do think
of daycare facilities as
individuals under the age of 6,
they are not always under the
age of 6, and this would be a
more broad definition to make
sure that those all day care
systems are covered. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, for giving
me.
Representative Kate, thank you
for a second time,
Representative uh Wuhan. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
OK, uh, I, I think we can, we
can really bolster this up, but
I think there are other, there
were other ways to have a a
steadier or more efficient
funding stream, if you will, if
we could look at those, those
mechanisms because we do know
that the, as I said before, I, I
fully support what this is doing
always and always um.
What more we can do for this,
but I, I do believe we're gonna,
we're gonna come to a head with
this, and that's just.
Um, as I've been following, um,
our budgets and and and the
needs we have there. Where are
those agencies uh with you and
the support for all of these,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so we have had
conversations obviously with the
ECECD um because we've been
renewing our rules as a result
of that, um, a little amount of
money that came in last year.
So, um, we've established a
great working relationship with
them, um, the primary care, uh,
group at at the Department of
Health. We've had a strong
relationship with them, going
back to the beginning of this
program started in 1997. Um, and
we've had a very strong working
relationship with the Department
of Health and my understanding
is that we've, we've restarted
conversations with now the
healthcare Authority. Um,
they've obviously had some other
things on their table. We also
had very little little money in
that program was initially
capitalized with bonds at the
Finance Authority issued 2.5
million, um, and there's just no
money left in those funds, so,
uh, we are back in conversation
with them. We're renewing the
rules as a result of Senate Bill
Senate Bill 423 that um Senator
Rodriguez spoke about earlier
in, in championed uh last year.
That's right, and I, and I do
remember that bill as well and
the need for it as, as we are
trying to um re-establish our
behavioral health systems in New
Mexico. I think those are, those
are, um, this, it's enlightening
and I, and I, I see the focus
here. I just want it to be
successful, Mr. Chair, fully
support what we're trying to do
here. Will, um, I've been
talking with my local
communities and, and my child uh
care, um.
Businesses and one of the
biggest issues they have is they
have to uh readdress old
building and building codes and
update their building codes, and
that's really what's really
hurting them. Um, and as far as
our behavioral health systems I
know a lot of telehealth is done
or behavioral health systems and
so them having a brick and
mortar is important, um, as well
as having, you know, the, the
capacity for the telehealth and
then it would move into that
realm, but I just, uh, I really
want this to be successful.
And I would entertain Mr. Chair,
even working with Representative
Lunstrom, if she's up to it or
some of the comments she made to
really maybe look at some of
those additional um ways of
really bolstering this and
making this more effective,
otherwise, I mean, I, I support
this and what you're doing with
us, Mr. Chair. But, um, to the
committee, um, I think there are
other ways of us really um
Improving this, this legislation
and really getting it on its
way. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Lundstrom.
I just wanted to make one
clarifying comment when it comes
to early childhood facilities if
they're part of a public school
campus, they are allowed to get
public school capital out funds.
Um, I think the other thing, Mr.
Chairman, is that um we must be
setting up a revolving loan
program then for private sector
providers is what it sounds like
to me. I, uh, for early
childhood facilities. Is that
correct, Mr. Chairman, the
childcare facilities are for
private, uh, private entities
for profit and not for profit.
OK. Because it wouldn't make
sense for a school district, not
to use uh uh.
Public school capital outlay if
they're upgrading facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. OK, I
think we've got the vice chair
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I just
want to emphasize that these 3
funds have benefited rural New
Mexico, primarily.
OK, thank you. And then we do
need a motion. Uh, do we have a
motion for, um, endorsement, Mr.
Chairman, I move an endorsement
of this Madam Vice for
endorsement. Do we have a
second? Representative Lindstrom
2nd, all those in favor say aye.
All those posts say no.
OK, we have one name for the
record that is representative,
uh block and the motion carries,
and we are uh have endorsed this
piece of legislation. Thank you
very much. And then we have
Representative Garrett as the
chief.
sponsor, and we will get you and
I will be the co-sponsor on the
Senate side,
so you, Mr. Chair.
Are we watching that? OK, thank
you. All right, thank you very
much. Uh, before anybody leaves,
uh, a prerogative of the chair,
I need everybody to kind of
maybe come on and gather around
me in the vice chair, I would
like a picture of the committee
here, please, before we go to
our last item and we'll have the
presenters come on up to the
table, that is Robert Lemming,
Ryan Mast, Michael Pulley, and
Mark Valenzuela if you'll make
your way up to the presentation
table. I want the picture also
if you don't mind. Ryan, do you
mind taking this?
I could take
the picture he's tall and he'll
make it'll I'll look thinner if
it's from a pie, so
thank you.
Come on and kind of gather in.
Come on, you weren't able to
that's great. Thank you.
It.
Here you go, Mike.
Yeah,
come in just a little bit more.
is
better.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you, Ryan, for doing that
OK. Thank you. Good to see you.
Oh, I'm sorry, can I entertain a
motion on the, uh, while we're
getting set up here on the
minutes. We have, uh, we did
establish a quorum.
Senator Rodriguez moves for
adoption of the minutes. These
are the October 9, 2024 minutes,
Representative Thompson Seconds,
all those in favor say aye. All
those opposed say no.
are adopted from the October 9th
meeting, and now we are going to
go to
Public-private partnership
discussion and we have Robert
Lemming, who is the uh director
of programs for the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, Ryan
Maston, a good buddy of mine,
infrastructure, uh, partner at
Sustainability Partners and all
things.
Sustainability. Michael Pulley,
chief government of relations
Officer, also a good buddy, uh,
University of New Mexico, and I
do believe we had, or do have
Markalenzuela, who will be
either coming to the table at
some point, managing principal
boss gay advisors LLC. So what
we're gonna start off with
everybody is uh Michael Pulley
from uh the University of New
Mexico has a presentation and
then I will ask the other
presenters to say a few words
about, uh, you know, whatever
they'd like to.
to say about, and we'll take it
from there. And we're gonna try
to do the presentation all in
about 45 or so minutes,
including everybody at the
table, and then we'll take some
questions after that. Mike will
go ahead and take it away.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, first of all, good
morning and thank you for the
invitation today. I really
appreciate the chance to join
this panel and, uh, share some
ideas and examples about P3
arrangements. Um, I will keep it
brief today because uh you have
experts here who can talk much
more about the current state of
P3 practice and different ways
the tools can be used. Um, my
main mission today is just to
offer an example of uh existing
successful P3.
that already exists here in, in
New Mexico, um, as I go through
my slides very quickly that you
have in front of you. Um, I'll
talk about some of the
principles about why P3s are
helpful to achieve public
purposes, and uh I want to make
sure folks often think it's
something esoteric or doesn't
exist, and as you said, Mr.
Chair earlier this hearing,
there are P3s that have been in
place at all levels of
government for a long, long
time. And, um, I'll give you one
example of one of those today.
At New Mexico, uh, at University
of New Mexico.
So
I would want approach something
through a P3. And um as I said,
uh, one of, there are many
advantages to the P3 approach,
and one of it is, is it, it
allows you to achieve projects
that would not otherwise get
done. It brings to bear private
capital to achieve public
purposes and for projects that
may not get prioritized or make
it to the top of the list, um,
for public investment right
away, but still you have a need
right away. P3s are where
private.
Capital can be brought to bear
to help the public achieve, um,
its goals. And again, to keep it
as simple as possible. These are
contracts. I will talk about
what particular kind of
contract, uh, UNM has for the
housing, which is, which is a
long term lease, but I do want
to, uh, echo some of the
questions that came up earlier
that these are contracts that
are entered into where there's
consideration both ways. There
are benchmarks, uh, there are
performance measures, and like
any other contract that the
public enters into.
Um, all of the parties are
expected to perform up to what
they've been expected to do. Um,
one more, uh, concept to talk
about is, uh, given the size of
some of these investments, uh,
P3s are also helpful when you're
talking about long term
comprehensive projects. There,
it's not the best procurement
tool, uh, for every single, uh,
public purpose, but certainly
for some um uh long term
complicated, expensive projects,
P3 is, is an approach.
to take. Um, the second reason I
think I was invited today real
quickly is that even in other
roles I've worked with many of
you on some of these P3 concepts
and bills over the years. If you
go back and do a search on your
own site, you see the number of
bills, and I wanted to address
that very quickly as well. Why,
why have a bill? Um, because
currently, public-private
partnership arrangements are not
prohibited under the procurement
code and there's a couple of
good reasons to put a bill in
place if you should choose to do
that. And the
reasons are, one, just
awareness, um, P3s may not be
the first approach that is
considered when considering how
to take on some of these public
challenges. Um, another is that
it's a roadmap or it's
guidelines. Um, right now in,
you know, any contract can be
negotiated, as you know, and
there is a procurement code that
guides in the contracts, but P3
legislation might provide some
benchmarks that make that, um,
provide more consistency and
transparency on how some of
these arrangements are put into
place. And
Again, you do need flexibility,
um, you know, the different
needs that P3s can meet are
going to be varied and, you
know, one set of rules or one
set of uh approaches is not
going to fit everything and I'm
sure we hear more about that
from the other speakers. So just
to cut to it, um, more than a
decade ago, um, at UNM, um, our
student housing was ranked some
of the lowest in the country.
There was a tension to the fact
in higher ed publications that
uh UNM student housing was
not up to up to standard and UNM
I did a procurement and entered
into uh a public-private
partnership.
To get student housing built.
And there were two different
specific projects.
The 4 tower dorms that are on
campus in Lobo Village, which is
over on Avenido Cesar Chavez,
and, um, those have been
providing housing at UNM, much
needed student housing, um, for
the past 10 years. And, uh, in
the slides that are in front of
you, it has some of the
statistics. I, I hate to
interrupt you, Mike, but you
know I am a little still upset
after all these years at the
moment I moved out of Coronado
Hall, they remodeled the entire
building. I see. That is a true
story, everybody.
You your computer in the entire
building would go black, so
yeah.
Understood, Senator. So I, I
will take that under advisement
and report back on that. Um, but
as I was saying, you know,
student housing, um, we consider
an educational purpose. I want
to be very clear that there are
academic studies that show that,
um, student housing does improve
graduation rates, and it
improves GPAs. So how we house
students is not just a
convenience, it's actually a
part of providing a top tier,
um, education. Also, uh, as you
all know, higher ed competes for
students, and these days as
Many of you know from visiting,
I'm sure, multiple campuses. Um,
if you don't have, um, you know,
decent, um, attractive housing
for students, you know, you may
not get those students wanting
to apply and, and come to your
institution.
So, I just wanted to lay that
groundwork, um, to let folks
know that P3s can be a very
powerful tool. Um, it's a tool
that's already in place in
certain situations as a tool
that's already succeeding, and
my contact information is in the
slides, if anybody had any
particular questions about our
project, I'd be happy to follow
up with you with more detail,
but more importantly, I think
you're going to want to hear
from, again, some of the experts
and practitioners that know how
to put these tools into place.
Thank you, uh, Mike. Ryan Mast
infrastructure Partners
sustainable, I'm infrastructure
partner sustainability partners.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. It's a
real pleasure to be here again
this year to discuss this topic.
Um, it's been a year and it's
been a very active year for us
in New Mexico. We continue to
grow, um, as, as a company and
supporting communities here
across the state, um,
sustainability Partners is uh as
a brief background again is a
public benefit company that
serves as a unique alternative
to traditional P3s, uh, we, um,
in, in the range of, of the P3
arrangements as, as you all
are, are likely where P3s come
in various forms. There's,
there's a whole pyramid of, of
differences between them, they
all fall into a general
category, but, uh, depending
upon the, the responsibilities
that are needed to move a
project forward or the capital
sources that are required for
it. Um, there's a lot of
flexibility into that. So for
us, uh, we, our, our main core
model is what we call
infrastructure as a service and
the, the benefits of that is we
can fund, deploy and maintain
essential infrastructure for
public.
entities as a public benefit
company, we only work with
public entities. We focus on
what we call the mush market,
which is municipalities,
universities, schools and
hospitals. Um, however, that can
extend out to utilities that are
providing essential services,
both private and publicly
regulated. So, um, from that,
uh, our model is really
beneficial to enabling projects
to move forward, especially
because we have, uh, we can
bring the capital to the table.
So for our projects, there's
actually 0 upfront capital
required.
However, for many of them, um,
it becomes a, a mix and match of
other capital sources that can
come to that, whether that be
capital outlay or grant funds,
etc. um, our goal is to achieve
a full capital stack and able to
move the project forward. The
other thing that we focus on is
maintenance and upgrades over
time. So if you think about the
way that traditional public
infrastructure is done. There's
actually a very limited
relationship between money and
the stuff.
Money is a source to get the
stuff, but the performance, the
design, even the construction of
that is disconnected with it,
which is why we run and not just
in New Mexico but across the
country and so many challenges
where you secure your amount of
money, but then it's not enough
money to actually complete the
project or it's not enough money
to maintain and upgrade that
project over time. So then you
come back later on with
emergency repair. So we actually
are upside down in our
infrastructure systems
nationwide because we don't draw
performance connection between
the two.
Sustainability partners
infrastructure as a service
actually focuses on that where
we building capital reserves
over time to ensure that the
infrastructure that we are, we
are deploying is actually not
just maintained but upgraded
and, and is there to serve um
over the duration of that
asset's useful life.
We also also a very flexible
month to month contract. So as
Mr. Poley mentioned, there's all
sorts, these are contractual
relationships, ours, we've
ensured that it's flexible and
that it's something that's not a
long term necessary commitment
for the public. Um, it is our
responsibility to ensure the
performance of that
infrastructure over time. And as
such, when we've converted all
of those costs into a month to
month usage based rate, we need
that infrastructure to actually
be in use and be performing. Um,
all this means is for a for a
construction project,
particularly if it's
complex and complex even in
rural New Mexico can mean small,
right? It doesn't have to be
large, it just might be outside
of the capacity of the of the
local staff, um, that we're
transferring the risk of
infrastructure to our company
and that risk includes both the
capital risk on the upfront cost
of of this stuff, the design
risks, so are we designing it to
meet the needs, um, whether that
be a water project or a
broadband project, are you
making sure that you're not just
accounting for what they're
needed now, but over the long
term life of the project.
Also the construction risks, so
if there are any construction
shortfalls, it's our
responsibility to meet those to
fill those shortfalls and ensure
that we're reaching the time
frame necessary to move the
project forward so that there's
no stalls or delays in
construction. Uh, and then
finally and most importantly,
the performance risk over the
complete duration of that asset.
So what our goal is here is to
actually have infrastructure
systems that are performing over
the useful life of the asset and
then continuously for the
communities in which we're
working on.
Um, the way that we structure
this in the usage-based model,
this is, this is, it's an equity
investment, so it does not
affect the debt capacity, it
does not affect the credit
rating for any of our customers.
And we also focus on
sustainability and environmental
benefits to the infrastructure.
So, um, the way that we approach
the project as we're looking at
it in the most sustainable way.
We're looking at, um,
incorporating the ESG factors
into it wherever possible. And
we're really trying to help
communities overcome that
upfront capital burden that they
need to move their
infrastructure systems into the
next century and
are because we know that these
systems are growing in
complexity and cost, and that's
going to continue to do so over
the, over the long, long term.
Um
You know, I would say sort of in
conclusion is, you know, our,
our unique flexibility and risk
averse format to approaching
P3s, um, has proven very
beneficial to our customers
across the country and here in
New Mexico as well. Um, I will
highlight one project, so we
have, we have several projects
already underway and, and dozens
more in development, uh,
completed projects in Portalis,
projects under construction
right now in Jal and Angel Fire,
um, the Project in Angel Fire, I
wanted to highlight in
particular, we started our
engagement there in January, uh,
work through the scoping.
of it, it is a complete upgrade
of their uh of their water meter
system to an AMI smart reader
system with acoustic leak
detection. Um, it is, it's a
significant project for them
because they had an outdated
meter project that was not
functioning and so they're
upside down on both the
accountability for where the
water leaks were in the
community, but then also um on
the revenue streams because your
water meter serves as both your
brain and your cash register for
your entire water system. So in
order to both improve the
revenue streams that they had
coming in to create.
a more sustainable water system
as well as get the data they
needed to know where they need
to focus their attentions on
future capital expenditures on
the water lines, we designed a
full turnkey comprehensive AMI
water meter system that was
approved by council to move
forward in late spring, and I am
happy to report that as of
today, we are over 75% done with
construction of that. So started
the engagement in January. We're
almost near completion of
construction at this point of
the year. Um, that project is
gonna be really
significant for that community
that is trying to um continue to
grow in the post-COVID world and
is also trying to become a more
sustainable community in
northern New Mexico. So I
highlight that as just a classic
example of how we would approach
a project in why P3s are so
critical to essential
infrastructure systems to
communities here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ryan. Outstanding, uh,
commentary, Robert Lemming,
director of Programs New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Uh, while I am
the director of programs at the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce,
I am also the executive director
of the foundation, which is the
primary
Organization under the chamber
umbrella that is a practitioner
of a public-private partnership,
uh, which is what I'm going to
speak about today. Ryan just
made a a great example in under
a year, the progress that can be
made through a public-private
partnership, and I, we have also
found that to be true at the
Chamber of Commerce in the
program that we run jointly in
this partnership called Bro
Broud, which many of you are
aware of, and as we look back,
That partnership started about 2
years ago.
And required a significant
amount of coordination and
coalition building to get that
off the ground. And I do believe
that that was one of the the
first of its kind, if not the
first of its kind in a
programmatic way to address an
issue facing the citizens of New
Mexico, which is workforce
development, uh, particularly in
the space of K through 12
education.
And what we have found in uh
implementing uh this, this P3 to
execute Bro be proud.
Is that there's a lot of space
for innovation and growth in P3s
more generally, and I want to
emphasize the speed at which
programs or projects can be
launched in the P3 framework.
So, when the contract was
signed, uh, for, for us to
execute that program in under a
year, we built a custom made
mobile workshop that houses
virtual reality simulators. Many
of you have been on it
yourselves and um
In other states where that
program exists, that process
took many years to complete, and
we did it in about 9 months. Uh,
so a similar time frame to what
Ryan was describing uh in his
example. And I think that shows
the promise of what what P3s can
offer the citizens of New Mexico
where we often hear about years
of waiting time and coalition
building and coordination, but
when we are bringing
stakeholders together to execute
these ideas, we see a drastic
reduction in the time frame for
impact.
And in the
We just passed a year
anniversary since we had our
workshop on the road. We've
impacted over 7500 students
across the entire state of New
Mexico, uh probably in all of
your districts, um, and more
than that, we've expanded that
to operate in correctional
facilities as well for justice
involved individuals and the
funding streams I want to talk a
little bit about as well, um,
for what, what these contracts
look like, that has come up a
couple of times in some previous
remarks.
Of how these public private
partnerships are actually
executed. So,
Uh, going back a couple of
years, um, we approached the
secretary of the Department of
Workforce Solutions with uh a
best practice idea of B pro be
proud that we identified through
uh one of our, our research
studies out of our foundation,
uh, for workforce development.
And we gauge their interest and
uh found that there was a need
for a program like Bro be proud
and so by securing that support
from the government agency, we
then took both our support from
private industry and the
government agency support to you
all here at the legislature to
ask for an appropriation to
execute this idea.
The very nature of a
public-private partnership. Uh,
we were successfully able to do
that with all of your gracious
support to make that happen. And
what we, what we were able to
secure, not only through that
appropriation, we were also to
raise from private industry as
well to increase the impact. So
it's not just a contract for,
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce Foundation to execute a
program with public money, but
we also raised money from the
private sector to fund that
program.
Uh, as well. So what we see is a
pooling of public and private
money to
Address uh an issue facing the
the citizens of New Mexico, and
that that's the way that we have
approached it, that we are on
Team New Mexico. There is no
room for divisiveness in the
execution of public-private
partnerships, we identify all
stakeholders who will be
affected. So we've spoken to
labor unions who sponsored the
program with their hard earned
money.
The private industry companies
that operate in New Mexico also
sponsor the program uh with with
the money that they make. And
then there's also the the public
financing that comes into it as
well. And then there's the
breadth of education
stakeholders who are engaged in
this effort as well. And so
we're seeing all of these
different communities of
stakeholders uniting behind a
single effort and in a very
short period of time, having
very real impact for the
citizens of New Mexico, and I
think it's a perfect example of
what is possible to achieve with
public private partnership.
And a very strong argument to
pursue expansion of various
types of programs, uh, in this
way. It is innovative and that
word has come up several times
today, um, and I, I think if we
can leverage the innovation of a
variety of stakeholder groups,
not just private industry, but
all others working together. We
can see real impact at a much
faster. Thank you very much to
our three presenters, comments,
questions?
Uh, vice chair Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and um,
Actually, Mike, um, another
great example from you and him
is the bioscience Authority.
Which, um,
Maybe we won't go in today, but
that's an outstanding example.
Well, my question is now, OK,
it's been set up.
And be pro, be proud is great.
Now I know why I don't want to
be a, a commercial driver,
having failed that experience,
but um,
How's the ongoing funding
working?
Now
You know, sustainability is the
word. How are you going to
sustain it? Will it continue to
have the multiple streams of
funding.
Yes, we continue to build the
private industry sponsorship of
that program, um, I think right
now we're at
Uh, close to $600,000.
Through that sponsorship.
Cool, um, and we continue to
grow that, and I think as we see
economic development successes
here in New Mexico to attract
new businesses, we'll see
further investment from the
private sector in that, um, but
there is a recurring
appropriation um that you all uh
very graciously supported, um,
for a 3 year period. Um, but we
actively work daily to cultivate
sponsorship for that program,
uh, and, and make the case to
our our member companies at the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce
that workforce development in
case.
through 12 space is a is a
critical avenue to meet the need
for workforce development in
this state. So yes, that that's
something that we continually
work on and will for
For however long that program
lasts, hopefully many years to
come.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
ask Ryan if you could send us
something, um,
About especially the angel fire
example.
That's a very powerful example,
it would be nice to
You know, have kind of what you
said, some of the specifics if
if that could be sent to our
committee, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair
Garrett, yeah, absolutely. I'm
happy to share information on
that. Um, the project's still
under construction, so we don't
have a full case study and
narrative done on it, but we
anticipate doing so. We do have
another project in Portalis
that's been completed this with
the Roosevelt County Water Coop.
It's been completed and now
underway, um, and functioning
for, for a couple of years now.
We've got a full case study on
that and just completed a video,
um, to
testimonial from the, from the
director out there as well, so
happy to share and follow up
with this on, on a variety of
information about examples here
in New Mexico. I'm sure that
would be great to get the
Proteas project too. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair
Representative uh Jadeta. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
I'm, I'm curious, uh, Mr.
Laming, what is the size of the
uh uh Chamber of Commerce is uh
endowment.
Our total budget currently is
$1.2 million.
So that's a total endowment or
the total budget.
That's what our budget is our
all of our, our revenue assets
liabilities is 1.2. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, we
have, you know, we're moving in
the direction of.
Um, it's the way I look at it is
filling in the gaps and how we,
how we get to, um, the goals
that we really need for our
state and and I know Ryan as
well, so thank you for being
here, Ryan, and well, I know all
of you, and I've worked with you
on different levels, so I just
want to, um,
Say thank you. Thank you for all
your work and what you're doing
and bringing this together, um,
just a couple of questions. Um,
you may have said this, but
right how many projects are, are
you, uh, involved with in the
statement, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, we
have, uh, we have one that's
been completed. We have 2 under
construction right now. I've got
dozens more that are under
development now that range um
from water to wastewater to um
electrification and energy
production battery storage to uh
actually starting to scope um
broadband projects here in the
state as well. Um, and we're
also scoping up in northern New
Mexico some workforce housing
solutions as well.
It's incredible. Thank you. Uh,
so thank you for your work, um,
thank you for what you're doing.
How, I guess my, my general
question is with um these
partnerships.
How, how does that make these
projects, um, move.
Faster.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's a great question. Uh, so
in essence, what our goal is, is
to, to achieve a completed
projects. And so when we scope a
project, what we're looking for
is, is, is primarily, you know,
our first and foremost, like,
what is the need? um and how did
we we develop it to meet the
needs, so we're, we're matching
the time frame that's needed for
the project. We also then work
to identify what are the sources
of, of funding that are going to
be contributing to that. So in
many of our projects, we're
providing the full capital.
For that project to enable
upfront capital to enable to
move forward. Perhaps there'll
be some application of grants or
capitally down the line, but,
but what, what we've noticed and
what we know is that um the, the
speed to getting a project
completed and in service and
community is actually quite
significant. Um, I've, I've
presented recently. I, I
typically use the number of 20%.
I've been told that that's a
little low. We should probably
use 24 to 25%. That's the
increased year on year cost of
materials and labor for
construction projects currently
in New Mexico.
ago. So if you think about that
from a from a project design
perspective, that means every
3.5 to 4 years, your project
costs double. Um, so if you're
taking you that long to scope
or, or develop your capital
stack, and you're actually, you
might not ever achieve that. So
what we're trying to do is get
the project moved forward and
upfront basis and like not, not
what the capital be the concern
to that. The next piece is, is
that we um are trying to uh uh
line as much as we can to where
the needs within the community,
where are the essential needs,
where
They either uh losing revenue or
have revenue capabilities where
they can maximize that or
something that's just essential.
I think that there's um the, the
hidden truth in infrastructure
is that deferred maintenance is
actually very expensive, um, and
that it costs a lot of money to
be poor. Um, those are two known
facts when you're talking about
infrastructure because the
reality is if you have systems
that are driving down your or
over overburdening your
operating systems in terms of
maintenance, um, and, and, and
lack of service for
communities, um, over time,
that's actually going to
continue to grow in that
situation will never get better.
So we're always trying to
identify what are those measures
where we can come in and
immediately make an impact in
the community, um, and then for
essential infrastructure needs,
um.
The other thing is, what's the,
what's, what's the future look
like? What's the, where are the
opportunities? I love the
discussion about broadband,
particularly around Middle Mile,
because we know that there's the
state's been very successful in
getting federal investment into
last mile causes, uh, but that
there's a missing link there
between long haul and last mile,
which is the middle mile, and
not just to have it connected
but have redundancy within these
systems have additional capacity
for growth is so essential, um,
and so that, you know, but a
utility like a, like broadband,
which it operates very similar
to like a telecom.
which has been around forever,
um, is actually a very
investable.
Public infrastructure.
Asset. It has been, it's one of
the oldest investable assets we
have in our country. And so
enabling these and and creating
those pathways where they can
actually drive more investment
into those is actually gonna be
really helpful.
Thank you. Um, I mean, I think
you covered it all,
thank you, uh, uh, and, um, I, I
just think that this is really
important, uh, we've, we've just
had such a hard time with um.
With getting a lot of the
projects done and really having
that um
Having that that entity come in
and and really step up, I think
is really important and that's
why I see you with our other,
um, our other assets, if you
will, in these partnerships are
going to be essential, um, as we
are building back.
Um, uh, our infrastructures and
really ensuring that we're in
particular with the broadband
too, uh, Mr. Chair, I knew you
were there, but we had the
broadband summit, was it about a
week, week ago. Um,
And that was really important to
hear this conversations how
people are all coming together,
but in all different realms, so
and then next door was the
infrastructure, uh, convention
as well, so going to some of
those conversations and really
seeing how uh Ryan, you're,
you're really integrating
yourself with, with what is
going on. So thank you for that,
but is
Where are we prioritizing
things, um, or what would you
say we need to prioritize
infrastructural through the
infrastructure, um.
Uh, issues we have for our
state, and that's my last
question.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, that's another
really great question. You know,
I think when, when you start to
look at the challenges we have,
I think you mentioned before, a
potential $2 billion deficit in
broadband infrastructure here,
um, the American Society of
Civil Engineers estimates about
$3 billion shortfall for
drinking water infrastructure
here in the state. We know that
there are capital, there's
capital available through
capital A process through other
state investments. We know
there's federal resources that
are coming out and that's
fantastic. This is
opportunity to really move the
needle on a lot of that. What I
would say, and I believe, uh,
Mr. Chair, you mentioned this
earlier is the, the, the way
that
That I would approach this if I
were looking at this is how do
we leverage the capital and the
resources that we have to enable
more monies to flow because
again, money is not a completed
project. So how do we leverage
what we have to drive additional
monies into these projects to
ensure they're fully capitalized
as well as maintained over time
and upgraded, um, but in
addition, how do, how do, how do
you kind of figure out what the
different needs are to offset
some of these costs because not
all infrastructure is created
equal, um, and there's a need to
match or there's, you know,
really need to envision how
we match the need to the
different sources going into it.
It's a little of a non-answer,
but that's how I would sort of
approach it.
Yeah, I understand. And for me,
Mr. Chair, that's like we, we
need to have that infrastructure
where the broadband in order to
for all the other infrastructure
pieces to really come together
as we're um moving towards some
of the, the bills we're going to
be seeing it with sight
readiness with with powering up
and with, you know, our EV
infrastructure and all those
sorts of things. I think that
it's, it's pretty vital, uh,
where a lot of our conversation
is gone today, so I commend you,
Mr. Chair, and all the work
you've been doing there and
others and, and, um, the house
as well with the broadband
initiatives and.
What we are really focusing on.
So thank you again and thank you
for the time. Thank you, Mr.
Chen. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative. Any other
comments from any other members?
I don't see any, so I have a
couple of just more comments,
but if you want to chime in, I
think that's going to be good.
So whenever I have an
opportunity to meet with the
University of New Mexico, and I
think we're going to try to have
myself in the president of the
university meet here pretty soon
on a couple of things, but one
of them is uh this, this
concept, everyone, this really,
I think, wonderful thing that
this university president, uh,
Doctor President Stokes has come
up with is called the grand
challenge. And how, how, and,
and obviously you don't want to
have too many grand challenges
because then you'll get none of
them done well, right? So I
don't know if there's a tier
system to the grand challenges,
but it seems to me like maybe we
could leverage all of the
brainiacs and all of the smart
and all the everything at the
university on some of these
things that we're talking about
on how to perfectly structure
something like a P3 piece of
legislation or whatever that we
can finally get accomplished
here in New Mexico.
And, and I don't, and it's one
of the things I intend to talk
to the president about when I
have an opportunity, um, to do
that, and it's been my schedule
too. We've been trying to
connect and all that. Uh, but do
you want to comment on that?
What would land on the grand
list of grand challenges that
the university would be willing
to invest time, energy,
wherewithal knowledge into. Is
this something that maybe they
would consider. So, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, first
of all, thank you so much for uh
raising the grand challenges
that President Stokes has put
into place. And quite briefly,
what
that is, is exactly what you
talked about some of the uh
complex public policy challenges
that we face as a state, um, are
not only complicated, but even
at a large uh institution like a
university, they crossed many
different departments, many
different parts of the
university. And the whole
purpose of the grand challenge
is to identify a specific goals
where we break our own silos
internally and we work on these
challenges across departments,
um, and that's also already had
a success of of drawing in much
more resources for the research
that goes towards these
purposes. So for the whole
committee, we'd be happy to, uh,
get you more information about
the 6 of those that exist, you
know, examples include, um, arid
environments and what it means
to be in a desert, a just
transition in an economy where
jobs are changing in the energy
sector. So to your point, um,
when you folks identify
challenges and stay in contact
with our leadership like you
said, I think that would be the
way to see how we
could fit in, um, initiatives
like the grand challenges that
meet the goals you're after and
um again, one of the goals is
exactly what you talked about,
is to bring in other partners,
which is part of what the P3
goal is and to bring in, uh,
different types of resources and
different revenue sources, which
again has succeeded to a certain
extent so far, and you may have
identified another area we could
look at.
Uh thank you, and I appreciate
that, and I, I'm trying, I don't
know all of the 6 of them that
are currently on the, on the
docket, but it's one of them
related to economic development?
for the state.
Uh, several of them touch on
economic development because for
example, um, one of them focuses
on um research and investments
in space technology, which, as
you know, can lead to a lot of
jobs. Like I said, another one
focuses on how as the energy
economy shifts, how do we have a
uh uh uh organized and
deliberate way of shifting jobs
that may not exist as much
anymore to jobs that will exist.
So I would say that I don't want
to guess, but out of the 6,
probably most of them.
you touch on aspects of economic
development, and if there were
ways that you wanted a deeper
focus on that, that would be
something worth all of us
talking about. Well, thank you.
I appreciate that, and that is
one of the things I intend to
talk to the president about,
which is, um, you know, and
again, P3s can be a dramatic
partner with economic
development. So it just seems to
me like we need maybe to
consider when the next iteration
of those come out. I will thank
you, uh, Mike for that on, um,
Ryan, I wanted to, you know, ask
you, as you look across
The country and you see
effective uh P3 models out
there. Is there something that
maybe we aren't thinking about
or something that we should be
thinking about on how better to
structure RP3 uh legislation or
or or how to structure it here.
Or are we doing something in
this legislation you heard about
today or others that, you know,
we're gonna turn and shoot our
left foot and then a few months
later turn and shoot our right
foot.
Because we're very good at that,
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you for
the, for the question. Um, you
know, I think
Across the country and, and this
is in part
What we see through my role with
sustainability partners and then
my past life working in large
scale disaster recovery, um, in,
in various states on the, on the
public side of things where, you
know, we're constantly trying to
figure out um what creative
financing we can bring in a, in
a recovery situation, which is
much more immediate need for
that. Um, uh, you know, for, for
P3 legislation where they tend
to be most helpful is where they
are, as Mr. Poy mentioned before
clarifying the rules of
engagement and
helping um everyone helping
entities understand what, uh,
what are the different rules and
responsibilities on, on, on each
side for the agreement. Um, I, I
haven't seen the legislation
and, and I'm sure the proper,
the rules being propagated will
clarify some of this, but be
very clear in what types of
infrastructure is, is sometimes
beneficial, um, in other, other
cases, you just kind of have to
figure what, uh what the needs
are for there, but trying to um
create transparency without
overburdening the process.
and then just creating a
different version of a
complicated procurement process
is sometimes where P3
legislations can sometimes fall,
uh, or falter, uh, for us as, as
our structure again as an
alternative to traditional P3
were procured in the traditional
way, right? So we're procured
through an RFP process were
procured through a cooperative
purchasing just the way that any
other goods or services would
be.
Um
One of the things that I'm
constantly working on for, for
our purposes, if you're bringing
innovation to the market, then
you have to do a lot of
education, right? So if we're,
we're responding to an RFP or um
a particular piece of
infrastructure, then it's our
job and responsibility to ensure
that it is known that
infrastructure is a service is a
slightly different model. So
what you're asking for is going
to determine what's get what
responses you get. And so, um,
create ensuring that um the
different
types of P3 models are eligible
in the legislation is going to
be cool, is key so that it's not
excluding innovation in the
market as well, um, because P3s
are constantly evolving, um,
typically to meet the needs of
the market and the local
communities and so um trying to
be inclusive rather than
exclusive in how you structure
it is important.
Appreciate that. And so as you
do continue to work with your uh
colleagues and partners around
the country. I hope that you'll
keep an eye on that for us
because we want, you know, why
reinvent the wheel if we don't
have to, right? If we see
something that works across
somewhere in the other part, in
another part of the country. We
want to learn from them.
We want to make that happen
here. Um, and then I'll just one
last question I have really, I
guess, um, you know, for Robert.
So
Do you find that there's greater
interest in how so originally
when the 5 or so years I was in
the one person, you know, what
kicking contest on this
legislation and boy was that
painful. Um,
I saw that sort of business was
sort of engaged then disengaged
and then re-engaged. I mean, so
it did the folks in the chamber,
are they seeing how this is
something that a a good P3
package could really help them.
I mean, are they willing to
stand up and sing at the top of
their lungs how important this
is and how they're ready to to
to participate in it. OK.
Mr. Chair, absolutely, and
that's one of the reasons why
I'm here today, the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce as the voice
of business is here to support
the idea of P3s fully and to add
an addendum, if I may, to uh Mr.
Mask's comments about your
question of what could be
considered.
Although the coalition building
element of of our execution of a
public-private partnership was a
bit of a heavy lift. It did
bypass an RFP process where
Where where we contract through
a government agency, and I think
when I'm, when I was talking
about the expediency through
which we can solve some
problems. If that can be done
with a more robust relationship
between a a contracting
government agency and a private
entity to execute that, that,
that could be one advantage for
speeding up.
of any number of P3s, um.
Where I think you still have the
accountability of a contract
with the government agency, um,
but whatever the public
investment is, comes through
that agency and um
And it's and it's, and in our
case, it was very specific to
what that program was, and if
there's a higher level of
specificity in the appropriation
stage that goes to a government
agency, I think we could see a
much faster execution of public
private partnerships, um, and
to, to reemphasize, I think
there are a number of our member
companies that would be
interested in pursuing P3s uh in
a similar manner to um
sustainability partners and
others um in sustainability
partners is a very
engaged uh member of the Chamber
of Commerce and so I, I think if
we can
Continue preaching the gospel as
we are today, uh, and promote
those opportunities. I think we
will see some growth in that
area, and I think part of it is
education, and that's something
that we can do, uh, as well as
you all, uh, I think we can play
off of each other's support to
promote these and educate all
stakeholders across the board.
Appreciate that. And so I guess
I do have an ask for you today,
and that is, um, if you can, and
I'd be happy to come over at the
next meeting that you have a
large meeting or whatever to
discuss it with the, the chamber
of members and and and all that
kind of stuff. But we do need a
lot more uh engagement from
All the chambers, but obviously
you represent the the state
chamber um today and then your
other in the various roles that
you've had. I was on your board
for 6 years when Governor
Richardson was in office and we
were talking about it then.
And that was a while ago. And so
we definitely need some, some,
you know, really large and large
uh loud sounding voices talking
through this and helping us
understand it better, and
helping members across, cause I
know you have members from
across the state, you know, I
hope that you're gonna ask them
to to sit down for coffee and
discuss why it's important and
what's what's going on with it.
Would you be willing to do that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, when
you were working on this with
the Richard, Richardson
administration that was a little
before my time, but I will
commit to you in grade.
Definitely
Not quite, uh, but not where I
am today. But in any case, I
will commit to you today um to
engage with our members in a
meaningful way to promote the
possibilities of P3s. Thank you,
and I'm happy, as I said, to
come and address your group at
some point before the session,
uh, because once the session
begins, it's a rodeo here. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'll take you up
on that. All right, well, thank
you very much Representative
Paetta has some follow-up.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. I,
I'm just curious about the angel
fire, uh, the meter program, the
water meter program, how many
meters did you put in and what
was the total cost of the
project?
Um, and lines. I get it. Chairs
representative, no great
question. So, uh, we're
replacing all of their meters,
uh, throughout the entire entire
community. um, I want to say
that that's uh in the
neighborhood of 2000 m, so
that's both on the residential,
commercial, and the production
meters for the, the snowmaking
machines, etc. So, um, wanted to
make sure that they had um
complete points of, of good
points of data for, for all the
different uh components. Um, the
total estimated construction
project for materials and
installation, um.
I don't have the exact number,
um, but, uh, you know, the, the
way that we operate is we, we
assume that upfront capital cost
for that and then we, we charge
the bass on based on a per meter
per month basis for the usage
of, of the meters and so, um,
you know, it was, it was several
million dollars for the full
construction costs and so when
you think about um like projects
for small communities that are
going through traditional
processes. If they make a
capital outlay request, they may
get.
A piece of that, um, but the,
the challenge with uh water
meter system is if you're only
going to replace a certain
number of meters and you keep
piecemealing that together over
years. By the time you get to
the last meter, you're usually
having to start back over and
get that. You never have the
full benefits of the project,
Mr. Chair, I'm very familiar
with the problems of water
meters in the north, let me tell
you, I, uh, but if you can do
that in 9 months, is the project
is completed in 9 months, and
you provided the financing for
that,
uh, that is correct. It's not.
Quite complete yet. We're,
we're, we're racing against uh
winter right now, uh, but we're,
we've got the last few because
part of the challenge in Angel
Fire was also some of their
meter cans needed to be replaced
as well, and they have a
specialized meter can, so that
extended the time frame for for
some of it. Uh, but yeah, we've,
we've got a similar project in,
in Zhao. Uh, we started the
project, uh, kicked it off in,
in summer for construction and
are now near complete, we'll
complete this month, um, on that
project as well and the
financing arrangement on that,
Mr. Chair, how does, would you
elaborate on that?
like a loan to the community and
then they pay you back.
Representative, yeah, so the way
it is, we provide the upfront
capital and we procure all of
the, the materials, um, and pay
for the installation as well as
ongoing maintenance costs and
software. We convert that into a
monthly usage charge then to the
community. So it's just, it's
basically like a utility bill,
it becomes an operating expense
instead of a capital expenditure
for the community. And so then
that just goes on as, as they
make the payment, that payment
includes the cost for uh all the
upfront.
Uh, capital that was needed for
that as well as we had, we build
maintenance reserves so that if
there's ever a challenge or an
issue with any of the meters,
then we can go ahead and and
account for that out of the
project as well.
And I guess my final question
is, did the, did their water
bills raise considerably with
the installation of that at the
local level, the residential
services. Mr. Chair
Representative, that's a great
question. Um, as it stands, uh,
they did not uh um have a rate
increase. And now the bills
would increase because you have
a more accurate meter, um, so
they're basically the residents
would just be paying for actual
consumption now uh with the
accuracy of it and we see this
with water meter projects all
across the country our number
one asset class.
That these projects are, are
almost in every case, revenue
positive for the community, um,
because they are the, the
increased revenue that they
achieved from that, um, from
that improved project actually
pays for the usage rate and then
some, in some cases, pretty
dramatically we've seen, um, for
example, we've got a large
project in Jackson, Mississippi
where we replaced their water
meters and they saw a jump of
50% revenue in the first month
of, of installation for the
water meters. So, uh, that's why
we
You didn't to start with us when
um when communities are, are in,
you know, interested in water
infrastructures we want to start
with where they're, where the
revenue loss may be, so that
that is 1st and 1st and
foremost, um, you know, uh, salt
as, as an issue for them. And
then you kind of work from there
into other issues because then
they can reinvest those revenue,
that extra revenue into other
improvements within their
system. So it stabilizes their,
their, their systems quite a bit
and worked closely with the uh
inimmeha and the water trespas.
Um, and, but it does take a 3
year period to, to, you know,
it's getting the grant ready.
It's, you know, and then, and it
has to be a very fair, very open
process when you're dealing with
government money, so
So that takes you and then it's
usually 50,000 for an
engineering study, and that
takes a year, and then they come
back again for the final
project, so I'm just saying, uh,
this could really
Really helped revolutionize uh
water problems in the, in the
rural parts of our state, Mr.
Chair. It's a, it's a huge deep
problem and I've heard estimates
of 8 billion, 16 billion. Nobody
even knows. I mean, it's up
there to fix water
infrastructure in the state. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think you representative, and
then, of course, a 36 month plow
through the cost, you can't even
predict the increase in the
cost. I mean, look what just
happened to us overnight in some
areas, so, uh, any other
comments, questions?
Oh
All right. Thank you all for
presenting today. We really
appreciate you.
All right. I think that that
pretty much does it. Um, I want
to thank also Senator Pinto for
joining us today. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, no, just, just,
just, yeah, um, and so we're,
uh, I think, done for the year.
Thank you all very much. Uh,
we'll work with the, the
committee staff and then also
NMFA on the legislation that we
adopted today to make sure we
give you direction on who's
sponsoring who and who's on
first, who's on second. All
