Warning thank you very very much
to all of you that came back
again today
and also to our presenters thank
you marquita and thank you our
vice chair of our colonious
infrastructure board we're going
to start with item number eight
on two day september tenth that
is update on the colonial
infrastructure board and the
colonial infrastructure project
fund we have marquita russell
a ceo i'm sorry secretary to the
colonious infrastructure board
we have our vice chair that'll
be joining us today as well in
place of mary k papen chair of
the colonials and for
infrastructure board all right
please take it away
good morning mr chairman and
thank you very much for having
us today and I am very much
appreciate sec- the vice chair
janice backer arguably for
joining us this morning she's um
this is her first time
presenting to the the colonial's
board and she represents the
area of san antonio which is the
furthest north colonia that we
have a new mexico so she
understands first hand what it
is to to be part of our live in
or near a colonia so i'm just
gonna take you through the the
program itself the statute and
sort of how the program works
how the board works and then
leave some time at the end uh
any additional comments or
questions for our vice chair but
I will be speaking from the
presentation materials that have
been handed out to you I think
many of you have heard much of
this presentation before but the
colonial infrastructure board
was um created in the likeness
of the water trustport solely
for colonials and to allow for
infrastructure development in
those areas where they're lacked
a basic decent infrastructure so
it was created in two thousand
and ten and we began operations
in two thousand and eleven um a
colonia is a rule community with
a population of twenty five
thousand or less that's located
within a hundred and fifty miles
north of the united states
mexico border.
And so you know there's a little
art for some of the so not
everyone goes as far as north as
um san tonio but that is of
course the forevist north we go
colonial communities according
to our statute have to have been
an existence prior in nineteen
ninety and they needed to have
been designate itself by the
municipality where the county
the act allows us to use funding
for water wastewater solid was
disposal roads housing and flood
control um and what you'll see
is that the majority of our
funding goes to both water and
the reds slash flood control
there's a lot of roads down and
uh southern new mexico that wash
out every time it rains that i'm
and so you see more of our
funding going to those on page
three you'll see that we have
the twelve member colonial sport
there and that we receive an
airmark of four percent of the
senior separate tax bond
proceeds
so you'll see at the bottom
there that short to date we've
made two hundred and eighty
seven point six million dollars
of awards and that does not
include twenty million dollars
roughly that we're about to
award next week that the
application system was broken
into two because there were not
enough entities that qualified
for the funding because they did
not have they've not completed
their audit for the most part so
as a result we had more funding
than we had demand so we for the
second year in a row much like
the water trustport we did our
rewards in two separate tranches
so the second one takes place
next week which brings us to
about three hundred and eight
million dollars over the
thirteen year period.
The the board itself which is on
page four is comprised of seven
voting members which are the
cabinet secretaries of dfa and
the environment department there
and myself and I service the
secretary of the the colonial
sport and that there are four
members then appointed by the
legislative leaders so the
senate protem
has appointed merry k people
the minority leader of the
senate appointed the vice chair
jammos back at argument speaker
of the house appointed how say
louis and the minority leader of
the house appointed rebacker
down there are also five
advisory members they are non
voting members and they are the
executive directors of the three
cards that colonials are
located in so that the self
central council of government's
jamie ho the south west council
of governments which is personal
lusado and the southeast new
mexico economic development
direct district door batista
also the executive directors of
the new mexico counties who is
currently joyous barson and the
mortgage finance authority is
there are not this so those are
the members that represent the
board i'd note that what makes
this board very well sort of
unique in the in the boards at
mfa overseas is that it does
have that non voting membership
and they are white active in the
board process so in these boards
when you get these appointments
you know a cabinet secretary
consent a design but these
legislative appointments count
so they either have to find time
in their schedules to donate to
dedicate to this process or to
this cars and that can be very
difficult for for working folk
so that is in we end up relying
a lot on the design these of the
sport as well as these non
voting members so a lot of the
work.
Um is done largely by some cards
i'm on page five or just go
through we have two committee
structures that we use we have a
project review committee and
that looks at all the
applications that come through
and makes recommendations and
that we have a policy committee
and that is the one that's
responsible for how these
projects are prioritised so they
are separated no one voice has a
bigger save than the other
policy committee helps determine
the criteria and the the the way
in which they are evaluated the
application procedures and and
the other thing related to how
the awards are made and the
project review committee so we
look at projects and whether or
not they should be amended at
any point.
Um I will turn it to page six
very quickly the board much much
like all the other mfa boards
that we oversee there is a
advisory board or kind of an
adjunct board in this instance
the colonial sport that is
responsible for selecting and
pro work ties in projects and
then the finance authority does
the financing and so there is
that two step process so this is
exactly what happens here the
bought duties of the colonial
sported promote the rules and
set evaluation pro origination
criteria and other policies they
look at any requests for
reconsideration and they serve
on the project management team
and then the finance authority
simply does the grants and loans
and determines any other
conditions we oversee the grants
and we report on the financing.
On page seven um i'll just hit
very highly the
eligible projects are really
broad capital outlet projects
which include those six that I
talked about earlier
but it also just relative to
housing dismentions and that's a
very hot topic these days we
can't do vertical construction
we can only do the
infrastructure related to
housing and so in many instances
that will stop right at the
the property line because most
communities done in these areas
have not put together their
affordable housing act plans and
so they can't go further than
the property line if in fact
they've done their
their affordable housing act
plans there is a way to get them
closer
get them connected to the house
but most of these are an
unincorporated areas and really
aren't part of a more formal
governance.
Um and as I mentioned earlier
eligible applicants are county's
minicipalities we get a lot of
mutual domestics and any other
political subdivision of the
state
one of the waste of the fight er
the colonial's board as well as
water transport and others
operate is that we require some
conditions of funding so they're
the projects that come through
and go into payg for you off um
when the projects come through
there is a certain level of
requirement to apply and then
there's another set of readiness
to actually move forward with
the graph so they'll have to
have to hit two different
hurdles the first hurdle is
really what we need to evaluate
a project we would we give extra
credit if they've got a planning
document but it is not required
much like water trustport
actually requires a planning
document we don't actually
require a formal document with
the colonial board and so it can
take a little bit longer for
those to close but we do give
them four months to get that
together so if in fact they're
asking for construction only we
need to see that their plans and
specs have been completed and
accepted so there is a certain
level of readiness that we
require in order to move the
money we don't want to be giving
out awards and then having the
money stop install for another
eight months while they decide
to get but why they work to get
their design done or to get
their clearance permits and
clearance is done
we give them two years to fully
draw the funds and after that to
your period we then look to
start loan repayments so that's
there is no interest that a
crews during the two year
construction period because it's
a zero percent loan with a very
small administrative fee of
point two five percent so they
don't have any any interest
accruing anything that but after
that to your period we then set
the construction loan and we ask
them to start making payments
typically over twenty years the
loan represents ten percent of
the total award so it's ninety
percent grant and ten percent
loan in every instance.
Um there is a local match
required as well and in that
inst- if they don't have the
local match they can borrow the
local match as well but there's
a minimum of ten percent loan.
Um when you take it a page nine
to talk about the funding we've
made to date and how quickly
were able to spend cause that's
really the important part we
have good projects but if they
can't get done if they can't get
completed it's not very much
help so just to take you to um
fiscal year twenty twenty
because that's the oldest award
we have outstanding
and we have one product er
you have one well three projects
that are being completed one
still in construction and the
other two are finalizing um
some of that last minute close
out of construction twenty
twenty one got a slower start
largely due to the pandemic then
have difficult it was to get
projects out there so we still
have eight open projects we have
expended roughly eighty percent
of the funds but only seventy
five percent of the projects are
completed so we still have a few
strugglers there
i'll bring your attention to a
twenty twenty two and twenty
twenty three we've got a big
asterisk there because there are
um
projects that can't move forward
because the usda won't consent
to that ten percent loan so if
they've taken out some awards
from usda usd requires a long
component in a grant component
they lock out their ability to
get additional funding and less
in this instance they go up to
washington to get the approval
and new mexico doesn't have the
current level of staffing or the
I think there's a certification
process they have to go through
to allow for them to make their
decision at the local level so
folks have to submit a fairly
detailed list of readiness to
state office which they then
sent to the national office and
wait for approval we made those
awards some of them back in may
of twenty two and they've not
yet been able to get that award
so I would just note that some
of these things when we try to
layer as much funding as
possible with federal dollars.
We run into these issues fairly
often so that two things that
stop us from being able to move
quickly with colonious awards in
particular but also water trust
board the first is the um the
executive order from two
thousand and thirteen which were
quite that they have their audit
in place and the second is this
usd funding we can wait two
years before before they're able
to get that award if they're a
city we can work around it
because cities have something
other than a rate base to to
pledge but if there are mutual
domestic they're going to get
stopped in their tracks and they
just have to work through that
process so just wanted to
highlight that because we're
seeing it be a bigger and bigger
problem and you'll see back to
twenty twenty two we would love
for those that they had all the
other reading is to proceed back
in twenty twenty two or they
wouldn't be on the list
we would have we would have
pulled the funding by that point
but because it's usda and
outside of their control we
allowed them to continue and we
so despite that four month
readiness to proceed period usda
we give them a pass until
they're able to get that done
because that really isn't
something they can control so I
just wanted to highlight those
cause you'll see that that is
stopping a lot of projects for
moving forward and you know we
expect this year to be similar
that we'll still see a couple of
them are unable to do that so
they will have passed all their
executive orders by the time
they get to this point they will
have completed all of their
other readiness to proceed it
will have completed their you
know permitting process and
everything else but usds
stopping them and I don't need
to call out local staff because
look at the local state folks
have been doing what they can
they're just in a predicament
but it is a problem that is
growing in intensity
but otherwise you'll see that we
are generally moving that money
very
expeditiously
and then the last thing i'll
notice just the timeline.
Unlike the water trustport this
doesn't this process can start
in january we don't require any
additional approvals as we do
with the water trust board
so we're able to start that
application training in late
january and go through basically
the same steps that you would
with the water trust board were
able to
make the awards in a may by the
colonial sport and then in the
board finance authority board of
proof those in june we try to
offset them from the water trust
board by a month just for
staffing purposes we have the
same staffing team for the water
trustport in the colonia so
we've got a mind policies and
practices all the way down so
that are it's easier for our
clients and for our staff so we
try to work that is sufficiently
as possible and there's almost
no way that we could have the
water transport and colonials
come forward in the same month
and keep our staff to be honest
particularly with the dollars
that you've been seeing
and so with that mister chairman
I don't know if you have
questions for us if there's
anything um that the vice chair
would like to add thank you for
your presentation and I would
like to extend to the board vice
chair and if you tell us exactly
your business well know who you
are but just for the record uh
name and business and then also
you know
what is your perception of how
the direction is going with this
particular board I mean we've
been doing everything we can to
short up so please take it away
no you know the the funding
that's provided for the
colonials infrastructure program
is a very important and very
hell helpful to all these rule
communities
speaking personally up in two
thousand and eighteen san
antonio had that big flood and
now with the colonious many we
were able to add apply and get a
funding to do a flood control
and that's in the process now
and it looks like it's gonna
help us cause it was a very
scary yeah.
Incident
the three eighty was just a like
a role rolling river you know
during that time in a lot of feb
fields and housing
redestroyed by the outflood but
up in these other
communities at the two years
that i've been on the board i've
seen a tremendous
things happening
you know in damning and up I
scruce this area oh
live in a county it's just stow
very helpful the funding in it
and i'm i'm sure that it and i'm
positive that the people in
these rural communities are very
very up thankful
well thank you and we have your
name for the record already but
can you tell us about your very
proud of your your part in new
mexico history
while I murden a spocker argue
right on the fourth generation
owner of the albarant coffee in
san antonio new mexico
it's been in business for eighty
years and just recently we were
awarded the best ranchery
cheeseburger and bescreen chile
from channel thirteen
we're happy and i'm making my
mom proud absolute the many many
awards that you and your family
have received I know that's just
one of them and you know we have
a big old fish fight in my
family over which burger we
prefer and my family prefers
your burgers to see you know
yeah thank you appreciate that
alright so I think we do have
some questions we'll start with
rep d l c
rep dlc harris is that okay if
we call you that a
representative they look crews
everybody nice and live downtown
sakara thank you chairman I just
received a hat that says a b l c
so thank you
baseball had
miss chairman marketer.
The the creation of a colonial
well let me back up a little bit
the
idea and the creation and
establishment of colonia is out
of federal creation.
Mr chairman it's a federal
designation that they are
obviously created by different
circumstances but the the the
concept of a colonia is one that
was done but by the by the
federal government
was german market so.
The colonials that we have the
hundred plus that we have the
president cabansey this is a
colonial was a state that did
that right
mister chairman you have their
locally designated so the city
or the county designates them as
a colonial they say that these
conditions you know that they
blacked decent water
economic development roads sit
sound safe sanitary conditions
and then that those conditions
have existed since at least
nineteen ninety so that's the
designation that the fed's use
we adopted that and statute when
it was when the law was passed
so as german then it's a it's a
partnership between the state
and the feds are correct mr
chairman we don't partner with
the fed's formally we used to
have a little more partnership
with them in terms of funding
projects but we actually found
that it was slowing up their
funding as well as hours going
out because of the conflicting
requirements um but there but
this program really mirrors a
federal program the colonious
awards of the usda operates
mischairman market this may not
be your wheel house but if if
there is a need to create a new
colonia would you your office
have a not a hand in that orders
it's separate from your
operation mr chairman is
separate from our operation I
know that colonials are being
added to there are new
designations being made so the
condition had to have existed
since the late since mid late
eighties early nineties but the
designation can happen now so
there has to be some
documentation that shows that
that that the conditions were
existing at that time and then
they can go through the process
I know that several of the
council of governments have
helped to get many of those
projects designated more
recently
mister this may not again not be
in your area of expertise but
should the need arise like where
we're talking earlier that san
antonio is the for this north.
Northern colonia
who would who would be able to
expand that and I again I don't
know if you can answer that
mischairman i'm not sure who can
write that's an important
question because we both have a
location district that's part of
me so that it's been problematic
for years when
congressman heine rick before he
was a senator we invited him up
to party to mesa to help us
extend that boundary and we
never got any movement on the
but it continues to be a problem
to this day so I I still think
it's an issue that we need to
consider because certainly the
county has done berlier counties
and quite a bit to bring some
infrastructure to party thomas
are but certainly doesn't have
the resources to be able to
levers which you do market or
what may be available at the
federal level and so I just get
a little frustrated with that
marketer because it's spent a
long long standing problem and
we are not able to extend it so
that it would go to berlio
county.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you representative and you know
on that point I don't normally
do this but I personally made an
effort with legislative
legislation to change that it
has been an extremely difficult
step and I think that we should
definitely open that up again
if you tour the area we have
done the two of you and I both
worked very hard to bring
services to that area and you've
done a lot when you were a
county commissioner so thank you
for all of that effort but we do
need to revisit that and so
maybe we go to this board one
more time and figure out if you
guys can get behind this because
but it doesn't matter where you
live in new mexico if you live
in a colonia then you should
receiving access to this fund uh
it's just my two cents alright
so will go now to vice chair
on that point
okay well come to the vice chair
garrett
thank you mister chair and thank
you I I just had to repeat we
can never get enough education
because as we're here longer we
understand more I just have two
questions mr chair the first is
auditing assistance that comes
up a lot with different boards
does animal be provide
assistance or their other
entities in state government
that can help address that when
local organizations simply don't
have the capacity or the funding
mr determined that is not
something the finance authority
does
the state auditor has make it
been making greater strides to
help the smaller communities
because of course there's been
some significant delays in
getting funding out the door
what happened when the first
that executive order happened in
two thousand and thirteen a lot
of systems that had been sort of
delinquent in their audits
started to take it very much
much more seriously and it took
them a while to get to more
compliant state so you sign
after a several year period that
the executive order had the
intended effect of bringing
people back into compliance but
then covered hit and so we
started went back to two
thousand and thirteen so within
about a ten year period we
improved and went right back
down to the state we were at.
Getting auditors out these days
if you heard yesterday and and
has have heard otherwise they're
very difficult to get out and
many of these communities uhm
just are many many years behind
and so that makes it difficult
but the state auditor has been
trying to work on that I don't
know more than that though
thank you maybe you have to get
auditor apprenticeships
wouldn't last question is on the
usda issue.
How is there a way that are
federal delegation or their
people that can help speed that
out when we are the other that
we need to get on board
mister chairman we've had a
conversation with a members of
the delegation it really is were
unusual most states have that
authority at the state level we
simply don't have that and so
there are enough there we don't
have either the requisite number
or the requisite training or
certification to make those
determinations at the state
level and so it goes to the fed
so they are kind of stimute they
don't quite understand why
there's a delay because when you
talk to them they say it's a
state issue and but it's very
clearly not a state issue when
you don't have that authority
locally
so mr chairmarketed so then we
need to get the state authority
for the new mexico based usda
officers is that what we need mr
chairman yes they need to get
someone certified so that
they're able to make those
determinations at the state
level thank you
all right thank you a matter
vice chair representative chat
field.
Thank you mister chairman.
Marketing in my never ending
quest which is
probably um frustrating to the
people trying to teach me
learning the
funding streams on off all this
money
four percent of the scene of the
senior severance tax bonds.
What is how much it is the total
of the senior
severance tax bonds
the total seven tax bonds I know
that
what transports and nine percent
or it has been uh so senior
severance tax bond what are they
and and what is the total that
they receive
mr chairman the the severance
tax bonds will vary it's based
on the capacity based on the
taxes that come from the
severance of tax and oil it's
what funds your capital outlay
as well and so that number will
very there's a fairly
complicated comp calculation
that's done to determine the
amount of bonds that are issued
each year and our determination
is made as a january I think
fifteenth we get the the current
designation as of january
fifteenth I don't know the
amount and I would like to not
do math in public if they could
but it's a the dollars have been
growing substantially as you've
seen on page
three there you can just see
that that amount
has been growing from about
twelve million in twelve in two
thousand and twelve two thousand
fourteen up to what's going to
be in sixty six million mid
sixties for the last two years
so my question are with chairs
is not what is severance tax
bonds and how much are they my
question is what is senior seven
several stack monies that just
refer to all of them what is
senior service how do they
different how are they different
from just severance tax months
mr chairman i'm sorry so that
the senior indicates the
bondline that are the state
board of finance goes through so
there is the general set of
bonds that are issued the first
primary set are senior bonds
after that there's additional
capacity that they may soak up
in other ways they used to be
notes and that the capacity that
follows that's what goes to psfa
in other areas and then.
There's additional uh
distributions but it's it's the
primary set of bonds that are
issued by the state board thank
you that that is
that's what I do need to
understand thank you very much
thank you representative okay
we'll go to senator or that he
is
thank you mister
just quickly
first I want to say thank you
market and this nice lady for
your work um just a to mention
that ever since the since the
legislature ear marked the four
percent for colonia's and tribal
communities the tribal
infrastructure fund also gets
four percent by the way um can
the same scenario
I have actually seen how things
have improved so much in in this
area's now specifically we're
talking about colonials but you
know in doing something like
this we actually help not only
people in general with better
water you know cleaner air
better environment over all more
adequate roads for people to
come in and now we help the the
work for us because people can
come in and out with good roads
they're more incentivised to to
get to work when they don't have
this big pot holses biggers i've
seen in actually like kitchen
sinks their huge and just a lot
of work that needs to be done
and I think that the state
really makes up the finding that
we are mark from these them
several's tax bonds we make it
up by having cleaner in
healthier people less health
care costs and happy your
families overall it reverberates
into this big past that is even
you know healthy your family
relationships when you have less
drops in your uh you know you
can go get water and and then
you're not breathing in all this
das to because another
pollutions in the air and sign
so I just wanted to to mention
that mister chairman I hope that
we can continue to one not only
to to have this employees but to
argument the year.
The services that we provide
thank you mister chairman okay
thank you very much senator
representative mother.
Money and everybody take a
chairman of market I need to ask
a question i've been working
with
the component as infrastructure
portion on the waste warrant in
my community and it's a big
pirate project room number one
on this project and we've been
hitting the walls and the walls
are
one we have in that in the
darning and aside we had a
scenario there was a
macro or run the sun apart
and it took all of what we had
established to be ongoing is
shop around for the wastewater
implementation and they did a
corner of a mile and it's gone
dead.
And i've asked numerous people
there was funding that helped to
work recoup that was close to
nine million dollars it was good
ready to get turned back and
they reached out to the board
and they did me the favorite
preserving that for us but the
issue comes to the point of i've
got two callies and they have
come to an understanding that
they'll work together and turn
it over to one county
but at that point it's a rare
star
neither one of them are doing
diligence of trying to come to
the m o u agreements and what
i'm concerned is we're going to
lose this one it would not
capitalize and on the funding to
be put in its place and I got to
see it from a perspective of the
counties is that one counting is
absolving itself from much of
the responsibility that for oz
to the other side the other side
is willing to take it on because
it is capable of taking on what
the population at this time is
to an existing facility
everything's in his place
but what do I gotta do to get
this black smooth over
particularly the more you cause
now that's where it's all
binding on the terms of how the
how that money is going to work
and in the set of star over a
year right now i've gone on a
year.
So mr chairman I apologize that
I don't have a direct answer for
you representative which is
I know that there is been a lot
of wastewater funding made
available for done yet a county
and I know that shop at all was
one of the ones that received a
pretty large award over the last
couple of years i'll have to
look and see what's particularly
holding that up but generally
speaking we need to know that
once the projects complete it's
going to be maintained by an
entity that has the where with
all to do that and so it sounds
like the one of the key issues
is not necessarily how you're
going to construct the project
cause that's probably the easier
of the two things to do but then
maintaining it over its useful
life of twenty plus years so
that would be my first guess and
I you know I don't know that the
finance authority of the
colonial sport has the ability
to go in and and bring that to a
resolution but if you think we
can help we're certainly welcome
to willing to go down and sit
with a parties and see if we can
get something worked out.
Uh mister chairman margaret I
think that's an excellent idea
suggestion I know this is
probably a law off topic and
needs more depth to be discussed
but please are in the months
remaining i'd like to get this
ironed out a little bit so it
doesn't help start by the new
year they can continue cause
this is not about having not the
money this is about running the
money through the process of
to the right identities and that
we're going to find out what the
problems are so we can help more
or do it so I appreciate it
that's the only question I have
and I think you offer what you
do for us in the state welcome
to chairman
all right thank you very much
representative any other
comments from members.
Ok so I most of my stuff was
asked and answered here I think
the bottom line is I have the
same concerns that are
representative delicates as and
I I said you know I personally
tried this and attempted to open
up the gates a little bit here
because we do define these areas
in our state and we have to find
a creative way to get this done
I know that there's going to
have to be some federal
congressional action here but I
guess I would charge the board
and ask the board since you have
come to lesson want to present
what have you if you would put
an agenda item on your agenda
stating that we would like to
either have a resolution from
your board or what have you to
the federal delegation to make
this change at the federal level
so that's easier for us to do it
here at the state level the only
thing that stop me from getting
this done that year that I
attempted this was the federal
designation.
So I don't know I don't want to
volunteer representative a
cruise enable will happen the
old mobile and will show up at
the the next board meeting where
you're going to discuss this
i'll be happy to drive over and
he can drive back and and then
we'll stop somewhere in the
middle and have a great you know
cheeseburger at the al cafe on
our way back so
and a good time will be had by
all trust me this dude can have
really fun times i've been with
that been around him you know so
anyway so thank you very much
for your presentations today it
was extremely informative and
helpful thank you very much.
Okay committee we're just
busling through here I do want
to give senator pinto and
opportunity to introduce herself
she was not with this yesterday
so i'll give the mike over to
you sender
just use me thank you mister
chairman to commit the amsterdam
to shadow pinto I represent the
strict three to be here supposed
to be here yesterday but had a
other things to do but think you
would think you for your
presentation.
Okay thank you very much senator
and welcome alright so we're
gonna keep moving gang we have a
couple of more things to get
done here and then we'll wrap up
we are going to combine just for
the information of the committee
we're gonna combine items number
nine and ten you are receiving a
deck in front of you right now
that has I believe both pieces
of information and updates and
we're going to ask marquita and
her team I think it's market and
her team are a teller and and
we're going to do update on the
behavioral health capital fund
and the primary care capital
fund very very hot better the
issues right there so thank you
very much for the work you're
doing there and then also item
number ten update on the child
care facility revolving loan
fund so let's go ahead and jump
right in there take it away
market thank you mister chairman
and and while the representative
of get seated all nothing
yesterday those two pipes that
were shown to by the woman from
truth of consequences that is a
project that the colonials is
funding a part of the other
parts being funded by the water
transport so sometimes we do
leverage some internal sources
to get major projects done cause
that combined received twenty
million dollars last year so
just to note that we do some
stuff locally and and in a
coordinated fashion even so
thank you today so over the last
two meetings you have heard
about our largest programs the
infrastructure programs the ppr
the water trust board yesterday
you heard about the drinking
water program and today the
colonies infrastructure those
are the four largest programs
operated by the finance
authority we have a couple of
economic development programs in
between and then we have these
which are relatively long
standing programs which have not
gotten much airtime nor a lot of
capital applied to them so just
wanted to give you a sense of
what those were so ryan and I
will be speaking from this um
dec I will go through just the
basics of where some of this
came from an alternate to ryan
to then go through the work
she's been doing after um senate
bill four twenty three was a
both endorsed and passed by the
legislated by this group.
A couple of years ago um and
senator rodriguez got that built
done
so the programs i'm talking
about of the primary care
capital sunday just turn you to
page three that was established
back in nineteen ninety four so
it is the second program that
the legislature asked the enemy
to operate so it's a very long
standing program when folks that
we just got created for
infrastructure I turn you to the
fact that the second program
that was authorized by the
legislature was in fact the
primary care capital fund
then in two thousand and three
senator lopez past the child
care facility revolving loan
fund the intent I believe was to
expand childcare in new mexico
unfortunately the weight now
that we're kind of in it with a
very active program we've noted
some things that probably could
get updated and made a more
useful for actually expanding
trial care creating new child
care funding
centers this really isn't
very
well suited to that and then on
the heels of that the behavior
house capital fund again which
was created in the likeness of
the primary care capital fund so
those were the three programs
are that we asked you all to
allow us to use working capital
to allow the funds to be used
for working capital that bill
senate bill for twenty three
past the legislature last year
and much to the hard work of a
senator rodriguez and so they
have now we're now completing
the rule changes that were that
came as a result of that we
still don't have a lot of
capital in this program so we've
taken our time a little bit as
we did other things that the
finance authority but we're now
at that point of establishing
those um
I think I know it since since
ryan whose are policy and
capital strategies is in charge
of implementing the changes from
four twenty three could I turn
it to you
sir so unslide forward as
following on some of the
additional changes introduced by
senate bill for a twenty three
so in
Health capital fund and primary
care capital fund and the child
care revolving loan fund all
three of those program
frameworks now on a at the
statutory level look a lot more
similar um
first the behavioral health and
and primary care capital fund on
so uh set a bill for a twenty
three transfer of the rule
making for those programs from
the department of health to the
animal fa were currently in the
process of establishing those
rules and also policies that
will be approved by the unimfa
board on we're also consulting
with our partners at both the
health care authority in the
department of health arm on
those rural frameworks but that
makes it relatively more
efficient for us from an
administrative person
perspective to promulgate those
rules and policies ourselves on
said it build four twenty three
provided that animal fait could
recover on our for full actual
costs for administering you to
these programs on historically
we actually ended up
operating those programs that an
operate in the long term it on
operating loss on because funds
were reverted back to the
general fund while we were still
monitoring and servicing loans
and those programs so this just
provides us some operating
protection to be able to recover
the actual cost of administering
those programs.
The primary car capital front
from the outset allowed for
contract for services so that
allows and that allows for
and in the policy currently up
to twenty percent of the
original loan amount on can be
on forgiven if the nonprofiter
public provider of primary care
services are demonstrates that
it's serving uh patience in need
and that's something that or
pertinent agencies verify and
certify for us on a on a
quarterly basis so senate bill
four twenty three introduced
that that capability are so into
the behavioral health capital
fund that we can also provide
for one forgiveness via
contracts for services with
those providers on and there
were some additional uh
technical changes that were made
by senate bill four twenty three
and mr trimmer just on that
point um we used the word
forgiveness in our loan program
but to be very clear it's
actually a sort of an income
repayment so we are using
quantifiable services provided
to indicate and medically
medically indigent patience as a
source of repayment so it's
forgiven from a long perspective
but it's but it's actually
repaid through services that are
quantifiable and are reported on
so I wanted to make sure that's
a concept that sometimes
triggers some reactions and I
wanted to make it very clear
that that's a just from a
technical perspective we forgive
it alone but it's actually
repaid another way and I wanted
to make the other slight nuance
that the primary care capital
fund explicitly provided for
contract for services where in
the behavior health capital fund
it was implied but not explicit
so it actually had us as it as a
one of the responsibilities we
had was monitoring the contract
for services agreement but it
didn't explicitly provide that
we could do contract for service
so that a lineman of statute was
really important because it was
very clear that the duties were
the same.
There was an expectation but it
was implied and not explicit
than we wanted to make certain
that it was clear to all parties
reading it that they were a
similar programs and so that
that technical change was very
important to us apologize for.
The.
Sure and on the next slide
should I just go ahead and give
an overview of our on the
programs okay and just
go a little bit deeper than
marquita's introduction of of
these three programs so the
primary care are capital fund on
the second oldest program and mf
created in nineteen ninety four
it's making loans at a three
percent fixed interest rate are
to non profit in later through
an amendment in twenty nineteen
publicly owned our primary care
clinics we administer that
program with the department of
health they basically verify the
eligibility of projects and also
a responsible for monitoring uh
the care and programmatic
quality of those care providers
and mfa structures and executes
the loans and then monitors
those loans for financial
compliance and as market explain
so up to twenty percent of that
loan amount on can be covered
for in kind first services
provided on to the targeted
targeted client all in this case
a rural and medically
underserved communities.
Slide six just shows you the the
history of the program there are
still a three the last three
loans listed here are currently
the only outstanding loans the
program was initially
capitalized with nine million
dollars on uh
about nine point seven has was
reverted to the general fund are
because it's a revolving loan
fund the program was able to
deploy just over or nearly
twelve and a half million to
twenty different projects are in
nine different counties
throughout throughout the state
and this program currently has
no funding available to deploy
or to finance any additional
projects in the primary care
space.
And slide seven just shows you
an example of the two million
dollar project this one was
completed in two thousand eight
it's been paid off and it was
for the expansion and renovation
of a hospital's house located in
last crucials.
The.
Iron slide eats so an overview
of the behavioral health capital
fund on this one was created ah
ten years after the primary care
capital fund and actually are
operates fairly similarly in
this case we're partnering now
with the health care authority
on which is the department
this responsible for determining
eligibility of projects and
monitoring the care providers
and i'm afar structures the
loans are executes them and then
monitors those for financial
compliance the terms on these
loans are very similar we offer
the financing at three percent
fixed interest rates on this
program was capitalised
initially with two and a half
million and you'll see on slide
nine on over the the life of the
program it has finished more
than five million dollars in
projects are eat different
projects across six different
counties and for them are are
are still outstanding and
current on the program actually
has roughly five million dollars
five sorry half a million
dollars of capital available to
learn and I spoke with
our lending officer regarding
this capital available and asked
why it hadn't been deployed yet
and his response was that
actually most projects he's
seeing just have a a capital
need that's greater than half a
million so this amount that's
available is just insufficient
for the project pipeline that
he's he's currently seeing.
Side turn and example of a
project that was done in two
thousand nine for roughly half a
million dollar loan amount this
was refinancing the construction
of a facility for
a service provider based in
santa fe
supporting on new mexicans
experiencing trauma
providing medical legal and
educational and so I got there a
few dick support.
I'm in last but not at least the
the most recently created per
in two thousand three the child
care facility loan acts created
the child care revolving loan
funds on at the end of
this program also offers
financing at a three percent
fixed interest rate for projects
and similarly we work with a
partner in this case it's was
formally the cyfd now that early
childhood education and care
department on that department is
responsible for on verifying
project eligibility and then
mm's playing the technical role
on structuring and executing
loans and monitoring their
financial compliance on this
program actually historically
only one project was completed
on side twelve you can see the
staff shot of what that project
look like on it was a fifty
thousand dollar loan to help a
home boost child care center in
last crucials expand and that
was actually the only project
that was completed due to the
capitalization in the fund on we
recently received an additional
appropriation and are working
with eccd were able to one side
uh thirteen our board just
approved last month
on our latest project to be
financed by this program it is a
new five star full time you're
round licensed child care
provider
in two come carry on the five
hundred and fifty thousand
dollar loan will be refinancing
the acquisition and i'm helping
them complete a building
renovation on this project
actually had been on hold for
nearly two years because they
didn't have sufficient and funds
to complete it also due to cost
over runs so we were able to
leverage on some of the the
funding in this program to help
this project advance
and we are currently working
with ecd so.
On distinct from the primary car
and behavioral health
governance framework I ecceded
still responsible for
promulgating the rules for this
program so they're in the
process of doing that we're
we're speaking with them about
it on they are looking to
really
make this program as accessible
as possible to providers that
are licensed and also in good
standing on as marquido looted
to the way the status statutor
start you lays out eligible
projects only licensed providers
and license facilities are
currently eligible on so that is
making it more challenging to
provide access to this financing
for new and start up providers
of childcare
easy cd is going to be
responsible for verifying
projects and they are also i'm
considering prioritising
providers uh serving state
subsidised clients and low
income families i'm consistent
with the statute on so we're in
the process of consulting them
on the rules that they'll be
promigating and also will be
updating our policy or a policy
framework on this fall on uh to
further deploy the capital left
on the fund and
mister chairman I would just
note a couple of other things
related to the chocolate
relative to the childcare
program this is actually a
program that had seen absolutely
no activities and we made that
first loan we lost the remainder
of the dollars so two hundred
thousand was reverted almost
immediately after we made the
loan to connie child care in los
crucials and so we had no
capital to lend fifty thousand
dollars over and eat your period
returns very little in terms of
interest and principle so that
money got repaired and fall and
then set back to the state so
all of the money from that first
trunk of funds went back to the
state we ultimately did that one
on based chocolate center it was
a great project though they did
after.
Non traditional hours for folks
at worked at night and so she
was able to add to a home based
center and entire room for
overnight career for those
children that need to care
outside of the typical sort of
seventy six time frame
we had been initially partnered
with cyfd who as you know has
many things on their plate and
the operation of a very small
loan pool just couldn't hit
their list of priorities which
we fully understood moving over
to eccd has given a lot of new
life to this particular
initiative and so while we had
targeted it several years ago
with you all I had said this is
a program we can eliminate it
seen no activity it it it sort
of
woke up is easy they had no idea
that this program was really on
the box and that we had the
capacity to partner and so we
have partner now with ecd three
times this is the most recent
one that one point seven five
million I think was targeted for
a different initiative but it
went to the fund went to this
fundamental web and now able to
both add to it we've put one
point one million of our own
capital into the program and the
that's allowed us to do the loan
that you just heard about to we
approved last week so we're
excited about the partnership
they have been very active a
very collegial and I expect
really good things to happen as
a result unfortunately even the
two point eight five million
isn't going to go very far so
we'll be able to share with you
some positive successes but they
will be limited and scope i'll
just need the ticket carry one
in particular will double the
capacity there is one child care
center currently operating and
took him carry this will be the
second one that's going to be
owned and operated by the same
provider which is made at the
the only way we were able to
make it possible under the
existing rules so we're excited
about that but mister chairman
with that we are happy to answer
questions on the primary care
behave or health care chocolate
programs.
Alright thank you both very much
these incredibly important
phones that you're you're
updating us on here at
representative of delicate.
Thank you mister german marketer
are these programs are
specifically for brick and
mortgage capital or are they
also for treatment healthcare mr
chairman initially the programs
were for brick and mortar
capital equipment the addition
of operating capital allows them
to hire
providers nurses so it's been
able to allow them to expand
their services on theoretically
we've just now done the one but
theoretically it will allow them
to expand their services because
working capitals very much
needed in television
imbursements can kick in
thank you so along that vein.
Can you give examples of some
programs or a program that
you're familiar with that is in
play now.
Mr chairman the projects well we
don't have much capital
currently at hand so the the
loans that we've done since
senate bill four twenty three
was passed where acquisitions
are facilities what we're seeing
particularly with the behavioral
health and and some with the
smaller primary care facilities
is that several of these that
are kind of corporate owned and
I don't mean to call any of them
out but in the smaller
communities corporate own
facilities are tending to
they're having a heart of time
staying staffed and what you're
seeing our doctors that used to
be part of those practices
wanting to start up their own
practice or be part of a
different kind of model um and
so acquisition of facility has
been really important to give
them the resources to get that
done um if we had more capital I
would expect that we would see
more of the sort of doctor run
facilities they were even sort
of I think they're called to see
three sups
they're very similar to employee
stock ownership programs but for
non profits so they are not
profit structured but there's
this other element to them
and we're seeing a desire for
more of those kinds of projects
so we would expect to see if
this were capitalised fully that
are capitalised at all we'd be
in a position to help some of
those uh.
Physicians start up their own
practices or stay in the
community with these kind of non
profit.
Clinics
and then the chalker would be
the second one that's the one
where I expect to see the is
easy has a real focus on
increasing the amount of quality
care that's available in the
state most of new mexico is a
child care desert there's
portions of albucker that don't
hit that but I think virtually
every other part of the state
does and so increasing the
amount of quality care is a
target for that
of for their department and we
would love to be a part of that
if we could get some capital and
the statutory change to allow
for start ups I think we'd be in
a position to really move the
needle a little because these
are very the clinton the chuck
your
providers in particular are very
difficult to finance their low
margin businesses people get
into this practice this business
because of their love for
children not because they wish
to make a million dollars from
it so you find that you have
very dedicated providers that
are just making it and just
getting by that doesn't
typically provide for a really
good bank long
and so they have to have a
critical size before they're
making enough money to really be
good candidates for bank ones
that's not a slam on the banks
it's just the nature of the the
kind of business and and the
requirements that banks are have
to fall under regulatory from a
regulatory perspective so we
were expect that we'd be able to
fund more of those kinds of
projects if these were
capitalized and if we had that
slight change to the statute
last determine I was intrigued
market or when you said that the
programs had to be quantifiable
what did you mean by that
mr chairman in order to qualify
for a contract for services
Sponsored legislation and we got
fairly far last year I mean it
got into the budget um but then
got out of the budget pretty
quickly but there was a sixty
million dollars
request for twenty five each for
the primary car and behave of a
health care you all endorse that
legislation last year mister
chairman sponsored it and then
ten million for the childcare
program but that would make that
would be that would take us
several years into a lending
process and what's important to
remember about these kinds of
programs is that you need to be
able to provide some
predictability projects don't
come out quickly they they have
to take some time to get
developed and for business plans
to say wow there's a capital
source let me get my my stuff
together that can't happen
within the year so I would note
that having a large amount of
money something that would go
more than one year allows
projects in your communities to
develop and access the funding
and so that predictability that
source of capital being there is
a really important part so we
were asked why we didn't ask for
a smaller amount and that's
because you just can't get the
money out in the year that's not
the way this these kinds of
programs work there a little
different than what a trust
border colonials cause they know
the money's coming they could
predict it it's an annual
funding this is very different
we need to be able to actually
market the program if you don't
have capital you're just waiting
for the when you actually happen
to have money and someone comes
by its very serendipotious but
it's not necessarily a planned
process and we don't know that
we get the best project we know
we get a good project but
whether we get the best project
funded we couldn't tell you.
I thank you mister chair thank
you marketer because I know
several of us are is.
Are open his run appropriations
and we want to support this and
frankly we're having meetings
now with house appropriations so
that we know about this now and
can start strongly advocating
for it so thank you for that
explanation that's all my
questions right now thank you
okay thank you very much out of
iced year senator of the
biggest.
Thank you mister chairman just
still a little bit of
information to elaborate on this
important thing that marquita
has been working on for awhile
and the legislature of
correspond I have to say that it
was all initiated by marquid as
usual you're creative mind
marketer thank you a few years
ago um we found ourselves with
these two funds for example the
primary care and the behavioral
health fund
authorized by the legislature by
virtue of statute but they were
intended for capital for example
bricks and mortar equipment as
marketer said and perhaps some
you know other forms of building
and even leases I think
sometimes because it can afford
to buy a building but the
buildings were sitting there
basically empty because a
building as we know doesn't
serve a purpose unless it has
the people in it to do the work
and how were we going to make
these two
ventures successful if we didn't
do something about it so
marketer came to me and sad you
know we really need to open up
the the statute.
In the language here and allow
for a different form of
authority I guess would be and
that would be for operational
support for example meaning to
hire staff and it in provide the
the operational support that's
needed to have a full are
operating at my community
venture I can't think of other
word but operators system here
and so it has worked well since
then the problem now is that
we're sitting there are now with
the buildings as we said earlier
and the potential to have the
staff fill these buildings and
do the work for the programs but
the finding isn't there so now
it's we had a three park need
there and now that third one
which is the funding needs to be
appropriate and made recurring
so that market and the and
they're afraid can can do that
their work otherwise we were
very good at having some
unfunded mandates through statue
but if we can't fill them
completely with a finding
necessary then it's just down a
white of it can be just lip
service for our constituents and
that's not good.
I know that was not the
intentive of legislature it was
a very hard working.
Uh time for marquita at the
legislature and in and for all
of us trying to get this thing
down so I just wanted to to
bring that out mr chairman and I
hope that we can't even know
market it before at the end of
the year as we're working with
the lfc appropriations perhaps
we can bring that up to see if
we can have some funding
allocated in either in house
bill tour and dividually and
then rolled into house bill two
or however maybe a vice chair
joy gear brought up a good point
in that house appropriations
also as meeting in in your form
of way and the house chamber
here and perhaps starting early
like now may not be too worried
you know because it's getting
it's getting close to the end
but I just know that i'll
continue to do all that I can to
help so that we can make it a
flourishing gur.
Um system for all we intended
thanks again marketer for your
work.
Okay thank you very much senator
representative luck.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you both for being here thanks
ryan and market of course for
your hard work so I just had a
couple of questions on page
eleven childcare revolving loan
fund overview and update so on
the second little diamond or
whatever that is mr chairman
says one point seventy five
million was appropriate in
twenty twenty four mister
chairman so do these funds I
assume they come from the
general fund is that correct mr
chairman that's right this one
appeared in house built to.
Okay thank you mister chairman
and think you mark it a so i'm
wondering because I know that
the.
Actual what is it called
uh
the early child had trust fund
that is gaining interest in
we're tapping I believe in the
last session we actually
increased the amount that we're
tapping from that fund i'm
wondering mr chairman is there a
way how we could utilize that
fund which is set to I believe
eight or nine billion by twenty
twenty eight to help upset the
costs from this fund that is
helping with these projects
mister chairman.
Mr chairman i'm gonna have them
show my ignorance relative to
the trust fund and what it's
eligible to fund and how ecc has
you know kind of earmarked those
dollars for operation so I don't
know I think theoretically the
answers yes but I honestly the
realistic answer is I don't know
whether or not that's whether
that's possible or not.
Thank you mister chairman so
sorry didn't mean to put anyone
on the spot I was just looking
it up because I thought it was
interesting how much money is in
that fund and if we can indeed
use whatever we're tapping now
we wouldn't have to go into the
general find especially if
something happens and there is
technically a rainy day and
we're like oh now what do we do
that is safe it's in in its own
part so I would just say that
something that i'm interested in
so mister chairman another
question I had so with these you
kind of explained it a little
bit about what to be to ninety
with contract for service and
loo of interest mister chairman
and marquita could you just give
me a little more information
about the examples of how that
works how is that tracked mister
chairman so mr chairman house
bill to ninety
you know I don't honestly know
it's origins because we weren't
really part of that conversation
but we did understand it's need
once we were able to review this
the the statute what it was
trying to do was exactly what we
do for
primary care and uh um the
behavior healthcare programs and
so their goal was to you know
get these programs started and
then allow for that funding
after they've served children to
than be repaired and fall after
a period of time so that was the
goal was to really put in a
contract for services provision
into that it started off with a
different model and ended up
it's in its amended form ended
up as a contract for services
but it started out as a what
they called forgiveness and I I
think what the amount was
contract for services or by the
time we got it into its final
form um as amended unfortunately
timer and out but that was the
the concept was put in an
ability to have them repaid
through services because of
their low margins and their
inability to get funding from
banks typically.
Great thank you so much mister
chairman thank you marquida and
then last question I didn't see
a list of the applications of
this current fund on here is
there is there an application
process right now or is that
still in the works mister
chairman so mr chairman for the
childcare program
we had two out approved projects
in the initial incarnation and
fortunately the second project
ran into permitting issues and
they were unable to build their
facility
so that was not something that
we were able to fund ultimately
so we did the one project in the
first round and we've just now
started new applications in the
second round as ryan mentioned
easy ecd is responsible for
promulgating the rules and they
are looking at whether or not
they want to do a competitive
application cycle so that we can
not just use the funds but use
the funds in the areas that most
need them
and so we're we're waiting for
them to make that decision in
the meantime we were able to do
this one loan cause of the
existing rules so well we're
happy to again start that
partnership and runs working
very closely with them to put
together a system that works for
both of us perfect thank you so
much mister chairman thank you
marketer and ryan for always
having the answer as I proceeded
take care thank you mister okay
thank you representative
representative case
thank you chair and and thank
you again for your presentation.
This could be a half day
presentation because there's so
many programs here and I know
that all of us are really
interested
in the detail i'm going to ask
you questions that you probably
have already answered several
times but we need to really
understand and still asking them
in different ways is helping
the full scope of it so.
Do you need re occurring funds
or do you need non reasons
reverting funds
mr chairman I think the answer
to that is it depends on the
amount so if it's an amount if
we knew we were getting a
certain number of funds in a
certain amount of funds each
year we could market the program
with predictability absent that
we would recommend a larger part
of one time dollar so that we
can then market that program
again it's giving the providers
enough time to put together
their projects and to put
together a financing proposal
and so if we just have a one
time small amount it really is
but if it's a one time large
amount more it doesn't have to
necessarily be recurring would
it needs to be as non reverting
correct amazing um
and thank you thank you for that
clarification so and that is the
reason why these two very
important funds the primary care
capital fund in the behavioral
health capital phone are not
currently funded because it just
takes a while to get up can we
talk a little bit about the
primary care capital fund
given the changes since nineteen
ninety four with different
amendments.
The I understand the we've a
change the scope of work it's
bricks and mortar it can be
operational it can be equipment.
Um is it only.
Stay on or clinics can I be of a
four profit clinic as long as
it's owned in operator as you
you talked about and i'm still
sorry and miss the their verbal
ac three what's a what's the
doctor own and run
organizations again mister
chairman it would it's called
the c three s o
so it's very similar kind of
combines a non profit in an
employee stock ownership program
owned facility and again you
don't have owners with a non
profit so it blends the two
together but they are non
profits.
It so as long as their non
profits or
government owned medical
facilities they would be
eligible for the primary care
capital find is that correct.
Mister chairman yes and do they
need to show
do they have to prove either a
certain number of medicare
eligible.
Services you know I guess a
certain amount that they have
served individuals on medicaid
medicare or do they have to show
a certain amount of income is it
is it that they can only
generate a certain amount of
income I understand the
nonprofit there's gonna put it
back in to the facility so are
they able to show that they can
put a large amount back into the
facility.
Mr chairman I think there are
two answers so the first
question is how do they get
selected in terms of eligibility
and how is that contract for
services negotiated with either
the department of health or the
health care authority and then
the second is what we need to
see to make the loan so those
are two very different
perspectives of the project and
I would say I may be ryan can
answer the question as to what
but the healthcare authority or
the department of health is
looking at but I think they are
looking at those clinics that
provide a high level of service
to integrate patience so out or
ununinsured patients or that I
think gets to your first I don't
know if we have specific metrics
on that I think the grain is
looking that up now
and then the second is you know
what we look for in financing
and what we look for is really
more cash flow where cash flow
lender in these programs are you
know because collateral clinics
in very small communities don't
have much collateral value so we
really do focus on their cash
flow and so we look historically
as much as we can at that
ability to reto make the debt
service on the loan.
Thank you an absolutely so you
are the lender I would I would
humbly request in the future
that we have hcard on this panel
so that we understand that
eligibility and then the loan
requirements because they're
both to be able to communicate
to constituents who would be
eligible for
such some sort of funding and
what we can do to be able to
support that um
I understand I like I understand
that the child care facilities
need to be licensed
and in in any of this funding
are you able to spend any amount
of money on the education
promotion and part marketing of
these programs.
Mr chairman with the changes
made in in senate bill for
twenty three we can be for the
we can fully recover a cost of
administration which includes
marketing outreach and the
education on the programs
themselves yes.
And and thank you very much
market it and do you and how do
you do that do you have.
Um
a fees to fees outray reach or
workshop in different regions
around the state or
is it a youtube key a pain to go
to your local office and apply
this way how is that how are you
doing your outrage.
Mr chairman I would know that we
don't really have money in this
programs and so early on when
there was capital in the
primarily capital fund like
before the year two thousand and
there was extensive outreach
with the primary care
association as well as the
department of health in outreach
and we had I think six rounds of
applications that came in and
that's the majority of those
twenty projects you see came in
through that process after that
we've been relending uh dollars
that had been repaid and so in
those instances they have been
typically projects that went to
the department of health or or
what's now the
the healthcare authority and
they've asked for help in the
they've referred them over every
once in a while a project will
come to us that we then sent
back to our partners to find out
whether they are programmatic
fit but typically because
there's not been money we
haven't been marketing the
program it would be almost
unkind to set up expectations
that we can't fulfill with the
programs so it's ban very much a
one off situation one of these
loans we were at a school board
association meeting and one of
school board members you know
mentioned that there was this
facility that if they didn't
find the money to buy it they
might lose the facility and so
that's how we found that last
project was you know at an
unrelated event but you know
folks are usually when their
active and civic affairs are
usually very active and so the
affairs
I don't know brand if there's
anything more you want to add
I would I would add and because
you are a good listener it's a
thank you go ahead right yeah I
think you
chairman so just on your
following up on your former
question on the eligibility so I
just looked up the current draft
rules and um I just want to give
you the full answer if so i'm
each program has slightly
different parameters but by
enlarged it is a qualitative
rural and underserved definition
and also in terms of.
Type of operator it's a
nonprofit or publicly so in the
in the case of behavioral health
specifically eligible entities
as I defined and statute or
nonprofit behavioral health
facilities so five or one c
threes on an a behavioral health
clinic that operates in a rural
or other health care underserved
area of the state
and we actually work in this
case with the department of
health on determining what
specifically that means and in
the case of the behavior a whole
fund we have a specific duck
definition for second medically
in indigent
that currently means individuals
below the federal poverty level
not covered by private third
party health care insurance and
those individuals between one
hundred percent two hundred
percent of federal poverty
levels who are not covered by
any private third party health
insurance and we're currently
working with the department on
to potentially revise that
technical definition that's the
put they give again into the
eligibility of of projects on
and the behavioral health
primary care of capital fund has
slightly different definition of
eligible entities on one can be
a community based non profit
primary care clinic or hospice
that operates in a rural or
other health care underserved
area of the state.
Can be a school based health
center that operates in a public
school district and that means
department requirements the
healthcare authority
requirements are that is funded
by the federal department of
health and human services a
primary care clinic that
operates in a rural or other
health care underserved area of
the state or a telehealth site
that is operated by an entity
described above.
Fit thinking mister chair
given the health care provider
crisis that obviously our nation
is is.
Challenged worth but most
certainly are status
the narrowing.
Of eligibility
as an only primary care as an
only rule I would say
almost the entire state I don't
know of albert is it considered
underserved by if if it is it's
the only place in the entire
state that is not considered
underserved and it may be
understood i'm not so sure so I
am wondering if.
I know is a linder you like
narrow scopes because it's it's
easier to make sure that things
are qualified but.
Have you.
Looked in either expanding the
scope or another fund such as a
weeny dialysis.
That's not a primary care we
need it everywhere and most
certainly rural areas we need
radiology we need a birthing
clinics are birthing clinic you
know and sadisor specialties
with this fall under the primary
care of fun
mr chairman it gets to how their
licensed so I would refer to
that there is a women's care
clinic in donate county south of
last cursor may be still in los
cruces that received a premium
here capital on so they can be
there can be specialised but it
does get to their license
ultimately forced to.
Make their determination and I
would just characterize as
lenders we'd like to see it as
broad as possible because in
fact we'd like to make certain
that regardless of who ends up
making a payment it's eligible
under our programs I think they
were targeted back then because
there were so little money back
twenty years ago and they wanted
to make sure it went to the
right place but those rules are
being replaced so those rules
that ryan is currently
referencing are the ones that we
now are in the position of
establishing at the finance
authority so we're changing it
from
to put into our handset that we
can monitor it more directly so
we don't have to rely on our
partners as much.
Thank you very much for the
information you're always
availability to access and thank
you mister chair for your
indulgence this is a very
important topic thanks
okay thank you very much
representative that will go to
representative mobile coming at
all please
think of mr chair and thinking
repeated thinking right again
for your thorough presentations
and I know it takes a while
especially on this committee
it's been hard to
when you first get in the more
and you've grown tremendously
since I been in office you've
grown tremendously so it's a
learning process each and every
time and I appreciate when you
come in at the beginning and
give us the complete overview
are because that sort of set to
sup for various committees
actually ah etc for um handling
the detail as we proceed through
the interim so thank you very
much for this
I just want a further clarify
the line of questioning by
representative case about arm so
for example if you and mh.
University of new mexico has
bill once two
respond to a community need in
took him carry to open up a
primary care clinic from.
You know they've located a spot
or whatever are they able to tap
into the primary care fund to do
so.
Mr chairman I believe that they
would fall under the definition
of publicly owned um rain points
out which i'd already neglected
to mention that they would also
qualify for the public project
revolving fund if we wanted to
make a learn to them just
straight up so we could do that
without having to go through
some of the other massionations
as long as they have legislative
authorization we could help fund
that project through the pprf
thank you for that clarification
because I am privy to some of
the discussions that they're
having in the primary care of a
group that all was enabled a few
years back
and and if they have the
capacity to do so which in many
cases larger publicly owned
healthcare facilities do have.
Then they're looking at how to
do that but it also is incumbent
on staffing and so that in in
telemet services and how they're
going to incorporate all of out
which is all part of the capital
um funding that's going to have
to be in place so i'm glad to
hear that I can connect offer
that I think they were along
that they were having
discussions along those same
arm.
Notes so thank you for that so
the other thing arm.
That i've brought up throughout
the years too is because.
Many of us overlap in our
interim work for example we said
on legislative health and human
services.
Some of us.
Um a lot of this is part of the
discussion will lhs so i'm
curious as to whether you're
continuing to have or do you
have interdepartment mental
meetings discussions.
That incorporate.
What
health and human services
discussions are having
concerning filling the needs
behavior health child care
primary care all of those other
burning issues that we discuss.
And how you.
Through your financing and
funding mechanisms can help for
solitate some of what we're
hearing in these other
committees does that happen at
your end.
The.
Mr chairman I think I would
characterise it to say that they
are dealing with the a large
scope of funding needs and I
mean funding as opposed to
financing and so I think that
when they're talking they're
they're talking about a much
larger universe we tend to come
in really on the edges we're
helping in more specific
circumstances to help you know
refinance or purchase a facility
to help expand you know in a
limited way when there are no
other funding sources available
but I believe our partners are
our program being very large
wouldn't really help the the
kind of health care system
because they do need a little
more grant dollars than you know
we don't really provide that
there's a small portion that
comes out as as grant but
generally speaking they need
more assistance in this fund can
really serve so we are on the
edges of what are sister
agencies or partner agencies or
dealing with and so i'm not sure
that you know we've we've been
very holistic in offering it but
certainly the conversations
rains having now there it's
probably um.
Uh.
Increasingly opportunities for
that collaboration I think for
many of them you know they.
They don't know about the
programs very well and if
they've been unfunded they
really haven't touched it very
often um so.
It would think you'll arm mr
chair and thinking marketer
would be very helpful for them
to understand the mechanisms
especially between the financing
and funding because on the
federal level when they're
tapping into funds obviously if
they have a matching ability in
a fund to help leverage what
they need from the services
perspective then that's where I
would hope that you would come
in.
Filling gaps the same with
financing in terms of if they
have to rehab a facility and to
come care of previously owned
facility then they would know
that they could come in and tap
into your resources what i'm
finding is that they're all over
the map in some cases not all um
your your partner agencies
aren't.
And so i'm i'm thinking that.
They're probably needs to be
more of that collaboration or at
least an understanding of what
you can offer.
So that they're not scrambling
and going in shooting for the
stars.
When we have them right here.
Could not always have but we
could but you also are resource.
Because where you can't fill a
gap in my view you then know
where they might be able to do
so because of your.
On extensive
collaboration that you have
outside of this you have a
tremendous network of
institutional support
institutional resources I mean
that.
Could very well.
Fit.
Some of the needs so maybe.
It's time to have some sort of
from the executive level perhaps
convenient some sort of show and
tell type of
annual semi annual
collaboration.
Between the agency so that
because we're when I go from one
committee to another committee
to another committee I often
times find myself seeing have
you asked him a fee have you
tapped in have you require you
know and they're like any mep
and so and because we cycle in
encyclope out administrators it
would be really helpful so it's
just my suggestion I know you're
on overload already mr chair but
you're a tremendous resource for
our state as well as a delivery
for a state sr I think that
would be great
mr chairman i'll just say that
the the conversations that right
beginning or has already started
with our partner agencies I
think is doing a lot of what you
are you're alluding to and again
with no money on the table it's
probably for some less you know
are urgent and I think is ecd
because that appropriation
existed they got really re
energized plus this has been
their primary focus is the
expansion I don't know if you
have anything else you want to
add.
The.
Yeah mister just to say that I
think.
One thing I understood
representative robot cover your
from your comments is the side
dear of the
really the policy leads in those
departments having the best
sense of where the strategic
priorities are in terms of
funding or in our case projects
that could be funded that could
have the highest impact and
that's definitely something that
we're starting to look like look
at strategically in our programs
is how we can work more closely
with our policy partners with
different programs and identify
before we advance pipeline what
the strategic priorities are and
then work through the pipeline
accordingly.
Think you and I would just add
finally mr chair
if
I wish I could go back into my
career days whether I would
demonstrate how you charge that
out and you have that column
that the resource column or
whatever you want to call it and
you add there who all is going
to help you with this project
you start with your project
development and someone and you
column and out and then that
final column is having to do
with funding financing resources
whatever and that's where you
fill if we could just do that
within every agencies and they
would know exactly where to go
to because they're right here in
our state but thank you ryan for
for you exactly right
strategically placing all of
this within your project
development will give you a real
holistic lock at what your needs
are gaps are who to go to.
So thank you I appreciate that
thank you mister richard the top
okay thank you are very much
representative
everything I thought that I
could possibly come up with as a
question is been asked and
answered thank you for the work
that you're doing please keep at
it on the early childs and stuff
you know that's one of my
primary swimlines here in this
certain this exercise and so I
want to make sure that we stay
on top of helping us but folks
do what they need to have them I
am surprised that there is a
significantly greater
participation but then of course
and we have the early
childhood education and care
department secretary presented
LFC this month we are sorry last
month you know we did hear about
the you know.
You know the uptake is just not
quite what we thought it was
going to be at this stage so
it's real interesting and i'm
sure that something it's showing
in the in terms of what folks
are coming to you with so thank
you very much for your
presentation mister chairman if
I could just finalize again I
think
the good senator was out of the
room I really want to thank
senator rodriguez for pushing
through that legislation and
anticipate for getting that it
was a cover beast of a piece of
legislation to draft it was very
comprehensive and very technical
and I want to think the two of
them cause the changes that were
made could not have happened
without either of them and I
very much appreciate all that
they did to put us in a position
of being successful here i'm
again we just now I think we
could just add money and it
would be really close um and to
the
answer that that ryan gave
relative to impacts our agency
is er in the final stages of our
strategic plan we're looking at
a three year strategic plan
cause we've changed a lot over
the last five we're not
believing that we could do a
five strategic plan and not have
it get out did it pretty quickly
but the impacts of these
programs are what we're really
focused on and so we hope
certainly hopefully by november
will have ability to share with
you are objectives and some of
the key metrics that will be
trying to demonstrate and
collect over the next couple of
years so we have some more work
in this area but it is our
current focus is not to just get
the project completed but to get
good projects completed and to
help our partners move the
needle in the areas that are
important to them as well so
more to come on that wonderful
thank you very much thank you
both okay so to the committee
when I ask our
committee director to comment on
the next two meetings or folks
know what we're doing
mister chair members of the
committee next meeting will be
on october nine and that'll be
in santa fe the capital building
most likely in room three o
seven.
It's a bigger ram.
Um then will have our final
meeting on november twelve I
will also be in the capital
probably in the same room and at
that meeting of course the
committee will hear bill
endorsements and yeah final
finalise the interim
gear okay and thank you are
saving up for your continued
work with us and so obviously
mountain chief executive officer
new mexico finance thirty you're
gonna want to bring your stuff
to that meeting as well maybe
start working with a couple of
us as you always do and what's
going to.
The stuff that I normally do for
you that's is that this coming
you're at all is it is that
every every evening i'm sorry
i'm sorry mr chairman I think
you're speaking to the
legislative authorization I
think we have another year for
that before because it's usually
three or four years um and you
know at some point we can think
about making that permanent but
in the meantime it'll be I think
not this year
next year the year after uh but
I think there's
in addition to the funding
conversation we just had for
those three programs and are
traditional water trust board
legislation I think there's
probably only one other peace
that we're looking at as we get
more into housing and again
we're just on the fringes or
partners at the housing
authority really are taking the
lead on this we're trying to
focus our efforts on the kinds
of changes we could make to
loose in infrastructure funding
to make it more available I
think that's the only thing that
we have that we probably haven't
talked about yet too much that
we might be at a making some
suggestions on in the form of
legislative changes wonderful
thank you for that and then if
you can also are just with the
upcoming session I think about
the non returning members if
there's legislation that they do
for you myself in the vice chair
volunteering you will like will
take those ones on if you need
us to okay all right any other
comments for the order good of
the order i'll entertain a
motion to adjourn we're done
with our agenda for today
we have a motion by
representative of the day to
adjourn to the second second I
think all right second by a
senator biggest all those in
favor ci are the supposed to say
no meetings adjourned
