OK, welcome back.
Um
to part two of day one, and for
our viewing audience, our
listening audience, I should
say, we're now on the public
project revolving fun, PPRF is
what you'll hear it referred to.
And we're going to hear an
overview and then a review of
proposed rules. So take it away
and just introduce yourselves
when you each talk so they know
this is so and so is now
talking.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
welcome back. That was a
delicious lunch. Um,
so we're gonna be picking up
basically where we left off this
morning with the concepts of our
bond program, but I just wanted
to provide you with some
high-level reminders of what the
advantages of the, to the local
communities are. So in addition
to, um, not having to kind of do
the hiring and maintain the bond
professionals that we talked
about before, not having to
ready a uh a bond issuance and
do the post-compliance, as we
discussed before.
Ultimately, it's the lower cost
financing that often brings
someone to the PPRF. So there
are a lot of ancillary benefits
that really don't get talked
about, but lowering your
interest rate is about at the
top of the reason that people
come to the PPRF, um, and we do
that in a couple of ways. Not
only is our AAA interest rate
allowed to, it brings down the
cost of actual market rate
loans. But then we also provide
disadvantaged entity funding. So
we set aside a portion of the
governmental gross receipts
tax, the 5% tax that's levied
on, uh, the, the services
provided by, uh, governments. We
take a portion of that and, um,
provide funding to those
entities that have a median
household income of less than
the state's household income and
either provide 0 or 2% loans.
And that's a significant, uh,
enhancement to most of your
projects. So we can, a lot of
our fire trucks are done at 0%.
A lot of school bonds, a major
portion of those
get purchased at 0%. So that
truly allows a community to use
their dollars as far as they can
to, to stretch them as much as
they can. Um, and then what
doesn't qualify for that
disadvantaged, um, is then given
that AAA, uh, interest rate,
which, as we talked about
before, very few entities can
achieve on their own.
So, uh, with that, I'll turn it
back over to Chip. I just wanted
to remind you that, uh, we'll be
going through the rules right
after this, and that's to
accommodate a small change that
was made, uh, at least a
temporary change to, um, the
public project revolving Fund
program, which is to, it, it
does two things. One is to, um,
allow for rural electric co-ops
to be, um, eligible entities so
they can now apply for the fund.
And then there's a 3-year
temporary suspension
of the prior legislative
authorization requirements. So
prior to Senate Bill 170, we
weren't able to make loans
unless they were on a list that
was approved by the legislature.
So entities that aren't on there
couldn't apply for a loan. We
have a 3-year suspension of that
currently in place, and that's
what the rules will primarily
address. Um, but I, I mentioned
it only that, um, for
communities that didn't know
about the PPRF that didn't
manage to get on the list. They
can come forward at any time. We
take those application
s monthly, and we're able to
work with the community to help
them get their application in
order. Um, we have already made
loans to entities that were not
on the PPRF authorization bill.
They did not know that they were
going to need to access the
funding, and that was for a
hospital district up in, uh,
Colfax County. So they weren't
anticipating using us and as a
result, we were able to save
them what we think will be
closer to a million dollars in
debt service. Um, so it's an
important tool and I will turn
it back over
to Chip, and I think he's
starting on page 24 of the
presentation materials.
Thank you
Uh, Madam Chair and committee
members. Um,
yeah, I'll, I'll, uh, we've,
we've talked about some of this
already, so I won't belabor it,
but again, we've got, uh, among
the highest ratings in the
state, uh, for our, our
communities, uh, right now we've
got over a billion dollars of
debt in the senior lane, um, at
about 333 million in the
subordinate lean, the 25 Cs is
large loan with um, with the
ABCWUA is going to be in the
subordinate
lien. The subordinate lien is
gonna won't double, but it'll,
it'll bump pretty significantly
after this next deal, which we
anticipate being somewhere in
the $225 million range.
Um, and Senator O'Malley, you
had a question earlier about the
um, sort of, you know, capacity
and so one of the things, one of
the ways we kind of work the
dials is we do have, uh, we had
substantial capacity in the
subordinate lien right now. And
so that's why we're putting
that, the 25 CUs in the in this
ABC loan into that lien, which
does uh essentially preserve
capacity for a senior
lien. So we're kind of, you
know, if, if ABC were to come to
us next year with another $200
million loan. I think we would
be hard pressed to
to fund that. It just, you know,
cause you, to your point, it
does start to potentially crowd
out other uses, you know, if
they come back to a sort of $50
million loan that we can handle
that. But there is a point, as
Marquita indicated, where it's
going to trip the, uh, trip the
concern, uh, by us.
um
so again, because of our
ratings, fars received the low,
the low interest rates. Um, we
do have disadvantaged funding
available and really
significantly, uh, for a
community that's
um
you know, got a smallish loan,
like a, you know, 23 $5 million
dollar loan. Um, and who doesn't
access the bond market very
frequently. It's like anything
if you don't do it fairly
frequently, you're not gonna
maybe be as good at it as you
could be. And, um, so the NMFA,
one of the things that we do
bring to the table is that we're
in the market frequently. We
have the infrastructure in place
with our, our, uh, professional
staff are the contacts of the
rating agencies, the context of
the banking community, all that,
it really is, if you're trying
to do that, uh
kind of out of whole cloth.
It's, it's an, it's
overwhelming, I think, to a
large folks. And the other, the
other factor is that right now,
the way the demand in the market
is a large issuer is more
attractive, a larger issue is
more attractive than a small
issue. So if you're out there
trying to issue a $5 million
bond that has maturities that
are, you know, let's say ranging
between uh half a million
dollars and a million dollars.
The demand for that, it's not a
very liquid security, whereas,
um, like for this 25C issue that
we're going to be doing, the
maturities are going to range.
uh, for the most of the loan
between 5 and up to 25 million.
And, uh, large institutional
investors really like that
because there's, you know, as a
big
maturity, it's highly liquid and
you can find a place to, you
know, if you need, if you're an
investor and you need to sell
it, there's a much bigger market
for those kinds of loans than
there is for a half a million
dollars loan. They're just not
viewed as, as super liquid.
Um
on page 25, uh, uh, again, let's
talk sort of about the, the
specifics of the PPRF. So
essentially, the PPRF has lent
to everybody in the state, you
know, by and large. I mean,
we've got 33 coyotes, 104
municipalities, the state, the
tribes, school districts, higher
ed, hospitals, all different
kinds of utilities. So it's a
very diverse, broad, uh impact
program.
And as Marquita mentioned, we've
got 11 different, uh, pledge
types from G GO net system
revenue, grocer seats tax,
special tax, fire protection
fund, law enforcement protection
fund, and on and on down the
list. So again, it's very
diverse program both in terms of
our borrowers and the types of
pledges that they're giving us.
We, uh, you know, you cannot
over
e mp ha s ize the impact and the
import of the governmental gross
receipts tax to the program.
It's been sort of the, the
foundation upon which we have
built this program when we
started in 90
3 really trying to structure
this and we, our first issue was
in '95. We had 4 borrowers. It
was a, I think it was a $41
million bond issue with four
borrowers in the rating agencies
were
you know, S&P wouldn't give us
uh an investment grade rating. I
mean, we were, we were below B
minus. They just, they didn't
know how to deal with it. All we
wanted at that point was to get
a high enough rating that we
could buy bond insurance. So I
did, I, we did get an A, an A
rating from Moody's, which, you
know, sort of catapulted us, but
it was profoundly based on the
governmental gross receipts tax.
They didn't know that much about
our underlying borrowers, but
they did know that we had this
tax that is, uh, supported by
the spending of people on
utilities throughout the state.
So that has, in every, every
credit report from then until
now, uh, from the rating
agencies still focus on the GGRT
as kind of a fundamental element
of the, of the programs.
security, and it's nice, very
nice that the program has grown.
Uh, the GGRT, I think the first
year we issued, I think the, the
total production was about $9
million a year. It's now up over
40 million, um, and obviously
with that, we've had more
capacity to make disadvantaged
loans, direct loans, and kind of
grow the program to the, to the
degree that it is, uh, today.
Um
the
Mark can answer questions about
sort of specifics about the GGRT
but we end up essentially
getting about half net of all
the other uses of the GGRT come
into the PBRF, um, and so even
though we
always
trumpet the fact that we have
not had any defaults. The GGRT
is still, again, a fundamental
element of our program security.
And Madam Chair, I wanted to
mention that this is the thing
that makes us different than
other pooled bond programs. So
states have pulled bond
programs, you know, I think
virtually every state has a
pooled bomb program, typically
to fund, uh, as part of their
drinking water, uh, federal
drinking water programs. But
what makes us different is in
those instances, since they
don't have governmental gross
receipts tax, they don't have
any sort of kickstarted money.
They make, they either issue the
bonds and make loans from those
bonds, where they bring all
their issuances
together like herding a bunch of
cats and then take one bond
issue with the 11 borrowers, the
10 borrowers to the market at
the same time. That's, there's
a, a lot of work associated with
trying to get all of those
entities to the market, and
there's not really much benefit
other than they're sharing their
costs. So there is, um, a little
bit of a benefit to the
communities, not merely the same
as there is with the
governmental gross receipts tax.
So here, we start with the, the
last year's governmental gross
receipts tax, and we make loans
from that, and then we go
and reimburse ourselves. So our
clients aren't waiting for a
bond issue to happen unless they
are more than $10 million a
bigger issue. Um, they're
making, they're applying
monthly, we're making the loans
to them. It typically takes
about 60 to 90 days to get those
loans closed, and then moving
on, and they are sort of
oblivious to the, the whole bond
issuing side of it. Um, and
that's not true with other
states. So we are sort of the
envy of the nation when it comes
to the pool bomb program because
no one else has that secondary
pledge. So
we have our primary pledge of
the revenues of the underlying
loans, and then we have the
secondary pledge of governmental
gross receipts tax, and then
you'll see later on that we've
put some, a little more, um,
belts and suspenders around
those two sets of primary
revenue. So I wanted to, uh,
mention that our, your clients,
your constituents, our clients
are getting the benefit of their
governmental gross receipts tax
several times over.
And I can, uh
underscore the, this is why the
NMFA was always my favorite
client because we didn't have to
herd cats. Every other program I
worked on was exactly that.
Everybody that came to the
program for a loan had to be on
the exact same schedule, had to
close in the exact same day it
was, uh, I mean, cat herding is
a, a generous description. It
was uh
I don't know what would be worse
than cat herding, but it was.
So, um, and page on the
following page, uh, we have the,
uh, the right now, this is, so
this is both senior and
subordinately. This is the
entire PPRF pre 2025 C bond
issue. Obviously, when we do
that deal, the pie is gonna
change around a little bit, but,
um, so you see that, you know,
city towns are our largest
borrowers
School districts are significant
as well. Um
and then really, you see, uh,
counties, the state, higher ed,
the water authority is ABC at
this point. It, it, we do other
water loans, but they're
typically through municipalities
rather than through a specific
authority and then tribal loans.
Um
and then the, the segment there
for other is, you know, a lot of
different flood control joint
power, hospital districts,
mutual domestics, public
improvement districts, etc. etc.
etc. So we've got a very broad,
uh, charge, and we are able to,
and I credit again, the regional
financial managers being able to
do the credit analysis of, of
variety of different types of uh
municipal borrowers.
Um
so, uh
this is revenues by the pledge,
uh, what the, what, what is
underlying the underlying
borrower, uh, loan. And so
general obligation
net system revenue, and gross
receipts tax, uh, make up, you
know, really 3 quarter, more
than 3/45 of our, uh, total
portfolio. So, and, and those
are, you know, more traditional
credits. I think that's one of
the reasons that the, the uh
PPRF is rated as highly as it as
it is that it's, um, you know,
it is fundamentally secured by
traditional municipal, uh,
revenue streams. And then we
have some other, some smaller,
uh, revenue streams that make up
about 20% or so.
Uh, the, and then lastly, this
is an interesting pie because
it, it sort of runs counter to
the prior two pies where
suddenly, you know, about 25% of
it is fire and law protection
funds. And what that is telling
us is that we make a bunch of
loans for fire equipment for
police vehicles, um, but in
terms of the par amount of those
loans are typically less than a
million dollars. So we make a
bunch of those loans, and
they're very well secured by,
um, uh, mostly by fire
protection funds. Um, but it, it
just sort of gives you a
different
kind of a sense of, of the
um magnitude of the dollars
coming in, going out and coming
in versus the number of loans
that we make, uh, and so it's,
you know, it's very important
for these smaller jurisdictions
to be able to come to the NMFA
and get access.
So what I, what I'm gonna do for
the next 3 pages is give you an
example of kind of how, how a,
uh, community X coming to the
program, looking at the NMFA
versus issuing debt on their own
and where the, where the benefit
comes in. So, in this case, I'm,
I'm assuming a, a $5 million
project.
Um
so in the case on the left hand
side, you have a community that
goes to the market on their own
Projects $5 million. They also
have to pay their bond council.
They have to pay, to pay a
municipal advisor.
and then they have to pay the
underwriter, um, who's gonna,
uh, underwrite the bond.
So
that's, that's sort of scenario
one, scenario two is they come
to the NMFA.
and let's assume that they
qualify for the uh disadvantaged
loan, so they get about 90% of
their uh funding for a bond
issue in about 10% from the
disadvantaged loan.
And then you'll see on the uses,
you don't see
borrower bond counsel. You don't
see municipal advisor. You don't
see underwriter, um,
underwriter. We, we pick up all
of those costs. So if you need
$5 million for a project, you're
gonna get $5 million for the
project. That's all you have to
fund.
On the next page, uh,
apologies for the size of this,
but, um, really the, the, the
key
difference here is in the, in
the column
uh called Yield. And what I'm
assuming is that this is, it's
sort of a, a, a high B triple B,
maybe low single A type
borrower.
And so you see the yields there
starting at 292 and 26 and going
out to a 5:36. Um, that reflects
the rates on, you know,
still very much investment grade
credits, but a smaller sort of
mid-range investment grade
credit. Compare that to the
NMFA's yields, which here I've
assumed 245 and 26 out to a, a
4:45 and 45.
But the other thing is that,
that last, the last two
maturities we've included, um,
the, the piece for the
disadvantaged funding, which can
be at 0%.
So
yeah, both the
you know, what, what's
essentially between a 30 and
you know, 50 basis point
differential in the rates that
they're borrowing, plus they're
not going to be getting the,
the, uh, the 500,000
disadvantaged funding.
So the ultimate result of that
is in scenario one with the
borrower that goes out on their
own.
you know, their debt service
rate is, is.
after the first year bounces
right around $400,000 a year
with the NMFA, it settles in
about 345,340 to 345,000. And so
over the course of a twenty-year
loan, you're looking at a
savings of over a million
dollars to a jurisdiction. And
that
you know, that is significant,
uh,
if you're
a local government and you're
able to save, you know, 50
$60,000 a year if that, that can
mean the difference between a,
you know, a, a staff person
that, uh, uh, is desperately
needed.
So before I go on, any questions
about that sort of uh analysis.
OK
Actually I say one thing we do
have a few media questions.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. This is very
eye-opening. Thank you. Uh, when
you say, uh, the net system
revenue, what is, is, is that
loans through money back into
the bucket to, to make more
money available for future loans
or what, what is net system
revenue? So it's, it's one of
the types of pledges that we've
talked about general obligation,
gross receipts, tax, and net
system revenue pledge is going
to be a pledge from a water
system, a sewer system, uh, any
kind of a public utility type
entity.
And so the, when the, the term
net system revenue reflects the
the pledge that we get from
those types of entities is um
revenues from the system. So
people, you know, paying their
water rates or sewer rates, and
then they're paying operations,
uh, they're paying, uh, you
know, just basically to run the,
the facility.
that comes off the top and then
we're the pledge that we get is
the revenue that's left over,
that's the net system revenue.
So, and that's where
um I think are a requirement uh
in the PPRF is a 1.25, 1:30. So
basically if, if you've got a,
uh, a loan that is going to
have $100,000 of debt service.
We require that the, the net
system revenue pledge produces
at least $130,000 of revenue. So
after they, you know, they get
$200,000 in. They have $70,000
of operating costs. They've got
130, we can lend them up to the
point of $100,000 per year of
debt service lever in their
amount of safety nets,
I guess so it's,
it's very similar to just net
operating income for, for a
utility primarily.
Oh, that's really smart. I'm
glad that you do it that way.
Um.
so on the, on page, uh,
29, I guess, well, they all say
5 million. I is that the cap 5
million?
No, OK. It's just an example
that you're giving us. Yeah, I'm
just saying if let's assume
somebody has a $5 million
project in one, in one case,
they go to the market on their
own, in one case they come to
us.
And then, uh, Madam Chair, and,
uh,
presenters, um, what is the cap
on, on the loan amount? Is it 20
million or, or 40? Um, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Chairman, um,
we've made a loan as small as
$5000 and our largest loan to
date's about 127 million, and
that'll get eclipsed with this
new bond issue, which could be
up to about 180 million for the
ABC, uh, project. They're going
to do some refunding and some
new money. So they're going to
take advantage of our lower
interest rate to help them, uh,
refund some of their debt,
refinance it basically.
So the capacity, Mr. Chairman,
is based on the underlying
borrower's ability to repay.
So on the nets, thank you. On
the net system revenue, um,
is there uh
obviously the higher that
they're in a protected position.
Are you the first in to get your
money and then they do, or do
they do their operating first,
then you, then others or how
does it work there?
I'm on the net system, yeah, we,
uh, we will take a, you know, I
guess you'd say we're
subordinate to them running the
system, um, because, you know,
it doesn't do us any good if we,
the the there's the, the
alternative to a net system
pledge would be a gross pledge.
which sometimes, uh, folks will
do that. The problem is if
you're running a tight, uh,
numbers with a gross pledge, you
may not have enough money to
actually operate the system,
which becomes the sort of
downward spiral. So, yeah, we
typically take um a net system
pledge, but as far as senior and
subordination, with one of the
things that we'll require in
almost all cases is that we are
in a senior position that where
there's nobody gonna be coming
in and taking
a position senior to us on that
net system pledge. Um, I think
that's accurate, Mr. Chairman,
the instances in which we will,
uh, let another lender have
access to the funding first,
where we take a subordinate
pledge is when the other lender
is a governmental entity. So
the, when the governments, like
the federal government lends
money through USDA, for
instance. They won't allow a
shared lien, so we have to be
subordinate. That's true of a
couple of other federal
programs. Um, and then the other
instances are when they have
other bond indentures out there.
So ABC WA has bond and dentures
that have both senior and
subordinate, and they've got a
well-established bonding
program. And so in those
instances where there's a
well-established bonding
program, and we feel we are
comfortable, uh, with that
pledge. We'll take a
subordinated interest in those
instances. They just have to be
able to demonstrate that for you
and lay it out and all that. So,
OK, thank you, Chair. Thank you.
Yeah, let's go on
Um, and, uh, community members,
I guess, uh, if we go to the
next page, so the one that looks
like uh some sort of an
electrical uh diagram. Yeah.
same
This, this is the, the intention
here is to just show you what,
what the PPRF kind of the lean
structure of it right now. And
so if you sort of focus on the
middle of the page, um
the, the top middle, we've got
the senior lean loan payments.
So those are payments from all
of our borrowers from
you know, I mean, that we
probably have loans now that are
still, that are outstanding from
the late 0s to the early, you
know, 2010s, um
and so we've got 185 million of
loan payments. This is, this is
for fiscal 26.
And then in addition to that,
we've got the governmental
grocer receipts tax that comes
in and uh as I said, it's over
40 million now. So between the
two of those, we've got 225
million, uh, roughly of revenue
pledged to senior bondholders.
Right now our senior debt
service is 155
so we've got about 70 million of
excess at that point. In
addition, sort of bells and
whistles stuff.
uh
our senior lean borrowers, if
you look in the upper left hand
box, we've got borrowers who
primarily are net are, are
utility pledges that have
reserve funds set aside at the
loan level
So that's 32.6 million. In
addition to that, we've got, uh,
the far right, uh, upper right,
you see the common debt Service
Reserve Fund of $40 million.
That was something that we
funded. We used to have
something called the uh
contingent liquidity account,
which I don't know, 10 years
ago, we converted into a, a
senior lien reserve. So that's
cash that we hold. It's not
dedicated to any particular
borrower. It's just dedicated to
the senior lean bondhold
ers
Um, so, you know, belts,
suspenders and, uh, you know,
any other uh device you can
imagine for the senior lean. OK,
so then
and this all happened, so the
senior lien payments occur on
June 1st, uh, of each year, the
principal and it uh interest on
December 1st, principal and
interest on June 1st. After June
1st, that 70 million of excess
flows into the subordinate lane.
So between that and you'll see
right in the middle of the page,
the box there subordinate lean
loan payments. So those again,
those are the loan payments, and
this is something that is kind
of unique about the, the way the
P
P R F is structured. A lot of
programs have everything coming
into the senior lean and then it
flows down and the waterfall
continues. In our case, we've
got
the senior lien loan payments
are pledged to the senior lien,
but all the borrowers like the
ABC loan that we're about to
make is a subordinate lien loan,
that's only pledged to the
subordinate lian bondholders,
the senior lean bondholders
don't have any claim to
that that money that's coming in
on our subordinate lean
borrowers. So I think that's one
of the reasons that I think uh
the rating agency see us see
both lean as essentially equal,
is that from the perspective of
the pledge of the loans from the
borrowers to that lean their
in both cases pledged
specifically to that lien, not
to a higher lien or, um, you
know, so that, that's one
element of the, of sort of the
structure of the program. So
like the uh senior lean, we also
have borrow a level reserves of
about 29 million and
we've got the supplemental
credit reserve, which is an
additional reserves pledged to
the subordinate lien. So right
now, the, the pledge of the, the
sizing of the reserve funds is
uh designated that they're gonna
be equal. So we've got 40
million in the senior, we've got
40 million in the supplemental.
We used to have to contribute
every time we issue debt to
those funds based on the
underlying credits. Um, and one
of the first things we did, when
I
uh joined the NMFA was to say,
let's stop doing that because
it's really, it's trapped money.
The only time you're ever going
to use that money is if you have
a default. And, and it's just,
you know, so right now, the
money in both the Common
deservice Reserve and supplement
credit reserve are locked in
there. They're trustee held, and
they
earn any earnings on that money.
And right now the earnings on
both of them are
uh, you know, 1.5 $2 million a
year. So that stays in that
fund. They're gonna just keep
growing, um, but we don't have
to keep adding money to it from
funds that would otherwise be
more, I think, um, beneficially
applied.
So that's, uh, so we, the
subordinate lien
debt service right now is about
59. It's gonna bump quite a bit
with this next issue, but, um
so we still, but we will still
have more revenue coming in from
the subordinate lean borrowers
then debt service. And so right
now it's 65 million from the
loan payments against 59 million
of debt service, so there's
about 7, you know, 66, a little
over 6 million of excess, plus
um, the flow through, which, you
know, we're essentially that
flows through again.
And so this is where we've
determined that there is
capacity for a third lien, and
we've talked to the rating
agencies about this, and they
seem, you know, positively
inclined toward it. It will not
have the same ratings as the
senior and suborant lean, but
it'll still have solid
investment grade ratings and the
intent there is to have a
vehicle that will allow the PPRF
to start making loans to uh
credits that we maybe not be as
comfortable putting into the
senior, the subordinate lien.
charter schools, some types of,
of, uh, special district,
special assessment, tax
increment, other types of
districts. So the, the capacity
is there, the basic structure
has been blessed by the rating
agencies. Now we just need to
actually, you know, identify
the, the pool of loans that
we're going to fund with that,
and we've uh started sort of on
that, uh, work even now, you
Yeah.
So, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chairman, um, if you're trying
to do all the math, uh, on the
sides here. You'll, you'll see
some discrepancies and one is
that our senior lean loan
payments are far greater than
our senior lean bond debt
service. And that's for a couple
of reasons. One is that we don't
reimburse every loan that we
make. Some of them are just too
small. It, it, for the same
reason, a bondholder wouldn't
want to buy a half a million
dollar loan or 2
5000 $0 loan. It's a lot of work
to put them into a bond
issuance. And so we keep a some
portions of our loans just don't
get reimbursed. If they're at
0%, they don't get reimbursed.
So our disadvantaged funding
loans and some of the smaller
loan amounts, we just don't
reimburse, but we're still
getting paid on those loans. So
we don't have bond payments
matched up against them, but
we're still getting those
payments in. They were a use of
the fund and they're dedicated
to one of those two lean. When
we closed the loan,
we decide, you know, where to
pledge those revenues. So that's
one of the reasons we have
excess. We call them equity
loans. Um, that's one of the
reasons we have excess money
coming in from the loan payments
into the debt service account.
Um, and the other is that from
time to time, at the end of the
year after we've paid all our
bondholders and we have extra
funding coming through in the
form of those equity debt
payments and governmental gross
receipts tax, which wasn't used
to make bond payments. We'll
take some of those dollars and
we'll pay down older bonds. So
our bonds have a 10 year call at
the end of 10 years, we, the
bondholders are allowing us to
prepay those loans, to pay it
off, um, and
we regularly do that. So we
regularly take money that's in
the account and pay down the
bonds so that we have greater
liquidity and flexibility with
the funding. If everything were
always a match set of books, and
one of our clients had some
distress. We would have a really
hard time make um, kind of, um,
making any adjustments to their
loans, right? Because we'd have
absolute bonds needing to be
paid by that loan. So if there's
any issue, they need some
additional
consideration, um, that happened
during the pandemic, certainly
that would not have been
possible if we didn't start
paying down these bonds. So once
they hit their 10-year mark, we
take a look at it. In some
instances, our interest rates on
the bonds are very low and we
couldn't get anywhere close to
that rate. So we won't do it in
those instances, but if, if
they're about a match set of
books, we will absolutely take
those, uh, some proceeds and pay
down our debt. So I just wanted
to kind of mention to you why we
had all
that extra money, and that's, we
just consider that a
conservative way to manage the
fund so that we have as much
liquidity as we can, which
ultimately benefits the client
because we are able to then be
more flexible with their loans.
So
um, that's what I wanted to
mention.
Excellent. Um, I'll just go
through some, uh, just examples
of recent bond issues that we've
done just to give you a sense of
kind of the variety of things
that we run up against. Um, the
24B bonds was unusual in that it
was purely a reimbursement loan,
so we took, we had 26 underlying
borrowers that had already had,
they already got their loans,
they had their interest rates
set. They, um, got, you know,
they had their money, they're
off and running, and,
and so then we sort of uh
warehouse those until we decide
to issue a bond, and basically
what we're doing is we take, you
know, each of those 26 loans had
a cash flow, had a repayment
schedule. We combine all 26 of
those, and now we've got one big
cash flow that we're going to be
issuing debt against. And we
just basically work the, the
program that we use and say
issue as much debt as you can
against that consolidated 26
loan cash flow and how much can
we get? And in this case, the
par amount doesn't reflect how
much we actually issue because
they were, they were sold as
premium bonds. So we basically
sold bonds, produced around 50
million of proceeds against the
$50 million of loans that we had
previously made. So that was,
and it's kind of, you know, in
retrospect, I wish we had sold
that one competitively because
it was, you know,
the, the, the problem with doing
a competitive deal with
simultaneous borrowers is
there's a lot of plate spinning
that you have to do with the the
day of the sale, which, um, I,
I, I don't think I want to do
that.
So
anyway, um
anyway, so that, so that was the
25B, the 20 or 254B, the 25A,
uh, it was an interesting
transaction in that, uh, it was
about $100 million deal in two
separate transactions, one of
which was about 77 million, and
it included simultaneous loans
to Elmo Gordo, uh, UNM Medical
Center in the city, uh, Santa
Clara Pueblo and reimburse 7
loans. One of the borrowers
uh, Taos County
wanted an unusual call
provision, in this case, a
one-year call provision
And I think it was because the
pledge of the pledge to the loan
was a gross receipts tax and the
way their ordinance was written
was that any excess, um, or
basically that all, all the, the
proceeds of that tax had to be
applied to debt service, and so
you don't know when you have an
ordinance like that, uh
you know, you get debt service
and if you've got more money
than debt service, then you have
to call those bonds. You have to
use that to pay off bonds. So
that's why they insisted in, and
rightfully so, needed a one-year
call.
That's an unusual structure.
That's not typically seen in, in
the municipal market as having a
fixed rate loan with a one-year
call. So rather than burden
everybody else who was in the
25A deal with a one-year call,
we segregated the Taos County
piece as a separate subseries,
and we've done that a couple of
times. I think we did it with
the, the city of Farmington a
few years ago when they did a
utility that there was a
possibility they're going to
sell it and they wanted the
ability to call the bonds so
they didn't
become taxable. So we have the
flexibility to, um, kind of
tailor the structure of a loan
to a simultaneous borrower as
long as they're aware that there
are cost implications in this
case Ta was fully, fully
apprised of that.
Um, moving on to the 25B. That's
the one where we were thinking
it was going to be a competitive
sale, and um
the, so the, you know, the, the
municipal market has, has long
been sort of viewed as a, uh, a
sleepy corner of the capital
markets world. And, um, so you
don't see interest rates
shifting a lot in, in the muni
market. It, it, it's, um,
historically
a movement of 2 or 3 basis
points on a given day is
typical. A movement of 5 basis
points is, you know, it's a
pretty significant movement. 10
is
you know, rarely seen. Well,
following, uh, the tariff
announcement.
for about at least a week, um,
rates were moving
uh, 50 basis points up and down,
just, you know, whips off
fashion, and it was, you know,
in that kind of a situation
uh,
investors don't know how to
value a bond because the value
is changing hour to hour. And so
if you're an investor and you
commit at the wrong time, now
you're holding, uh, an asset
that's worth, you know, 10% less
than it was when you put in the
bid. So, um, rather than trying
to sell into a competitive, sell
a competitive bond into that
market.
Uh, uh, Marquita suggested I
wholly agreed with her that this
would not the, not the best time
to, uh, uh, to dust off our
competitive sale, uh, wardrobe.
So we, um, we did, uh, the, the
way we select our underwriter
pool. We've got 6 firms in
there, and it's just basically,
uh, we, we have a structure of
the top, top, uh, scoring
underwriter in the last
RFP process is the first
underwriter and it goes down to
the 6th underwriter. In this
case, we were, it was easy to
look at the list of where we
were. We'd actually batted
through the order in the last 2
years. So now we're up, I think
back at the top, Morgan Stanley
was, um, the lead underwriter.
And they, they, you know, we had
the official statement pretty
well done for the competitive
deal, so there wasn't a lot of
um effort that they needed to go
into their fa
fa mi li ar with the credit, and
we've fairly quickly
transitioned from, uh, the
competitive sale process to the
negotiated sale process, and I
think it worked out, uh, just
fine. It was, uh, it was a
disappointing not to be able to
get into competitive market. And
the only reason I like
competitive sales occasionally
is that
you're not, um
you, you, you get a benchmark on
that day of the best bid the,
the, the market is able to
provide and ideally you get, you
know, a dozen banks trying to
bid for those bonds, and once
you have the, the winning bid,
you figure out what their yields
are. And so now you can use that
as a benchmark for the next
negotiated sale, say this
competitive sale sold within 10
basis points of this market
standard
that's where we want to start,
rather than maybe 20 basis
points or whatever. So we'll,
we'll do it. Uh sometime in the
next 2 years, we will do a
competitive sale and again, we
invite you all to come watch. It
is very exciting
It's, uh, was as exciting as
public finance gets.
And Madam Chair, I would note,
in order to do that, we, in
addition to changing our
preliminary official statement,
our board had to meet, and we
put them into special meeting
and they were able to do that
very quickly. Um, they
understand the rules of, of the
game and, uh, we were able to
get one called in about 4 days.
Um, so I wanna just spend a
minute now that we've gone
through the required delegation
report. And I'd note that before
this law that was passed, I
think in about 20 2017 or so.
Um, what would have to happen is
that we'd always have to issue
the bonds the day
before our board meeting. So
regardless of what was going on
in the markets, because the bond
purchase agreement had to be
approved by our board, um, then
that meant that we only could
ever issue bonds right around
the time of our, our board
meetings. And so that not great
timing, um, necessarily.
Sometimes it's great timing,
sometimes it's terrible timing.
But we were stuck. When the
securities delegation law went
in place, um, again, about 2017
or 2018
it means that you can delegate a
the board can delegate a member
of the board, um, to view the
pricing and sign off on the bond
purchase agreement so long as
they then report back to, um,
the, the board on the sale of
the day. So Chip makes this very
same presentation to our board
after each of the delegations.
And then that law has one other
spe special piece which is
everyone in the state that
issues can use that delegation
authority, but we're the only
ones that get to report it back
to you. So we have a special
ment
ion in that law that requires
that we then report back to this
body on the Times in which we
use the delegation authority. So
I just wanted to mention why you
get that report. Um, so this law
that we got that we, um, Senator
Cervantes helped us put this in
place and it's been benefiting a
number of communities, City of
Albuquerque benefited almost
immediately from the ability to,
um, be able to delegate a member
of the governing board as the,
uh, to sign the bond purchase
agreement.
All right, Madam Chair, so with
that, that's the end of that
secondary report. And then
lastly, um, as I mentioned
earlier, we are going to ask you
at the Demming meeting in
September to consider, um,
approving changes to our rules.
Under the NMFA Act, rules are
established by our board and the
oversight board approving the
same set of rules. So for the
PPRF, um, for our local
government planning fund and a
couple of other programs that
are authorized under the AI
F A Act, uh, local solar access
will be coming to you. Um, those
are a set of rules that both
this board, this committee, and
our board have to agree on. Um,
so what we'd like to do is go
over the rules with you today,
answer any questions, take any
feedback, have our board then
approve rules and then bring you
back a final set of rules in
Deming. So that's kind of the,
the process that we use. It's
either it goes to our board
twice or it comes to you twice.
And so, um, we thought we would
try it this way. Um, so
the Senate Bill 17, uh, 270.
No, Senate Bill 170, that was
passed this year, Senator
Padilla carried, uh, endorsed,
carried this bill. It, it made
some changes to site readiness,
um, but it impacted the PPRF in
two ways. Uh, one is that it
added rural electric co-ops
pursuant to the, um, electricc
Cooperative Act as a qualifying
entity. So regardless of whether
they're taking on electric
project or a broadband project,
they can come and access the
PPRF to fund their project.
So that was the, one of the
changes. And the other was that
it provides this 3-year
temporary suspension of the
prior legislative authorization.
So last year, you all endorsed a
piece of legislation that
ultimately ended up with 200
qualifying entities that would
allow them to apply to the PPRF
for a loan because it was
certainly no guarantee that
they'd have to actually, uh,
access the fund or that we'd
make the loan. But it gave them
the authority, uh, to really for
us to consider the loan, uh,
from the PPRF. That won't have
to
happen now for 3 years. So you
won't see that bill this year.
We will be reporting in the
interim on the instances in
which we use that. We think
that's, it's helpful for you to
understand, um, the, how often
we, uh, community did not
um
did not anticipate either
issuing the debt or issuing
through us.
So that's important. Um, so we
only have modest rule changes
because we did actually change
this last August as well, and
that was to accommodate Senate
Bill 216 from that session,
which added, um, housing as a
qualified use and nonprofit
housing developers as a
qualified entity. And we did all
of our procedural cleanups and
some of the older things that we
wanted to take a whack at. We
took care of most of that last
year. What you'll see today is
that we didn't get all of it
last year. There's still a few
procedural
things. We had a fresh set of
eyes in the form of, um, Mr.
Chaikin, um, who was able to
look at it and ensure that we
had some conformity with our
statute, the way we were calling
things our process itself, and
to get rid of some redundancies.
So we're, we have some
additional language in here that
deals with things other than
adding the rural co op and
dealing with the legislative
authorization. So if it's
covered in policy and is not
adding value in the rules. We've
suggested it come out. There's
some redund
an c ies within this, the, um,
the actual set of rules itself
that we're asking
uh, to just get rid of because
the elimination of it makes it
clear and anytime you have
rules, the clearer the better.
Um, so, for instance, we're
conforming language to the rules
of the statute. We're adopting
rules rather than establishing
regulations. It's little things
like that. Um, the redundancies
within the rules, unnecessary
language. There's an entire
section, the financial approval
requirement section that
unnecessarily limits the access
of the PPRF. There are ways in
which borrowers are
disadvantaged by that language.
Um, and duplicates our language
and policy
Um,
and then again, uh, other
clarifying language relating to
financial assistance for charter
schools, um, clarifying that the
charter school, if it's, um,
chartered by a local authority
can apply directly, but a PEC
chartered entity cannot. I'm
sorry.
Yeah, that's right. The PEC
cannot, cannot apply on behalf
of the charter school.
Um, that planning and design as
a phase of a project is eligible
as a public project to stand on
its own
Um, we've taken away the project
feasibility determination that
was part of that financial
approval requirements. Um, that
financial assistance includes
the purchase of bonds issued by
qualified entities and to
distinguish the differences of
financial assistance and
disadvantage funding throughout.
So you have a copy of those
rules. They're, they're in front
of you now, as I said, most of
the stuff got taken care of last
year in terms of bigger
procedural issues, but I would
just highlight a couple of
things, and I apologize, I think
yours printed in
um
in black and white, uh,
still getting used to our new
printers at our new office. I'm
not quite there yet. But on page
um, wanted to just show you
where the most of the, uh,
deletions occur, and that's on
page 10, and that's that
financing approval requirements.
Um, so, for instance,
uh, Section 9B has, has us
determining that the financial
assistance, um, that determining
the qualifications, we'd have to
consider the ability of the
entity to secure financing from
another source. That comes back
from our very original set of
rules when we thought we'd have
to limit the use of the fund
because we didn't think the
program would ever get that big.
So, as I think Chip mentioned,
that's when governmental gross
receipts tax was about $8
million and we thought
ultimately, we'd be funding
the pro the project just from
cash and not issuing bonds.
Clearly now, we have a robust
program. We don't think we need
to unnecessarily limit the
access of the program, based on
whether or not they could get
funding elsewhere. So it's those
sorts of things that we think
are unnecessarily narrow. And
again, all the other issues are
dealt with in policy. So since
that was the biggest section, I
wanted to kind of highlight that
for you there. Um, I think
otherwise, Madam Chair, if you
would like us to walk through
the sections, we're happy to do
it.
Um,
uh, Mr. Chikin is here. He can
answer technical questions.
Um
what, how would you like to
proceed?
Uh, let me see if anybody has a
specific question right now.
Uh, Representative Block and
then Representative Vide.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys, you all, appreciate
you. So, OK, uh, can I just
start at the beginning of the,
of the rules, and I'll just go
with my questions. Sorry to
belabor the point. And if you
already answered it, I apologize
if I, if I'm asking again. So
when it comes to charter
schools, it says only locally
chartered schools and not state
chartered.
You might have said, why can't
you just go over that for me
briefly, Madam Chair and
presenters.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block. It's because of the
different powers, charter
schools can be chartered by a
local school district or by the
publication commission. um,
local, uh, school districts can
own property, for example, and
enter into a lease-purchase
agreement of that property with
the charter school. The PEC has
very limited powers and cannot
own property or enter into a
lease purchase agreement. So
that's why we can do a lot more
with locally chartered chartered
schools and state charter
charter schools.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And is
there any current PEC
commissioned charter school.
that has utilized this.
Oh
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative,
no. So right now, I would note
that we have very, uh, we have
purposefully limited the use of
the public project revolving
fund because it is a land
secured transaction. We're not,
it's not a loan. We're actually
buying a building and leasing
it. And so we'll be holding with
PPRF assets of property, a piece
of property. And if they choose
to walk away from it, they can
do so. That's within their right
annually, that lease renews. So
it wasn't an appropriate kind of
loan for our senior and
subordinate lean. It's the
reason we created that junior
lean. So with that
now in place, having gotten the
indenture in place, we are now
in a position to accept those
applications. So prior to very
recently, we'd only tested one
charter school in the PPRF and
that was, uh, to Albuquerque
Public Schools served as the
applicant, and they leased a
building from us
and then we, and then they
subleased it down to Data
charter schools. So it's the
only time in which we've used
the PPRF and the, and
Albuquerque was the applicant in
that instance.
So, but we could, we could do a
PEC chartered school today under
this authority. This doesn't
change the access. Perfect. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much, Marquita. And then
I'm gonna go to page 5
and I'm on
D, I believe it is now.
And it says as provided by
lending policies applicable to
such entities.
Do we know why we struck that
Um
you wanna answer my
you wanna answer,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that's because there are no such
policies that we had that were
specifically applicable to, uh,
Indian, uh, nations and pueblos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. I have a couple more,
sorry, maybe, maybe a few more,
uh, a little more. So, uh, next
on the same page
we actually had that same
question, so I'm just gonna flip
over to my next
question
OK, so page 7
it says
at the top of page 7 on A, it
changes it from is feasible to
meets the requirements of
policies. What have we been
using currently to measure
feasibility versus what the
policies would then measure,
Madam Chair, and, uh, folks. So,
Madam Chair, this is a, that's
an excellent question. Thank you
for that. So the policies right
now are get to the feasibility
in terms of its ability to
repay.
That's really what we're looking
at in policy, and that's what
our board has been considering
to date. The way in which that
read, we believed it meant the
project feasibility. We don't
have engineers on our board. We
don't have architects on our
board, contractors. So we wanted
it to be clear that it was
really the policies and the
policies deal with financial
feasibility.
Thank you. OK, Madam Chair
uh, presenters, OK, at the
bottom of page 7, we added
language, and I'm just wondering
where is the allowance of the
waiver in this rule that is
referenced in that new section
or that new uh line.
It says uh
may approve the applications
unless a specific waiver is
granted by the board, where is
your authority to give such a
waiver in this rule.
Um, Madam Chair, so the waiver
here is the waiver of the
policy, and it's contained in
the policy itself.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And what
if the poli so that every single
policy has a waiver, every
single policy.
Um, Madam Chair, yes. OK, great.
OK. And then, uh, page 8, why
are we changing the word
financial assistance to
disadvantage.
funding?
Madam Chair.
It's on page 7, line. It's on B
throughout the page. Madam
Chair, this was the area that we
thought was clarifying language
because it was financial
assistance to disadvantage
entity, qualified entities, and
really, we are talking about
that 0 and 2%. So it is, we
think it's clear to say
disadvantaged funding and so
that's, it was a, uh
uh not a substantive change, but
a clarifying change.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And then
I'm going to go to page 10 now,
where you struck all this fun
language.
So I, I guess I'm just trying to
figure out why we struck some
language, uh, let's see.
So on C
on that page, it says the board
must find the average useful
life of the public project will
meet or exceed the average
maturity of loans.
made or bonds purchased or
issued by the board. Why are we
striking that specifically?
Well, we're striking the whole
page, but why are we striking
that? My first question, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
all this language is contained
in the policies. And so we felt
it was really redundant. The
rules are meant to be more
inward facing, um, for to guide
us in the policies are more
advisory for those applicants
who are applying for financial
assistance. So all this stuff
was just duplicative, basically.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much. Uh, so then
the policies, I'm just trying to
really figure out where in your
regulations internally, do you
mandate that this language is in
the policy. So how can I ensure
that this language will end up
in the policy
so that we understand that, OK,
if it's duplicative, like we're
saying today, are we sure it's
duplicative, because are we
ensuring that this language does
indeed end up in the policy.
So Madam Chair, I would also
mention that it duplicates most
of the tax code as well were
required as one of the tax, part
of the tax opinion requires that
it meet the useful life of the
project. So we can't issue
10-year bonds against a 3-year
project. And there's actual tax
code. So, uh, there's a, uh,
useful life, if you will, um,
uh, chart that we usually go by,
and you will find, for instance,
that a community might use, um,
a fire truck, for instance, for
20 or 30 years, but
IRS sent a special useful life
for it that's less than that. So
we regularly have to deal with,
um, the differences between the
IRS, which was far more
conservative than in real life
where people use fire trucks,
for instance, for 30 to 35
years. So it, it's also
duplicates that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so we, so we defer to the IRS if
it's more conservative than the
state. Is that
what I understand
Madam Chair Representative
Block, yes, that's correct. Uh,
we use the IRS annually
publishes its depreciation
tables, and that's what we go
off of. I forget the number of
the publication, but uh it's an
annual thing the IRS puts out.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all. So I, I get it. I
get why you want to clean it up.
But I think that it might be
useful to keep some of the
language like on page 10, if
it's duplicative and we're
already using it in the
policies, why not just keep it
in the rule just to have a check
and balance. I, I would
venture to
provide that
opinion
But I, I just think that could
help, and I think that's all I
had on, on the rules. So thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you all.
Representative
Did you raise your hand
Uh, sorry, Madam Chair, my
question was answered. It was
about charter schools. Thank
you.
Any more questions
I do not see any more questions.
Anything more from our panel?
that
you, Madam Chair, do we need a
motion to approve this? You know
it goes back to the board, Madam
Chair, we're asking to take, to
allow us to take your feedback,
go to our board, and then bring
you a final set of policies, uh,
but sorry, rules, uh, in
February,
You all fed me too well. I'm,
I'm in a coma now. Um, to take a
final set of rules to you
indemning in September.
Thank you
And this is just representatives
so
you're exposed to it already, so
there's no surprises. And, um,
Representative Block brought
that up last year.
having some preparation time
like this. OK, thank you.
Thank you
Take a nap now.
Uh, before our next
presentation, Senator Ramos, can
you introduce yourself?
Yes, ma'am. I'm, I'm Gabel
Ramos. I'm senator for District
28 for grant
uh, Luna, and Hidalgo County
OK.
We are already now for our 3
o'clock presentation. So we're
going to welcome up
our New Mexico Bioscience
Authority, including Stephanie
Tofii. Did I say that right?
And as
Huliosi who had.
Well
OK, wait a minute. We have a
very unruly group of legislators
talking to each other right now.
OK, we're going to start our 3
o'clock presentation.
OK, and just for
listening audience, just as you
each talk, introduce yourselves
so the people that are on the
web know who's talking.
OK, thank you
OK thank you for the
Thank you.
OK. Is it on when
ready? Oh yeah, it is on. OK.
Um, all right, well, thank you
so much for having us, um
trigger it and, uh, the rest of
the committee. Uh, my name is
Stephanie Tafii. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Bioscience Authority. I
am joined by our chair, um, Paul
Lore and a board member, Doctor
Alex Coghlan. Uh, we are here to
provide an update on, you know,
what the Bioscience Authority
has been doing, but also, um,
the state of the industry in
general, as we've been, um,
seeing it for the last, uh,
year.
So, I'm just moving on a brief
um, overview of what the
Bioscience Authority is. Uh, we
are a state agency created in
2017 by the legislation. Uh, we
are administratively attached to
the University of New Mexico,
um, Health Sciences Center. Um,
so we're a little bit of a
hybrid when it comes to
agencies, um, but we are a
public-private partnership that
is working to, uh, build a more
robust bioscience industry, um,
by helping those different
groups to collaborate, whether
it be government, um,
universities, national labs, and
private industry. Um,
so kind of working as that
umbrella to be able to help that
out.
Uh, like I said, the bioscience
Authority moving on to page 3,
is administratively attached to
the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center. Um, they
provide us with administrative
support, um, including, um,
accounting services, HR
services, um, procurement
services and all of those
different pieces, um, at a very
reduced rate, but they do not
have any kind of say over our
policies or our direction, um,
that is decided by our board of
directors. And so, um, it is a
little bit of a
complication there. Uh, we do
have a full board. Um, if you
look on page 4, you can see, um,
all of the board members that
have been appointed by the, um,
governor, um, the
representatives yourselves, um,
as well as the university, um,
presidents.
And so, uh, we have a, you know,
group of people who are working
to, uh, represent their
organizations and their
districts to be able to be a,
uh, resounding voice of support
for the bioscience industry.
Uh, we currently have 4, staff
members. Um, two of us are
full-time and, um, 2 are
part-time. We are all, um,
employees of the University of
New Mexico, but myself and
Sterling Nichols, uh, 100% of
our time is spent working for
the Bioscience Authority, um,
Ryan CantlioCR strategic, uh,
strategy and policy director
works a portion of the time and
our intellectual property
special specialist, um, Ann
Lowe.
um, Schmidt Olivier, also, uh,
works part-time. We are right
now, uh, with the million
dollar, uh, one-time, um, funds
that were allocated to us
through last year's, um, well,
through this, this past
legislative cycle, uh, we are
working on hiring a new
employee. Um, this person will
be the
um, communications and industry
outreach manager. Um, they will
be, uh, managing the internship
programs that we're going to
talk a little bit about. They're
also going to be working to, um,
have more of a communicative
voice with all of the
stakeholders, whether it be
government, um, private industry
inside the state or outside the
state, as well as the university
is a national labs.
Uh, again, we are public private
partnership which allows us to
be able to, uh, work with both
private industry and public
entities like National Labs and
universities. Uh, one of the
pieces that, uh, we utilize a
lot being administratively
attached to the university. It's
just understanding what's
happening within the
universities, um, as well as the
national labs, we're able to
have that kind of communication
to be able to share it more
broadly with all of the members
of the stakeholders.
Um, biosciences, just in case
any of you are not all awares.
um, if you haven't heard me
talking about it for the last
few years, um, biosciences is
comprised of a number of
different subsectors. Um, we
include all of them, whether it
be Ag sciences, um, that is more
prevalent in southern New Mexico
or whether it be pharmaceutical
and medical devices, which is
more prevalent in Santa Fe and
the Albuquerque region. Um, but
it also includes
bioscience-related distribution,
drugs and pharmaceut
ical s and research
bioinformatics testing and
medical laboratories.
Um, as we've pointed out before,
biosciences is not only one of
the, um, sectors that is being
capitalized by the state
economic development, um, but
it's also, um, part of
sustainable and value-added
agriculture and renewable and
green energy when it comes to
biofuels.
Um, on page 8, you can just see
a breakdown of all of the
keywords that are related to the
bioscience industry, um, as well
as where they pop up the most,
uh, when it comes to
conversation in the state.
Um, on page 9, you can see how
the industry has been growing
over the last 5 years. And so
we've been able to see a 22%,
um, job growth.
um, from 2019 to 2024.
Um, we've been able to see a lot
of, uh, money going into, um,
you know, investing in the
growth of the industry, whether
it be from NIH awards, um, that
are predominantly going to the
universities as well as, um,
private investment that is going
to the, um, industry.
Uh, we've also been able to see,
um
rises in the number of employees
and in the number of students
that are graduating.
Um, if you look on page 10, you
can see a breakdown of the, um,
some of the major companies that
are in the state, as well as
their subheaders.
um, that are there. We are, um,
the bioscience Authority and
you'd think that it would be
valuable for companies to, uh,
disclose themselves to us. They
do not. And so we find out about
them, uh, randomly and they get
added to our list. They get
added to our maps. And so this
is a list that is continuing to,
uh, grow and expand as we learn
more about the industry.
A way that we are working on,
uh, cataloging all of that
information is through our
ecoMap. And so, um
we've created an eco, um, that's
at, uh, NM Bioscience
Connect.com. Uh, this ecommap is
a living catalog of all of the
organizations, resources,
people, events, um, and, um,
career opportunities that are
available throughout the state.
Um, this is a tool that is being
utilized by economic development
departments across the state,
um, just because it is so
comprehensive, and it's a really
great place for, um, students to
be able to go to, to be able to
find jobs, to be able to find
internship opportunities to be
able to move to different, uh,
locations within the industry.
If, for instance, a business,
um, may close or go out of, um,
state, which has happened in the
last, um, year or so.
People are still able to find
positions because they are able
to find them on the ecommap. And
so, um, this is something that
we continue to be able to expand
and to be able to grow. Um, I
did bring QR codes for y'all. So
if you want to have one for
yourself to be able to get
access to it. I would be, uh, I
would love to share it with you
Um, but that's our overview. Um,
now we're going to go on to talk
a little bit about the, um,
priorities that our board has
identified, um, for what we want
to see the bioscience industry
moving into, um, those break
down to financial capital for
companies. Um, this is something
that we continue to come back to
the legislation. We come back
to, um, the, um, administration
to be able to, um,
express that need. Uh, lab
space, and educated workforce,
and statewide collaborations.
Um, the first that we're going
to talk about is financial
capital for the companies. Um, I
would like to turn it over to,
um, my chair, um, Paul Lore, who
has worked on this tirelessly.
Um, he comes to the legislation,
uh, repeatedly during the
legislative session, and he
knows this very well.
Thank you, Stephanie. My name's
Paul Lore and I am the, uh,
chairman of the board of New
Mexico Bioscience Authority, and
I'm also the founder and
president and COO of a company
called Mercury Bio that's uh
working on a, a, uh,
pharmaceutical drug delivery
system, a platform technology.
We're based in Santa Fe.
Um
so the co-investment fund
is, is really to take advantage
of the fact that, um, as a state
entity, uh, we're empowered to
enter into public-private
partnerships.
and, um, one of the areas that I
think is really needed in the
state is to fill the gap between
uh what the economic development
department can do with the tools
available to them, Lia, uh, for
one.
uh, the industrial revenue bond,
and um the JTIP program, job
training incentive program.
Uh, those
are hard to access for small
startup companies. They take a
lot of uh
requirements for having
financial stability such as
having been able to show two
years runway, which is really,
um, I can't believe any startup
can actually honestly say they
have 2 years runway unless it's
just a mom and pop company
that's working out of their, uh,
their kitchen, but in biotech,
it's, it's especially um
expensive, um, you know, we've
been in business with Mercury
Bio for about
5 years and um, you know, we've
burned through at least $6
million. I mean, that's kind of
what it takes, and
but the risk is worth the reward
when these technologies pan out,
uh, right now we're working on
a, uh
cure for
dementia and Alzheimer's, so
that could be an incredibly
valuable technology once we have
it, um, proven out.
And, um, so the, the ideas for
the state to really get behind
building this ecosystem of uh
biotech companies so that it
attracts more talent to the
state. Uh, it diversifies the
economy, which is one of the
primary things we're trying to
achieve from traditional revenue
streams.
And, and biotech can be
essentially uh recession proof
in that um these are
great-paying jobs. They, they
are we're working on a global
market and um
they are not a commodity item,
so our, our, our
intellectual property is really
what we're developing. And that
and that that can go for
agricultural and biofuels as
well. There's a lot of work
being done and crop science,
crop protection, um, efficiency
of production, increasing
production per acre.
as well as, uh, in biofuels. I
mentioned this a year ago, but
uh algae is a very promising
biofuels base that can
potentially um
replace um fossil fuels, but it
needs a lot of infrastructure to
to get to that point.
Um
so our, the, the model that we
were uh came up with and the
bills that we were working on
both in 2022 and 2024
legislative sessions.
uh, was a co-investment fund.
Um, this last session, it was uh
Senate Bill 119.
uh, which requested $25 million
for uh
a co-investment fund that would
require a 2 to 1 match with
private equity funds, and so
that would be the company's
like, uh, the venture capital
groups that are located inside
the state.
um
we were successful in getting
this passed in the 2022 session,
but um it was uh vetoed by the
governor because of the concern
over not having enough, um,
guidelines for, uh, clawing back
money if, uh, state companies
took funds and moved out of the
state. So we added that to the
bill in 2024. And in fact during
the legislative process, uh, we
actually improved on a clawback
clause to more man manage the
fund
s actively, and by that I mean
we would if we have an
investment that we've
identified through a venture
capital fund that brought the
deal to us.
We would, uh, require that we
would negotiate with the company
to set milestones and then
release the funds in tranches as
they achieved milestones. That
gives us more hands on, uh,
management of the money and and
doing due diligence and, uh,
being a good, um, steward of the
state's funds.
So I, I, and I, I hope we can do
this in the future because
capital is a real need. And, and
other states do this all day
long. They, they really, the
areas like Boston, San
Francisco, San Diego, uh, the
research Triangle Park in, uh,
North Carolina. They, the state
is heavily invested in
developing those industries.
And every single investment
that's the bioscience company
makes is not necessarily going
to be guaranteed to work, but
the idea, just like any venture
fund, is that the ones that do
make uh a successful company,
um, will pay back to the state
treasury, uh, the funds that,
that we can, uh, the, the gains
we can achieve by a merger and
acquisition or a dividend
disbursement by the company. So
the state would actually
own stock in the company. And in
fact, if that company moves out
of state in order to be more
successful than the state's
investment, um, would, would
grow
The money would stay in the
treasury until such time as it
uh uh is approved and it has to
be approved by the Secretary of
Economic Development and
Secretary of Finance
Administration, so there's
still, there's still guard rails
on what kind of deals we're
we're able to do.
Um, I'm not following the, the
presentation very well. I've,
uh, forgive me, but I think it's
important to really talk about
what the concept is, and, and
certainly if you have any
questions about this, we can
come back to it.
But um
the, the things that, uh, to me
make a lot of sense and that I
don't want to be part of uh
asking for state funds and then
not have a really solid
uh, chance of being successful.
So things like clawback
provisions underfunding the
fund. Those are things that I'm
concerned about
um, because then we end up with
deals that uh aren't very good.
Most of the really good deals
won't agree to those kind of
terms. Um, so I get the, the,
the risk management side of it.
What we're depending on is the
venture capital groups that
bring deals to us to really know
the business and basically we're
saying, OK, the state will
participate in this deal, which
gives them more legis more
leverage for their funds.
And, um, and then we do our own
diligence as well, but I think
this method of, of dispersing
the state funds and tranches
based on milestones gives us
that kind of control where we
can see if something's not
working, you know, you know,
companies need more resources in
one form or another, then we
can, we can fill in that gap.
Um
so we do have several business
people on the, on the board, uh,
Doctor Coghlan, myself, uh,
Ryan, who's an employee of
Friska, uh, she's uh uh uh works
in Los Alamos as an economic
development. So we do have
expertise in this field, um, and
we do have resources at our
disposal, which is why uh we
feel, and, and we're focused
very much just on this sector.
So that's why we, we feel we
could, we could do a good job of
managing state funds to achieve
the goals that we are, uh,
we're, we're trying to achieve.
But, uh, again, I think um
that's just one piece of the
puzzle.
and the um
the, the reason we would need
I, I think we should really be
funded by $50 million we need to
make at least 20 or 25, 30
investments in order to scale
this properly, we have to have
that ability, otherwise we're,
we're going to fall short of the
goal. And again, that would
actually amount to $150 million
fund with the private funding
match.
So, um, with that, I think I'll,
I'll.
pass the uh
presentation on to my colleague,
uh, Alex Coughlin, and he has
can talk more about the other
main issue that I think we, we
identified is uh infrastructure.
So basically lab space, so we,
uh, we did lose a company, um,
circular genomics to San Diego
this year. That was a promising
biotech company because they
didn't have any place to grow
into.
And Sartorius was another one
that, uh, is doing very well,
and we missed the boat on. So.
uh, with that, uh, Alex.
I,
I will,
I will just add with 11 other
point, we also work with other
venture funds to get them to
locate here. So, uh, we have JP
Morgan. We've met with their
life science division out of
Dallas. They became to us and
they were very interested in
learning about the the in the
landscape of biotech in New
Mexico. They're actually
presenting to our board at our
next meeting. You're all welcome
to, to, uh, join that present
ation but we've had several
meetings where they've traveled
here and they are interested in
putting a considerable
investment into New Mexico.
if the, if the conditions are
right.
And uh I think there was another
one, driver's VC that uh is also
setting up shop in uh in
Albuquerque. Uh, so, so we're
working both with companies and
with, with the VC funds.
So thank you
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
I am on
yes,
Let's see, maybe it is better.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time to listen to us. Um, Alex
Coglin has mentioned, um founder
or co-founder of Nature's
Toolbox NTX.
by manufacturing company still
located in Rio R Renal, which I
exited last year and now
co-founder of what we um call
New Mexico Venture Studios.
um
infrastructure, um, out of
experience, uh, when I started
the company, we actually ended
up building labspace twice.
first at the community college
in Santa Fe, where we framed in
with the support of community
college, uh, the mezzanines to
actually create lab space
because there wasn't any.
And we were there until, uh, the
Santa Fe County fire marshal
told us that we cannot have
desks in hallways and staircases
anymore.
and needed more space
Found a building in Rio Rancho
that again, we basically then,
and I'm very grateful for this
with support from Sandoval
County.
uh, city of Rio Rancho and EDD
um had a chance to remodel.
and create a lap space that we
needed. And that is not
necessarily a path every company
can take and is willing to take.
Um, so infrastructure is still
and remains a significant issue.
Though there is a number of um
incubators located in the state.
And the ones that actually do
have capacity for biotech pharma
companies is very limited.
And as it stands right now, this
is at capacity.
Out of the work we do now for
with the Bai Science Authority
and with uh New Mexico Venture
Studios.
we noticed that there's at least
a demand for another 20
companies. That also includes
companies willing and interested
to move out of San Diego.
out of Boston
and actually trying to find a
home coming from Europe.
and simply
because what we can offer, and
Stephanie and Paul mentioned it
is with the diversity of
education and research this is
happening among the national
labs and the universities. This
is attractive.
The amount of funding that goes
in basic research in the state
is highly attractive to actually
take a look at the technologies
and turn them commercial, and on
the other hand, what shouldn't
be forgotten is that also there
is a core of generating
workforce. This is suitable to
work on commercial environment.
Unfortunately, the capacity for
anything beyond early research
doesn't exist.
So that means as soon as a
company hits the point where a
commercial prototype needs to be
generated.
Uh, a scaling is required.
There is no capacity, which
actually means that with
companies that are funded,
privately funded, the
alternatives are still
to leave the state
And I think there's a chance to
turn this around, especially at
the moment. One thing is clear,
how to say biotech and pharma
went through a phase of
consolidation over the last
um 1218 months.
What it means is that we get
back to something that's more
real.
The overheating of the market in
the Bay Area in San Diego, in
Boston is coming down
That means workforce becomes
available
Venture firms pay more attention
to how and where and under what
conditions they invest.
Paul mentioned we had
conversations with um Mog
Stanley.
We also met with Silicon Valley
Bank, who actually admitted that
every single time that one of
their companies, their
investments in uh San Francisco
or in Boston.
is asking for more space. They
break a sweat.
simply because they have to make
sure that they actually prefund
this expansion and this becomes
incredibly hard. So I think we
stand here really an opportunity
uh to provide an alternative
with our cost structure, with
our quality of life, with the
resources that we generate and
bring in to actually capture a
lot of this which is not
necessarily supported anymore in
hubs that just have overheated
significantly overheated.
What the state did and which was
heavily supported by the
Bioscience Authority. They start
to rank sites.
that are suitable
and what becomes necessary, I
believe, is to now execute
against that. Start to
prioritize
what makes sense where to build
out.
and create those lab spaces. We
have actually 2
um, commercial
um activities in this, at least
to, to the extent I know, um,
one is ours where we really try
to also provide a platform for
if you want to consolidate the
pitch events, that means
increase the attractiveness for
venture firms to take a look.
not having them isolated by
National Lab and by university.
but create a forum, which
certainly can and should be
managed by the Bioscience
Authority.
to actually consolidate
everything. So well, if you
want, so all the universities,
all the national labs,
within 3 or 4 days.
pitch the technologies
I think this creates enough
attractiveness, and we know that
from the venture firms that
actually now signed off to
partner with us to come to the
state to work with us that have
an interest in seeing this.
and willing to invest
Um
with that
I'm
I think I summed up pretty much
what the needs are. Um, first
steps have been taken.
Legislation has been signed.
to actually um execute against
it, create those capacities, and
I think it's the time to
um move
become active
move forward on it
Thank you. And yes, House Bill
20 that was passed, that creates
the Office of Technology
Innovation in economic
development, uh, director Nora
Sackett, who serves on our board
as well as Mexico Bioscience,
uh, New Mexico Bio.
Association, uh, is was just
named to be the, the chair of
that board. Um.
or run that department rather.
And um, so we're, that, that we,
we spent a lot of time, uh,
testifying in committee for for
HB 20 as well. Last session and
uh and I'm happy that y'all
heard what we were saying, so
thank you. Um, and just the last
piece of that is the
accelerator, um, piece that, um,
the New Mexico Bioscience
Authority would want to
champion, um, in collaboration
with the other, um, lab spaces
that are
being developed. Uh, we are
going to be running a
feasibility study on that just
to make sure that this is the
right path for the state's money
to go. Um, if that feasibility
study comes back, that it is,
um, feasible to be able to, um,
you know, meet the needs of the
industry and to be able to be,
um, economically, um,
sustainable. Uh, we are going to
be asking for capital outlay
funds to be able to begin, um,
building that space. Uh, it
would be about 25,000 square
feet. It would allow for about
20 companies to be able to be in
the space. Uh, we would be
working specifically with the
research universities and the
national labs, but, um, private
industry would also be, you
know, welcome to join. It's
just, that's the low hanging
fruit is the researchers that
are creating the, um,
intellectual property that may
not have the, um
experience of how to build a
company, um, and they may need
the help to be able to do that.
So we would be able to serve as
that conduit from research
innovation to commercialization
to meet the needs of the
community.
Uh, moving on, the next piece
that is really necessary to be
able to build a sustainable
business and it's something also
that we are working in
collaboration with Doctor
Coghlin's, um, venture studio,
um, ambitions as well as, um,
Howard Kozloff's Noble Space
ambitions is to be able to, um,
use the businesses that are in
those spaces to be able to have
a sustainable, um, internship
program.
Um, the economic development is,
um
tied exclusively to an educated
workforce. If you don't have the
workforce to be able to continue
the business, um, you better
have robots. We don't have
enough robots and we don't want
to, you know, rely on robots. We
want to have people in the
spaces to be able to, uh, work
on the problems and to be able
to move forward with their, um,
experience and their, um,
economic growth as well. I came
from Georgia Tech, where it's
required for students to have a
cooperative experience
in industry before they
graduate. Georgia Tech is one of
the leaders in,
uh
you know, in return on
investment for an education
because the students that are
coming out of the university are
going right into jobs. How are
they going right into jobs? It's
because they've had that work
experience. They've already
worked with the industry
partners that they could then
get a job with. Many of them go
right into those positions after
they've graduated. Uh, when I
was back at Georgia Tech, I, I
hired a number of interns to be
able to do other work. And
whenever they had done a
cooperative agreement and I
would talk to one of their
former employers. They always
had rave reviews and they were
like, I will hire that kid right
out, you know, because you get
them when they're young, they're
scrappy, they're ready to learn,
and then you're able to, you
know, mold them into the
employee that you want them to
be once they graduate.
So an educated workforce is
something that we're really
excited about. Uh, with the
million dollars that, again, we
were allocated from the
legislation. This is one of our
big pieces that we're moving
forward with. And so, um, we've
got two internship programs. One
of them is called the Bioscience
Entrepreneurship Experience or
B. You can be the change, um
I, I've done a lot of grant
writing for the National Science
Foundation, and they like
acronyms, so that's why I went
with that one. this program is
going to pair a bioscience
student with a business student
and then put them into a
bioscience, um, company within
the state.
Um, people who, um, participate
need to be New Mexico residents.
They do not need to be New
Mexico students. And so one of
the pieces of this is kind of in
line with the STEM boomerang
idea is that people may leave
the state for their education.
They may go out of the state to
get other opportunities, but we
want to bring them back to the
state because this is the place
where their families are. This
is the place that has a great
cost of living. This is a place
that, you know, they can be
appreciated for, you know, what
they bring to the culture and to
the community.
And so we really want to be able
to target those, those
individuals. um, Inbra is a, a
program that is based out of New
Mexico State. It's, um, a
program that's funded by the,
uh, National Institutes of
Health. They have an internship
program where they're just
getting students from, um,
primarily undergraduate
institutions research experience
and the director of that
organization told me that 150
applicants, um, you know, apply
a year to their program and they
have to wheedle it down to 60.
Uh, we want to be able to help
with that experience and not
only give them research
experience, but also give them
entrepreneurship experience. And
so part of, um, their, uh,
experience in the BE program
will be to, uh, take classes
from the, um
uh, New Mexico Bioscience
Authority in collaboration with
our partners at the universities
as well as private industry and
venture capital to be able to
learn how to actually
commercialize an innovation. And
at the end of the program, we
want those teams to be able to
pitch an idea, you know, whether
it be something simple, um, you
know, like a better brand of
toothpaste or whether it be
something really complex that
they learn from working within
the industry, um, but we want
them to get that experience of
knowing how to pitch to a
potential investor to be able to
learn that not only are they,
you know, employees in this
business, but they can actually
be leaders in this business as
well. So we want that. Um, the
second internship program is the
Bioscience commercialization
internship. We, um, have
representatives from all three
res research universities,
especially, um, those that are,
are in leadership, um,
administrative roles at their
universities. Um, Dina Catron is
the director right now of, um,
the Arrowhead Center, um
uh
Tanner Shab is the Assistant
vice president for research at,
uh, New Mexico State. They are
very on board with, um, having
students come into their tech
transfer offices to be able to
work directly with researchers
that want to, um, innovate their
bioscience related, uh, research
to commercialize. And so we will
be, um, putting interns in the
tech transfer offices at New
Mexico State and New Mexico
Tech. I've also worked with, um,
Mariah Tomer, who used to be on
our board, um, and they're very
excited about being able to do
that.
At the University of New Mexico,
um, the students that will be
interns in this position will
actually work directly with the
Bioscience Authority, and they
will be able to work with
researchers both at the
University of New Mexico, but
also at CNM at, um, Santa Fe
Community College at Saint
John's, anywhere that they're
doing, uh, research to be able
to help lead them in how to
commercialize that research. In
collaboration again with the
bioscience Authority, our board,
and with our, um, newly going to
be newly hired.
uh, communications and industry
outreach manager.
Um, these internships, like I
said, they have a significant
return on investment. Um,
students that participate in,
uh, these kinds of activities,
they have a higher chance of
graduating. They have a higher
chance of going into the
industry. They have a better,
uh, representation of what is
feasible, um, to them. I've
talked to a lot of, um,
undergraduate students that
believe that if you're going
into STEM, you've got to go into
medicine
uh, which is great. We need
doctors in the state of New
Mexico and we definitely don't
want to, um, thwart that, but we
want to make sure that they have
another opportunity because many
of them, once they start looking
at the MCAT, they get freaked
out and they think, oh, this is
not for me, and they go into a
different field. We want to make
sure that they have another
avenue if, you know, that turns
out to not be what they want to
do.
Um,
it will also help, uh, with the
pipeline to be able to, uh, help
with entre with, uh, employment,
uh, needs of the startup
companies as well as the, um,
businesses. Uh, one part of the
ecomap again, that I, that I
mentioned is, um, career
opportunities. There are some,
uh
you know, employers that
continue to like curia continues
to have these high-level,
high-paying jobs available and
they're not being filled. OK,
why are they not being filled?
Maybe it's because the students
that, you know, we're going
through those fields, they
either don't know that they're
available and they haven't
gotten that opportunity to, uh,
learn the, the skills that they
need to learn, or they're not
getting the skills that they
need to know because they're not
getting the opportunity to go
into the industry. So we want to
be able to help mitigate that.
Um, on page 28, you can see an
overview of the, uh, the B
internship program. Um, our plan
is to launch the pilot phase in
the spring of 2026. Uh, we're
working right now to, uh,
collaborate with the businesses.
Um, they're signing up like
crazy. I have not gotten turned
down from anybody that I have
talked to about, uh, whether or
not they would be interested in
participating in this internship
program. Um, it will be paid
internship program. It will be
paid through, um, by the
Bioscience Authority.
um, you know, to be able to make
sure that these students are not
losing anything by participating
in the program.
Um,
that moves us on to prioritize
statewide collaborations.
Um, this is an incredibly, uh,
valuable piece that the
Bioscience Authority, uh, we see
it as being the umbrella of the
bioscience industry. And so when
I think of an umbrella, I think
of different spokes and those
different spokes, they are
connecting all of the different
pieces throughout the state. Uh,
like I said, our board is made
up of representatives from all
across the state, from all
across private industry, from uh
government, from economic
development, from all of those
pieces. And so it's really
valuable for us to stay
connected to all of these
different pieces that are
happening
So we're working on being able
to be that statewide, uh, tool
for the bioscience industry.
Uh, this last year we had, we
were able to facilitate a couple
of statewide collaborative
events, um, these are in
partnership with funding that we
got a couple of years ago from
the Small Business
Administration Growth
Accelerator Fund Competition.
Uh, we were able to create
something called the Rural
Biotech ecosystem. And so we
target rural communities and
rural, um
entrepreneurs when we're, when
we're having these kinds of, um,
events and so we were able to,
uh, coordinate a tour of the
bioscience sector, um, at Los
Alamos, um, which was really
great. Uh, it was only for
American citizens. So it kind
of, um, cut off a couple of, uh,
a few people that were not able
to come into the lab, but you've
been in the lab before, so
Doctor Coghlin was not able to
come, but he's already worked in
the lab, so he knows, he knows
the ins and outs really well.
That's why he's grinning. Um,
but it was a, it was a fantastic
opportunity for, um, different
groups to get together that had
not gotten together before, and
I was very shocked by this. But
the VA hospital does a lot of
research. They're gathering a
lot of data, and they don't have
the resources to actually
analyze that data. They were
able to have a great
conversation with the Los Alamos
National Lab researchers, and
they were able to collaborate
with that. And so I was really
excited to be able to see
you know, real hands-on work
going on to be able to, um, have
better collaborations. Uh, we
also had an amazing, um, event
at New Mexico State. Um, Chair
Loh was able to, to join us
there as well as many of our
other board members, um, to be
able to capitalize on the, um,
intellectual property, uh,
successes that are happening at
New Mexico State regarding ag
science, um, and everybody that
was there, they said that we,
they were so excited that they
were being included, which
of course, they had to be
included because they're part of
our state and we are a state
agency. But just the fact that
they, they needed to go out of
their way to say that really hit
us very hard. And so, um, going
forward, we're going to be
working, uh, with the Arrowhead
Center and with In Bray to be
able to have, um, a day of
office hours for the Bioscience
Authority at New Mexico State.
So we're going to be able to be
more of that conduit between
Northern New Mexico and southern
New Mexico and just making sure
that we're all, um, part of the
same club.
Uh, again, the EcoMath, um, just
looking at the next page, uh, it
talks about all of the different
pieces that we're working on to
be able to, um,
champion what is happening
throughout the state and in the
bioscience, um, including
events. And so if there are
events that are happening that
are relevant, we put it on
there.
Um, on page 32, you can see, uh,
we've continually to, uh,
participate in the bio
International, um, convention.
Uh, we also, uh, like, we, we
want to be able to be a
representative for the state in
other, um, conventions. Uh,
we've been able to collaborate
with international partners who
have been able to represent the
state at international events,
um, in collaboration with us,
but this one, was really
exciting. It was being led by A,
which is the Albuquerque
Regional Economic Alliance.
Um, the Economic Development
department was the premier, um,
sponsor of it, as well as New
Mexico Partnership and so it
really was a valuable, uh,
collaboration between the state
agencies that are working to
fulfill economic development.
Uh, we had a great turnout. um,
you know, for the 4 days that we
were there, uh, we had 471
companies come to see us. Uh,
many of them were interested in
finding out what kind of
resources we had. I'm sorry to
say many of them ask about lab
space, and so we know that that
is still something that we have
got to be able to remedy before
we're able to really, um, invite
companies to us if we don't have
the resources, it's really hard
to say, well, we've got a great,
you know, um, cost of living. We
have a great weather, um,
you can build your lab space.
And many of them are still very
interested in that just because
of, you know, the resources that
we talk about in New Mexico.
Um, so that was in Boston this
year.
Um, I've also, uh, as part of
the, uh, Small Business
Administration growth
accelerator Fund competition. I
was able to get to know many of
the other, um, participants in
that award. Uh, we were awarded
in 2023 and we were a cohort of
30 different organizations
throughout the country that had
been awarded, uh, one of them
was from Keene, New Hampshire.
um
and they, uh, collaborated with
us to be able to create the
national rural biotech
ecosystem. And so with that,
we're able to have, uh,
representatives from, you know,
the New England area from, um,
Ohio from the south, we have
representatives from Virginia
and North Carolina, um, all of
those different places, Marylyn
now, um, so we have
representatives from all of
these different areas that are
really, um, giving voice to the
rural communities and how
they're supporting the growth of
bioscience industry in those
indust in in those regions, um,
New Mexico is, you know, a key
player in it because we are
predominantly rural and, you
know, when I say r
ural to a lot of people, um,
they think that I'm talking
about, you know, middle of
nowhere rural, but really what
I'm talking about is Sequora and
Los Alamos. They are considered
to be rural. And so these are
places that we have the
expertise, we have the
intellectual property, we have
the innovation to be able to
develop strong companies, and we
just need to be able to give
them the support and the, you
know, help to be able to do
that.
Um, and so this partnership, uh,
really helps to, um, be able to
capitalize on that knowledge,
um, and to be able to share that
knowledge.
uh, like I mentioned, we do have
international partners, um, this
gentleman, um, on the page 34 is
Ethan Chen. He is the economic
development department, um,
liaison in Taiwan, and we've
been in collaboration and
communication for the last year
and a half now, um, to be able
to, uh, share what is happening
in New Mexico in terms of the
bioscience industry. He has been
able to, uh, represent the state
at these international, um
events and then companies are
reaching out and they want to
collaborate with New
Mexico-based companies. Um, it's
something that is a learning
opportunity for New Mexico-based
companies. Many of them.
have a little bit of, uh,
reservation about working with
those international partners,
um, but we're working on, you
know, being able to, uh,
share the dialogue, at least,
and to be able to encourage the
communication, whether it be
leading to any kind of, um,
working together or not, it's
good to have that collaboration
Um, finally, um, like, uh, Chair
Lo and director, um, Coghlan
have mentioned, um, New Mexico
bio, uh, is, you know, the,
well, it's a trade association
for the state. So it, it works
to be able to champion, um, the
state's, uh, the, the, uh,
company's needs and to be able
to get discounted rates when
they join the bio, um, program
uh,
Greg Burns is currently on my
board. Um, he is the director
of, um, NMbio, but he is
stepping down at the end of the
year. And so, um, NMbio is
looking to, um, collaborate more
with us to be able to meet the
needs of the industry, as well
as the needs of the economic
development department. I mean,
the economic development, um,
initiatives of the state. And
so, um, there are newly elected
president, Lisa Kudola is also
on, on my board. And so we have
a lot of, um, cross, um,
Yes, exactly
That's exactly what I was going
to say. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, and so we're working on
developing a shared, um
priorities with that
organization just to make sure
that, you know, there's no
duplicative efforts and that
we're, uh, maximizing on the,
um, efforts that we, that we are
able to have and that we're not,
um
you know, just straining
ourselves when we don't need to
and we're working together, um,
to be more of a team
organization.
So,
uh, in
conclusion, um, so just
something that, um, you know, we
were able to get the
million-dollar, um, allocation
this year. We're very excited
about that. We have, um, you
know, big plans to be able to
spend that money, and we're
hopeful that this, the, uh,
legislation will be able to
support, um, an increase to our
annual budget, moving forward,
um, just to be, so, so that we
can make sure to continue the
programming that we want to
have, so that we can be able to
expand the presence that the
bioscience industry, um, is
able to have in the state to be
able to, um, really, uh, grow,
you know, in that economic
development way.
Um, so just in summary, what
we've talked about is the
co-investment program, um, and
it increased to our annual
budget and then when we're
ready, the capital outlay funds.
We have many more things to say,
but I would love to take
questions.
just to make sure it's all that
what you want to hear too.
Thank you very much and just so
the committee remembers, we're
hearing this report because
they're required by legislation
to report to this committee and
I also wanna add that you've
heard several things about
funding, venture capital.
Tomorrow we'll hear about NMFAs,
um, venture capital program, and
we'll also hear about two state
venture capital companies that
help things like the Bioscience
Authority and help connect the
parts that the NMFA venture, uh,
fund does not, so they'll kind
of be venture capital education
tomorrow just so you know, and
with that, let's have questions.
We have Representative Kateson
and Representative Herrera.
Representative Ferrera, go
first.
Thank you. Thank you. uh, thank
you so much for your
presentation. Um, so as I
understand it, you're looking
for a million dollars in
recurring funding, and then 50
million in uh, in investment,
uh, pool. Is that correct?
Uh, that is correct. Um, at this
time, we are not seeking support
for that million dollars. We
want to spend the million
dollars that we have right now,
um, but moving forward, um, we
believe that that would be a, an
optimal amount for us to be able
to, um, continue the work that
we want to begin with the
original million dollars, um,
with the co-investment, um, yes,
that is something that we
continue to, um, champion
because the state
needed that
thank you. And Madam Chair, and
I guess I want to know the um,
who carried this legislation
last year and what, what
happened to it? Where did it end
up?
Yes, it was, um,
Senator Munoz.
and, uh, Representative Dixon, I
believe, were the two main
carriers of, uh, yeah, it was,
uh, Senate Bill 119
Senate Bill 119. OK, thank you.
It's called the Investment in
Bioscience Companies.
Thank you Madam Madam Chair and
thank you for this, and I, uh,
on page, um
where are we? P 9
You said there are 580 million
in NIH awards, uh, that were
brought into this state along
with $322 million in five-year
private, uh, investments.
have all of those NIH awards
been funded or that has the
funding continued for them?
Um, Madam Chair and rep
representative, um.
some of them were cut.
Uh, it, I know UNM had their uh
NIH funds cut, and they had them
restored.
Um
uh NMSU I know has been hit as
well by uh cuts.
Uh, I'm not sure where that
stands at the moment.
Um
I had conversations with the
program manager at NIH, uh, in
regards to uh
a call for proposals that my
company is submitting, um, and
she assured me that um small
businesses are still being
funded.
So,
um NIH through NIH, yes, because
I know they, I mean, I, I think
our attorney General, I know
that grants that were funded,
Madam Chair, um
were cut like the first day and
then the attorney as uh uh uh a
conclave, I guess I'd call it,
of attorney generals, uh, filed
lawsuits. We were one of those
states. It was 28 attorney
generals have filed lawsuits to
say that if you'd already
awarded funding, you couldn't
pull it back again. And I think
those were restored, but it's,
it's really a mix. It's really
hard to know what was funded and
what wasn't funded, and I
wondered if you could enlighten
this committee
on any other information you may
have about that.
So we did talk to, um, so Ryan
Canalosi is our representative
from the University of New
Mexico. He's the economic
development director for, um,
UNMHSC. Uh, we talked to him
before this, this meeting. Um,
he was hopeful to be able to
come, but ended up not being
able to join us after all. Um,
but he did say that, you know,
of the awards that were cut, um,
they are working to get them,
uh, restored. And the state's,
um, direction to be able to
match federal funds has really
been help
ful um, to the universities to
be able to make up for those
losses that have been felt by
the federal, um, funding being,
being taken away. And so he did
not say that it has impacted the
research that is going on. Um,
the, the research has been able
to continue. They have not had
to let, you know, people go, um,
in terms of that case, um, the
one situation where I know that
funding was lost and it was not
recouped. Um, it lost
equipment. And so, uh, we helped
to write letters of support, um,
to the, um, state senators to,
uh, to ask for that kind of
funding to be able to match, um,
those, those losses. Um, but it
is definitely something that,
you know, is on everybody's
mind. It's on, you know,
everybody's to do. Uh, we did
have really great, um, meetings
with the NIH, um, at Bio
International. They came to us
to, to talk to us about, you
know, what researchers and ent
re p re ne ur s needed to do to,
um, apply for funding.
Uh, they want to come to New
Mexico to do a panel discussion,
but they're pushing it back
until November, um, just because
the, um, their budget will be in
place by October 1st. And so
they wanted to make sure that
they had the feasibility to be
able to do that before coming
forward. Um,
so,
fingers crossed, but, uh, we'll
continue to move forward.
Uh, Madam Chair, yeah, I, I hope
you can keep us better informed
about, about these things
because it, it is imperative
Uh, the federal funding
Civilization Committee, we think
uh,
we won't have our numbers till
September.
maybe October
Uh, a lot of the legislation
that will impact us statewide
has been put
past the November 26 elections.
Uh, so a lot of things won't go
into effect until then, but just
the, the snap cuts in Medicaid
budgets are killing us now. And
I, I'm a strong supporter of
this. I, I just want you to
know, I, uh, you know, I
I worked with Los Alamos for
many years as the director of
their foundation, and I, uh, I,
you know, I, I worked with
people who did very innovative
design, both in funding and in
drawing down funding, and of
course those were the days when
we had Senator Pete Doinicci,
uh, to, uh, to handle our, our
legislation so I'm just saying
the more you know, uh, the
better we will be able to either
help, help you or continue this.
I, I think it's a very important
endeavor for the state.
I think we're dearly situated
for it. Uh, and I think, uh, I
think we have the workforce. How
much do you spend on your
internships every year? What's
that budget?
Um, so it will be about $250,000
for the 50,000 for 40 interns
so that's what,
uh, 6, it's not very much. It's
about 5, well, the, the, um,
yeah, it'll be 5000, um, 6,
5000 for um they're stipended
and then, uh, we'll be paying
for the training.
and, um, travel for the students
to be able to, to move around.
And then do the, uh, Madam
Chair, I'm curious if the, uh,
if the companies that get these
internships, are they putting
skin in the game too? Are they
putting any money in for these
internships. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, not at this
moment. Um, we are just in the
very, um, early stages of
launching it. Um, but we do
believe that working, it, it
used to be when we were first
having this conversation, and
the apprenticeship program
was available, um, from the
federal government. Um, that was
part of the conversation that in
order to be able to get these
interns, they had to go through
the apprenticeship program to be
able to then possibly have
apprenticeships afterwards that
would be skin in the game for
them. Um, since that program has
dissolved, um, we're
we're waiting to see the
responses of the industry before
we start making demands, but
we're hopeful that they will,
um, want to continue to, um
put
financing into it
Well, Madam Chair, I, um, I
would just encourage you to
maybe look at a match situation.
I know that's hard for startups,
but you know, 6000 to get a
great employee and that would be
probably double the hours that
you would have under this, uh,
would really, really make a huge
difference, I think, in their
companies and, and it's a great
time to test out, you know,
whether that, uh, person would
be, um, would fit
in the, in their group of, uh,
in their, in their working
group. And that, that's an
important consideration that,
you know, usually I've started a
lot of fellowships over my time
and I started the, uh,
congressional Hispanic Caucus
Fellowship to get more
more Hispanic, um, um, uh, staff
on the hill, right? And I saw
all these kids from, you know,
the Ivy Leagues, you know, who
had rich parents and they just
pay their semester to go work in
an office for free and, uh, so
we got that we started the
fellowship and now I think, I
think over
I think over like
4000 people have been through
that internship now. I, this was
years ago, folks. I'm very old.
This was in the 80s so I started
this. So, so it has, you know,
it has really made a substantial
impact of Hispanic staffers who
then go on to, you know, run for
office or or be heads of
agencies or, or do all those
things that that it starts a
leadership pattern for people.
So that's what's important for
our young students too, is to
understand entrepre
entrepreneurship at the base
level. So when they see somebody
else start a company and grow a
company, then they kind of they
have a model already embedded
in, in their brain, and that's
really what we wanna do as a
state. So I just would like to
say, Madam Chair, I stand as a
strong supporter of of this
organization. I think we need to
get you recurring money for
sure. I mean, this one year at a
time is nuts. I, I'm just gonna
tell you, you can't take
that to the bank, so, you know,
we really need to work to get it
recurring. First of all, and
then to see how much we can get
in this investment firm. And
with that, I, uh, I yield, Madam
Chair
Representative Kates, I thank
you, Madam Chair, and I see
ditto to my, uh, colleague, uh,
to my left to thank you very
much, Representative Ferrera.
Um, just because it's a fire
hose of information in your
presentation. I have to restate,
uh, this program of my
understanding is that New
Mexico, that that the the uh the
biotech industry is ripe for
expansion, pharmaceutical
medical problem solving, dealing
with tech hard and and and and
and soft technology and that New
Mexico is uh well positioned
because those tech hubs are
around the country, um
you know, people are not in the
Bay area because the traffic's
so good, right? So, uh, we have
a, we have beauty, we have good
housing, um, uh, thank you for
your investment in Rear Rancho.
We've got a top public school
district in there. And so, um, I
very much appreciate it. And so
that, that is, that is what we
want to make sure that we are
prioritizing and making sure
that we're taking this
opportunity. I just needed to
restate that, um,
I, I wanted to go a couple of
things because this is the first
time you've, uh, presented in
front of the legislature.
So, um, I will ask you
to make your numbers as accurate
as they can be. Obviously, if
they're taking money away and
then giving you back money
within 2 days' time, your power
points might not be updated,
but, but accurate information. I
would also, as a legislator, I
want to know where are your
investments in each county.
Um, I, uh, uh,
uh.
Doctor
Koblin is a celebrity in Rear
Rancho, so I know, I know about
his presence because everybody's
very excited about the company
being there, but I would, in
this, in this, and this is a
thorough, which is wonderful for
those uh cause it's a ittro. You
have to get us up to speed and
so I appreciate that. But I
think as legislators, we want to
know how is it affecting our
community? Are you investing in
agriculture in our community,
manufacturing
medical, and so I'd like to see
that in the report, for the
future. Um
uh, Unim Health and Sciences in
Rio Rancho. What, what, what are
they working on right now
besides being a beautiful
building with an awesome view.
Orthopedics, OK, fair enough.
That's a, that's a fair
statement. OK, um, I will say a
couple of things. uh
you're saying that that there's
money, you know, I don't like
the clawback either. I, I, I
very rarely like the clawback of
anything. But can you please
provide us, or are you
developing a piece of
legislature that would address
your funding with accountability
so that you are not susceptible
to the clawback because the
clawback is there because we
don't wanna see the money
wasted. We don't have a lot of
money sitting in a pot. We don't
want the money out of the state.
So what is your proposal?
to make sure that our money is
staying in the state and staying
invested and it may be that,
because I know with water
projects, we, we, we have this
problem with water projects, is
we're going to invest in this
infrastructure. Well, water
doesn't take a year to invest.
It takes a year just to do
planning, you know, so we may
need 3 years before there's a
clawback.
So either some sort of proposal
of a longer developmental time
or some sort of proposal that
you guarantee a certain
percentage of it is, um, is
provided. I would like to see a
piece of legislation like that.
I'd be glad to work on it if you
have ideas, um, and so that we
don't, we're not susceptible to
the clawback.
Your, uh, 25,000 square feet. So
at first when you said it was
being funded by Capital Outlay.
I was like, why?
But I guess it is a
it is an ongoing but temporary
space of development before they
can go find more permanent labs.
Is that correct? Is that what
that, that, the 25,000 square
feet of.
So, uh, when a business comes
out of the research university
or the national lab. Usually
they're just at their small lab
space. Um, it could be, you
know, for 11 or 2 people, but
it's not going to be a large,
um, space at all for them to be
able to have a transition space
into an accelerator, um,
opportunity where, you know,
they have to meet with the, the
people to be able to, um, get
the investment dollars to be
able to practice their pitches,
to be able to, um, get that VC
funding, um, to be able to then
move on to a larger space, um,
it's definitely, uh, the goal
for it. Thank you so much. I, my
legislative office is, uh, in
the workforce, uh, CNN Workforce
Training Center. So I'm very
familiar with the ingenuity
program. Um, was, as familiar as
I can be with someone who's not
in it because it is you are
doing dense work like it's,
there's a lot of spinning
plates, um, uh, so I appreciate
that
Have you looked into NMFA to
they have capital out, I believe
they have a funding group for
bricks and mortar investment, at
least in the medical and could
this not biomedical to be able
to build lab space on
speculation, um, for an
investment for so many years,
and then the company could
decide whether or not they
purchased that from the state or
not?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
I'm happy to take this question.
Issue with the NMFA is that they
still require a personal
guarantee.
to actually help to financially
support such efforts.
and I can tell you this is
almost impossible, so you cannot
get private investors
to come in
and they're required to actually
have liability with a personal
guarantee against the loan that
was given by the NFA.
OK,
thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you. It's not,
but that's not what he's saying.
I'm so sorry, uh, Representative
Herreras is, is concerned about
private donate by by pri, uh,
anti-donation.
legislation and, and I can, I
can see that, but I think that
NMFA if they own the building,
we'll, we'll talk about it off
here.
but I do see, I would like to
see, uh, OK, New Mexico, New
Mexicans were all about the
relationship. That's what's
beautiful about this state.
It's what it's beautiful about
our, as a legislator, and I
cannot see that even more strong
of what your agency is. It is
all that's what your agency is,
is building those relationships,
um, and so, uh,
I would want to see some sort of
uh, introduction and maybe I
will be the one that makes it
to, uh, commercial investors for
specspace for lab space, because
you're absolutely right. We have
space
um, and so, uh, between uh the
site readiness NMFA and then our
private investors, I would not
see why they couldn't. It's they
just could not, we couldn't give
them the building. It would have
to be
the state would have to own the
building.
And as a, um, administratively
attached to University of New
Mexico. We do qualify for that.
And so, um, that's why Capital
outlay would be available to us
for, for those reasons, um, but
we've also talked to NMFA about
the, um, Opunity Enterprise, um,
fund, and once we are ready to
be at a place where we can build
up, um, we, we see that as, as
being necessary right now with
the, um, feasibility
study and with the development
and design of the space. Uh, we,
you know, don't
we're not ready to charge rent
to be able to pay that loan
back.
OK, yeah, I, I understand. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair, and
thank you. You're absolutely
right. There's many steps before
him, but the enterprise
absolutely, and, and I just
think the capital outlay is
limited. I understand for, for
an incubator, OK, but you're
talking about you need some real
investment with labs across the
state. Um, I just have to one
last, give a plug for Sandoval
County. We have a world-class
robotics, uh.
organization there that are, uh,
that are gearing up for the
individuals at a young age. um,
it's been told me that we have
tons of PhDs and lots of
entry-level workers were needing
that certificate, that, that,
that skilled laborer in between
that that's really where we need
to invest and with Riotech and
the CNM uh trade school and, uh,
the R 4 robotics organization.
Um, I
hope that we're
in all the other counties as
well. Thank you.
Any more questions?
And I will say this isn't
actually the first time they've
been presenting. We've had Dale
Decker, we've had different ones
of you, um, because it is such
an incredible driver for our
state now and forever actually.
My only question is, um, now is
the time to work on Capitol
outlay. I'm already meeting with
people. Now we have district uh
legislative aides that assist us
and so if, if you have specific
things you wanna do
I would start contacting every
legislator if it's based in
their area, the better, um, do
you have plans
What kind of vision do you have
now? Do you have anything we
want to build this space in
Socora. We want to live, build
this space in, uh, Luna County.
Do you have any specific things
like that now?
Our board is working on
developing what they want to do
going forward. We have some
members that are interested in
creating a plan that is
reproducible in various areas.
And so that piece would not
necessarily be a capital outlay
request that would be, you know,
from our design and development,
um, piece that would be coming
out of the million dollars. Um,
others, you know, we want to,
um, start building right away.
And so, you know, where,
wherever it is, um, the rail
yards has been suggested
Los full of, um, Lomas has been,
um, suggested Broadway, you
know, has, has been suggested.
And so, um, it would be in
Albuquerque if we start building
right now. Um, but again, the
idea of being able to have
something reproducible to be
able to go to the, um, various
locations that could utilize it
and could benefit from it.
Um, that is still, um, part of
the conversation. And so our
next, um, board meeting is going
to be August 21st. Um, we're
still moving forward on
you know, being able to develop,
to, to decide exactly where our
focus is going to be, but I will
definitely share with them,
Madam Chair, um, the capital
outlay needs to be discussed
right now.
I think that would be good.
Thank you. Yeah, and we're not
in an election year for senators
and reps, so
you're not
vying with other forces of
attention. So yeah, the sooner
the better, the more specific,
the better how it benefits their
students, K-12 college, the more
concrete bullet points that go
yet. I'd better give to this so
I'm gonna be behind the curtain,
but thank you. anybody else
don't see any other questions.
Thank you so, so much
to voting
your careers in various aspects
of this very appreciated.
Thank you, Madam
Thank you
I think
spare
Yeah,
um, we are actually through for
the day.
but, um, I think everybody got a
text whether your staff or
member you're invited to La
Cosina.
and Espanola. You received a
text with the address and the
time
uh, this isn't gonna be one of
those prolonged one hour
cocktail hours. This is gonna be
eat, talk.
go back to your hotel, your home
or your bed.
So,
I hope to see you.
uh, in Espanola at 5 o'clock.
