I
Present
Present
Second
Yeah.
Hello, Madam Chair, board
members, uh, what's being
presented is a water system
upgrades loan for enchanted
forests, mutual domestic water,
consumers association.
The association has requested a
$1,250,000 from the drinking
water state revolving loan fund.
This is to finance construction
of a phased process for new
distribution system is designed
for well improvements.
The association qualified for a
principal forgiveness grant uh
for $937,000 500 dollars. And um
Moving on to the strengths and
weaknesses, the strengths, the
upgrades will enable the
community to receive a more
responsive and updated uh water
system, the updated system will
provide public uh health and
safety. Uh, there are no
weaknesses to note. This is the
first time the project has
appeared before the NMFA board,
staff recommendman's approval
and I stand for any questions.
We stand for any question.
Thank you.
Any questions on this project?
Uh, if not, do I hear a motion
to approve?
Motion has been made. Is there a
second?
Motion made and seconded. Is
there any discussion? If not all
those in favor say aye. Right,
right.
Although suppose same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you. City of Santa Fe
next.
Yes. Hello, Madam Chair and
board members. What's being
presented is a flocculation and
sedimentation and improvement
loan for the city of Santa Fe,
uh, the new flocculation and
sedimentation process will
provide a safe drinking water
and continued citizen water
services.
Uh, moving on to the strengths
and weaknesses, the strengths,
uh, the upgrade. Oh, I'm sorry,
the city received a principal
forgiveness grant for uh
8,500,000.
And the straightness and uh
strengths and weaknesses, the
strengths of the upgrade utility
infrastructure will provide
health and safe drinking water
to community, it serves. The
upgrades will enable the
community to receive a more
responsive and upgraded water
system. There are no weaknesses
to note. This is the first time
this project has appeared before
the NMFA board. Saferman's
approval. Uh, we stand for.
Any questions from board members
on this project?
Not a question, but a comment,
uh, very happy to see this
project in front of us, uh, very
pleased that NMFA has been able
to come to this, um, come to
this loan agreement, so thank
you so much for your work on it.
Any other questions or comments
from board members?
If not doing her emotion on this
project?
And
Motion is made to approve the
project. Is there a second?
Motion is made and seconded. Any
discussion.
If not all those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed same sign.
motion carries. Thank you.
We
Next, uh, the project from the
University Medical Group.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
members of the New Mexico
Finance Authority Board. So I do
have some guests here today. I'd
like to introduce uh Jo Clark.
She's the chief operating
officer of uh UNM Medical Group,
and then we have their CFO, uh,
Jared Udall, and then of course
we have the financial advisor,
George Williford. So I would
like to start the presentation
with Jill to talk about the
project, and then I will talk
about the financing, and then we
will stand for questions.
Ma
Thank you
My apologies, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the board,
thank you very much for having
us here today and for
considering this project.
Um, this is an opportunity for
us to take, um, our Truman
Health Services program and
clinic that is currently housed
in 8 different suits or
buildings in a single complex
that is deregating around us at
the moment, um, and how it into
a single um building we are
currently occupying 22,000
square feet and we will be
moving into 28,000 square feet
with an opportunity to add some
additional exam rooms and uh one
additional procedure room. It
will also enable
to be providing these services
together under one roof instead
of the 8 different buildings
that we are in now.
The owner of the buildings that
we occupy now, um, he is
planning to tear down the
complex in the summer of 2027.
So,
We've been on a mission to find
a new home for our Truman Health
Services and um finally landed
on a great piece of property on
university in Gibson that is
right off the bus line and it,
and gets our patients quickly
into the main hospital and I'm
excited to be able to uh.
Start to build them and create
them a new home under one roof.
Thank you. Thank you, Jill. So
the structure of the loan that
we have before you today is will
be a simultaneous bond closing.
And basically what that is, is
this loan will close with the
2025A New Mexico Finance
Authority bond that we
anticipate closing in February.
Therefore, our tax-exempt loan
amount and our net net interest
cost will be determined when we
close that loan.
So I do have some parameters
before you today, and the loan
will be a 23 year loan.
We do have gross unrestricted
operating revenue serving as our
pledged revenue. We have a
capitalized interest fund NMFA
will hold those funds, and we
will, um, uh, use those funds to
pay the interest.
through um August 31st, 2026.
And with that, our last audit
was 2023. It was unmodified. It
had one finding, and again, um,
staff recommends approval and we
do stand for questions.
Medicare.
Oh, go ahead, Andy. No, I know,
uh,
Tresa's gonna abstain from
voting. Yeah, exactly. Thank
you, Andy. And I'd like to make
a motion for approval.
Thank you for that motion has
been made for approval. Is there
a second?
Motion and any discussion.
There's no more discussion. We
can vote on the motion on the
eye.
All those opposed and carries.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Congratulations.
So my next project before you
today, Madam Chair and members
of the board is Taos County. I
do believe we may have Tas
County manager, Brett Harmio
online.
Did we have any uh additional
questions.
So with that bed and chair, I'd
like to share that Taos County
on behalf of Holy Cross
Hospital, would like to make
some improvements to a hospital
that was actually started in
1936.
It was built in 1936, our very
first hospital.
Uh, actually, it was a house, so
I'm on page 126 and then
improvements were made in the
60s to the hospital.
Improvements were also made to
the hospital in the um 1990s and
fast forward where we are today,
we're going to continue to make
improvements through this loan
before you. That, that will
include infrastructure
improvements and additional
equipment, and it'll keep the
hospital maintaining high
quality and innovation for both.
the Taos and the northern
community.
Again, this loan will be a
simultaneous bond loan closing
as well.
Therefore, our tax exempt loan
amount and our net interest
costs will be determined when we
do close it with the NMFA 2025A
bond.
This loan is a little special
because it has the GRT as its um
revenue, like revenue.
But the voters approved the GRT
with an extraordinary redemption
feature, and all that means is
any excess GRT will be used to
pay this loan down.
Quickly.
So even though we do have a 10
year term, this loan will have
an anytime call, you use the
extra revenues to pay later
maturities and principles.
So the 2023 audit did have 7
findings, and there were 4
material weaknesses.
Um, the, uh, Taos County, uh,
staff did provide a management
plan.
To remediate the findings and
ultimately they um vacancy rate,
especially in the finance
department was in the 40%, and
they have been able to hire
staff.
Accounting specialist, they have
put a framework together, they
have instituted segregated
duties, internal controls,
training processes and
procedures that have actually
brought it down to 14%, the
vacancy rate. With that, staff
does recommend approval, and I
stand for questions and if Mr.
Hermis online, um, we can. Thank
you.
Any questions from board
members?
Madam Chair, I do see that
manager Jaramio is online and I
know that was quite a hurdle
with some of those vacancies.
Um, anything else you wanna add
to those findings and how you've
been addressing them internally.
Uh, thank you, thank you, board
members. Thank you, uh, Marquita
and Carmela, um,
We believe we've uh addressed
the findings of, whereas, you
know, we're in our fiscal year
ending 24 audit, uh, all our
capital, uh, inventory, uh,
those have been addressed, um,
Are we put in in instituted a
plan on reviewing the
still-dated checks and
And uh so the, the main finding
was on the capital assets, so
we're on top of that, the
inventory has been completed,
um, for the fiscal year ending
23 in that audit report. The,
our chief purchasing officer,
um, capital asset manager went
in the same was also acting as
finance director, so that's
where we got uh behind on that
year for our audit uh
for audit and
And uh
Regarded capital assets and then
on the IT, uh, we have addressed
those issues uh regarding uh our
IT and uh we're working with a
pretty good company and we're uh
doing a lot of education and
penetration tests to make sure
that our system is sound.
Thank you.
Any other questions from board
members on this project?
Mr. Cameron, uh, Madam Chair,
staffing is difficult, so we, we
commended actually going from 40
to 14 is, is, is pretty
substantial, so congratulations,
uh, Mr. Manager and uh and find
people in Tusk County.
Alright, thank you. I appreciate
that.
Any other questions or comments
from board members on Madam
Chair, I would move for
approval.
Motion has been made for a
second, Madam Chair.
Motion is made and seconded. Any
discussion on the matter.
Not all those in favor say aye.
I.
All those opposed see inside
motion carries.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next city of Berlin.
Hey, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair and board members. What's
being presented uh is a 2024
infrastructure loan for the city
of Berlin, the finance director,
uh, Daniel, Daniel Carle Hall to
be available if any questions
come up.
The city has requested 2.5
million from the public project
revolving fund to finance city
projects to improve the city's
infrastructure.
Proceeds will be used but not
limited to city infrastructure
improvements and uh the cost of
insurance.
The city has requested a spring
reserve in lieu of a
traditionally funded debt
service reserve, uh, which is
allowed by PPIRF loan management
policies.
The city has requested a
contingent intercept as well.
Uh, the strength and weaknesses,
strengths will provide
improvements to city properties,
which will enhance health and
safety to the community and the
project will help preserve a
historical landmark. There were
no weaknesses to note, um, last
completed audit was in 2023. It
was unmodified with two
findings, no repeated uh
material weaknesses. And one,
repeated significant deficiency.
This is the first time the
project has appeared before the
NMFA board. Reckleman's
approval, and we stand for.
Thank you. Any questions?
From board members on this.
I just want to again note that
we have a
A finding a significant
deficiency in the audit plant,
check with staff to make sure
that we have.
Thank you, madam, uh, chair, we
have received uh the management
uh uh report from them, and they
are on track. They have a uh
audit in 2024, and they are
working diligently beyond what
has happened in this and um I
will let uh director Carmel Hall
answer any questions if you
don't.
Great.
Mr. Carvahal, thank you so much
for joining us today. We
appreciate that.
Do you want to make any
comments, thank you for having
me. Um, uh, I just want to say
that the um financial health of
the city has been improving
every year. If you go back and
look at our audits from before,
there was quite a more uh
material weaknesses, um, and,
you know, now we got to a
significant deficiency, which
is, um, you know, an improvement
from our other ones, but uh we
should be on track to, you know,
work through these and have a
clean audit.
Um
This year, so.
Thank you. Thank you for your
comments.
on this?
Second, Madam Chair.
Seconds till motion's been made
and seconded any discussion on
the motion?
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Hi
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
The project moves forward.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next
Clovis MSD.
Morning, Madam Chair and board
members, which you see here in
front of you is for Clovis
Municipal School District, and
they are the home of the
Wildcats. And what you have here
is presented in front of you as
a PRF 2024 general obligation
bond loan request, and I am on
page 150 in your board material.
In November of 2021, this
district did receive voter
approval and that that um voter
approval is valid for a period
of 4 years.
The Clovis Municipal School
District does have a loan
request. It is for $5 million.
It is for a 15-year term with
the 3.56% net interest cost.
As you look at the project
description, you'll see the loan
proceeds will be used for
remodeling of the Clovis High
School Fine Arts building, which
includes HVAC, Security,
remodeled offices and classrooms
and remodeling of the auditorium
to include drainage.
Looking at the audit, you'll see
the audit is a fiscal year 2023
audit was unmodified. They did
have 4 findings, but none of
those findings impact this
project or this financing
request whatsoever. Um, this is
the first time that this project
has appeared before the NMFA
board. Staff recommends
approval, and I'm happy to stand
for any questions you may have.
Thank you.
Any questions on this project?
If not, do I hear a motion?
to.
motion is made to approve.
Motion is made and seconded. Any
discussion, if not, all those in
favor say aye.
Hi.
Motion Cars.
Project is approved.
Next, Project 8.7 on your agenda
of the.
Hello, once again, Madam Chair
and board members. Uh, what's
being presented is a 2024 land
purchase for the city of Baird.
Also have the city manager, uh
Martha Sales available if any
questions arise. Um, this is to
finance the purchase of 675
acres of land that is located
between the village of Santa
Clara and the city of Bayard.
The acquisition will inherit a
present lease agreement because
of this, the loan will be
treated as taxable.
Uh, the strengths and
weaknesses, uh, this will
provide the city to develop land
and increase economic
development and growth, which
will increase their tax base and
possible new housing development
for the community.
Uh, there are no weaknesses to
note. The last completed audit
was in 2023, and modified with
two findings, no repeated
material weaknesses or repeated
significant deficiencies.
This is the first time this
project has appeared before the
NMFA board staff recommends
approval.
Thank you.
Any questions
a mini move for approval.
Motion has been made for
approval. Is there a second?
Madam Chair.
Motion is made and seconded. Is
there any? And I'm sure it looks
like Priscilla has her hand up.
Thank you for letting me know
that. I can't see that from
this, so, uh, I appreciate that.
So good member, uh good morning
members of the the board and
Madam Chair, my name is
Priscilla Lucero and I am the
director of the Southwest New
Mexico Council of Governments,
and I just wanted to extend the
depth of gratitude to your loan
team over in New Mexico Finance
Authority. They have been
working with me and the city of
Baird on this project for about,
um, well, me specifically um for
about the last 9 months, and
then we came to them when we
moved this project very quickly,
but
I think what I wanted to share
the most uh with all of you is
how important that is for the
city of Baird to be able to
expand their incorporated
limits. Most of the mining
district, if you know anything
about the mining industry in
Grant County had been landlocked
by mining company land, and just
a little bit of history, this
particular property was owned by
a former representative and that
was a legislator in the in the
state legislature, and so it was
really important for the family
to
Give Baird the opportunity to be
able to give back to the
community that allowed their
father to really develop, um,
the city of Bayard. So I want to
share a little bit of that
history. Again, thank you for
your continued support and all
your efforts and, and working
with the communities of the
state of New Mexico. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you and thanks for your
comments. If there's no other
discussion, we have a motion on
the table.
All those in favor say aye.
Hi.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
And the project is approved.
Thank you. Next Southwest solid
waste Authority.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. What you
have before you is a memo
requesting a revised repayment
schedule for the Southwest Solid
Waste Authority. The solid Waste
Authority contacted
Enimate-based staff, and they
notified us that they have
become unable to meet their
obligations due primarily to
turnover of staff in their
finance department.
They have formally requested a
7-month moratorium, um, of
monthly payments on loan 4940.
Um, this loan has a debt service
reserve and a debt service
reserve account with balances
that are adequate to service
their November interest only
payment and their May of 2025
principal and interest payment.
The monthly payments will resume
in May of 2025, and this loan
will mature on schedule in May
of 2026. Uh, I have updated the
credit analysis and it reflects
a debt service coverage ratio of
1.52 times. So with that, staff
is requesting a seven-month
moratorium on monthly payments
for loan PPRF 4940 for the
Southwest Solid Waste Authority,
and I will go ahead and stand
for any questions.
Thank you.
Any questions on this project?
Madam Chair, if I could ask a
quick question. Um, Aaron, is
that gonna fully deplete the
reserve fund once those payments
are are made. There should be a
a balance of 19,000 left.
Um, so that provides a little
bit of a cushion.
And in the event that they need
an extension beyond that, what
would be triggered to cover
those upcoming future payments.
At that point, we might look
into rescheduling the um or
restructuring the loan, uh, to
extend the payments. Thank you.
Any other questions from board?
Madam Char for approval.
Motion has been made for to
approve, Madam Chair.
Motion is made and seconded any
discussion on the motion, say I.
I
All those opposed seem.
Motion carries on the projects
approved.
Next on our agenda.
Uh, revisions to the PPRF loan
management policy.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Happy
Halloween.
Um, so I'm gonna be presenting
this item and also the next 2.
They're all relating to charter
school facility projects, um,
uh, that, uh, we're hoping to
open two programs, uh, uh,
before the end of the year, the
charter school revolving fund
and then also the capacity in
PPRF, um, with, um,
Uh, for these projects. So I'm
gonna give you a brief
introduction and overview of how
we see those two programs
working, um, and, and providing
capacity for these types of
projects and then I'll, I'll
jump into the revisions for the,
the PPRF um policy, and then,
um, the next two items will be
the governance for um the
operation of the framework of
um.
The revolving fund.
Um, so, and what, um, we'll be
covering today in, in the two
sets of policies, um, really
reflects the work that myself,
um, Chip, who's, um, online here
and many members of the team
have been doing, um, over the
last few months to develop
specific underwriting criterion
um the application and also
monitoring procedures um for
these specific credits. So
you'll see those specifics here
in these revisions and then also
in the next policy.
Um, just a, a quick step back,
so there are about 100 charter
schools in New Mexico, about 70%
of them are 70% are in um urban
communities and then uh 30% are
in rural communities. Um,
historically, NMFA has done one
charter school facility
transactions and transaction in
the PPRF. So, the PPRF has
always had the ability to
finance lease purchase
agreements. Um, uh, it, however,
has only done one transaction.
And that
primarily uh for from two main
reasons related to the, the
credit risk. So first, the
primary source of repayment on,
on lease purchase agreements is
typically the lease assistance
revenue that charter schools
receive from the public school
Capital Outlay Council. Um, and
that's an annual, uh, grant
award. Um, so it's not an
enduring revenue stream, um,
like a typical GRT pledge, um,
in the PPRF.
Um
The second is that the form of
contract, so, um, these aren't
actually loans, these are lease
purchase agreements, um, charter
schools or public schools,
they're not um allowed under New
Mexico law to enter into
long-term debt obligations
themselves. So we have a New
Mexico, um, uh, statutorily
created, um, structure, or
contract called the lease
purchase agreement, um, which
is, um, what charter schools,
uh, can legally use, um, to
basically enter into
long term leases, and then they
have the option to buy the
property um back. So, um, we'll
be entering into lease purchase
agreements and we will
effectively be owning um these
um charter school buildings, um,
until the charter school, um,
would, would take us out. And so
that's obviously also very
unique. It's, it's one of those,
um, land-based transactions, um,
uh, that this and others um were
we would potentially be doing
with the new junior lane
capacity and
As you all know, that was just
um created over the last um
really year, year and a half.
So, um, now we're at a place
where, um, not only can we
operate the revolving fund and
that was actually created 2
years ago, but when that
happened, uh, we took a step
back and looked over all at how
we were working with charter
schools and given um the
affordability of PPRF and the
fact that we were looking at the
junior lean, um, it made sense
to see um see really to wait.
And um let that PPRF capacity,
uh, developed, there was also a,
a, um, a bill that passed
earlier this year that actually
changed, um, uh, changed the
nature of that lease assistance,
um, it was, um, House Bill 207,
um, and it, uh, sorry, I'm
saying ome alot
um, and, and I'm getting very
technical, but this is very
technical,
um, it changed, it, it was a one
word change, um.
And it said that lease
assistance, um, shall be paid
every year by the PSCOC instead
of maybe paid. Um, and so that,
uh, to some degree improved um
the security of that revenue
stream that charter schools are
relying on to pay their lease
payment.
So, um.
So we feel like we're now at a
really good place to to open
this capacity. The way the two
pro programs are gonna work. So
PPRF is primarily going to be
looking at refinancing existing
lease purchases, purchase
agreements and permanent
financing on transactions where
there's no construction risk.
So, um, at this, at this stage,
we're not going to be taking any
construction risk. We're just
gonna be using PPRF for
permanent financing, um, and we
expect a good handful of um
applications to refinance.
existing LPAs hopefully at lower
rates than what charter schools
are already paying and then the
um charter school revolving loan
fund will be um providing
construction financing and
financing during the
construction period. Um, we
anticipate that for um projects
that require longer term
financing post construction
period, they could then perm out
in the PPRF, um, so we intend to
use that revolving fund as kind
of a construction and then um uh
kind of uh rotate that capacity.
and hopefully that will free up
for, for, for new construction
projects. Um, the other thing I
wanted to highlight was, um, so
eligible schools, um, and then
this is in some of the, the
statutory frameworks, uh,
schools must have gone through
their first renewal. Um, so
we're not, we're not able to
look at charter schools that are
operating in their 1st 5 years,
they had to have had some
operating history, um, and been
approved their contract, uh,
re-approved by their authorizer
in order to be
eligible for either of these
programs.
Um
So I hope that was just some
helpful background, um, and I'm
just gonna go ahead and walk in,
walk through then um on the loan
management policies, if you
don't mind going to 190.
These are some relatively minor
changes, just um, including a
charter schools here on these
tables uh for the debt service
coverage and additional bond
test requirements. Um, so we've
included this here and on lease
assistance payments, um, we'll,
we'll, will potentially be
structuring those, so the annual
payment is the same as police
assistance, um, uh, well, that
is how those contracts will be
structured, um, uh, if a fund,
if a school has additional funds
and
general fund that they can
pledge, um, for additional
collateral, um, uh, the minimum
debt service, there will be one
or, or um
Minimum coverage on the annual
lease costs, I should say, um,
would be 1.3 times.
And um we actually just removed
charter schools from um the
additional bonds test table
because it wasn't, it wasn't
actually relevant.
Um, and then
Uh, on page 196.
Um, these are some of the, um,
Uh, really just very specific
charter project additions we're
making, um, to reflect, um the
underwriting, um, you know, what
our credit and, and lending
teams will need, um, from the
schools that will be requesting
in the application that's um not
typical for a PPRF building
project and also just
highlighting some of the things
that the credit team will be
looking at. So, um, the business
plan, for example, we are going
to be requiring schools to, to
submit a comprehensive business.
plan, um.
And unaudited financials or
standard on the next page, um,
student demographic breakdown,
uh, currently waitlist if
available, um, enrollment is,
um, a key driver and and a data
point um around the school's,
uh, success, um, from an
operational, uh, standpoint. So,
um, the application requests
were detailed information there.
Um.
Letter of recommendation and
review from the um charter
schools chartering Authority, so
charter schools are authorized,
um, uh, or required to be
authorized. Um, it's either uh a
school district, uh, or it's the
publication commission.
Um, and, um, so we'll be looking
at um the authorizer authorizers
reviews of the school.
Um, uh, if the charter school is
currently in designation from
the public education department.
Um, so that's related to the
public education department's
review of the, of the school and
the school's performance. Um, so
we'll be drawing on, you know,
various sources from other, um,
public agencies to um to
understand better the the school
and the credit. Um, we request,
um, uh, uh, uh, pretty extensive
facility documentation, um, uh,
description of facility
currently.
facility master plan, that's
their plan over the next 5
years, as you all know, um,
maintenance budget, um, and
we're gonna require that for
multiple years to see that
they're adequately planning, um,
and have adequately saved for um
uh required renovations, um, and
we're, we're, we're gonna be
requiring reports from uh uh the
inspections conducted by the
public school facilities
Authority, which is our state's,
um uh uh agency that that
oversees public school
buildings.
Um, you'll see lower down, um,
I've already covered the, the
coverage, um, but if you, you
can see we'll be requiring um
75% or 80% loan to value on, on
or financing the value, I should
say, um, on the buildings and we
are gonna be requiring um
relevant appraisals.
Um, we're gonna be requiring,
uh, to see, um, in their, um, on
their balance sheet, a repair
and replacement fund. That's
where they're um saving for
facility maintenance costs, um,
uh, and also for ones that might
be more substantial in any, in a
year.
Um, in terms of, um, moving down
to other factors, so we're
setting the range of financing
available to schools between
5000 and 15 million. Um, uh,
obviously the PPRF, um, kind of
has a broader and does
significantly larger
transactions. We thought this
might make sense initially. Um,
also given the junior lean does
have, uh, albeit right now, um,
significant capacity. There is a
limit and we're expecting
significant demand also from uh
credits that could be eligible
for that.
Um
Highlights here that
construction is not a type of
risk that PPRF is taking on
these particular credits, um,
and then on the, um, next page,
um, so we're in the
lease-purchase agreements, we
require that one year of rent
payments be paid on delivery of
the lease, um, uh, so upfront.
Um, and the last 3 editions here
are, um, you know, ensuring that
school is in good standing with
its relevant, you know, the PED
and the PSFA, um, agreeing that,
uh, them agreeing to notify us
of any adverse action and also
an agreement to submit, um, our
annual reporting requirements.
Um, and the last thing I'll
mention, um, I, these, the, the
PPRF loan management policies
came before you all in the
summer for a substantial
revision, uh, alongside the
rules, um, and it's our
expectation that as we build
out, um, some of these
alternative credits and, and,
and look at more transactions.
We may be coming back to you to
make uh these types of
adjustments where it's not
substantive to the body of the
document, but, um, including
more
detail on the policy around how.
Um, and, uh, all that concludes
my comments on this item. I'll,
I'll stand for questions.
OK. Any questions from?
venture on page 197 page 18 of
the
Policy.
It talks about um
Determination that repayment is
adequately secured by a deed of
trust, etc. etc. to a minimum
amount to value of 75%.
Should that be a maximum?
Wound value, I'm not sure I.
Understand it well enough to
know why we have a minimum
value.
Right.
That's a good catch.
So that's maximum.
Uh, no, actually, um.
The lower's better.
Yeah, so we want to change that
to Max.
Thank you, Member Collins.
Haven't you just have an
additional comment, uh, you
know, this is long been uh
needed, you know, one of the
things that the public education
department used to challenge, uh
charter schools was they had to
own the business, but uh without
uh without these type of
programs they were basically uh
uh mandate to go through a lease
purchase and uh had very little
uh uh way of of doing so
otherwise, uh, you know, they
have this, uh, lease assistance
based on their enrollment, all
that stuff, but uh, so this,
this.
Solves a very long standing
problem. One question is, uh, I,
I would imagine that the amount
of the enrollment, uh, will
determine how much they can
actually uh secure from the
PPRF.
For the facility. I mean, that's
gonna be related to, um, how
much revenue they have. And so
yeah, that's gonna um mean
directly impact how much they
can afford to finance. Thank
you.
Yes
And, um,
what happens if the enrollment
changes year over year is NMFA
staff going to be reviewing the
repayment schedule to make sure
that they have enough revenue
each year to be able to cover
the repayment of the loan.
Yeah. Thank you, member
Trujillo. That's a good
question. So, um, uh,
If there, we will be having to
monitor that, um, and I think
enrollment stability is one of
the key um
The things that we'll be looking
for.
Um, when we underwrite these
transactions. Thank you.
A couple of questions. So, um,
Our policy will basically
Only be applicable to schools
who have been in operation for
more than 5 years.
Um, what happens to the schools
who are less than 5 years who
are startup schools and I, I
heard there was maybe a
moratorium that was discussed at
last legislative session on new
charter schools. Has that been
put in place or do we still have
new charter schools?
Madam Chair, I'm sorry. I'm, I'm
not aware of the moratorium, but
it may have been put in place
have not been passed, yeah, and
I, I, um.
I've understood that that 5 year
hurdle is really um more about
the risk on the on the financing
side, um, so.
And that has always been um one
of our requirements, even though
we haven't done a lot of
projects, um, that's always been
and Madam Chair, I would just
note that that's also in law, so
both the charter school facility
revolving fund as well as the
PPRF require that they have made
that five-year, um
reauthorization, and that was
actually at the request of the
public school of charter schools
of New Mexico, whatever their
acronym is, um, because they
feel like that is the best risk
for us to undertake with this.
program and they're sensitive to
this being a new um element,
being able to do public
financing for these charter
schools. So that was, that's
where that came from.
Thank you Madam Chair I add the
charter school did have a
history of there was quite a few
of them opened up, lived, uh,
survived it a year or two and
then they were gone, so that
would be the long term problem
of of financing uh school that
hasn't existed or proven the
ability to maintain their
enrollment. Thank you. Any other
questions from board members?
Yes.
Uh, good morning. Good morning,
everybody. I'm just not, just a
comment for, um, I guess under
the heading of, of risk a little
bit. I, I have the dubious honor
of um dealing with the charter
school that we did a lease with
that um had its charter revoked
by PED and the, the, I, I don't
know how you all do this, but
the one piece of advice I, I
would tell you where the change
happened for us was relative to
the board.
So they ran about 12 years.
But in the course of the 12
years as as kids left board
member changes is where the um
unfortunately the school um
the leadership of the school
changed and so there went the um
management and of the school, so
I just offer that as a comment
to to staff to that that's the
place where I saw the biggest
hurdle and weakness and they
survived about 12 years. It was
a Montessori school.
But anyway, that's it, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you member Lovato.
Any other questions or comments
input from board members on
this?
Jon and Madam, uh, move for
approval.
There's been a motion for
approval of the policy, um,
Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair.
Motion is seconded any
discussion on the motion.
to maximum for minimum.
Will you accept that?
As a friendly amendment.
Yes, as will I. OK, thank you.
So, uh, the motion to accept uh
the policy as revised, has been
made and seconded. Any
discussion.
If not all in favor, say I.
Hi.
All oppose same sign.
Motion carries
So we'll move on to the
recommended rules for the
revolving loan fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this
is the fun fund that was created
two years ago by HB 43A, um, uh,
and it was created to um help
schools purchase, uh, construct,
expand, or renovate uh their
facilities, um, and, uh, what
you, what you have is a rule
framework that's very consistent
in terms of what it establishes,
um, uh, and then relative to the
the accompanying rules.
Um, so, uh, the rules cover the
authority, purpose, key
definitions, application
procedures, evaluation, so these
credits, they're public credits,
so they'll be going through the
public lending committee, um,
and then come before you, um, if
recommended for approval, um,
appeals, financial assistance,
closing and disbursement,
reporting requirements,
administration of the fund, um,
all relatively standard areas
and what you have um in the
draft um that was included in
your.
materials are of our standard,
um, procedures, um, in each of
these areas, um, where, um,
where it's not specific to
charters. Um, I think the only
thing I was, I was just gonna
highlight is on the um in
applications, so 205, um, the
requirement for annual audits
and then also evidence that so
any lease purchase agreement
that we enter into with a
charter school has to have been
approved. Um, and those two
elements are also
Um, statutory requirements in,
um, the revisions that were made
by HB 43A.
Um, I didn't have, um, too many
more comments, but I'm happy to
elaborate more on any of the um
aspects of the rule or, or how
um overall the, the, we see the
program, and I'd be happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members?
Motion for approval, Madam
Chair, if there are none.
Motion has been made to approve
the rules governing the
reversal.
Is there a second?
Motion is made and seconded any
discussion on the motion.
If not all those in favor say
aye.
I,
I.
motion carried one more, yeah,
one more, um, so here you have
the policy for for that program,
um, and, um, this one, is a
little bit more detailed. It
includes, and I'd, I'd like to
just walk you through a couple
of the sections application
requirements also um criterion
for prioritization, we're
actually anticipating opening,
so right now, um, that fund is
capitalized with $10 million
that was received um as an
appropriation back in
2022. Um, that is not, um, uh, a
lot of capital for what we
expect to be the demand for not
just the number of projects, but
also the size of a um school
building project, particularly
given, um, cost inflation that
we're, we're seeing on the
construction side. And so, um,
we did see the need to build in
a prioritization mechanism, and
we do anticipate that when we
open this 10 million capacity,
it's gonna be um opened uh.
For a competitive round that
will be scored and then
applications will be moved
through in order of priority.
Um, it was great to work with
the Public Charter School of New
Mexico, um, they gave us so I'd
like to, to walk you through
that and some of the um
financing parameters, um.
Maybe starting on, um.
to 12.
Um
One thing I did wanna highlight,
um.
So this is just the detailed
list, even more detailed list of
application requirements. It's
very consistent with what you
saw high level in the PPRF, um,
the application content content
is gonna be the basically um uh
very, very similar slash the
same, um, because the revolving
fund is taking construction
risk. There is um some
additional information that will
require for new buildings um
that aren't the current cool uh
school facility. Um,
But here you have a a more
extensive list of all the
different things that, that will
be requesting. Um, we do have,
um, biographies of school
leadership, and we are going to
be requiring um bios of all the
members of the governing
council, which um is what
charter schools often refer to
as their board, um, and remember
Lovato's point was a really good
one, also not just turnover on
the board, but, um, you know,
charter schools are typically
founded by um very strong.
educational leaders and um
sometimes when those leaders
then leave the school, um, that
can be a significant event, um,
for the school as well, so.
Um
And then on 2:13, the
prioritization criterion, so
hopefully it's rela relatively
straightforward, um, uh, also
for, um, those on our team that
will be um looking at the
projects and scoring. Um, so
first, um, if the project is
improving an existing public
school facility, not currently
owned by the applicant, um, they
get 2 points and the rationale
behind this is that, um, you
know, for if, if they uh are
looking
acquire maybe a vacant school
facility and improve it and
occupy it, um, in the end, that
actually is, um, overall helping
the state uh uh save some costs
and also utilize a, a vacant
facility.
Um, second, this is just um a a
a a ranking around um academic
performance, and we're look,
we're gonna look at their
performance relative to to
average statewide
accountability.
Or, or at the average, the
average score and we're, we're
gonna um look at PE PEDs
statewide accountability system.
Um, so they're gonna get 1 point
if they exceed the state average
and they're going to get 2
points if they're designated a
spotlight school, um, which
means that they're in a top, uh,
percentage.
Um, 3rd, if the applicants in
good standing with their
chartering authority, they're
going to get 2 points.
Um, 4th, if there's demonstrated
demand from their local
community for what the school's
offering and that's gonna, we're
gonna look at enrollment and
just see that enrollment is, um,
uh, edging up towards capacity
of the school.
Um, they get 2 or 1 points
depending on where enrollment
is.
And then last, um, they get 2
points if the applicants located
in a rural community.
And I'm gonna go ahead um on.
So, starting on 213, just the
financing parameters. So this is
what um our underwriters are
going to be looking to
understand once they get all the
information in the application.
So, they're gonna want to um uh
be comfortable that these
charter schools um have a good
view towards long-term operating
and financial health.
And those, you have a list here
of the different things that'll
be they'll be looking at to um
uh to get that conviction.
Um, one of the interesting
things about charter school
contracts is they last for 5
years.
Um, so we are gonna be entering
into financing agreements, um,
that um exceed, um, technically
the, the life.
Of our
Of who we're offering fin
financing assistance too. So,
um, getting a, getting a view on
that long term stability and,
and basically their ability to
um uh achieve renewal when they
come, when their contracts come
up for for renewal every 5 years
is really important.
Um, project size, so, um, uh, we
set this range, uh, half a
million, up to 5 million, um,
half a million seemed like um uh
uh uh a reasonable amount for
what um what we're gonna be
doing in terms of our, our own
underwriting costs, um, and
also, um, we don't
We, we think it's unlikely that
a school is gonna have a small
construction project where
entering into a lease purchase
assistant where we're actually
purchasing their building would
maybe make sense. Um, and so
that's why we set that there,
and then we are capping it right
now at 500, um, and that's
because we know that there are
projects out there that already
exceed the total capital in the
fund, um, and we are trying to
help um diversify what we have
right now, at least across a
number of projects.
Um, I'll skip to D&E. They kind
of go together, so, um, during
this, basically the revolving
fund will be offering financing
during the construction period
and then um we'd like to um uh
perm those, those contracts out
into the PPRF, um, we expect
construction periods to be um
anywhere up to 3 years, um, and
then permanent financing would
be offered, you know, up to 30
years. Um, so during the
construction period, the
revolving fund is going to be
offering.
Um, financing at fixed interest
rates of 3%.
And then the permit financing
would be um uh PPRF's um uh
relevant rate uh for, for, for
junior lean projects.
Um, and this also has the same
um, you know, lease cost
coverage and collateral
requirements. I'm gonna double
check.
OK, this one, the wording of
this one on loan to value is OK,
I think.
Um
And you know, part of the reason
these are relatively consistent
with the PPRF is because we'd
like to perm um uh from some of
these projects into the PPRF,
um, after construction period.
So if these had been different,
we wouldn't, um, H has, um,
various, um, uh, various
requirements that we'll have in
our actual um lease purchase
agreements with the schools and
then 6 reporting requirements,
um, uh, we do, um, these are
gonna be
Uh, kind of a high, uh, uh,
monitoring lift, uh, for our
team, uh, particularly during,
um, construction period, so
we're gonna be requiring quar
quarterly construction project
updates and then also um uh
annual uh reports related to,
um, financials, the facility
itself and uh reports that they
um
That that are made by the public
education department and the
PSFA um related to the, the
school itself.
Um, so I think that concludes my
comments on this policy. I'd be
happy to. Any questions on the
policy?
You're not chairman for
approval.
Motion has been amended or
motion has been made to approve
the charter school fund policy.
Is there a
Motion is seconded any
discussion on the motion.
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Bye.
Althoughpose same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Thanks for your time today and
your work on this. Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm gonna stick around for the
next item if that's OK. Just
stick around.
Next, economic development
committee and Madam Chair
members of the committee, um,
the Economic Development Report
is on page 216.
Of the package.
We met on October 22nd, um.
Members Constantinides, uh,
Lovato and Shelton were in
attendance.
Um, we listened to a
presentation on a venture
capital fund and Ag fund that I
like.
And um so we'll be here, we'll
be hearing that presentation in
a moment.
Um, we also, uh, looked at
scoring on a new market tax
credit deal.
Um, or actually around 33 in
several projects.
Uh, we also, um, voted to, um,
Request an additional allocation
on the next, uh, on the next
round, um,
We also looked at a authorized
resolution for environmental
improvement revenue bonds for
enchantment water LLC, which was
complicated.
Um, and then finally, um, staff
reviewed. Go ahead.
So before us today, um, a couple
of projects.
On the agenda, the first is the.
Investment, commitment to the
perennial Fund too.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
really excited to be here today
with Ethan from Akita who you
all know, and then also the
co-founders of Matt Agriculture
and Mad Capital who have come
here to present to you today.
I'm just gonna give a very brief
overview and it over to Ethan.
He's gonna cover their diligence
and also some of the key risks
in the transaction, and then
we're gonna hand it over to
Brandon and Phil, and they're
gonna, um, present to you all.
So, um, in terms of, um, an
overview, so Mad Capital was
founded in.
2020, um, their organization
helps farmers transition from um
conventional to regenerative and
organic uh uh agriculture, um,
they, uh, they're at Mad
Capital, but they also have an
affiliated um nonprofit, which
I'm sure they'll um tell you
about. So their current
currently raising their, their
fund to or their second fund
targeting 50 million, um, we're
recommending to allocate 10
million to that fund from, um,
The state, um, the state
appropriation, 50 million, um,
Uh, and, um,
Yeah, sorry, I lost my train of
thought. Um.
Uh
Oh, and one of the other
reasons, um, we're excited about
this, um, 10 million is they are
um committed to deploying that
$10 million for dollar, um, here
in New Mexico to New Mexico
farmers. So this is actually a
really, really unique
opportunity where um we're
investing in a national, it is a
national fund. It's got, um,
diversification, um,
geographically and we'll
actually have exposure to that,
but they are telling us that at
least $10 million of
they deploy in that fund, at
least, hopefully more. Um, um,
we'll go to New Mexico farmers.
Um, so that's a, that's a
really, um, uh, great
commitment. They're also going
to be coming here regularly. Um,
they've committed to, um, uh,
hosting educational webinars for
farmers around regenerative and
organic farming. Um, and they've
also committed to providing
technical assistance to um local
farmers that are looking to, so,
and that's really
important because um, uh, things
like this and also uh small
businesses like this, um, uh,
doing something like this can be
both a um capital barrier and
then also sometimes a a
technical assistance or a skill,
um, uh, barrier. And so, um,
they're going to be working with
our, the borrowers here, um, and
supporting them. Um,
agriculture, as you all know, is
one of EDD's um targeted sectors
um of focus, um, together with
the Tiberton allocation that we
made.
earlier this year, um, this
would make 30% of our state
funding, um, that came into this
program going to um the
agricultural sector, um, also
100% of these borrowers will be
in rural communities, um, uh,
they're also SETI, um, but
unfortunately we couldn't look
at this fund uh with the SSBCI
capital because it's a debt
fund. Um, it's gonna be the 2nd
debt fund in our, in our
portfolio, um, alongside.
the other um more traditional VC
equity and just equity
strategies, um, and that's
important one because it's just
addressing a capital gap that
they'll talk to you about in
this very, you know, um, and
also very specialized lending,
um, and also, um, the debt
profile will actually um balance
out the risk return profile in
our overall program.
Um, from a financial return
perspective.
Um, so that's all I'm gonna say.
I'm gonna go ahead and hand it
over to Ethan.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board. Thanks for
having me again, uh, Ethan
Sampson from Akita Investment
Group. I'm going to be very
brief, so you have plenty of
time for the Mad Capital team,
uh, Nikita conducted our
standard due diligence uh
process on this opportunity,
including reference checks and
background reference calls and
background checks and a track
record analysis, and it went
through our full process and was
reviewed by our private markets
research committee. So, uh, we
are uh believe it is a
reasonable investment
opportunity for an economic
development.
uh
programs such as yourselves, um,
and happy to bring it to you
today. I'll mention a couple of
uh facts about the program, then
just quickly hit strengths and
weaknesses and turn it over to
the mad Capital team. Um, the
program's going to make loans
from 500,000 to 2 million to uh
farmers and ranchers, uh, and as
Ryan mentioned, $10 million
commitment, the $10 million will
be made to those loans will be
made to farmers and ranchers in
New Mexico. This is not rescue
financing, the borrowers need to
be creditworth.
The, um, and the total uh loan
portfolio that'll be in this, in
this fund will be 50 to 75
loans. There's a 2% management
fee with 10% carried interest
that's charged by the manager
with a 6% preference for the
preferred class and a 3%
preference for the impact class
of um of owners of of investors
in the fund. There's a 5 year
investment period and a 10-year
term.
In terms of the strengths of
this opportunity, this really
addresses a need that we've
identified as a gap um in the
New Mexico ecosystem, uh,
farmers and ranchers, uh, have
had struggles getting
traditional financing to
transition from uh traditional
agriculture to organic and
regenerative. Second, uh, as
Ryan mentioned, this has strong
alignment with New Mexico's
economic development objectives,
uh, including attracting
additional investment, um,
benefiting underserved
communities and uh
Making farming and ranching in
New Mexico more economically
sustainable. Um, and third, uh,
this has the added benefit of
because it's a fund that's
already going, of being able to
deploy capital relatively
quickly to New Mexico
businesses, um, already having
met the matching requirements.
In terms of the weaknesses, the
way we see it, um, there's
organizational risk, probably
the biggest risk here, um, the
assets under management of the,
of the firm to today do not uh
do not make it so sustainable,
uh, but in 2025, they project to
get two asset management, assets
under management that will uh
reach profitability for the
firm, and there's good uh path
to that runway.
Second, the team is not uh
highly diverse. It scores low on
the benchmark for that, both
from a gender and a racial
perspective and uh farmers and
ranchers are diverse, so we
think that's a weakness and we'd
like to see them improve that.
They've talked about, um, they
know that's a weakness that they
will improve.
Um, they're not, and they're,
they're not yet active in New
Mexico, so this will be a new
market for the firm.
Um, I will stop there, turn over
to the Mad Capital team and
stamp for questions later.
Thank you.
All right. Thanks for having us,
Madam Chair and board members,
uh, it's exciting to be here and
present um before we launch into
a formal presentation. I think
it's worthy of just mentioning
our personal um affection for
New Mexico. Um, the BOLO I'm
wearing is from Santa Fe. My
wife and I escape our 4 kids to
Ojo Caliente every year, um, you
know, there's a litany of things
that we love about this state,
our CFO and not went to Saint
John's.
Um, we're headed to Pascal's
after this, which I think is one
of the best restaurants in the
world here in Santa Fe. So
there's a lot of connection
personally that we have and
there's a personal excitement of
working here professionally, uh,
we have long been connected to
folks like the Kavera Coalition,
um, who are leaders in this
space and really for
regenerative e um globally and
they um have long been a leader
that we actually have looked up
to as um a more fledgy.
Organization. So, um, Sarah
Winzel Fisher is a dear friend.
We're gonna um grab some lunch
with her this afternoon and
touch base on some of the deeper
currents of what's happening in
New Mexico and, and so, um, the
other thing I would say is that
New Mexico has been a leader in
regenerative bag with the
healthy soils program as a, as a
neighbor being in Coloradan, um,
we worked on legislation at the
state level in Colorado and we
were tracking and just a little
behind um the way that your
legislature passed that program.
So a lot of the, the grantmaking
that's been happening at the
state level here has been
inspiring to us and we share
quite a bit of overlap, um, from
a perspective of thought
partnership with folks in the
healthy soil program. And so I
feel like we have a nice
communal network that's gonna
help us if we begin working here
to um quickly understand, you
know, the the stewards and the
ranchers and the farmers that
are working.
Um
Just a little bit about mad, um,
I get the question, does that
mean you're angry or full of,
you know, insanity or, or what
is the madness and the word mad
comes from Wendell Berry's Mad
Farmer poems. Um, he's one of
the great agrarian sort of
patron saints of regenerative
ag, um, that a lot of the elders
look up to, um, and
He wrote a set of poems called
The Mad Farmer poems, and the
madness really speaks um as a
call to humanity, to all of us
to try to build economy and
society around the virtues of
love, reciprocity, place-based
wisdom, community values, and so
at the core of the way that we
go about our financing is that
ethos, and that's how to think
about the madness. Um, it, it,
the madness also contains a
little bit of, uh, a little bit
of radicalism in the sense that
if we're going to change the
system that is, we need to push
against the edges of what's
possible, and
Really the impetus of Mad
Capital was a realization that
as farmers and ranchers go to
traditional or commercial banks.
They're often met with a
challenge of not being
understood. And as they want to
transition to something
different, um, the traditional
system doesn't know how to think
about that risk, understand that
risk, underwrite that risk and
ultimately support those farmers
and ranchers in transition. And
so a lot of the innovation that
Mad Capital's brought to the
market is a deeper awareness
around what it takes to make
that transition and create
favorable debt structures that
really come along.
side, the farm and the ranch,
and kind of breathe with its,
with it the challenge and the
success of its um evolution. And
a lot of that awareness comes
from my own history of being
living and growing up on a farm
in Maryland, um, and a lot of
the people on our teams have
been deep in the agriculture for
a long time. So there's a, I
would say if we had one bit of
like kind of secret sauce is we
have a lot of trust with the
people that we work with because
we've been there and done.
that
So that's, um, that's our
approach, that's our customer
service approach. And I just
want to affirm that we will be
here if we move forward with
this, uh, partnership. Um.
The last thing I'll say before
we go to slides is just why New
Mexico, um, New Mexico is close,
so we feel incapacity to serve
it. Uh, New Mexico is a rising
leader, as I mentioned,
Coalition, um, you know, your
soil and water conservation
districts as states go are it's,
it's one of the best that I've
seen in the country, having
traveled all over the country.
Um, your department of bag, your
healthy soils program. There's a
lot of noteworthy, um, qualities
to not only
leadership, but ultimately, that
leadership comes from grassroots
interest from farmers and
stewards wanting to make a
change, and that's being
actually heard nationally. So
it's a, it's kind of a a ripe
place, um, for some alternative
financing that's more favorable
for transition to come in and um
support ultimately your goals
around both economic development
and healthy soils work. Um,
The other side of it is, is that
we love it here. You know, there
is a, as I mentioned, it was
opened up, we're, we're excited
to be here. Um, Brandon and his
wife are coming back over
Thanksgiving and, and hanging
out in Santa Fe and, and uh, in
Taarra area. So there's um just
a, a quality of excitement in
the team on a personal level,
um, to be, to be in and amongst
your community.
So with that, I'll, I'll shift
over to uh the presentation.
Uh, the presentation here on
slide 219. These, these slides
are information rich, and so as
we go through them, I'm gonna
give you top level sort of
takeaways. The reason we made it
this way is so that um you know,
any of, any anyone reviewing
these slides could take some
time and get into some of the
details.
So if we move this slide 220.
Um, you'll see just as a basic
context, conventional
agriculture, um, is, as we know,
increasingly unsustainable and
really challenging business for
farmers, farmers that are stuck
within the conventional
commodity system, you know, are
leaning on subsidies more and
more, their financial margins
are close to 0 year on year. And
so something needs to give, we
need to figure out a new way
forward. As we move to slide
2000 or 2021. Um 22.
one
Um, just getting a little sense
here around what the potency of
regenerative and organic ag is.
Um, as some of you might know,
as farms go about changing their
agroecosystem by investing back
into soil health, um, which is
that foundation of good ag
economy. Um, it really yields a
different sort of system, one
that's more resilient, one that
creates economic vitality, and
it has outcomes not only for the
ecological things we're
hoping for, whether that's
things like climate change or
water sustainability, um, but it
also, there's a preponderance of
data that's growing, that is
good for a rural economies. Um,
regenerative farmers are more
resilient. They are more
profitable, and their
well-being, their happiness, um,
is improved.
Um, if we move forward to 222.
Um, these are just some stats
around organic. Now, we know
that um in this state, there's
um a lot of grazing and cattle
and ranching, that's behind
dairy. That's, that's the big
thing. Um, and so organic isn't
necessarily a great
certification for those, those
individuals, they are more tuned
into concepts of holistic
management, um, and groups like
Ranching for profit, you know,
really play a strong role for
the ranchers, um, here.
And the main point of um this is
that there's abundant evidence
that as they make the
transition, there is economic
well-being that comes with it.
We move forward to um slide 223.
Very basic slide here. Um,
To go from a conventional system
that has a degree of degraded um
soil health, to move that to a
vibrant ecosystem where soil
health is being restored and
that foundation of that economy
of the farm economy. Um, it
takes money.
Um, to reinvest in the proper
practices and techniques,
whether it's setting up a
rotational grazing system,
whether it's buying the seed to
rejuvenate the pasture or the
grazing land, whether it's, you
know, buying compost to restore
the soil, whether it's
diversifying your rotation. Um,
if you're transitioning to
organic, you need new equipment.
You might need to upgrade your
equipment, change, you might
need on farm infrastructure. The
list of those things goes on and
on.
Every farm is different with our
knowledge, we can help
understand where those farms
need to react and adapt to that
transition. And so what we have
designed is a um a capital and
financing solution to help them
get through that transition
difficulty to the other side of
something that's ultimately
more, more healthy.
And with that, I'm going to pass
it off to my co-founder Brandon,
um, for the next uh bit of the
presentation. Awesome.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thanks for having us
here today.
Um, some capital, we're we're a
lender to regenerative organic
farmers. And we've really built
our expertise around helping
farmers steward that transition,
you know, it's a challenging
time when farmers have to invest
in their soil when they have to
pull their leaving the kind of
chemical dependency system and
thinking about working with
nature versus against it. And as
they're trying to navigate this,
having a partner like Mad
Capital is important from kind
of a financial advisory
standpoint from a
structuring standpoint, and
really having a partner that can
saddle up next to them through
the 3 to 5 year time period that
it takes to actually make that
transition.
Um, so currently we're working
about 17 states with 117,000
acres of land. Uh, we're about
doubling year over year, because
it's, it's resonating, cause
we've found really good
alignment with the partners. So
if we look to slide,
25.
You know, this, this transition
trough.
a farmer's margins before they
make the transition. The
challenging cash margin
position, they put themselves in
as they're investing in the
farm. But then after they make
it to the other side, and they
have more resilient farm from
adopting soil health practices,
they can access new markets, um,
ultimately, you know, these
farms can produce more
consistent yield, drive more
revenue to the individual family
farm, and then that can create
more, you know, economic
development with
In their communities. And
there's actually some early
data, uh, even showing that in
areas with high densities of
organic farms, uh, poverty rates
decrease um by a few percentage
points. And in impoverished
communities, median net income
goes up roughly $2000 per
household. Um, this is again,
sparse data, but we're hoping to
help, you know, prove and, and
collect some of these, these
metrics along the way.
So where we really show up is
providing a full stack of
financing for the farms that we
work with across operating
capital, so farmers can buy
additional cattle, able to pay
cash rent, insurance, um, things
like real estate. So if, you
know, they need to expand their
operation. Um, they can get a
mortgage.
Uh, equipment, um, things like
tractors and no till drills and
weed zappers. Um, there's all
sorts of different types of
equipment that organic and
regenerative farmers use that
are different than conventional
farmers. And then also
infrastructure, things like
fencing and grain bins, um,
because some of the challenges
of bringing their crops or
animals to market are different
in a regenerative farm compared
to a conventional farm.
So if we move to slide 226, um,
what we're doing right now is
raising our second funding
vehicle. Um, this is a $50
million private credit fund, uh,
where we're building a
diversified portfolio and the
orientation is really towards
generating current income and
yield. So by having a diverse
pool of loans from creditworthy
farmers, they then create cash
flow to return.
Investment to, to our investors.
Um, we're supported by groups
such as the Rockefeller
Foundation, uh, builder's
vision, which is a group of
Lucas Walton's family office and
the Schmidt Family Foundation
that have already invested into
this fund and also run um their
extensive diligence processes.
So if we look to slide 227.
Um, you can kind of see the
geographic breakdown of where
we're we're currently where
we've been historically focused,
which has been a product of both
um the communities that we had
relationships with to start. And
then also some of the um
limitations that our early
investors um had
Had agreed on with the types of
farms we're going to work with.
Uh, but as of the last 12
months, we've been very focused
on expanding into ranching and
helping farmers transition to
perennial based systems. So we
started working with these
farms, as you can see in Upper
Montana, and then also into
Oregon in California, and
When we were raising this fund
and we got connected with the
New Mexico Finance Authority.
We're pretty excited about the
opportunity to now expand into
New Mexico, and also looking at,
you know, Arizona and West
Texas, um, because these areas
don't have access to the type of
lending um that we're offering.
It's, it's scarce in many of
these rural communities.
Um, so we're hoping to take, you
know, the learnings, the team
that we've been able to build
the capital partners we've been
able to bring to the table and
really be able to direct all
that energy into the state of
New Mexico.
Um, if we look to slide 228.
Um, we have kind of a playbook
that we've been able to build in
terms of how we're able to get
on the ground, build trust with
farmers and be able to then um
really be able to find farmers
that have the highest need for
the type of financing we're
offering offering. So it really
starts with getting into the
community, getting to know all
the players, um, and just doing
a landscape and kind of
discovery phase. And that's
really what we've been able to
do best over the last uh few
years as, as we've been growing.
And um we're really hopeful with
some of the, the early
conversations we've had with
Rodale and save savory Courvera,
uh, also looking to connect with
the Forest Service and the soil
and water conservation districts
that um there's a lot of
opportunity here and um we are
pretty excited about the
opportunity to um help uh not
only educate, but then finance
these farmers as they so if we
look on 229.
Uh, we already have some early
pipeline, uh, we're in
conversations with at least 4
opportunities that um are
looking pretty probable, um, to
help these farms expand and and
transition to more regenerative
acres. Um, you know, there's 49
million acres of farm of land in
New Mexico, the 5th largest
state in the United States,
stewarded by about 23,000 family
farms, about 9000 of those are
ranchers, um, and there's quite
a few that are already focused
on direct.
consumer branding with grass-fed
beef and holistic management and
um those will be a likely target
market that we'll be leaning
into to help help those
businesses grow.
So if you look to slide 230,
We have a pretty unique mad
ecosystem, um, that makes us a
little different than other
financiers that are out there.
We have a nonprofit um called
Matt Agriculture that helps
farmers with farming business
planning. We also have um
brokerage firm that helps
farmers get paid more for the
crops that they're growing. So
they act as a matchmaker between
big brands who want to purchase
these crops and animals and
farmers who are producing them.
Um, if we look to the next slide
or.
If we could skip aside 232.
Uh, based on our, our estimates
and historical track record. We
believe that this potential $10
million partnership, uh, will
ultimately help us work with
20,000 acres of farmland in the
state of New Mexico. It's going
to enliven rural communities,
um, and it's also going to
create a blueprint to scale.
We're hoping that, you know,
this isn't the only um
commitment that we have um from
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and other funders that were also
in discussions with, but we can
use this to then grow our
relationships in this state.
If we go to slide 233.
Yeah so
That's one of our last slides.
Bigger voice now. Um, one of our
last slides, uh, you know, it
probably the most important
thing is that, you know, farmers
and ranchers like working with
us. Um, you know, I've said it
some, you know, in one way of
saying it, I would give you the
cell phone of any of the one we
work with, and they'd pick up
and say, we really like working
with Mac Capital. They've helped
us make the transition and for
us having that confidence and
trust and feedback is the most
important thing. Um, we really
are a farmer and rancher first
organization. And um,
While we do lack some diversity
on our operational team. We, we
serve a wide array of farmers.
In fact, over 40% of the farmers
we serve are historically
underserved, um, as defined
either by women led, younger
beginning farmers less than 10
years or buy pot farmers. So we
have a, we have a strong
commitment to diversity, um,
that isn't reflected in our
operational team yet, but it's
certainly reflected in the way
we work. And so, um, you know,
if you have the time, there's
some wonderful little
testimonials and links here.
Um,
from these, these individuals
that we work across the the
country. And then um the second
thing I'll mention is that on
that map of where we're
currently working.
That reflects all the areas
where we're financing in the
nonprofit, we have a much higher
concentration in the inner inner
mountain west and um have been
doing a lot of work um in
northern New Mexico, and
particularly we just actually
helped get a new seed bank. I'm
off the ground in the Pecos
Valley called Lineage seeds. Um,
and so we have a variety of
active projects uh through the
nonprofit that aren't reflected
on that map, um, so.
Yeah, I think with that, um,
And maybe we'll open up for
questions and uh I really
appreciate time and attention.
Thank you. Thanks for your
presentation this morning. Are
there questions from?
Good morning. Thank you so much
for your presentation. Um, I
have a special soft spot in my
heart for agriculture and
especially uh small and
beginning farmers and ranchers,
so very excited to see you all
in presenting this proposal. Uh,
one thing that I'd like to
address that we that didn't come
up during the presentation is uh
farmers are typically on the
front lines of climate change
impacts, so, uh, fluctuating
growing seasons, severe storm
events, um, increases in, in
pests and so I'm curious as you
guys are executing some of your
financial assistance as you're
working with farmers and
ranchers on.
plans through your nonprofit
support. How are you
incorporating some of these
shifting baselines and um
helping farmers better prepare
for the risk that comes with
climate.
Great, great question. Um,
You know, one of the strongest
ways to adapt to this shifting
reality is by building
resilience and the strongest way
to build resilience is through
diversity.
And so a lot of our work on the
ground is about helping farmers
diversify what they're growing,
so that as those shocks, um,
come into their system. They're
able to weather them more
effectively. And we, one example
where we're doing that.
Um, up in Montana, prairie grass
Ranch, um, they're on kind of a
knife edge of climate change up
there. And um water now has
been, you know, 10 to 14 inches
per year. Now it's 6 to 7, and
more erratic, and a lot of their
annual row crops um don't grow
as well and and then sometimes
you'll only get a crop once or
twice every 3 years. So what we
did is we actually helped
finance a large scale
multi-thousand acre
re-perennial.
ization and restoration of
grassland in that annual system,
and we financed um a new herd of
cattle, and they were familiar
with cattle. They've they've
always had kind of a back 40
herd. Um, but now, you know, the
integration of livestock with
their annual cropping systems,
creating long rotations where
you have, you know, living roots
in the ground for many years at
a time where you're building
soil capital and then coming
back into annual road crops,
that kind of system design, um,
is a
really big transformation, but
one that we're fully prepared to
underwrite and support, if not
even help design. That's an
example.
Thank you so much for that. Um,
I do have one more question if
that's OK, maybe 2, so you
mentioned that you're starting
to expand into pasture um cattle
growing specifically. I'm, I'm
assuming. Are you also, is there
also any diversity in there
within the pasture livestock
that you're addressing, um, in
New Mexico, we have a really
strong um history and legacy of
sheep farming. Yeah, so we
curious about that
love sheep, yeah, yeah, we, we
love, we also love, um, you
know, cotton and fiber. So on
that side, when it comes to
textiles,
Actually, the, the jeans I'm
wearing, the cotton in my jeans
are from a guy named Dosy
Alvarez. Not sure if you know
him, he's down close to El Paso,
and uh, you know, there's,
there's like a lot of leadership
happening here. And so I, I also
think that poultry is a big
opportunity. I know there's a
lot of poultry here. Um, the
transition between highly
confined um operations to
pasture based is a big
transition and one that we're
also um supporting.
Thank you. And then just one
final question, um, I noticed
that we're mostly focusing on
growers. I'm curious if there's
any interest in the future to
expand into uh value add, so
food processing, um, yeah,
curious about that. Great. Yeah,
yeah, certainly. Um, we actually
have been experimenting a little
in that space, and we've now
funded two loans that are post
Farmgate. One is a vertically
integrated meat processing
facility, um, and then another
is an organic grain processing
facility, mostly for
uh, lentils up in Montana,
because, uh, you know, for
farmers to be able to
transition, they need to be able
to justify and have access to
the right fit market. So we're
starting to to play in that
space and really understand the
economics. It's, you know, a
little different from an
underwriting perspective. Um,
however, there's quite a few um
great operators that really want
to grow in that space. So
that'll be an area we're
exploring in New Mexico. Yeah,
we also know of uh opportunity
near Taos that we were already
sort of starting to, you know,
very beginning of working on. So
we're meeting this afternoon.
to discuss that. Excellent. And
I'll just note for the board
there's been um historic
shortages in meat processing, so
that's something in a particular
interest for me. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Yeah, thanks for being here. Um,
I was just curious, how are you
defining regenerative and
organic? Is it with the goal of
the farmers or ranchers
obtaining certifications or
there are other ways that that's
defined. Yeah, so I think if
you're in the row crop space,
um, the organic certification
often marks a really nice price
premium that is ultimately
beneficial for the farmer. And
so, you know, a lot of the way
that we see regenerative ag
stepping way back is that
regenerative bag is really about
healing our relationship to the
land to ourselves and other
people. It's
inclusive of land management as
well as reconciliation with, you
know, a lot of the damage has
been done between people. And,
and so at a broad level, that's
what regenerative bag is, and I
think it's a, a highly inclusive
movement where anyone is
welcome. Within that movement,
we tend to focus on, on the
transition to organic for
croppers and row crops because
there is that price premium and
we personally are really um big
believers in a chemical-free
food system that generates
really highly nu.
Traditional food for people.
That's our orientation, um,
though we don't judge the other
system. Um, we let it rock and
roll, um, and so that's a big
key, key piece of it. The other
piece is that when it comes to
grazing and management, the
organic premium isn't really
there. And so there are other
analogous certifications and
ways of, of, um, approaching
your management, you know,
through things like the Avery
Institute and their land and
market program, um, ho.
Management International Kivara
Coalition, uh, ranching for
profit, you know, those, those,
that set of organizations which,
you know, is actually really
birthed in this area, you know,
um, is, is, is the best
guidepost for us to um help
farmers transition to.
And and just to clarify, we
don't require a certification on
the ranching side. Uh, we just
look for graziers to be
grass-fed, grass finished, and
holistically managed to be right
fit to their land base, because
it's, it's such a, a nuanced.
If I could, 11 comment, this
came up when we looked at this
in an investment committee.
You know, I, I think this really
fills a gap.
Um, I've never been an egg
lender, but certainly if
Um,
borrower came to me and said,
we're going to take our revenue
offline, and while we're
offline, we're also gonna spend
money on equipment and other
things.
As a banker, I'd go.
Yeah. Not gonna do it. So I, I
think there is a need for this.
Otherwise, farmers that may want
to pursue this don't really have
a, a
Financing mechanism to achieve
that.
So, um, I think this is a good
niche.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, um,
I think that also that there are
such a diversity, um, especially
with the New Mexico agriculture
of small and mid-size producers
that having more options is
better than having um what we
currently have. I think as long
as we have additional options to
sort of meet different people
where they're at, um, that's,
that creates a much more
resilient overall system.
There's someone online.
Madam Chair, this is, this is
member Shelton. I um wanted to
just clarify because I raised
this issue when um when this is
before the economic development
committee. My, uh, and I'm, you
know, that, that my issue was
the reason that this is before
you on a staff recommendation,
not an economic development
committee recommendation, uh,
my, my confusion for this
initially in the subcommittee
came from the use of the term
regenerative grazing, which I
would optimistically describe as
an aspirational target, um, and
uh when evaluating sort of
sufficiency for investment, I
wasn't really.
Sure exactly what element of
sort of regenerative grazing was
going to sort of make this a
safe investment whether or not
my skepticism about regenerative
grazing is warranted or not is
kind of out of camera for NMFA,
I would argue, um, I would, um,
say thanks to Ryan's quick
follow up um with some
information for me as well as a
follow up conversation with
Fernando and remember
Castaonitis, um, I'm pretty
satisfied that basically the
based on the uh uh grass-fed,
grass finished sort of the, the
price premiums that attached to
both of those.
issues that um certainly my uh
issues and concerns have been
have been resolved.
Um, around, around this, at
least the ones that are raised
in the economic development
space, the one that my only sort
of urge going forward is, you
know, the things that are terms
that are, uh, maybe.
I'm not gonna say a marketing
term, but not necessarily a
settled term in the in the in
the public arena like
regenerative grazing, whether
it's sufficient for um
You know, public land
protection, uh, don't help me to
understand whether or not we're
we're looking at something that
is that is that it sort of feet
on the ground from an investment
perspective. I think this does
wanna be really clear so um I
just wanted to clear that up
thanks to the staff at NMFA, and
I would love to um to make a
motion to approve when you are
ready for one.
Thank you. Any other comments
from board members or do we need
to come back to you?
So I hear remember Shelton is
open for that.
So I moved
Madam Chair, I'd like to make
the 2nd. This is Teresa.
Motion has been made and
seconded. Is there any
discussion on the motion?
If not all those in favor, say
I.
I.
All those opposed same sign.
What she cares.
Thanks. Look forward to working
here.
Next on the agenda is the uh
authorizing resolution for NMFA
Environmental Improvement
revenue bonds.
Well project we've talked about
before.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, good morning, uh, with us
today, we do have some guests. I
know, uh, some of our guests are
limited on time. We do have the
CEO Mike Dyson and Ashley Kegley
Whitehead from Enchantment Water
with us today for this next
item, they do uh need to leave
shortly. There is no
presentation that presented to
this board before, but they did
want to uh be here before you to
answer any questions that you
might have time permitting, uh,
so with that, we will move on.
Um, what we're going to be
asking you for today is a uh you
know, to approve a resolution.
to allow us to move forward as
the conduit issuer of the uh
bonds that are before you today
with us uh in person is Adam
Daley, our bond counsel from
Gilmore and Bell. We also have
Brad Patterson on Zoom with us
this morning. Um, Adam will be
going through the resolution
with you in the presentation.
It's a little bit different than
what you will normally see for a
bond sale from the finance
authority because of the limited
role that we play. So, uh, today
will be a, a pretty short review
uh from what you're normally
used to, given that limit
role, but Adam will do that.
John's gonna give you an update
on the project and then we can
move this forward.
Thank you.
So, Madam Chair and uh board
members.
Again, this, this project where
we came before you, I believe,
in July, um, and in July, we um
Requested authorizing uh
inducement resolution for amount
of about $125 million.
Um, as we stand today
phase one project
um as, as we contemplated at the
beginning in this transaction,
but we're finding phase one with
the $567,700,000. That
authorization came through the
State Board of Finance, the
state Board of Finance reviewed
this and also approved it and
then
a couple of weeks ago, approved
that uh the extension for the
$56 million of
ization um, in terms of the
financing team over at E
Champment Land, uh, they have uh
secured an engineer, Salisbury
Industries Inc. they, they were,
um, when we last looked at this
presentation, they were, um,
entering into a contract that
contract has been completed. And
then finally, um, we did
solidify the economic
development portion of of the uh
financing again the
Economic development benefits
that we would receive our number
one strategically located
facilities that are going to
reduce truck miles and
greenhouse gasses. The hall
produced water. Uh, number 2,
reclamation of uh produced water
to use water for oil and gas
production, um, and reduces the
potable water for fracking and
drilling and water sliding in
the 3, the elimination of need
of re-injection of salt water.
Um, and, uh, which would reduce
uh seismic uh seismic seismicity
risk.
What was that word again.
We'll talk
and then finally, um, there, the
job creation aspects of this
that's on page 239, which
includes, um,
The, uh, approximately 2250
direct and indirect jobs, uh,
300 jobs will be retained uh for
estimated 70% of the jobs going
to New Mexicans and with the
average salary of $95,000 plus
benefits. So those are some of
the highlights I wanted to go
through. Um, this is the same
project we reviewed in July, you
know, um, stand back and, and
these gentlemen can handle the
rest.
members aboard the project that
did come with, with the
extension from the State Board
of Finance, it does lead the
project remains on.
track to close before that time.
So with that, we'll turn it over
to Adam to go through the
resolution that is on page,
unfortunately 637 of your board
book.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board, um, the
resolution before you would
authorize the authority to issue
environmental improvement
revenue bonds in an amount not
to exceed $56,700,000 for the
financing of water and
wastewater facilities owned and
operated by Enchantment Water
LLC.
Uh, these bonds are payable from
revenues generated, um, by
enchantment, water, and do not
constitute a general obligation
of the authority.
Uh bonds issued in accordance
with this resolution must mature
within 25 years of issuance, it
of at least 95% of the principal
amount.
The resolution also authorizes
the chair and secretary of the
board to execute and deliver the
trust indenture and
substantially similar form to
the document provided on page
404 of the board book.
This trusts indenture authorizes
the issuance of these bonds,
provide security to the bonds
and outlines the repayment
structure of those bonds.
Additionally, the resolution
authorizes the chair and
secretary of the board to
execute and deliver a financing
agreement in substantially
similar form the document
provided on page 500 of the
board book.
The financing agreement acts as
a loan agreement pursuant to
which the authority will loan
its bond proceeds to enchantment
water into which enchantment
Water agrees to repay the loan
using its own revenues.
Uh, finally, the resolution
authorizes the chair and
secretary of the board to
execute and deliver a bond
purchase agreement in
substantially similar form to
the document provided on page
581 of the board book.
The bond purchase agreement
obligates the authority to sell
the bonds to Wells Fargo LLC
acting as the underwriter on
this transaction.
The underwriter will purchase
these bonds for resale to
secondary purchasers of the
bond, each of, each of which is
required to be a qualified
institutional investor.
Resolution authorizes the
underwriter of the bonds to
utilize a limited offering
memorandum and substantially
similar form to the document
provided on page 247 of of the
board book to market the bonds.
As provided on pages 245 and 246
of the board book in Roman
numeral 3 of the offering
memorandum. The offering
memorandum primarily contains
information relating to
enchantment and enchantment
waters project and contains
limited information relating to
the authority.
Further in our responsibilities
as bond counsel to the
authority. We will obtain
opinions and certificates from
enchantment Water wherein the
company will assume
responsibility to the accuracy
of information contained in the
offering memorandum.
Uh, bond counsel to the
authority recommends this
resolution for approval and I'll
stand for any questions. Any
questions from.
Chair Keith, I, I heard a
comment, um.
About limited risk to NMFA uh
through this issue could, could
I hear an explanation of how the
risk is limited.
So, these are obligations of
enchantment water, uh, pursuant
to the indenture being approved
under this resolution, the uh
repayment obligations or pledged
revenues of the company and not
of the authority. Um,
additionally, there is no um
effect on the authorities credit
with respect to this issuance of
bonds.
Remember, uh, thank you, Adam,
um, member Burke, members of the
members of the board as, as I
was trying to say earlier,
typically you see a POS which
has a lot of information
pertaining to the finance
authority when we issue our
bonds. In this case, we're a
conduit issuer, as Adam just
described on behalf of
Enchantment Water. So the
preliminary limited offering
memorandum before you has very,
very limited information with
respect to the finance
authority. This is uh the most
of the information relates to
the project itself and to
enchantment Water, the company.
That's where, so again, limited
risk.
Um, we're acting in a very
limited capacity based on our
statutory authority and what
we're able to do. And so uh
remember Burke, if that answers
your question, um, please let us
know.
Yeah, I'm just assuming, um,
That if there was default of
payment that
That, you know, the, the
property and or the uh
requirement for repayment would
not fall on NMFA.
Never broke, that's correct.
OK, thank you.
Any other questions
from members no questions. I did
want to recuse myself from this
um vote simply because I work
for the board of Finance and
they did provide the volume cap
for this project.
Madam Chair,
uh, because the applicant here
has current uh pending and
proposed permits in front of the
OCD I need to recuse as well.
Ornament for.
Have, um, a motion for approval
of the authorizing resolution.
Is there a second?
And share, this is Teresa 2.
Motion has been seconded. Any
discussion on the motion?
If not all those in favor say
aye.
I.
All those opposed, same sign.
Motion carries.
Resolution is approved.
Congratulations. Thank you.
Next on our agenda is the
Approval of prior desertation
ranking for around 33.
Born in Mexico, tax credit.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the governing board.
Before you as a request for to
approve round 33 of the market
tax credit applications for
rural projects only.
The application cycle was open
for 45 days from July 29th
through September 16th.
A total of 5 completed
applications were received.
Or of those applications were
deemed eligible in a rural New
Mexico New market tax credit
census tracks.
The applications were reviewed
and and scored by a team of 3.
Project build and Hotel Willa
met the requirements to move.
Their application forward with
the process. Projects were
presented to the finance in
Mexico Advisory Board and were
approved. The remaining $7
million from the 2022 new market
tax credit allocation will be
used.
And staff does recommend.
Approval of the two projects to
be prioritized as.
Uh, part of round 32.
Any questions?
You for.
Motion for approval. Is there a
second?
been seconded, any discussion?
carry on all those in favor, say
I.
I
All those opposed same side.
Next on the agenda, request to
apply to the community
development Financial
Institutions funds, CDFI or New
market tax credit allocation.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, I will take this one.
This is a bit of a housekeeping
item. This goes back to 2006
when the new market tax credit
program was, was set up and
authorized. So because of that
Finance Authority board has to
authorize us to apply for uh
allocation for new market tax
credits. So this is not an
unusual topic for us. We have
applied several times. We have
$346 million in awards over the
course of several years, the
resolution before you today is
simply to uh document
and show a track record that the
board has approved it. We will
apply. We're gonna request $100
million from the CDFI fund for
allocation and hopefully we're
successful in doing so. The
resolution before you just
authorizes us to do that and
authorizes the appropriate
officers to sign the application
and submit it. And with that, we
would stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
the manager.
a motion to approve. Is there a
second?
Motion has been made and
seconded to approve the
applications for Newmarket tax
credit allocation. Is there any
discussion?
Not all those in favor say aye.
Hi.
All those opposing motions.
Thank you. Finance and
disclosure Committee chair
Swazzo. Thank you, madam. As per
usual, I will be brief. Uh, we
did uh meet uh last Wednesday.
There was a quorum of finance
disclosure Committee, uh, uh,
during that meeting, we listened
to a presentation of the
investment report. It'll be
presented to the board here in
just a few minutes. We also uh
approved and recommended the
full board, the broker dealer
list, uh, which will also be
before us, uh, we just
presentation of the annual
review of the investment policy,
uh, which will again come come
before us, uh, and we heard a
summary of the uh public project
revolving fun Series 2024 the
issuance, uh, which, uh, Chip
will be here to, to, to talk to
us about here in a little bit.
Uh, we also listen to
procurement notifications as as
were presented and the bond
issuance forecast.
I'm sure that concludes my
report. Thank you.
Any questions on the committee
report?
If not, we'll go to item 10.2.
The investment report
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the board, um, I believe we have
Dean online, um.
I'd like to introduce her. She
is our investment advisor with
governmental portfolio advisors.
Um, they're actually really
instrumental in monitoring our
portfolio, um, outside of just
staff.
As well as giving us a review of
of our policy and a broker
dealer list. Go on to page 6406.
I'm just gonna go over the memo.
And I'll let Deanne go over her
report as of September 30th, we
had total invest invested funds
of 1.5 billion.
1.3 billion or NMFA funds.
And the total of 224 million uh
the Department of
Transportation.
The EA funds, we break those
down by uh our group and by
type, like funds.
And our benchmark to based upon
government governing statutes.
Um, bond and denture
requirements and the liquidity
needs of each of those funds.
Our longest one is our debt
service reserve Fund. We use
their five-year benchmark.
have a total market value of
53.3 million. The book yielded
2.89.
And current mark yield of 3.82.
And the duration is 2.105.
Next week is 0 to 3 year
benchmark or operating funds.
These are operating, uh, these
are funds.
Our programs really outside of
the PPRF um held within the
authority.
We have a total market value of
580.4 million.
Book guild of 4.53 and current
market of the 3.93.
In the duration of 1.357. Our
next group of funds, we use 0
one-year benchmark.
It's our program funds, capital
project funds, those are both
PPF project funds, as well as
our two bond reserve funds,
common debt service reserve and
a supplemental credit reserve.
We have a total market value of
504.8 million with a book guild
of 4.74.
In the current market yield of
4.25.
And the duration of 0.664.
Finally, we have our shortest
duration funds, we use 0 to 3
month um.
Benchmark.
Mainly debt service type funds.
We have 161.4 million in that
group.
With the current market yield
and the book yield of 4.83.
Again, overall, the NMFA has
1.3 billion of investor funds.
With the book yield of 4.577.
Current mark yield of 4.164.
And the duration of right under
a year at 0.950.
Um, the first quarter of the
fiscal year, we have net income
of 14.7 million.
It's 52% increase in the first
quarter of last fiscal year of
9. The unrealized gain and loss
in the portfolios, um, as of
September 30th, it's 7.6
million.
Compared to August and of 4.6
million.
Now, the, if you look at it
today, we're back down to a gain
of only around $2 million.
Um, that is
Even after the Fed dropped rates
by 50 basis points in September.
Through the month of October,
rates of
Rates have actually really
increased um September 30th to
now, and that is, you'll see
that in that unrealized uh gain
in that drop.
And with that, I stand for any
questions and
If not, I believe Dean has a
report that she will give.
OK.
Any questions?
Matt and chair and members of
the committee. It's nice to be
in front of you this morning.
Um, Mark, do you have my report
in this packet?
Uh, yes, we do. It starts on
page OK, perfect.
So as Mark mentioned, we've had
quite a lot of volatility in the
market, and the reasons that we
are focused on establishing the
benchmarks for each of your
funds is to allow us to maintain
discipline on the investment
strategies that we're doing. So
I'm just gonna give you a couple
of economic background drop, uh,
pages for you to review and know
what we continually are watching
within the portfolio structures.
So on September 18th, the
Federal Reserve finally came in
and did a 50 basis point drop in
interest rates.
Uh, for the federal funds rate.
The federal funds rate is the
borrowing rate between the
banks, so it really is a, a tool
that the Fed uses to control
growth uh within the economy and
the availability of funds. We've
been waiting for that drop for
about a year and a half. Um,
the, the, the pressure points
that they have to, to move that
rate is inflation and the
economic growth of our economy.
So they got room for that as
inflation is trending down. It
hasn't hit their 2% mark yet,
uh.
But it, but the markets kind of
let it and really had they had,
in my opinion, had to make a
move in the 50 basis point was
the right move at that point.
The challenge now is, what are
they going to do next? And we're
expecting the market had been
expecting another 50 basis
points in the end of the year.
However, we're now seeing some
inflation numbers and economic
numbers that might not give them
that balance. So the key that
we're looking at here in front
of you right now on the slide is
really the outlook of the
federal uh open market
committee.
these opinions as a group going
out to 26, all trend lines that
we're seeing uh in the market
are indicating lower rates uh
into 2025, 2026, so we're very
focused on managing the
portfolios to a discipline to
anchor as much as we can and
then overall elevated rate
environment that we're seeing
today, but never compromising
liquidity. So we have very
strict rules on how much you're
keeping in your money markets
versus how much we're investing.
Next slide please.
This is just a picture of that,
we look at interest rates, I'll
draw your eye down to the
two-year note um in the uh table
at the bottom. So at the end of
last year or the same period
last year, September, the
two-year note was yielding a
505, the end of this quarter of
this year, we were all the way
down to a 364. But those of us
in the fixed income market,
that's, that's quite a move. We
normally move 25, 30, and, and
we just have this volatility. So
again, in managing the
portfolios there for NMFA we're
very.
focused on just holding a
discipline. You guys have
continue to increase in your
balances as your program uh
funds expand and we're just
really diligent on making sure
that we're balancing and keeping
those portfolios invested, uh,
as much as possible.
The next slide is showing us our
inflation components and the
impact and what's been kind of
battle that top slide shows you
how the two-year note in that
blue line moves with inflation.
So again, this, this graph, the
purpose of this is to really
illustrate that we are coming
off a very high level of rates
uh in the investment arena of
5%, um, and we, that was very um
unusual to have a interest rate
environment go basically from 0
to 5%, but your portfolios were
positioned really well to take
advantage.
of that. So I'm really excited
in, in the positioning, the
earnings and the increase in
those earnings, uh, that you're
achieving.
Next slide.
The other component that we're
watching is the labor trends.
The labor trends continue to be
slowing down a little bit, um,
and that also is giving us room
to, to make moves on the uh
federal funds. So the next slide
is just showing you what the
analysts are expecting in the
markets. Again, all trends to uh
downward um movement and rates.
So our focus is to invest and
anchor down the portfolios based
on the benchmarks that are
assigned to each portfolio, be
very aware of your funding
flows.
Um, and how we deploy those
assets and then Mark and I work
together on a strategy of
investments and then he makes
those individual investments.
So the next, I'm just gonna hit
a couple other slides and then
we'll go to the policy, but one
report that I do provide the
board and the finance committee
is your compliance report, and
this is what you'll be voting on
today as you look at your
investment policy. There were no
changes to the structure, the
diversification limits within
the policy. This is the
guideline to the investment team
on, based on statute and um
NFA's own uh criteria. So we
have the policy limit and then
the actual, so you're able to
at the executive level we have
the portfolios positioned. We're
primarily invested in US
treasuries at the 80% mark right
now, and then we're very
balanced with the uh money
market funds. So the money
market funds are your liquidity,
the treasury and a small
component of agencies are what
we're using for the investment
component.
The other sector on the policy
has to do with the next slide,
which is your maturity limits.
And so right now you have a
maximum maturity that you're
allowed to purchase by statute
as well as by policy of 10
years. We are using and just
investing up to 5 years at this
time based on strategy, and
that's what this report is
generating out. And then we also
have rating criteria. So all
that in your policy ties to how
the portfolio is being invested.
And then the next slide covers
the strategic positioning of the
portfolio. This is actually from
last year to this year. I have
noted in there it was from June
30, 24, but it's actually from
September 30. And this is just
a, a, a picture for you to be
able to drill in on that the
interest earnings in the
portfolios that book ield has
moved from 431 to 459. So we
were able to get the yields on
the portfolios up in this uh
rising rate environment and kind
of anchored. I do expect those
to come down.
uh in the um coming year as the
trends are gonna go that way.
And as the oversight committee,
that's what you're watching for
is the portfolio doing what you,
it should be doing.
When we look at the overall
market value of the portfolios
increased by about $300 million
again last year to this year. I
just looked up before I got on
this call, you're up to 1.4, so
the acids are, are quite large.
They're NMFA and continue to
grow. And I guess, and for you,
it's just we have disciplines on
every single portfolio that you
have, uh, to help guide how
those investments are being
done.
And then over on the left side
is, is the duration of those
portfolios. So that's really the
risk in investment maturity
structure of the portfolios.
Right now, your average maturity
across all um holdings is one
year. We have the longer
portfolio out around a two-year
duration, but that's very
consistent and appropriate given
the, the needs of the uh
portfolio structure.
So with that, I, I won't go into
the rest of the reports. I'll
leave it at that unless there's
any questions uh on the
additional pages and then we can
go into the policy and broker
dealer review.
OK.
Mark, do you want to move us
down to the next items then?
Or you wanna
I went on to page 666.
Annually we go through um a
review of our broker dealer
list. Um, myself as well as
Deanne and her group. We go
through each of our brokers and
Verify that we still have that
broker that is assigned and the
firm is still giving us
coverage.
I'm on page 667.
This is our current list. We
currently have 12 bank banks or
brokers, and we are proposing to
add one new firm hyper Sadler to
the list.
And getting rid of Citigroup as
well as RBC. We lost coverage on
both of those.
Um, with that, it was for.
And she would approved would
motion to approve the broker
dealer list as presented.
Motion has been made to approve
motion is made and seconded any
discussion on the motion.
If not all those in paper, say
I.
Bye.
All those opposed.
And the next agenda item, we
have our investment policy
review.
Um, as Dean mentioned um
manually we go through the
review of the investment policy.
There were no changes this year,
but we are adding one section.
Section 16, that is um a section
on business continuity.
Um, this just gives back up to
the treasure in the extent that
there's an extended period where
the position is vacant.
and transactions need to be
executed in line with the
policy.
Um, Dean, do you want to add
anything to that?
Uh, yes, this recommendation
came out of uh the audit review.
Uh, the question came to me of
what happens if something
happens to Mark. And so, uh, the
business continuity plan is very
consistent and we're seeing that
across many associations
recommending to have this
language in their policy. This
would be a temporary trigger uh
for uh GPA to becoming be able
to come in and assist in, in
that absence until a new person
came in. So it's a, just a good
uh due diligence uh issue to
have in.
po lic ies
Well that was for any questions.
Thank you. Any questions?
Madam Chair, well, we certainly
hope, I hope that nothing
happens to Mark
I guess uh we do need to have it
in, in place. I would move for
approval of the item 10.4 is
presented.
Thank you. Motion has been made.
Is there a second?
I
second
there's no one.
OK.
No, no, I, I can't hear seconds
are made, so I was gonna make
it, but we're good.
Sorry, we're not doing a good
job of turning our microphones
on and I'm owning that and I
know it makes it hard for you
guys to hear. So please, please
let us know, um, if we leave
them on, we get feedback, so we
have to remember to turn them on
and off.
No, we're good. Things have been
going great. Thank you, Char
Keith.
Um, so the motion has been made
and seconded, um.
No hearing no discussion, um,
all those in favor say aye. I,
all those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
And next summary of the public
project Revolving Fund Series B
issuance.
Uh, thank you, madam chair and
board. Uh, we sold our 24B bonds
on October 1st at a paramount of
45,315,000, uh, the lead
underwriter will be of a
securities and Steve on RBC
acted as co-managers.
Uh, our board designee was Joy
Esperson and the bonds closed on
October 16th.
Yeah, we actually sold into a, a
good market, um.
You know, whenever there's uh
Instability in the world,
there's tends to be a flight to
quality and so there was a bit
of a flight to quality with the
Middle East, uh,
Disruptions and so, um, the
market tone was, was good to us.
We actually, um,
Today, the market, the interest
rates would be between 30 and 50
basis points higher, so, uh, you
know, in, in retrospect, we sold
them a very good market.
The uh
The sale itself went went quite
well. We, we ended up uh getting
orders for all 19 maturities,
uh, which has not always been
the case. We were
oversubscribed, uh, throughout
the, throughout the, the scale
between 1.7 and about 6 times.
Consequently, we were able to
reduce yields by 2 to 6 basis
points.
Um, which, since this was an
entirely a reimbursement issue
we didn't have any simultaneous
borrowers, uh, we were able to,
um, essentially fully reimburse
the PPRF for loans that have
been made previously, which
again, is not always the case,
so that was, that was a good
thing.
Uh, we did get our, our ratings,
um, reaffirmed AAA S&P both on
the senior and sportedly double
one senior sportively from
Moody's, so that's uh it's nice
to get that uh feedback.
Um, as you can see on the, the
graph there on page 3 695. You
just see that we did um improved
substantially from where we sold
our last senior series, the 23B
bonds, uh, just about a year
ago. So, um, as several of the
folks who presented today have
mentioned that the rates have
hied down where they have been,
uh, kind of going in the
opposite direction for the last
3 weeks or so, uh, but we did,
we did.
hit the market at a good time.
Uh, the table below the graph
just went uh lists.
The, uh, the investors that we
had on this issue, and as you
can see, it was sort of a mix of
our largest investors, uh, since
2013, um, our number one
investor BlackRock, uh, put in
23.4 million of orders,
Susquehanna, which is also in
the top 20 that those were, you
know, two fair, fairly large.
Participants and we also had uh
4 new investors, um, mostly, uh,
sort of smaller retail type
entities, but uh still we had uh
a fairly decent order from a, a
new investor CIBC private wealth
advisors.
So, um, with that, I think, uh,
you know, I've left uh or
included a bunch of numbers
related to the issue, uh,
subsequent to this page, if you
had any interest in those and
Um, we are.
You know, from, from one deal
closing two weeks ago to a new
deal. We are looking at the 25A
issue, which um I think, you
know, Carmela had sort of uh
mentioned the fact that we have
at least
Uh, 2 or 3 simultaneous
borrowers for that deal. It'll
probably be a fairly large
transaction for the PPRF because
uh in addition to the, the
simultaneous borrowers we also
have um a number of
reimbursements, so we're looking
at that deal coming to market,
uh, probably in the middle of
February, so with that, I have,
uh, I have to answering your
questions.
Thanks.
Any questions from board members
about?
Represented the board.
Yes, and I, I encourage, uh, any
board members that have not
participated in in a bond sale
to uh volunteer. It's uh the,
the time commitment is not
terrific, and I think, uh, yeah,
I think the members who have
participated have have enjoyed
the, the process, so, um,
they're all, any, any and all,
welcome to, to join us in the
next bond issue.
Next on the agenda, the audit
committee
and a.
Uh, chairkeith members of the
board, the um audit committee
met on Wednesday, October 23rd.
We just had a couple of agenda
items, uh.
August financial statements and
performance indicators were,
were presented, um,
Nothing really of note, um, in
terms of, of transactions or
changes. We had an update on the
NMFA building project which um
is moving along like you would
expect a construction project of
this size too, and I think the,
the, certainly the staff is
looking forward to completion
and being able to get access to
the building uh early next year
to to move in and and enjoy
their new home.
Uh, that's my report. Any, any
questions of the
Audit committee.
If not, that concludes most of
our agenda.
Need to
announce our next board meeting,
so a quick remember board
meetings because of holidays, we
will, um, have an early December
4 means December 12th.
At 9 a.m.
Um, and seeing no other business
on the agenda, the meeting.
Thank you.
OK.
