Today as well we've had a couple
of others that we know up if
first we just start with quick
introductions instep Center
sumptuous.
Still a freshman year so.
Mr chair my name is Nathan small
very proud to represent house
district thirty six on the
account clearing some areas
served with the chain thank you
Mr chair.
A good morning Mr chairman Mr
vice chair members of the
committee thank you all in the
audience of those presenters and
senator Michael Padilla
represent the southwest quadrant
to Bernalillo county service the
Senate majority whip and served
in the Senate Education
Committee for nine years and
very invested and interested in
this subject thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
representative at the ceremony
of one of Representative
district six one despite the
Cibola at McKinley County my
complaint to fade agency I
represent all of or part of the
school districts that are part
of this to the
Lawsuit so.
But if I feel there.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Ingle hi extruding
Representative Senator twenty
seven southeastern part of the
state I your town is down there
and I'm very glad to be here.
A good morning Mr chairman the
state Senator Mimi Stewart from
the international district in
east gateway area of.
Thank.
Senator are you ready down there
you want a moment.
Morning office chairman.
Members of the committee staff
of Benny Shendo representing
Senate district twenty.
Dr Sanchez Griego.
Full thanks to.
Good morning Mr chairman morning
everybody in my name's on this
from I don't Representative
house district ten far south
valley park southeast
Albuquerque happy to be here
thank you Mr thank you I'm bill
souls the state senator from Los
crucis district thirty seven the
beautiful organ mountain area of
Los crucis the east mesa and
very pleased to be here
if you want to introduce
yourself in the very staff to
revel in the back John.
And from.
From the Legislative Council
Service the public school
capital outlay task force staff
is let we have myself Clinton
Turner and Sheila Keller and
we're Graeser with our director
we have Ralph Francie ID here
and he's also a member of our
a public school capital outlay
council and the office of our
deputy director for drafting
Shawna Casebier.
Great given we didn't miss
anyone.
At we do have our Representative
smelly S. C. and L. F. C. will
grace us all the time with
whenever we have meetings
dealing with anything with
education so thank you all for
being here as well.
But.
Good morning Mr chair members
thank you for having us here
today my name is particularly
because CS and the executive
director of PSMA and I have miss
Harris Romero she is our deputy
finance offer officer with PS
yes well.
So thank you for having us here
today.
So if I'm gonna start with a
presentation that should be in
your books and I would like to
open up with saying that some of
you might have heard the first
couple of slides before but we
wanted all the new members to
here where we come from and what
we're doing and refresher for
the rest of you.
So it is a if you get your hand
out.
So we have our agenda on the
first page and we're going to
talk about the hierarchy between
the public school capital outlay
task force the public school
capital outlay council and the
public school facilities
authority which is where I was
and I work.
Then we're going to talk about
our funding programs the
processes the applications the
sources of funding the state
local match and a brief twenty
twenty three legislative update.
On page three as many of you
might be aware our agency was
created as a result of a lawsuit
that was to indicated there was
it inequity for funding capital
projects Google school projects
based on the tax base of areas
school districts.
So the task for the PSUC was to
create a way to equitably
distribute the funding for
capital for schools that were in
need of replacement or repair.
And the public's the public
school capital L. outlay manages
the allocation of those funds.
The your body provides oversight
of the public school capital
outlay and we are staff to the
public public school capital
outlay council.
Page four has a really nice
illustration of the that what I
just said it shows that the
school.
Then the PSC OC and then the P.
SFA As staff to that body.
If you go to page five you will
see the PSC OC members and I'd
like to say here that it's
really nice blend of people with
their background and what they
bring in their positions to our
council is that we have
Djerejian who is from New Mexico
school board association so he
brings that voice we have Mr
Burciaga who's a vice chair of
the Legislative Council Service
we have when put a half one of
meant from the legislative
education study committee to
bring us knowledge about what
facilities might need in the way
of education we have actually
leach from DFA so she can help
us you know I understand any
bring her knowledge of money and
have DFA operates we have David
Abbey until the end of the month
from the LFC.
We have stored in came from the
Public Education Commission to
bring us the voice of the state
charter charter schools to our
attention might end up by the F.
from the governor's office Mr
teas from the public education
department and Kay Bailey from
C. ID which this building codes
it is very familiar with
construction so it's a great
blend of experience to make our
committee a whole.
Page six re emphasizes what we
do again with the past the staff
of the PSC OC.
We distribute the state funding
want to PSUC awards it and then
we manage the projects from the
beginning to the end from a
facilities master plan to award
to the RFP for construction to
construction management
throughout the whole entire
process until close out and then
we do the financial close out as
well.
And the last column in yellow
facility information management.
We go out to every school in the
state we assess it to see what
kind of deficiencies it has so
that we can bring to the PS
you'll see what schools are the
most need so we start from one
down to seven hundred and sixty
nine schools so the assessments
tell us.
These top one hundred schools
need the most attention.
However we don't do the
assessment without the schools
by our side so the schools go
with us the schools view the
assessments they can contribute
to the data that we gather
whether it's correct or not.
Page seven has the funding
programs in in the beginning
The state Senator Stewart might
remember that the only program
that the PSUC funded with
standards and standards was when
we did a full replacement of the
school or renovation of the
school.
And then we went on the council
went on to add systems so the
systems are bits and pieces of
the screen like if you only need
a new roof he only need HVAC or
perhaps your fire fire control
the alarm has gone out so
instead of if you don't need a
whole new screen but merely to
replace some of the systems to.
Second program.
And then we do separately
prekindergarten so there is a
need for prekindergarten garden
classrooms in your district and
school districts the council
fund those or they'll upgrade
exist.
New program funded by the PS
uses teacher housing and that is
really if there's a lack of
housing for teachers in a school
district the council will fund
teacher housing on school
district property but only if
there's no funding of a.
And then we do lease assistance
and that's for mainly as for
charter schools but for school
districts as well so if they're
renting a building or facility
to teach in the.
Seven hundred and some dollars
per student as lease
reimbursement.
And then there's a facilities
master plan.
Which is really important to
facilities master plan is a five
year road map the district has
what they need in their
facilities.
One of the reasons it's really
important to sometimes there's
turnover at districts the
superintendents come and go but
you've got this roadmap that
everybody can stick to so
practicing keep moving forward
if there's a change of
administration of course it can
change whenever the school board
chooses but it's helpful to have
a plan in place already.
And then on page eight
this is the explains how often
this the PSoC gives awards I
used to be done once a year.
And now it's done throughout the
year the school district and
apply when they're ready and
it's very helpful because a
school board they have to plan
about their bond sales and such
so why wait a full year just
come for when you're ready the
council considers awards every
month.
We visit with the school
district we do a site visit we
bring the project forward bring
to the peace you'll see for
their review and analysis and
then the following month the
consider renewable.
And then page nine.
We're just talking about the
current projects and
applications that the PS you'll
see has in front of them.
Right now we have seven hundred
and.
Two hundred and seventy three
current yes you'll see projects
so that standard space that
systems
Security projects.
Date from from FY twenty three
we have fifteen new awards.
We have twenty two no okay
applications for the council to
consider thirteen of those are
standards based which means
replacement schools or rent of
major renovations fiber systems
based one is for pre K. facility
and three are for tier housing.
And the council will be
considering those awards in
Probably make it was in July or
August.
Page ten just talks about the
different funding sources that
districts may have
They may get direct legislative
appropriations they may get New
Mexico finance authority loans
or money through the public
school capital outlay Act.
And then on the other side
there's local sources on the.
All right hand side of the paper
SB nine a house.
Local general obligation bonds
lease purchase act education
technology equipment act and the
public.
Building energy efficiency and
water conservation act so they
can use any of those.
The council gives an award
there's a state local match as a
CMP.
The matches go from zero was
only having no match because
they have no Tax base up to
ninety four percent for the
districts that might have a
higher tax base such as Santa
Fe.
The state local match is based
on that evaluations member SIPC
and residential mills a school
district has imposed and you see
the chart shows.
If you have a higher land
evaluation your districts share
will go up.
And the state share will
decrease so I won't walk you
through all of that and this you
have questions at the.
Page twelve talks about Senate
bill one thirty one which is
committee past in indoors and
took through and we're very
happy about this one.
briefly it it cuts to local
matched by one third.
If you have less than two
hundred students it cuts a local
match by one half and if you're
going to do pre K. it cuts it by
one half as well.
All offsets were eliminated and
this takes effect July one.
Districts waiting for July one
to pass to put in the
application so they can receive
those benefits.
page thirteen has House Bill
five oh five which gives money
for career technical education
pre K. and maintenance at risk
and prepare public school
buildings.
it's sixty five million in the
year twenty twenty for a minimum
distribution of a hundred
thousand and this is based on
your SB nine distributions if
you don't get SB nine you get a
minimum a district gets a
minimum of a hundred thousand.
Below that you'll see security
answer for ends for structure
that passed and it's thirty five
million.
With the minimum distribution.
So last year the some of you
might remember Senate bill two
twelve that was for maintenance
and repair and the distribution
was similar to just be based on
the SB nine once we receive SB
ninety yes they was able to get
that money out to the districts
in about two months so we have
to have the same success this
year.
That is the end of our
presentation and we stand for
any questions that you might
have.
Wonderful students from the
committee.
Representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you very much for the
presentation when did the awards
and consideration go change from
annual two month to month.
Mr chair representative small
with this year that it changed.
Great thank you very much thank
you Mr.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so I think
some of your last comments
answered my question already but
on page nine where you talk
about the applications you have
I'm just so surprised that you
only have one pre K. asked and
so is it probably because
they're waiting for July one
where the cost goes down
considerably for the local then.
Mr chair.
We think that some of its
waiting.
but last year we also did.
There were.
But we had not had a high demand
so we are going to be meeting
with uh Senator I mean.
Secretary begins Kate and she's
going to come present.
The needs that she sees
statewide and the space that we
see space wide as well.
Mr chairman the market because
the the the pre K. is for the
public schools the awards that
you do in the funding that you
happens for public school pre K.
is that not correct Senator
Stewart that is correct you know
we've just gotten we're that
ECECD Hartman is about have
millions of dollars so
hi I think we're ready to expand
but I'm a little concerned that
nobody's asking for these
classrooms I don't quite
understand why they're not so
you had five last year was at
five different districts
And Centers.
Three of them were in Farmington
if my memory is correct and the
others were in Los crucis.
But I have to verify if it was
three to make to make sure that
I'm correct.
Right well Mister chairman I I
just think this is an issue we
you know we want to go all in on
pre K. for this school districts
are not going to be applying for
these that that's.
That's a big loss in my book and
I know there were plenty of
dissent Rio Rancho has been
telling us for years they have a
long waiting list on their pre
K. and they need more pre K. but
they weren't really able to get
much from the state so perhaps
July one will see a difference
but to I just think this I need
to keep an eye on it try to
figure out what is going on.
This thank you Mr chairman thank
you yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation.
I'm sure you present this to us
before Mr chairman that of on
slide eleven the.
The description on the bottom
right can you just walk through
that a little bit more want to
make sure I'm not following
exactly
What's going on here.
Can you describe a little
greater detail I can centers
schools
So.
We've been working quite a bit
on this to understand it a
little bit.
Hi valuation property back to.
That is part of the formula so
your share is higher.
They were talking to and I
really basically that way so we
were thinking we were trying to
learn and understand the state
local match and thinking about
what pieces of that make the
local share higher.
So what makes it the local share
higher or lower.
Is it's based on your number
students so the lower number of
students who have the lower
gross square footage that you
need.
So if you have fewer students
your match goes up a little bit
higher because part of the
formula is about your gross
square footage times a dollar
amount in the numerator.
So that's a contributor the cost
per square foot in.
What from the past and if if
this committee is going to look
at stating that we might
consider raising that amount to
and that that with the district
share again would go lower and
the state share would increase
it's it's a mathematical
formula.
the other thing that causes the.
The local share to be high is
the life time of a building that
we have.
It was a higher span.
Local share with the lower so
there's a lot of little pieces
of a mathematical formula that
spit out the actual state local
match and I have those written
down if you'd like me to.
Senator Padilla so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you so you
know I guess I'm with the
formula I might be a little
concerned because in the urban
areas the land values are going
to be higher so they will
definitely you know be affecting
you know will happen there and
then so we got to make sure we
understand that a little better
because that that serve turns
into a problem for these areas
and then separately from that I
don't know but you we we get all
the interns started right now so
I I try to get my we're in this
many of this possible that I'm
on thank you madam president I
kept everything I'm supposed to
be and I I try my hardest to get
there and I was recently they
can refuse LFC or L. E. S. C.
last week where we were told
there was a district building a
school at seven hundred and
fifteen dollars a square foot.
What's going into that school
because I want to go to that
school again I want to go
through the whole preparation of
my life again to go to that
school because they have a
swimming pool in each classroom
because I was like what the
world.
Senator school Senator by the
end we are seeing very high
costs the highest one is blue
water as seven hundred seventy
three dollars a square foot
followed by Los Alamos is seven
hundred sixty five dollars a
square foot and then Gallup is
going down to about four hundred
seventy six dollars a square
foot it is not about the
materials or the content or
having a really fancy school
it's about the material costs
and.
Hi the the market one of schools
and Gallup we got one better
only so that.
What we're seeing is it's not a
fancy school.
I hear you so Mister chairman I
feel like we need to do a little
more investigation on the you
know little look into that maybe
during this interim
Not sure if you're the work plan
calls for anything like that but
we really need to get our hands
around that because it seems to
me like then that suddenly
becomes a way to you know
utilize the formula to you know
I can come in here and say I've
got a school that I need for
seven hundred dollars a square
foot and all of a sudden I'm
gonna get a much larger piece of
the pie we're as maybe we could
have done to square feet or
three square feet off of that
seven hundred dollar whatever I
don't know building costs.
Anywhere that are above the two
hundred and thirty Bucks a
square foot maybe three hundred
on the high end but for school
and I I know there a lot of
things going to schools and on
going to homes and to
residential with I'm just trying
to figure out what what we do
we're what we missing here.
So if we could look into that
Senator much you're like that
then what and senator one of the
things that you asked about a
new commented it is we have some
schools that are being billed
it's seven hundred eighty or
something but then another one
at four hundred.
I don't understand how possibly
there could be a seventy five
percent difference in the cost I
mean I could see if there was a
ten percent even fifteen percent
based on location and distance
from materials markets and
things of that sort but seventy
five percent seems outrageous
that's what alerted me Mr
chairman to bring it over you
know if they were all coming in
at seven hundred dollars a
square foot that's you know the
cost of doing business but when
there's such a wide range that
that seems odd.
If I may Senator schools I might
I might want to add that the the
one is lower might be a smaller
school is where footage.
And can I get a follow up
comment to a question from Santo
by the F. yeah the smaller
school by square foot would be
more expensive not less
expensive I would think.
But yes please go ahead.
I just wanted to point out.
Rural district being land rich
and having a higher state match
and then if you combine that
with them having a lower
enrollment the less critical
square footage that those two
elements because their match to
go up so if we revisit the the
formula we might.
Rural areas and number.
There should go.
Mr chair.
Was published in January.
January twenty twenty four.
Of.
Doctors I just created thank you
Mr chair just a couple of
comments on the pre K. and I
think Senator Stewart it was it
was what she was saying is very
good in that I don't think that
we under that we know the
superintendents and some of but
there's miscommunication I think
a lot of us have started
applying and have in fact that
we I think I just sent an
application last week and I know
that a lot of my colleagues are
also signing applications for
the new pre K. I but I think
there's confusion between you
know here's the building and are
we gonna get the money to
actually run run it because
you're talking about two
agencies that that kind of come
together so I think better
communication on that I know
that you probably get a lot of
applications here in this new
term the other thing I would
would like to say to the
committee as well as the concern
about the applications that are
being received so even on the
teachers housing and other
things we there was all of these
regulations and rules that said
you need to turn enlighten this
certain time and there's that
and then your offices that we're
we're gonna make decisions by
this time which is in January
then we didn't hear any anything
because it went into the
legislative session but all of
the policies that they were
going to be done by the certain
point so we're calling your
guises office saying what's
going on happen there hasn't
been a decision made and then
we're being told will because it
went back to the legislature
we're gonna wait to what they
decide yet none of the policies
and procedures and application
processes that you guys wrote
notified us of that so those are
deterrents when we're trying to
come forth especially when we're
asking for full payment of of
tier regions are some of the the
things that we're trying to
build when our communities do
not have the tax base to carry
that it and I think one of the
other things for the committee
as well as one of the things
that superintendents as a whole
are also looking at
I is the fact that Hey I guess
in the one of the the last
funding cycles a lot of the
school district a lot with some
of the school districts were
able to put their teacher just
and other.
things in their plan and even
though they weren't paying for
them this is what I understand
maybe I'm incorrect this came
from your guises office and so
therefore their teachers got
paid their teacher just got paid
a hundred percent and because it
was in their building operations
plan or something and the rest
of us didn't know that you could
do that and so therefore we were
applying for teacher just on the
on the other side does this make
sense to the committee.
It just it just I think I would
just say from the the end of a
you know us in the in the in the
trenches if you will they're
trying to get these things built
the more complicated they get
and the less that the
institutions and departments
talk together the more we're
trying to figure out we apply
for here do we get the money
here if we get a building are
gonna have money to actually
bring in that we're we're doing
a daycare and preschool and
other things and it's just
taking so long for the
application person who comes
first the chicken or the egg the
kid or the building can't we get
about the same time because by
the time the system has decided
it could be a year after that
and the kids are here this year
so thank you Mr chair.
Question.
Other comments.
Mr chairman I I would like to
hear from our take thought for
the superintendent just brought
up because.
That sounds like a very
complicated and not very helpful
the thing that we did to
districts so I don't know if
you've got any comment about
that
Mr Senator so full.
Have recognize that we need to
get was.
Talk about.
With their program looks like
versus the building and we did
have a meeting set for June
ninth
As you know our program for
facilities has been out there
for quite awhile and it is.
To the needs and so those two
things do need to to come
together and we are bringing
that to the PSC OC for
discussions
in regards to the teacher
housing the teacher housing can
be applied for a separate.
It was a private pilot program
and now the council is funding
those but or that can be applied
for as part of your screen
replacement
application.
But the council has not paid a
hundred percent for any teacher
housing it's always state local
match and less your local
matches zero like it is and
Sony.
In Gallup Inc can central
consolidated they did pay for
one hundred percent of the
teacher housing as I understand
that was in their construction
of their their entire package we
look we looked into that so
that's what we understand madam
I'm sorry this.
Thank you Mr chairman I've I've
we need to figure this out so
it's really good that we're
bringing in the secretary Kirk
and ski on this.
We have so much funding we need
to move forward on these pre K.
programs so that it it's always
so frustrating after we have a
full session we do all the stuff
in the nobody knows about it so
I don't know what is wrong with
our communications but we all
need to sort of step up and do
more with that thank you.
And I think we have a real
opportunity now secretary
Groginsky hasn't been.
In the public school stuff we're
we've been doing a lot on the
building side of it that you
know educating her on how we can
be helpful one her role intended
to get more of this pushed out I
think and so I was talking with
Clint will try to get her in the
building people at the same time
so we everybody's hearing the
same message.
Your story Ingle.
Save that.
Friction school destruction
calls what we're talking about
here of seven hundred dollars
versus the should two hundred
four hundred but there's got to
be some we have to answer some
of the this is
We issue but I don't know where
you stop this with winstar spike
this.
And we are flush with money now
but that will change believe me.
It always does and
Can you give me some kind of a
explanation I mean of the seven
hundred square dollars a square
foot been approved
Senator so Senator Ingle that
project was
That particular project was not
approved but the other one the
other ones were but the PS
you'll see is equally concerned
and they have asked us to get
together with the construction
community the design community
and look into it and then we're
going to bring a presentation to
the PSUC to talk about what what
is making what is.
Causing these costs increase
they they very much want to
study it as well the the three
prices that I quoted were bids
projects that would out to bid
and came back from contractors.
Then that but by the same token
that that increases just.
I mean I know there's a lot of
construction going on economies
is very.
Is really going well and that
certainly does does drive up
cost of ownership costs jump
like this there's got to be
something here that we don't do
that as we don't have enough
people can bid on these jobs and
then basically they can.
Do whatever they want to and I
think that's a big problem we
have is that there were very
limited on who can bill who can
build the schools because of the
bonding of past and things like
that so we need to take we need
to.
Take a look at this and see
where we're going here because
this is not something that's
going to work.
Because once you start approving
Nash it never stops and I guess.
You better take a hard look at
this pretty quick thank you.
Thank you other members
questions.
Yes Representative come chair
justified when I'm looking at
the we're talking about rural
water that this is my district.
We're talking about the fact
that that school was being built
it is area where they have to
provide water sewer and
everything else to make that
school do some private school so
they're not just building a
school building the real do the
whole system we basically if
community so to speak so that is
why you're looking at probably
that cost
I think you just those problems
in a lot of their school type of
federal consolidated that we may
have to build up all the way up
to the the road up to the school
to some places so you're looking
we know what you're talking
about that it's including
everything included comes out to
the cost of.
That much more than seven
Albuquerque where everything is
set up and all they got to do is
call the city and hook up.
So there's a big difference in
in this world in the state of
New Mexico yes it's out with
here they're Shendo.
Not a job I want to.
So what you're talking about
separating the building costs
from the infrastructure costs to
to do this.
There's always infrastructure.
Other questions or thoughts on
this topic.
If not have a short interlude we
have a couple of people have
joined this Representative girl
like introduce yourself please.
Thank you.
Right.
First.
That wonderful welcome.
And someone else yes Sir.
Good morning members my name's
on twenty Ortiz I'm the director
finances of director finance
operations the public education
department I also on the public
school capital outlay council
and I am the dignity for
secretary Romero.
Thank you I also like to
announce that Representative
rollout and etcetera but the of
both been elevated to voting
members today to allow us to
have a quorum and so yeah
congratulations I think that
you're now officially voting
members for the day have the
leadership of both houses both
chambers about taking care of.
So.
I thank you do you have other
final comments you know it
sounds like you know we're very
back regularly with this and
some of the topics clearly that
people are concerned about with
particularly the cost of that
seem to be writing a fast train.
Thank you.
First one to go over the next
section which is kind of the
work plan that we put out I
think it's very ambitious both
with things we currently have
but some thoughts and ideas
about some potential expansions
of of where we might use awards.
Sure chairman souls and members
of the task force the other hand
are you gonna have in your
folder is this for page white
hand out and that will include a
tentative
work plans and also very back
you'll see the the planned
meeting dates at this point so
I'm gonna go real quickly and
and then chairman souls I think
will open up for discussion
with the overview of some of the
work plan.
the work plan unlike some
interim committees of this task
forces statutorily created task
force it was first created back
in two thousand one and then it
involves to look as it does with
its current membership in two
thousand eight and these first
four items are statutorily given
that are pretty broad mandates
to the members and compass
almost anything that you
discussed this morning and the
following items they include
overseeing the work of the
public school capital of the
council and the public school
facilities if the Ford Authority
as they perform their functions
and implement grant making
awards to monitoring the revenue
streams that come into the
the the fund the public school
capital outlay projects to
ensure that the remain adequate
and the.
The sufficient for long term
funding monitoring the progress
progress of bringing all
facilities up to the statewide
adequacy standards monitoring
the effectiveness of the
programs administered pursuant
to the public school capably Act
and.
The public school capital
improvement act.
And
some of these are similar to
last year's and some of them a
different but and beyond the
statutory mandates the tentative
plan is to review again and
receive an update likely from
the attorney general's and
others on current developments
in the soon the lawsuit
as we just discussed quite a bit
here this morning to evaluate
in here about the facts of
recent inflation and bids on the
school construction and
maintenance costs and assess the
adequacy of the current funding
framework to address the
challenges imposed by these
rapidly rising expensive
expenses
to the legislative education
study committees planning to do
some pretty in depth analysis on
school transportation funding
and we're going to the task
force plans to it hear from some
of their studies including
possibilities from electric
school buses
it likely from the department of
finance administration and other
economists receive some updated
forecasts and information on the
supplemental severance tax bond
proceeds and the long term
trends on those revenue streams
to review current development
teacher housing and consider how
those criteria are developed to
meet the needs and allocate the.
The allowance of school
districts who have teacher
housing.
To consider and needs funding
structure and for general
neutral restrooms and during
remodels and new constructions
chair of view the expenditure of
the large expenditures of
federal funds and also any
possible additional federal
funding opportunities that the
state can leverage our examine
appropriateness and needs and
recent requests for funding
technology with capitals sources
evaluate the needs of cafeteria
and kitchen facilities after
significant changes with the
implementation of universal free
and healthy school meals this
last session.
And
like was mentioned we had
significant legislation to
reviews that implementation of
Senate bill one thirty one which
among other things reduces
temporarily reduces some local
match for projects forgives past
offsets eliminate some future
offsets and for direct
legislative appropriations and
also make some specific
appropriation amounts for
schools to see security
career and technical education
and pre K..
and examine how statewide
adequacy standards should
incorporate the need for the
career technical education as
outlined in Senate bill fifty
one thirty one also.
And
in funds to one of the memorials
that was passed in this last
session house joint memorial
seven to respond to their
requests that request to study
public school heating
ventilation air conditioning
systems and considered
sustainable funding mechanisms
for their those H. fax systems.
Thank you Clinton
World War questions comments.
Additions and kind of get things
started a couple of the ones
I've with the weather put in
that we I think as a state we
have an opportunity to look at
electric school buses and to do
that with capital money
some of the problems with
getting buses out is that a
higher initial costs than other
buses and but they have much
lower operating costs and so if
we could fund with capital money
there a long term kind of
investment
it actually shifts that capital
money into the classroom money
after the buses are purchased
and it also provides some equity
in that districts with the
higher state match get the bus
to get more of the cost of the
buses paid for and so would
encourage electric buses that
would require I believe
statutory change to expand that
area into something that is
available.
Questions on other stuff
budgeting.
Senator the ID probably would
pick up on the one on that for
the healthy meals one of lots of
districts have moved away from
having kitchens at every school
in that bill essentially says
you're going to find site made
food for everyone it's gonna
require lots of rebuilding of
our kitchens and kitchen staff
and how are we going to manage
that as is that going to be a
systems project for yes for the
public school capital outlay
council how is that going to be
managed does that require a
statutory changes were just
rural type of changes I know
that's it something it's been
very important in the
superintendents would love to do
this but.
Lots of about school Capt
cafeterias and kitchens have to
be rebuilt or added on to.
Still getting no takers for
other questions or comments
Senator Stewart thank you.
Mr chairman I just want to say
this looks like a lot of work
but are I really like the way
it's been laid out thank you
Clinton and with your input so I
think this really does cover a
lot I want to hear more about
teacher digits because it's more
than just just rural Santa Fe I
think is going to ask for
teachers so I kind of want to
more.
That and after what
superintendent Sanchez Griego
said I really yes.
Try to solve these glitches in
our system so I hope perhaps we
should perhaps we should reach
out and have I don't know a
panel of superintendents or
cheated at school dismember
school board for chief business
officers that will come up and
tell us where the problems are
where the loopholes are.
As you know we should be using
this funding well and we've had
this need for a long time so
let's get it right so I'd like
us to drill down a little bit
more into a improvements that we
have a fantastic system okay it
says Hey I think is one of the
best state agencies we have so
let's let's utilize them and try
to even improve on our system so
I I just like what you put on
here so thank you for thank you
Sir Mr chair currently we're in
the middle of the Martinez
Yazzie losses will know there's
a tech order in place that
requires that the the state
provide devices and connectivity
to all students in the state of
New Mexico
right now are currently in all
districts if utilize the federal
funding and and.
US regular funding to to try to
purchase those devices but we're
at the point right now we're all
those devices need to be
refreshed for the third year of
that so if it's a pleasure this
task force maybe we could take a
look at that the cost that's
going to and maybe this could be
a funding source for that.
Hey up not are you talking about
actual devices or the
infrastructure to support the
devices Mr chair just the
devices are under both and if
the pledges Task Force filed we
can have our I. T.
Division from PED come and make
a presentation the.
Infrastructure for it I
understand I'm always a little
bit nervous on devices that are
out of date in two or three
years and using bonded money to
purchase devices which is where
lots of the state local match
the goes through this would be
but you we certainly can have a
discussion but I'm I'm leery of.
Of things that are more
consumable or that are used up
in a couple of years as opposed
to things that are ten fifteen
years in lifetime but certainly
we can have a discussion thank
you.
Representative.
The the.
Thank you Mr chair I have I just
want to of agree with the
Senator Stewart because I
believe that we really need to
look at the processes because
what I'm hearing from the
superintendents and I hear from
my own my own superintendent I'm
still a teacher in the classroom
so I've had lots of cut
conversations with them is that
we all know that we filtered a
lot of of funding into the
schools but the process is in
which they have to access that
funding is not friendly at this
point and like like
doctors Sanchez Griego with
mentioned not knowing how to get
it or it is he's not talking to
each other we have to be able to
streamline this process so the
schools can get the money that
they have available to them and
get it in in a in a timely
manner because I know there's so
many times that schools have to
put in their operational funds
and if they have it some schools
have and some of those don't and
then hope they get reimbursed in
a timely manner or else some
other entities don't get the
money that they need so and out
to be able to stream like that
streamline that process and find
out where their glitches where
where is that money stopping of
what we not know for these
districts because of so many of
them some of them have figured
out and some of them have it and
they have no idea if they have
access to this kind of stuff so
I think that would that would be
an excellent way to to help
them.
Thank you other comments
questions.
The other things you might have
questions about older in.
What what from anyone
chairman souls the as as you
said it's and vicious
agenda we could and we were
statutory limited to four
meetings but I hope to have for
very little the film.
Yes if you have if any of the
task force members or if you
have any more specific feedback
on presenters to
School districts that would be
appropriate to hear of
that I'd really love to hear
those ideas strictly with.
But and I really like the idea
of the panel that's got you know
the superintendents on it
business people wanted people
from the agency's early
childhood everybody talking
about how do we make it smooth
we don't want it we're we're
throwing money out without any
checks and balances by any means
but it should be cumbersome to
provide the application and fill
out the application and go
through the process.
The.
Mr chairman I at move adoption
of our plan and meeting dates
and we do have a quorum we have
not appointed some of the people
on this committee so that's why
we only needed to voting okay
thank you that moved in seconded
is there any opposition to
approving the work plan in the
meeting dates.
And we are.
Anything else we need to take
care of as far as.
I think the plan is the meetings
will start at ten o'clock here
in Santa Fe on those dates I
know Sean is working very hard
in trying to move all the tiles
around to have the fewest
conflicts with other communities
particularly voting members of
other committees and done quite
a stellar job at that and
everybody thinks about the
committees there on she's going
to think about what other about
fifteen committees.
Seventeen eighteen we might
wanna talk to pro tem another
leadership about whether we need
that many.
One okay
but again the the meetings
unless otherwise plan on
probably this room starting at
ten o'clock the ending time will
depend on how much we've got to
get on that but we will try to
get people on the road by four
o'clock each day because I also
have a four hour drive home.
For for all of the meetings if
things get busy and you
certainly don't know but will we
could have an earlier start time
if we just got too much other
stuff to do but the plan is
basically tend to four at the
latest on on those days.
Anything else we need as far as
this committee I appreciate the
people wanted it's always nice
some of our newer members that
are also teachers you're welcome
it's wonderful having you and
certainly superintendent here
representing many of the the
superintendents voices and
people from we have LFC Ellie S.
C. there is others this is an
