Uh, but very quickly, let's do a
quick introduction of members
and
Each of you would, please. Yes,
good morning, uh, everyone. I
think it's still morning. Yes,
uh, Ashley Leach, director of
the State Board of Finance here
representing uh Department of
Finance and Administration on
behalf of Secretary Prost. Good
morning, thanks.
Thank you, Amanda, if you were
represented. Yes, Amanda Luiss,
public education department
filling in for Secretary
Padilla.
Thank you.
Cindy Montoya, New Mexico School
for the Arts representing
charter schools.
Representative Tara Lujan, uh,
Santa Fe House District 48.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Senator Cliff Burle
from Roswell, um, represent
portions of Chavez and Otero
Counties. I believe I've, I've
been on this committee since uh
I first came 12 years ago and it
is one of my
Favorite committees, usually
because it's only one day and we
we get straight to work and, and
we don't make 3 days out of a 1
day meeting, so I appreciate
you. Thank you.
Represented
that was nice and sweet and
short. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am representative Elioli
Alcool. I represent uh parts of
Sibula and McKinley County.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, good
morning, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee,
Senator Michael Padilla
represent the southern portion
of Bernelio County also serve as
the Senate Majority whip and
served on Senate Education with
the chair for quite a while. I
always enjoyed this because I
learned a lot. What's what's up
on the horizon next? Thank you.
Morning, Mr. Chairman. State
Senator Mimi Stewart from
District 17 in Albuquerque, the
International District and East
Gateway area. I think this is my
30th year on this committee.
Yeah.
And I'm Bill Souls. I'm state
senator from the Las Cruces
area, the East Mesa where the
beautiful Oregon mountains are,
um, this committee, the
leadership of this switches back
and forth with the LESC. So this
is the 2nd year.
In this turn round where I've
been chairing this committee and
then next year it switches back
over and the house.
Education chair typically chairs
this committee then for 2 years.
And so very important committee,
we were kind of talking offline
earlier, this committee, more
than almost any others,
literally you can see what this
committee does on a regular
basis as it's involved in
building schools for our
children and has a very direct
impact that is both tangible and
bricks and mortar but also
tangible in what it provides
space for, for our educators and
for our little ones that are in
the education system. And so it,
it's a
Very important committee. Um, we
are staffed by Simon Suzuki and
so Simon, if you'll kind of
introduce yourself and the staff
that are here from council
service helping. I'm Simon
Suzuki, staff attorney with the
Legislative Council Service, and
I'm joined by my colleagues,
Rebecca Griego and Clinton
Turner.
Thank you. We are scheduled to
try and, and wrap this up at 3
with a break for lunch. We may
only break for a half hour so
people can run, get some food,
bring it back over here so we
can try and get back a little
bit closer to on schedule. Um, I
know others have some travel,
but I've got a 4 hour drive back
down to Las Cruces, and it's
nice to get there where I don't
have to spend 3 hours in the
dark driving, uh, we have a
beautiful state, but at night
it's just lights on the road
and, you know, it gets a little
dull, um, with that, we're gonna
go to item 2.
On the agenda and as we get
other members, we'll take a
break for the
The business side of what we
have to do with with having a
quorum and so
My old man glasses on, and so
Ellen, if you would take us
through uh the Board of
Education is
public school district in the
state of New Mexico and that
lawsuit and what's happening
with all those things, please.
Thank you. Certainly. Good
morning, Chairman, members of
the committee. My name is Ellen
Venegas and I am from uh what's
formerly known as the Attorney
General's office. We recently
rebranded to the New Mexico
Department of Justice. I'm an
assistant solicitor general
there and um
Out of the Civil Appeals
division.
So I'll be um providing an
update of the the ZUNI
litigation, which is a
longstanding case. It's been
around for over 25 years now.
Um, but only currently in the
last couple of years has it made
its way to the appellate courts.
So I'm going to provide an
overview of the case, uh,
focusing on the most recent
events. I believe the last time
our office provided an update to
this committee was a little over
a year ago. So since
That time there has been some
significant movement in the
case, uh, most significant is
that the case is now pending
before the New Mexico Supreme
Court.
So, uh, a quick overview, the
plaintiffs in this case are the
uh the ZUNI public school
district appearing through its
Board of Education and the
Gallup-McKinley School District
Board of Education.
The defendants are the state of
New Mexico and its public school
capital Outlay Council.
And uh the main issue in this
case concerns whether the New
Mexico's uh system of funding
capital outlay funding to public
schools violates the education
clause found in the New Mexico
constitution.
And that clause states a uniform
system of free public schools
sufficient for the education of
and open to all the children of
school age in the state shall be
established and maintained.
So the district court, um,
Um,
Almost 4 years ago now, back in
2020, ruled that the states uh
funding system for capital
outlay of schools is
unconstitutional, and then so
ruling the district court
determined that both the public
school capital Outlay Act or the
PSCOA, and the public school
capital Improvements Act, the
PSCIA are unconstitutional
because they're not uniform or
sufficient.
So here's a bit of history, um,
of the case, uh, this complaint
was initially filed in 1998, so,
um, a long standing case, as I
mentioned, um, there was an
initial ruling that the funding
system in place at the time,
which looks vastly different
than what we have today, um, was
unconstitutional, and then there
was some more proceedings in the
trial court where a special
master was appointed, the
legislature undertook a
significant changes.
As to how the funding works,
develop the adequacy standards
that we have today. Um, this
committee, the public school
Finance Authority, all sorts of
things.
So that was the beginning of the
case, um, more recently, around
2015, the plaintiffs reopened
the case and filed new
complaints, um.
And then that went to trial in
initially in 2016 and then there
was a bit of a gap there for
some uh procedural matters in
the litigation and the trial
continued on in 2019.
So, resulting from from that uh
trial, we have a district court
ruling from 2020 that held these
statutes are unconstitutional,
um, the court really focused on
um it's belief that the the the
funding system itself causes
disparity among the districts,
something that the state has uh
consistently contested
throughout this letter.
So after that, um, the state,
uh,
filed a motion for post-judgment
relief or motion to reconsider
in the district court, which was
also denied by the courts. From
there we took an appeal to the
New Mexico Court of Appeals, and
that has since been transferred
over to the New Mexico Supreme
Court, which I'll provide a bit
more details on in a moment.
Uh, something I wanted to
mention is because the state
took an appeal by operation of
law, the district court ruling
is stayed, meaning that um the
district courts determination
that these statutes are
unconstitutional is not in
effect right now, so the
committee, the task force, um,
and, uh, the legislature can
continue on um enforcing these
statutes and amending them as it
sees fit.
Something else to note is that
um although we have quite a long
timeline that we're working
with.
This is uh not entirely
uncommon. Many other states have
education clauses in their state
constitutions as well, and um
the litigation surrounding those
clauses can take decades similar
to what's going on here. So this
is um common across many states.
So, covering the more recent
timeline page, this is just a uh
a snapshot of our current appeal
and where we're at, starting
with the, the district court
order which was back in 2020.
After that, we um completed
briefing in the New Mexico Court
of Appeals, and after that
briefing was completed and uh
the case was submitted to a
panel. The plaintiffs then filed
a motion for certification, um,
which I'll talk about a bit in
more detail in a moment here.
Um, the Supreme Court ended up
accepting certification of the
case, meaning that the case was
transferred from the court of
appeals to the Supreme Court,
um, the state Supreme Court then
Ordered supplemental uh new
briefing and also um ask the
parties to comment on the Court
of Appeals certification order
in its briefing.
And looking forward to the
future, the next thing uh coming
up in this case is oral argument
scheduled before the Supreme
Court on November 7th of this
year.
OK. So I'm gonna just talk a bit
more about each, uh, what's
happened at each stage of the,
the process here, um, and then
there should be plenty of time
for questions or uh if anyone
would like me to elaborate on
anything, I'd be happy to do
that. So in the district court,
um, we have the, the court
declaring that the, the PSCOA
and PSCIA are unconstitutional,
uh, because they're neither
uniform nor sufficient.
The court really focused on um
On the uniformity component of
the education clause, and it
determined that the the state
system of funding uh public
school capital outlay projects.
was itself the cause of the
disparity um across districts,
that's something that the state
has contested throughout the
litigation, um, our position has
always been that, uh, the
disparity or the difference in
schools is really the result of
differing local funding ability
and um some districts can raise
more money through property
taxes, and then you have the
state system coming in as an
equalizing effort that really um
tries to, to um make up.
For that discrepancy. So it's
not in the state's view, it's
not the capital outlay funding
that's causing these
discrepancies. It's local
ability uh to raise property
taxes, and then the states
coming in and trying to uh
improve that any disparity in
that area.
So I had mentioned before that
after the the court's order and
the trial, the state had filed a
motion to reconsider um
requesting post-judgment relief,
and that was largely based on um
legislative developments, as I'm
sure you all are aware, the
capital LA funding system has
undergone some significant
changes in the law in the last
few years and so that's
something that we brought to the
court's attention and that we
have continued to share with the
courts, uh, as we're on.
Appeal.
So despite um, despite that
argument, the, the district
court still denied.
Um, our request for
post-judgment relief and at that
point we took an appeal to the
the New Mexico Court of Appeals.
So in the Court of Appeals, um,
as I mentioned, the parties
briefed the issues, uh, the
state of the appellant filed the
opening brief, and many of our
arguments focused um sort of on
discrete specific issues with
the court's ruling, uh, such as
our position that there the
evidence didn't support that the
state's funding system was
causing the disparity, as the
court determined and also we had
um.
We had noted all of these
legislative changes and um
There was some other procedural
issues that we raised. So our
briefing didn't really focus on
the broad meaning of the
education clause in the
Constitution, but was more
focused on the specific errors
that we identified in the
district court's ruling.
So despite this, um,
The plaintiffs in the case after
the briefing moved to certify
the case to the Supreme Court in
certification, um,
is appropriate where the Court
of Appeals certifies to the
Supreme Court that the matter
involves either a significant
question of law under the
Constitution of New Mexico or
the United States, or an issue
of substantial public interest
that should be determined by the
Supreme Court.
So the Court of Appeals uh
determined that standard was met
and it issued an order
requesting the Supreme Court to
then um certify and accept the
case.
A few months later, the Supreme
Court did that, uh, so back in
November 2023, the Supreme Court
accepted certification of the
matter, which is completely
discretionary and up to the
court, um, and at that point,
the Supreme Court ordered new
briefing, and as I mentioned,
also directed the parties to
comment on the certification
order, which um could be a
signal that um maybe they won't
keep the case. Uh, we, we're not
sure exactly what.
That means, but we did expand on
our briefing, um, that was
submitted to the Court of
Appeals, or Supreme Court
briefing, as well as identifying
those specific discrete um
errors that we uh had previously
briefed, we also got into sort
of um
More of the broader
constitutional questions about
um what is uniformity mean under
the education clause and is the
public is the capital outlay
funding system uniform, as well
as what is the um requirement
for sufficient education under
the education clause mean. So
that's where we're at right now.
um, I should mention after we
submitted our party briefs, we
also had an amicus brief or a
friend of the court where
non-party, another school
district.
Uh, the central consolidated
School District did submit an
amicus brief in support of the
plaintiffs, and so that is also
before the court, um.
At oral argument, unless the
court rules otherwise, it'll
just be the parties, the state,
and the plaintiffs making the
arguments there.
And so currently we're still uh
waiting.
Uh, as we were likely doing with
the last update to the
committee, um, but I don't
anticipate the court will do
anything prior to oral argument,
but after that is when um we'll
be awaiting a decision from the
court.
And um there is a link on your
slides here, the Supreme Court
oral arguments are available to
watch live streamed online or
you can listen to them recorded
later, and so on that website,
uh there's also, they also have
links to the briefs there too,
so if you'd like to do any
further reading the briefs are
available there.
So I know there's been a lot
going on, um, a lot of movement
in this case, a lot of
procedural uh things. So if
there are any questions about
where we're at or where the case
has been, I'd be happy to to
answer them.
Thank you, and I appreciate kind
of the, the tight.
You know, uh, update on it. Uh,
Simon just told me that the 7th
is the day of the last meeting
that we have that we will be
here, so we may, depending on
timing, live stream at least
part of the oral arguments for
that, which I might be.
Very interesting.
Hey.
Interle. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for your
presentation. Um.
I do have a question.
So I know, I mean, the kind of
the underlying issue here is, is
Pilt, uh, payment in lieu of
taxes, I think, as you look
around the state, I mean that's
really
What's going on or it's been the
position of not just myself but
Democrats as well, but there is
a little bit of an issue on the
ability to raise money. I know
in Albuquerque, um, Senator
Morris has told me, he said,
look at my, my tax bill, um, and
they just have more private land
that's able to be taxed and they
do a great job of doing that or
some would say great job, some
might not appreciate it as much,
but um even in Chavis County,
we, we have a lot of federal
land.
And so that's an issue. How
close to the Pilt payments come
or has there even been a study
to look into how close to the
payments come to what um payment
would be made if it was uh.
Private ranch. Mhm.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Senator, and you're correct. Um,
much of this lawsuit since the
inception has focused on um
those types of federal payments
and specifically here um federal
impact aid payments that are
made um when there's a lack of
taxable land, such as um Indian
reservations or forest service
things like that. And so one of
the things that we've
consistently argued is um
Because a few years back, the
legislature changed its
calculations and how it
considers these payments, um,
and so the state used to take a
big chunk of that impact aid and
then distribute it, and now the
districts are keeping more of
it, so our position has been
that this is significantly
changed and perhaps even mooted
some of the the claims in the
lawsuit, um, so that's something
that, um, that we continue to
argue as far as specific dollar.
Mos. I'm, I'm not aware um of
where, where that comes up or
how that comes into play, um,
and at least in this specific
case, the, the findings of fact
we have from the court doesn't
address that. When the findings
of fact were entered, the the
way impact aid was taken by the
state and distributed was
completely different from where
we're at now. So, um, if, if any
study like that does exist, I
would definitely recommend that
the the court
At this if it um goes back on
remand, but as of now, um, it's
sort of an unknown, but
definitely a focus of one of our
arguments that this is a big
deal and it needs to be looked
at.
And thinking uh Mr. Chair and
thank you for that response and
maybe that's something moving
forward, I think, um, we have
Another generous year um coming
up that, you know, moving
forward on this issue, it feels
like we can't ever get
Anywhere because we don't have
enough information and so I
think if we were able to get
funding maybe to our county um
assessor's offices across the
state. We don't have to reinvent
the wheel. I mean, they should
be able to get that information
or at least get close enough to
say, hey, this is what would be
coming in. We might find out the
federal government is getting
closer than we think, or we
might find out they're way
behind. And if they're way
behind, um, you know, it might
be time to, to make them an
interested party or do a
separate lawsuit. Um, I know
sometimes it's a little scary
taking on the
Federal government, but if we
look at what just happened in,
in the Las Vegas Moura era area
took on the federal government,
the government's paying. So I
think um in some instances, if
it's able to prove that, hey,
you guys are falling short,
other states are at an advantage
because there's more private
land. I'm not saying privatize
the land. I'd like to see more
of it privatized, but also, I do
appreciate having national
forests that we can go into, but
why should New Mexico children
carry the burden of that.
For the rest of the nation to be
able to come in and enjoy our,
our beautiful national forest.
So if, if we're going to house
the national forest, we should
be reimbursed for doing so, um,
and unfortunately, the children
are being punished for that. So
if, if that's something moving
forward we have to do, um, you
know, but it's always kind of
one of those terms you say sue
the federal government and
everybody kind of gets a little,
uh, you know, uneasy, but just
in the recent history, somebody
sued the federal government and
they fought the law and the law
didn't win. So I think, um, you
know, that's something.
That we need to look at bringing
them in as an interested party.
The burden shouldn't just be on
the state and our limited.
Resources that we have.
Um, so hopefully we can finally
put this baby to bed in 1998.
That's uh I was.
13 when that was going on, so
it's been going on for a little
while. Um, but I mean, we see it
also in Chavis County.
With the amount of federal land
that there is, um, and the
disadvantage that, that puts us
with even school districts like
Bern that that exists within
Bernlio County. So, I mean, I, I
think um most people from rural
parts of the state would agree.
That this is not an issue that's
gonna be swept under the rug
anytime soon, but until we get
to the real root of the problem,
in my opinion, is that the
federal government needs to pony
up some more money.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Acom.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh.
I just wanted to let uh
Mhm
No, that, uh, well I went to the
field thing here. Uh, the county
itself is gonna get spilled
money.
Federal land.
Not just the school, so.
If you look up at your, your
individual county, you can look
up and see.
How much
to lure tax is paid to the
county.
Or
This federal land that sits in
that county, in other words,
Forest Service and all this
other stuff.
So there is money coming
directly to the county, not just
to the schools.
Uh, my question for you is, OK,
where was I at?
OK, this is all uh
All of this
Pork stuff
The guy
everybody money.
cost the AG buddy that you got
staff you to.
Defend
Because the school's body.
Where is the school's money come
from? Where does your money come
from?
Um, thank you for the question,
representative. Um,
As far as um staffing on this
case, um,
We have
I believe pretty consistently
provided in-house attorneys
rather than outside council, so
for the cost of the Department
of Justice. It's just, you know,
salaried employees who are
working on this matter and um
the school districts, I'm, I'm
not exactly sure. I know they do
have a private attorney, the two
plaintiffs in the case have the
same attorney, um, but as far as
Total dollar spent on um this
case in particular, I, I, I'm
not sure about that, but I can
imagine it's, it's getting up
there. And and I guess that's a
never ending question, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, the thing is that,
uh,
Where is the money coming from?
It's coming from the state of
New Mexico.
both sides, I mean, the schools
are paying money out of their
budgets to pay for that private
attorney or however many
attorneys they have.
AG has you and your staff.
the other side,
come.
To get me a place somewhere
where you can meet.
And mediate this instead of
going through the courts and
come to a conclusion somewhere.
Um,
Thank you, Representative, um,
when, when I uh started on this
case, which has been probably
around a year now. Um, it was
Past the point of mediation
because of the novel legal
issues that were raised, and so
at that point, um, like for
instance, in New Mexico Court of
Appeals has a mediation program,
but they typically don't accept
cases that um are involving like
legal issues that need to be
decided by a court. So, um,
Right now, I don't believe that
mediation would be appropriate,
but depending on what happens in
the Supreme Court, I think that
is definitely something we could
look into. Um, we'll likely get
an order from the Supreme Court
where both sides will be saying
what do we need to do to comply
with this. And so at that
juncture, um, you know, that
could be something that we
consider just to keep the cost
down to the state.
Well, thank you, and, and Mr.
Chairman and
I mean, my thing is uh a little
that uh
We're spending all kinds of
money on this thing and we get
nowhere.
And I think uh somewhere along
the line, somebody's gonna make
a decision for us. Why don't we
make the decision and just
settle this once and for all.
This is been going on, uh, way
before I got elected, I dreamt
that I would never hear this
case again. And uh here we are
30 years later, uh, Senator
Stewart, they were stealing
during the same thing over and
over again for
Are we going to continue hearing
this?
That's why somewhere along the
way somebody's got to sit down
and say, that's what playing
this court game. Let's sit down
together and see where
We can come to a point where we
both agree on something there's
gotta be an agreement somewhere.
Somebody's got
Agree that they
Maybe
somebody's gotta agree that we
can win or lose in a certain
area and uh make this come to an
end.
Because I'm planning to retire
maybe in the next 30 years.
And I hope that I'm done uh with
the booty. See here's the thing
is I, I represent Zudi, the
whole.
But, I mean the whole school
district.
I represent part of Gallup and I
represent part of Grant.
Well, I'm tied up to all three
entities that are made up and
then I represent the state of
New Mexico and the way itself.
So,
I just think there's gotta be
somewhere, somewhere that we can
just, I'll just leave it at
that, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Stewart.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I will
answer uh uh representative
Alconn's question.
Uh, I, I believe it's landed
where it needs to be. This is
the last stop, the Supreme
Court.
So what frustrates me?
Is that for 15 of these years.
Uh, there's been a special
master that's worked with us. I
mean,
We put in place the public
school facility authority, which
didn't even exist. We put
together this task force. It
didn't exist. The public school
capital Outlet council didn't
exist. All of these uh new
mechanisms we put in place 20
years ago to deal with this
issue. We have spent
Billions of dollars. I think
it's about, it's over 3 billion.
In new schools,
And if you look at the heat map
of where they are.
The new schools, the majority of
new schools are in the Native
American districts.
We have bent over backwards to
try to run to right the wrongs
of the past and to move forward
with a good system.
We have changed it over the
years. I know after spending so
many years on this committee,
I'm usually the, was the bill
sponsor of those changes, one
year was to make it more
flexible so that you could get
teachers money. We now have
teachers in the statue that we
can spend.
Um, and we have lots of
districts doing that. So it's my
understanding that when this
wound up,
In the Gallup courthouse, that
judge didn't want to deal with
that.
So he just said,
No, they're unconstitutional
boom, and that's why it's made
its way to the Supreme Court.
So, uh,
We, we have changed these
procedures over the last 6
years. Finally, rather than
continuing to try to have uh
equal uh uh.
Um
Equal distribution of all the
funds we had, we just gave up on
the impact Da district. All of
that goes to the district
period, end of discussion, state
no longer has any uh uh touch on
that. Uh, the next lawsuit might
be from the southeast part of
the state.
Where a huge amount of money is
coming.
To a state to build these
buildings.
And yet
You know, they look at the
impact a dis uh distribution,
much different.
And many of the rest of us. Uh,
so, um,
We have been so careful. We have
done so much.
Uh, we have really put this
money to good use. We've
expanded the definition of
adequacy.
Uh
So, you know, to me, it's if the
Supreme Court rules these
unconstitutional, we may as well
just give up because it'll be 25
years of constant work on these
issues down the drain.
Uh, so I, I anticipate the
Supreme Court is going to look
at what we've done and say, no,
these are constitutional. You
passed the laws, they were
purpose, we've amended it, we've
listened to everybody, you know,
we finally just gave up on the
idea of, well, let's make sure
everything is distributed fairly
and yeah, we have much bigger
distribution through Impact A.
That's fair. That's now
happening. So, uh,
The Supreme Court, in my
estimation, hopefully we'll see
all the work we've done because
if they don't,
I don't know. We just have to
quit.
You and I will quit, I say,
we'll just go do our own
business.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I have a couple of
questions a little bit along the
lines of what Senator Stewart
was asking, is
You know, as I was looking
through some of the timeline.
Do the complainants give any
Suggestions on what still needs
to be fixed or is it more just
not that.
Does that make sense? I mean,
I'm not a lawyer, but it seems
like we're trying to do things
and we get told, well, that's
not what we want.
And we ask, what is it? And
they're like, we'll try
something else and we'll tell
you whether it works or not.
Is, is that an understanding or
are they saying you need to do
this and give a specific.
Expectation. Uh, yes, thank you,
Chairman. Uh, we have briefed a
similar argument, um, where
we've pointed out that the
impact aid funding has gone to
the districts that teachers are
now funded and sort of chipping
away at all the specific items
that they, the plaintiffs have
raised complaints with, um, and
for that reason I argued that
Their claims are somewhat moot.
Um, the courts so far have not
agreed with us and um we've
continued to brief even in the
Supreme Court, um, this type of
issue where, you know, what is
left of your lawsuit, what's
left of your claims. Uh, there's
a few things, let, let's see,
um.
I, I know some of these are are
now covered, but some of the
specific things the plaintiffs
were pointing to was that the um
funding doesn't include offsite
utilities.
Tetridges, which now are funded,
uh,
Navajo Nation taxes and security
systems. I believe security
systems are now eligible for
funding. So, um, it, it's just a
handful of things, um.
Perhaps that oral argument we'll
hear some more from the
plaintiffs about what is really
left of their claims because I,
I agree with you, Chairman, this
has been something that we've
been raising, um,
The the the claims in the 2015
complaint, which is the most
recent complaint that we have in
the state of the law today, it,
it doesn't even match up, and
even the district court's 2020
order, the reasons that it found
the system unconstitutional,
those are no longer um the
reason he is no longer based on
the current system. It's
outdated. So, uh, I recognize
that issue and it's something we
will continue to advocate for
and perhaps we'll get some, some
more insight at the oral
argument.
Thank you, because I mean it
feels somewhat the other lawsuit
of the Day Martinez lawsuit.
I keep asking, it's like,
What is the goal? How do we know
we're there and it's really not
fair to say, well, keep trying
and we'll tell you when it's
enough.
You know, that's like, you know,
playing a football game is
where's the goal line? It's like
we'll, we'll tell you if you
ever get there. Otherwise keep
going type of thing is, you
know, you need to know what
where we're, where we're headed
or what needs to be done because
I think similar to what Senator
Stewart was indicating, every
time we hear another piece,
We've tried to address that and
think we have, and it's like,
well, OK, but what about this?
You should have done this too.
And it's like, tell us, you
know, kind of give us the whole
list so we know what, where,
where we're headed. Um.
To when the last pages where you
were talking about, it says um
the plaintiffs filed and opposed
motion to certify the appeal.
Does that mean the plaintiffs
did not want it to go to the
Supreme Court?
Um, thank you, Chairman.
Actually, the plaintiffs did
want it to go to the Supreme
Court, and at that juncture, the
state had opposed that request,
and the reason for that was
because the briefing that the
state filed in the New Mexico
Court of Appeals.
It didn't touch on these broader
concepts of uniformity and
sufficiency under the education
clause. It was um
A bit more discreet than that,
sort of saying that the evidence
isn't, uh, is not there to
support the court's ruling, the
court erred by just wide scale
adopting all of the findings of
fact from the plaintiffs without
considering the defendants more
specific issues, so at that
time, uh, the state did oppose
certification on those grounds,
um.
When certification was granted
and the S Supreme Court accepted
it and ordered new briefing, we
then had the opportunity to
expand on some of those
constitutional issues that were
not uh included in the briefing
before the Court of Appeals. OK,
so, so I have it backwards when
I read this, you know, up is
down and down is up, but when
the plaintiffs file and opposed
motion means they wanted it to
go to the Supreme Court, not
that they opposed it going to
the Supreme Court, correct, yes,
the state is the party in
opposition to that. Sorry for
any.
No, no, just trying to
understand some of the legal
speak as the
how things function, um.
I find it very interesting a
couple of years ago, I was
talking to a colleague in Idaho,
and this was more about
Most of the western states all
adopted similar language about a
uniform system sufficient for
I wish I could go back and talk
to the framers and say, could
you be a little more specific of
what you mean by that?
But was mentioning that and
like, oh yeah, we're being sued
also, and I said, well, what are
you doing about it? It's like
we're just ignoring the Supreme
Court and others, and I'm like,
it just ignore them. And so I'm
glad New Mexico is actively
trying to meet the needs and
resolve these things rather than
just saying we're not gonna do
it no matter what you tell us,
so.
Yeah, I just found that very
interesting that other states.
Choose to ignore their Supreme
Court or the rulings and things
of the court, where I think at
least the New Mexico
legislature.
You know, the frustrated that we
don't know where the goal line
is, or at least trying to meet
the spirit of, of what's needed
because we do recognize that all
children deserve a good
high-quality education that is
equitable. Um, and it hasn't
always been, and that we are
actively trying to, to meet the
spirit of what that means, even
though I wish the framers had
been more specific about what
they mean by sufficient.
Thank you.
Certainly, if you like or review
our comment, either one.
Go ahead, Senator.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
my question about this really
and, and the other lawsuit is.
Are the people speaking on
behalf of the legislature.
Uh, you and others, um.
Do you all really understand the
educational system and what
we've done. I, I worry that
there's no education person in
front of the court to say why we
did it, when we did it, what
the what the uh uh good
consequences showing the heat
maps, showing all the data that
shows what we've done, is it?
I know it's a weird question,
but I worry about it, you're
trying to book a date with the
Supreme Court.
I'm so glad that we're meeting
at the same time. I do want us
to watch it, but is your feeling
that from what you're hearing
from us is what the attorneys
know that are trying to
represent us.
Uh, thank you, Senator. Um,
You know,
I believe a lot of that
information such as the heat map
and how the funding really works
is, are things that are
developed at the district court
level, so we do have plenty of
evidence on that. Unfortunately,
it's from nearly 10 years ago
now the trial in 2016 and 2019.
So that, that is the stage where
we typically bring in the
experts or have people as
witnesses, um, and really
explain to the court how the
system works. Um, however, I
agree with you it's, it's very
important for
The appellate courts to
understand how the current
system works. So, um,
Although I wouldn't say we have
a specific education attorney.
We do work within the office at
the Department of Justice to um
update each other and so I'm
involved with um meeting with
people who are working on the
Yazi Martinez case and um while
we are focused on the law, we do
strive to also understand how
the system works and the reasons
behind the changes, and so, um,
for this case in particular,
I've been in.
Contact with Iris at the public
school facilities authority and
they are very instrumental in
providing us um information
about changes in the law, um.
Anything we need to know how
things really work. So, um,
that, that's how we're handling
that right now, um, but we would
be open to if there's any
specific people or players that
um we should be meeting with, I
would be open to hearing about
that, um, because I think it is
really important even though
we're focused on the law, um, in
my role to also understand the
background and.
Um, reasoning behind all of
this.
Well, thank you for that. It
makes me more nervous now,
actually.
You know, you could talk to
attorney Ken Martinez, who's the
county attorney for Bernal Leo,
um, who created the very first
Uh, uh
Uh bill where that started this
um by having the public school
facility authority by setting
aside dedicated uh funding uh to
uh capital outlay for the
district, so, uh.
You know, Iris is new.
You know, you're new, uh, uh,
Leroy is new. I mean, now we've
got new people on, on um public
school Capital Outlay Council
just makes me more nervous.
So, good luck to you. Thank you.
Any other questions?
I mean, a couple of us know way
too much about this than than a
one person ought to. I was part
of the original task force that
set this stuff all up right
after that lawsuit was said. I
was a middle school principal
who was brought in, some because
of being on with the school
board association, but also on
how big should rooms be in
middle schools and, you know,
setting up all of the original
things. So, number of people who
have been involved for a long
while and
We're kind of getting tired of
this lawsuit hanging over us.
Other questions, comments from
anyone. Thank you so much. I do
appreciate you being here and uh
we're gonna work on trying to
make that part of the, the next
meeting, uh, to watch him kind
of break in whenever that
actually starts, that we'll,
we'll switch to that at least
for a while.
So that the committee has full
understanding. Thank you so much
for being here,
um, and I believe the oral
argument will start at 9:00 a.m.
that day.
So we'll schedule the meeting to
begin early instead of 10
o'clock on that day.
And if they in fact do get
started on time, you know,
hopefully we'll be tuned in. We
don't know whether the court
runs on legislative time or on
real time.
I'm sorry, what?
Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you.
So I mean we went back up to the
update on the public school
facilities Authority.
Is that that where we ought to
go next and so back up to item
number one, and Iris, if you and
Larry will come up and kind of
Give us
The update on uh
Where the monies are going, what
projects are underway, where the
glitches are, where things are
going smooth, all of the, the
good information. Thank you.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the task force. I
have the privilege today of uh
reintroducing uh Larry
Tillotson, who is the deputy
director of operations and
outreach today's topic will be
covering maintenance, um today,
so I'm gonna go ahead and defer
to Mr. Tillitson.
Well, good afternoon. I almost
said morning, Mr. Chair,
members, I do appreciate you
inviting me here today, uh, for
this update on what's
transpiring across our great
state with regards to
maintenance and operations.
As I progressed to the comment
section, I'll be happy to answer
any questions if I don't have
the answers, definitely write
them down on a notepaper and get
back with you folks.
Um,
This presentation before you is
an update on maintenance
performance across the state of
New Mexico. The pages are
numbered for your reference.
Really quick, I want to set the
stage. What are we talking about
here?
We're talking about
62 million square feet of public
school space and property and
buildings.
Over the past 22 years, we've
Invested billions of dollars
into the investments across the
state of New Mexico, which I
think is incredible.
I think that is just fabulous.
Ourfes, the facility information
management system that our
districts use to manage
properties and work orders,
preventive maintenance tasks and
utility management are
investments have been nearly
$70.
Maintaining our schools,
definitely costs money.
We have to maintain roadways,
utilities, playgrounds, grounds.
Windows, doors, roof systems,
HVAC systems and now security
systems as we progress with
funding for our schools.
The scale below is important for
me to articulate as we move
forward.
Quite simply a scale from 0 to
100.
Much like the test that we all
took in high school.
90 to 100 is outstanding
performance, 80 to 90 is good
performance, 70 to 80 is
satisfactory. Performance 60 to
70 is marginal and anything
below 60 is poor performance.
Moving on to slide number 3.
In 2011, the PSFA
Went down the path of answering
the question that the council
had.
Our our New Mexico school
districts, the maintenance and
operations crews, the custodial
staff, are they maintaining the
investments over time?
I think that was a great
question to ask at the time. We
did not have an answer to it.
In 2011, we implemented a very
detailed process called the
FMAR.
The facility maintenance
assessment report.
It is now a best practice not
only in New Mexico but across
the the United States. Several
other states have integrated the
FMAR process into their
measurement as they moved down
the path of measuring
maintenance performance.
Flight number 4.
FM defined, again, a best
practice emulated by other
states across our great nation.
It's a process tool that we use
to measure maintenance
effectiveness at a district at a
public school.
to consideration quite simply
three things.
Number one is preventive
maintenance plan, statue-driven
New Mexico school districts are
required to have a PM plan.
Basically says, this is how
we're gonna maintain the invest
investments from year to year.
The second item is fms. Are they
using the state provided
facility information management
system to manage their resources
and their assets from day to
day, the work orders that
preventive maintenance tasks,
the utilities that they have to
pay from month to month.
And the third thing that we take
into consideration on the FMAR
score.
Is the actual physical building
audit.
When we walk up to the grounds.
Is there evidence that the
grounds are being maintained? Is
there evidence that the life
safety systems and the HVAC
systems are being maintained.
Are the air filters changed on a
routine basis? What's the
condition of the roofs that we
walk across on any given day.
Those three things
accumulate to up to 100% score.
It's the test.
Slide number 5. The F Mart
intent over time has been
Measure maintenance performance.
Are they taking care of the
investments over time?
To help New Mexico school
districts identify quickly
opportunities for improvements.
Many times as we walk through
our homes, we put our blinders
on as time goes by, we forget to
fix that light bulb that has
burned out. We forget to fix
that tree that needs trimming.
Over time,
Another aspect of the FMAR that
um goes to measuring is
It also supports district's
long-range capital plans because
one of the things that we're
doing now is we're identifying
things that are broken.
That need to be fixed, and in
some cases districts can fix
those things pretty quick
through the maintenance budgets.
But in some cases, these things
have been dilapidated over time,
and they need capital.
Money to make improvements with.
Moving on to slide 6, basic
definitions.
Of the Fmark categories. What
does it mean for a district to
be maintaining their assets to
an outstanding level.
What does it mean for a district
to be maintaining their assets
to a poor level?
It was critical for us to really
take a step back and define what
these things are. And back in
2011, as the FMR progressed, we
took a step back and we came up
with these basic definitions
that are used across the United
States today.
Flight number 7.
Fmar also identifies what we
call life health safety and or
property loss multipliers.
We have 2 deficiency categories.
One is a minor deficiency. These
are the potholes in the roadways
that are starting to develop.
It turns into a major deficiency
when those potholes are ignored
and they get worse over time.
This is the minor fire alarm
light blinking on the panel.
That's a minor deficiency, but
over time, if it's not paid
attention to, or the district
does not take action, it turns
into a major deficiency, and now
we have a system that's not
working effectively or providing
a safe environment, not only the
students, but the staff.
Those are the two categories
that we use to also measure
within the within the FMRR
process tool that we've created.
Major deficiencies typically are
issues that need more money or
capital improvements to make,
make repairs to.
Slide number 8, our performance
cycle.
Currently, where are we?
We are now living in what's
called the 4th FMR cycle.
It takes us 5 years to do a
complete cycle across the state
of New Mexico.
Our teams are out there today,
boots on the ground, measuring
facility conditions. Are they
taking care of the investments,
updating the FAD documents that
we also provide. We've now
completed since January 1 of
2023, 249 FMAR assessments
across the state of New Mexico,
spanning over 60 New Mexico
school districts and 13 state
charters.
We've, we've assessed elementary
schools, middle, high schools,
district charters, state
charters, pre-Ks, and public
school academies.
One of the good news that I want
to articulate here today is
this.
For the first time, we have
districts performing in the
outstanding categories of
maintenance and maintaining
their investments to a high
level.
They're more dedicated, they're
more motivated. They are engaged
in recognizing maintenance and
operations as a business.
The highest school rating this
cycle so far is a 97%.
That is amazing news that I
wanted to really articulate to
the council.
This one goes to a charter
school.
Like a little bit of competition
here, so congratulations to the
charter schools as they are
performing a little bit higher
than the public schools
currently in the state of New
Mexico, and that was done in
January of this year.
Previous cycle, we identified a
high score of 98%.
What does that tell us? It tells
us that outstanding maintenance
and facility conditions as
possible.
The lowest school ranking this
cycle is a 39%.
Previous cycle, 3rd cycle,
5-year cycle, was a negative
5.673%.
I will tell you these conditions
at this particular school site
were pretty poor.
As a result,
This ended with the school
district getting
Funding to build a new school.
A lot of facility conditions
were identified that were in
need of capital improvements
that they could not maintain
with the current maintenance.
Um, funding.
Our lowest district average this
cycle is currently at 44%, which
I will say is not as bad as the
previous cycles.
So our lows are increasing and
our highs are getting better.
Moving on to
Slide 9.
The 4 cycle performance
statistics currently and, and,
and ladies and gentlemen,
Mr. Chair members, these are
incredible numbers that we have
not seen before across the state
of New Mexico.
We only have 24 poor performers
and 33 marginal performers and
I'm going to explain that
momentarily.
These are our focus areas at the
PSFA. Our small team of
maintenance specialists really
focuses on these school
districts to get them out of
these categories into higher
performance levels through
education.
Training
And
Outreach.
82 New Mexico school districts
are currently performing in the
satisfactory performance level,
which is the PSCOC Council
recommendation.
At the satisfactory level of
performance, New Mexico school
districts will see.
They'll meet, they're they're
building systems will meet
manufacture recommended life
cycle.
This is where we want them to
be, although it's the, it's the
bare bones basic.
84%, 84 districts are now
performing in the good category.
And for the first time ever, I'm
proud of this number.
Well, we are the motivational
group that
Teaches New Mexico school
districts how to do it. It's the
districts doing this work.
They're rolling up their sleeves
and they're really having an
impact on the investments that
We are all making
26 are performing in the
outstanding range of the
deficiencies that we're seeing,
there's always going to be
deficiencies, but the good news
here is we're seeing a great
reduction in the amount of
deficiencies that we're seeing
across the state of New Mexico.
We now have methods for
districts to repair these
deficiencies in in a timely
manner within 60 days and
improve their score if they're
engaged.
Yeah.
Slide number 10 is the end
result of the 3rd cycle FMR
performance.
I think this is a powerful slide
that really shows
The council
Our local communities, to our
taxpayers that our districts are
getting better in performing
improved maintenance across over
time.
We now have 2 New Mexico school
districts performing in the
outstanding category.
Many in the good category, a lot
more in the satisfactory and
we're seeing a reduction in
marginal and poor performers
across the state of New Mexico.
The next slide is a comparison
between the end of the 3rd
cycle.
And where we are today.
Now, today we've only done
Outreach to 160 New Mexico
school districts. We still have
31 to go.
But these numbers are
outstanding. This is incredible
data that I was really excited
to share this morning.
Pubs, Farmington, Clovis and
Central Consolidated.
Performing in the outstanding
categories in maintenance and
operations.
As a father with two daughters
in the public school system
today. I'm really
Proud to say that I would send
my kids to these schools.
Anybody in the outstanding good
and satisfactory performance
categories, and it's growing
over time. We're seeing an
increase in districts performing
in these high categories, and
we're definitely seeing a
decrease in those performing in
the lower categories.
Lot number 12.
One of our goals during this
cycle is to provide districts
and opportunity to respond to
their FMs to fix what's broken.
To create a plan if they need to
create a plan on seeking capital
monies to improve facility
conditions, and through the PSFA
we've developed those methods
over time, new systems,
standards, teacher housing,
pre-K funding that we have
available for our New Mexico
schools. Our goal is 25%
response rate.
So far of the 249 FMAs that
we've done statewide to date, 61
of those New Mexico's school
districts are engaged.
They've responded back, they've
created work orders and they've
repaired things that are broken.
And improve their score over
time.
Our current response rate is
24%.
We definitely would like to see
a higher performance rating, and
I have some goals that we're
going to talk about in just a
few moments, age 13 is an
example.
districts across the state of
New Mexico that are engaged and
Show a willingness to improve
facility conditions.
That's a lot of districts.
To me, this is a tremendous
success story for both public
schools and charter schools.
14
The current cycle
18 months into this 4th cycle,
our goal is 70%.
Statewide FMA performance
average rating.
is now a 76%.
We're heading for great things
in the state of New Mexico. It
really shows that the platforms
that we've developed over time
through the PSFA or having an
impact on our public schools,
both in the capital side through
projects and maintaining the
investments over time.
Are
Statewide, charter school FR
performance reading is a little
bit higher than public schools.
I like to instill a little bit
of competition as we progress
down this path of improving our
facility conditions over time.
In comparison,
Let's look at the 4 cycles over
time.
Cycle number one.
I had to write this story for
the annual report.
Uh, recall having many
conversations with Mr. Bob Grell
about this report and building
in transparency and telling the
truth.
The state of New Mexico was
performing poor maintenance.
It was a hard pill to swallow.
We've come a long way since
then. We're now in the 4th
cycle, and if you just look at
the comparisons, year cycle over
cycle.
We've gone from a 57%
performance rating on the test?
It was 65
71, and now we're at a 76%.
We are continuing to make
improvements.
Just like our vehicles and our
homes, we have to maintain them
on a routine basis, so it goes
for New Mexico public schools.
It's a never ending process.
Let's put this in perspective.
This pie chart was from the
first baseline cycle of FMAR
performance across the state.
And I want you to look at the
red and the orange.
All the red and the orange is
reflective of all 91 New Mexico
school districts over 800
schools assessed during that
time period. We had no school
districts performing in the
outstanding range.
We had a few pockets of quality
in the good and satisfactory.
But the red and the orange were
areas that we recognized that we
had to do a better job at having
an impact for our public
schools.
If you turn to the next page,
you'll see where we are today.
And
probably could have done a
better job at putting him on the
same page so you could see the
difference between cycle 1 and
cycle 4.
These are tremendous numbers,
something to really be
celebrated, um.
Both from this council level
down to the PSCOC and the PSFA
in New Mexico public school
districts as they progress with
maintaining investments.
We've got more districts
performing outstanding
maintenance.
Much more performing good
maintenance and satisfactory.
We're seeing a tremendous
reduction in school districts
and they pour in marginal
categories.
A brief summary on slide number
17.
We continue to improve.
And that's the important process
here. We continue to make
improvements over time.
From May 2017, spanning 60
months of
Collaborating with our New
Mexico school districts over 840
assessments, 91 New Mexico
school districts and two
constitutional charter schools,
45 state charter schools, our
data indicates that we are
getting better, better and
better.
Statewide, again, if you recall
back in 2015, we're performing
poor maintenance. We had an F on
the test.
Currently we have a C+ on the
test and we're heading for a
bee.
I do have a few typos on slide
18, my apologies, that should
read.
It shouldn't read Fmar end of
3rd cycle. It should read 18
months into the 4th cycle, our
performance statistics are
Identified in this uh pie chart
for your review.
And again, refer back to slide
15, which recognized poor
performance across the state, as
little as 10 years ago.
Continued impacts for our state
of New Mexico. I will tell you
this, having conversation with
the Mexico school district's
facility managers,
superintendents, business
officials.
The funding that was provided to
support New Mexico's school
districts through House Bill
505, the security
infrastructure, SB 212 had a
tremendous impact.
And their ability to make
improvements to the school
infrastructure through their
maintenance programs.
So we hope that streams like
that can continue.
I'm not a politician.
Yeah.
But I'm here on behalf of the 91
New Mexico School District.
Plant the seed.
If that money is available
somewhere somehow, I think it's
beneficial to put that back into
the public school
infrastructure.
A couple of years ago on slide
2, we ran a scenario.
Of the 25% of New Mexico
districts that responded to
FMAs, making improvements.
If the remaining 75% of the
school districts could just
Plug in two work orders.
To make improvements to facility
conditions that were broken.
We would be at that B level.
Absolutely, and we're almost
there. We're heading in that
direction.
We're not going to let up at the
PSFA. Our teams are excited to
continue down the path of
outreach and training and
showing these districts what
needs to be maintained to
support the educational
environments for our students
and staff.
Moving into the start of the 4th
cycle, definitely.
I'm one of those worker bees. I
will roll up my sleeves. I'll be
the first one to do it. More
work has to be done and, and
we're prepared to do that. In
fact, we've already engaged in
it.
We really are emphasizing the
value of preventive maintenance
versus reactive.
And we said that many, many
years ago, but now we're living.
The dream, if you will.
More districts have really
recognized the value of
preventive overreactive.
We're seeing a reduction in
unnecessary capital by doing
better maintenance. We're seeing
a reduction in deferred
maintenance across the state of
New Mexico.
Two ways to impact the FCI.
Either you dump more money into
it.
Where you do better maintenance.
I prefer that we do both, and
through our capital process we
are doing both.
We're supporting our school
districts that need new schools,
new systems, and we're doing
better maintenance. So we're
having double the impact as we
move down the path of better
maintenance. We're seeing life,
health, and safety issues
resolved.
And reduced to a very low level.
We're seeing efficiencies in
morale and prove that our New
Mexico school districts. We're
seeing more and more people come
to the annual Ben Luhan
Maintenance Awards and applying
for those awards.
And that's exciting.
Our goal is continued success
for our New Mexico public
schools.
So that when our Secretary of
Education tries to have an
impact as she moved down the
path of improving our test
scores.
We're doing our due diligence
when it comes to facility
conditions and maintaining those
investments and we want to be a
part of that and help her be
successful.
Our goals moving forward with
the FAR.
80%.
We want to drive B ratings for
the next 3 to 4 years and
eventually, hopefully, we get to
that A rating.
It's not gonna be easy, but a
small portion of New Mexico
school districts performing in
the outstanding category have
proven that it can be done.
We just have to motivate and
improve the morale of the rest
of them, get on that train and
move forward towards that
direction.
Tools and methods to progress
this.
Additional outreach. Our teams
are doing a fabulous job at
reaching out to our districts
through formal processes and
training methods to help them
get better.
Site visits, quarterly trainings
are now available to all New
Mexico school districts across
the board, teaching them how to
do it.
We want to leverage the New
Mexico public facility Managers
Association to provide better
training again to to support New
Mexico districts with their
performance.
We now have advanced instruction
sets and educational tools and
resources to support this goal.
And I think it's really
important to share improvement
performance ratings across the
spectrum of New Mexico school
districts.
Time to stop hiding.
The information and sharing it.
Sharing that our performance can
improve over time by improving
staffing levels, improving pay
scales, and paying attention to
what's broken by doing more
preventive maintenance versus
reactive maintenance over time.
Slide 23.
Almost done.
It's just a reiteration of where
we've been versus where we are
today with maintenance
performance across the state of
New Mexico.
The number that I love.
Is that 76.8% currently.
Now I know it's only a C+.
But it's an improving C+ and the
next stage is that being that
we're looking for in the state
of New Mexico.
In summary,
I think we're seeing it across
the state of New Mexico. We're
seeing higher costs with regards
to construction.
That also goes for maintenance.
As we progress down the
maintenance path, maintenance
professionals are seeing higher
costs in maintenance and
operations.
Reduced capital dollars
definitely make efforts
necessary to sustain school
facility conditions more
critical than ever.
And we're doing that. We're
trying to motivate New Mexico
school districts on seeing the
value.
Taking care of the investments
for our, for our children.
We put in billions of dollars
into the investments and our
infrastructure and maintenance
really shows that we're doing a
better job of maintaining those
investments over time.
We have many tools and resources
that will continue to be made
available to our New Mexico
school districts because they've
been proven to have an impact.
Those tools include the facility
assessment database.
Used to drive.
District's awareness of their
facility conditions and
necessary capital funds that
they might need moving forward.
The construction information
management systems, the facility
information management system
for maintenance and operations.
Yes Yes Mar.
Proven best practice. I'm really
proud to say it was created at
the PSFA.
With your guidance.
Facility master plan funding
project and maintenance
management, all tools necessary
that will help drive New Mexico
districts to higher levels of
performance.
Last but not least,
We've done a PowerPoint
presentation previously called
The Cost of Maintenance, and one
of the
Primary things really recognized
that just a 10% improvement in
the FAR.
70 to an 80.
And save the state of New Mexico
$23.2 million.
Cost avoidance a year.
You can put that money back into
capital improvements.
That money back into the
educational environment.
Across the nation,
The score for public schools.
is a 62.5%.
Here in the state of New Mexico,
we are at a 76%.
We are well above that rating.
With that
Care members, I stand for any
questions.
Thank you. Um, I don't recall
all the years on this that we've
gotten a report like this and
you lay it out very nicely and
very well and so I very much
appreciate
And the charts, the, the
Not sure that they're not pie
charts, but the
The circle charts or whatever of
how we're doing over time is
very telling about the
improvements, and so start uh
with Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
was gonna say essentially the
same thing. This is really great
news. You know, it's this kind
of news that I don't think is
gonna be in front of the Supreme
Court, meaning the reason we
haven't gotten this before is
that we were not doing very well
and we didn't want to put it on
paper. I mean, that's how bad it
used to be. We're talking 10
years ago or or more so, and I
apologize to you Larry.
I called you Leroy, that's OK.
Uh, so this is fantastic and
You know, the way you laid it
out and.
I mean
I tell people that our public
school facility authority is one
of the best state agencies we
have because of work like this
we needed to do this work and
these um
These systems that you have
created.
For the public schools. I just
think are phenomenal.
Um, we started with one, we had
no, now we need a different
measurement, so, uh, the FRR I
think is really significant and
the SMA too, so.
Oh, thank you for this work. I
think you have about 40 people
in
BFA, right? I write about 40.
It's 566.
I'm glad that went up because
we've got 89 school districts
and 8040 school buildings, so.
Um, the fact that you do this
rotating basis of going in and
the people know now how to
access help
because you help these
districts, uh, so I'm, I'm just
also very grateful, very pleased
with the report. So thank you,
Mr.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Chairman. I guess
what she said.
So, um, I, I think it's, it's,
uh, I'm a business owner and I'm
a we're a 6 Sigma company and so
I'm actually gonna steal a
couple of things. I was sure
that was implement the like my
clients, uh, because we do a lot
of this and, and this is just
fantastic. So, um, but I do want
to zone in. I'm not sure or or
zero in. I'm not quite sure if
I'm barking up the right tree on
this one, but um,
Do you monitor things like uh
HVAC systems and take a look at
like what the conditions of
those are, it just seems like my
phone turns into a a a little
call center that's what I do for
a living call center, but turns
into a little call center over
my district and the the the HAC
in cooling systems.
Coming out of the summer and
into those classrooms, are you
monitoring and watching that and
producing any data on that?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Padilla, yes,
sir, we do. One of the
categories that we review are is
HVAC systems and within the HVAC
systems is whether or not the
districts are changing out
filters in a timely manner, they
dating them? Is there evidence
that they're being changed and
we also monitor their
performance in the facility
information?
Yes, sir. OK.
I, uh, Chair, Mr. Chairman, do
you have a report right now that
you could email over to me? I'm
just curious. I'd like to see
it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Padilla, we
don't have a formal report, but
we can create one. Yes, sir.
I'd really like to see that.
Thank you, Chair. That's all I
have.
Thank you. Representative
Alcombe.
Um
00, thank you.
I've got somebody here to take
care of me and turn on the mic
for me.
Uh, get, um, just following and
Senator Padilla steps
or
But his comments are, uh, my
phone.
That is what it rings about more
than anything else is a heated
and cooler than my school
districts.
And it seems like I've got
classrooms that are
Right now they are frozen.
OK, last month.
They were hotter than than hot.
So
Somewhere, and I mean, this
could be, it's a classroom sit
in here.
The classroom over is a
completely different world.
And it just seems to me.
Like nobody understands the
system.
I am being told by a teachers
and uh
And students that there's people
running around all over the
place.
Nothing, nothing gets fixed.
I have one elementary school
where they tell me, uh,
Some of those students are told
to take blankets to school in
the winter because it can't get
heat into some of those rooms.
the other parts of the building
are
In a whole different world, so.
It just seems to be OK. It seems
to me, I, I remember, here I'm
going to go when I was a young
man,
a young man a long, long time
ago as a purchasing officer at
the county we were building a
new buildings.
And uh
I would never finish with the
systems whatever they did.
It brought me the manuals.
He is the purchasing office you
need with the manual.
But I mean,
So that's one of the things that
I, who maintains and keeps up
with the paperwork that goes to
the school district after it's
built.
And the other thing that I often
wonder is, why can't we go out
and bid the same type system for
every one of our schools that we
don't have.
The
So we don't have to learn or
relearn how every tag on uh
HVAC system throughout the
whole.
They are I mean I can't bet you
there's.
290 different HVAC systems and
power plants and everything else
running together at the same
time we had no idea how they
work.
And that's because uh
It goes to the lowest bidder.
And we do not bid uh.
What we are experienced with.
That's my thought anyway.
Anyway, I'll keep that in mind
because I want to keep that in
mind because I really do think
as you're building on to start
thinking of
How can we implement this to
where
We have control of what's coming
into our buildings and we know
Oh, we're gonna maintain those
in the future.
Absolutely, I couldn't agree
with you more, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Alone, we do have processes in
place that once a building is in
close out the you're talking
about the manuals, the ONM
manuals, they should be provided
to somebody in the maintenance
and operations crew so that they
can better understand the tools
that have been just given to
them. The manufacturer
recommendations for maintenance.
Um, the warranty information.
Absolutely, I would agree with
you. We do have training
programs in place.
That
And help New Mexico facility
managers better understand that
process.
And we'd, I'd love to share that
information with you. Um, the
training is currently
implemented. It's been
implemented for the last 5
years.
I think many times it takes
The district owner really
understand it and maybe a little
bit of better outreach from
PSFA, and we'd be happy to.
Move down that path. The second
item that you talked about, um,
Mr. Chair, um, was much of what
Mr. Padilla just mentioned, uh,
6 Sigma, and it has to do with
standardizing to optimize.
Um, creating and building
systems that are the same across
the board, so that our facility
managers aren't managing one
system.
And then another system 10 ft
away.
I think it really helps that
when we go down the construction
path, really talk about
standardizing equipment across
the board, not just from one.
Sight, but maybe from school to
school, we had the same types of
systems that when we go by
filters, we buy the same types
of filters, instead of having
this hodgepodge of different
filters.
Uh
I'll do it at that, Mr. Chair,
but I really would appreciate it
if they wouldn't call me.
You know I enjoy the cause, OK,
I don't get me wrong, but I
mean, I just wish they were
called that, hey, we got this
fixed.
Thank you.
And Mr. Alcona, if there's any
particular district that you
have in mind that we could reach
out to, we would be happy to do
that.
I got 3 districts absolutely.
Right.
Thank you. Representative Lujan.
I mean, uh let me help
got got the terrors mixed up.
I'm sorry.
Or me.
That's what happens when we sit
next to each other.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. You're
right. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for being here and for
your presentation. So, um, I,
I'm also on the local school
board of of my community and um
uh just helping our communities
to be able to thrive and move
through this process and I'm
looking at them here on this
list in satisfactory and um
something that you said at my
ear, you know, if they had
answered certain questions and,
and so I'm learning about this.
Is this
Mandatory for every district.
The FR score is a strong
recommendation when it comes to
capital funding.
As an industry standard, the
It is a requirement. We, we need
to be doing a better job of
maintaining the investments and
the only way to do that is to be
engaged in facilities.
The p.m. plan for New Mexico
schools is a statute
requirement. The use of the
facility information management
system is a statute requirement.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, are
there any districts who are not
complying with it?
Mr. Chair,
Miss Hail? Yes, there is. We do
track that information very uh
specifically we reported to the
council on a quarterly basis,
and that's part of our outreach.
Anytime that we see a district
that is not performing.
It raises a red flag and we
reach out. How can we help? How
can we provide training? What
guidance do you need?
So, uh, so that brings me, Mr.
Chair, to my last question, and,
and you broached on that. What
kind of support do you provide
for districts and how would they
contact you?
Currently
We have a best practice
preventive maintenance plan free
of charge.
And that preventive maintenance
plan is developed from school
districts across the state of
New Mexico.
Every year when a new plan comes
in, we not we notice the best
practice.
We integrate that best practice
into the current template. That
template is always available to
all 91 New Mexico school
districts, and we even have one
now for New Mexico charter
schools.
The facility information
management system is available
to all New Mexico public school
districts.
We have several training
methodologies to include a new
white paper.
With videos just for New Mexico.
That show our current system how
to put in a work order.
How to collect labor material
and contract costs. You can also
come through the PSFA staff for
training.
Known in Mexico is an
interesting state, they like us
to come out and do the training,
we can do that.
And through the local vendor
training is provided free of
charge.
There's many methods to improve
performance with the use of
those tools.
Thank you so much and I said
that would be my last question,
Mr. Chair, but it's not. How do
we identify those districts who
are choosing not to participate?
Is that posted?
Yes, ma'am. We provided very
detailed report called the
Maintenance Program Status
report to the council on a
quarterly basis. We use it
internally at the PSFA to drive
what we do from day to day.
If we noticed in New Mexico
school district is not
performing or.
Maybe they've fallen off track a
little bit. You definitely get
on the phone, we get in the car
and we drive out and we see
them, and our goal is to help
them improve performance.
Thank you so much. And how, Mr.
Chair, how would I get access to
that report?
I can send you a report,
absolutely. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
I've got a
Oh
Oh that was a yarn. I thought,
no, no problem. Um, I had some
questions, sort of along that
same line, and first, I really
appreciate it. Sos like this is
run very much with carrots, not
sticks.
But
What did you a district turns in
the report, but it's just a
piece of paper they don't
actually do it. What are the,
the penalties? What are the
sticks if they're refusing to
To do adequate maintenance.
That's a great question, Mr.
Chair, um, we are actually
improving our stick.
Um, we, and I'll give you a
prime example.
As we go out and do an FRR
assessment at an elementary
school.
And our assessor identifies that
that elementary school has a
non-working fire alarm system.
If that fire alarm system is not
repaired within a certain amount
of time through the FMAR, no
work orders in place.
We now fabricate a letter.
The formal letter from the PSFA.
Requiring the district to take
action.
If the district does not take
action, that letter is sent up
to the insurance carrier.
Insurance carrier also has tools
and resources to assist the
district in making amends and
repairing that system.
Last but not least, if there are
no resolutions there, it gets
sent to the state fire marshal's
office. So we are improving our
stick as we move forward to hold
these districts more
accountable.
And the PSCOC council is really
holding us accountable to higher
levels of expectations for
districts that if you don't have
a PM plan,
You're not taking care of the
current investment, why would we
give you $50 million for that
new investment if you're not
taking care of the current.
We're really putting pressure on
New Mexico districts to see that
big.
Um,
I hope that answers your
question.
Yes, thank you. I worry about
the kids in those districts or
in those schools that are not
being maintained, so it becomes
safety hazards that are not high
quality learning environments.
It's already have enough
problems with whether they've
got food and places to sleep,
much less whether they're
attending a a school that is
inadequate for for good
education. Um
Every year we have lots of
changes in school boards and
superintendents.
Have you found that those
changes
A district that might have had
good maintenance, now the focus
of the board and the new
superintendent is to just kind
of let it float and how do you
bring them back on board more?
Through the stick method.
Um, Mr. Chair, yes, we do have
methodologies. In fact, we just
finished one of those
methodologies. Every year we
Attend what's called the CES
Superintendent meetings across
the state of New Mexico.
Uh, CES does a wonderful job at
garnering new facility
superintendents, facility
managers, and business
officials. We are a part of that
entire process. In fact, I just
did a presentation yesterday in
Gadsden.
Where several superintendents
showed up and we taught them
about the PSFA infrastructure or
funding processes that are
available to them, the
maintenance expectations, the
energy.
expectations across the board,
so yes, we do have methods where
we can help deal with that churn
that happens at school
districts.
Thank you. Um, you know, and,
and that's important. I mean,
superintendents are at the whim
of the or the pleasure, shall I
say, of the, the school board,
you know, I've seen in my years
and worked in a district where
the board was like, you know,
that's not our goal, we want to
use that money for something
else, um, you know, and
superintendents kind of trying
to try move them along that, you
know, look, you really need to,
but they feel they're there for
4 years and a lot of the
buildings don't fall down, it's
the next one is to get to take
care of it.
The
Do you ever see districts who
We hear about stories that we
start a different way. We hear
about stories of districts that
realize the building is not
doing well, they want a new
building, and the only way you
get higher on the list for
attention from the PSFOA or get
the letters all twisted in my
tongue, but is you gotta be
higher on the needs list and so
they stopped doing the
maintenance, so the building
shows a higher need. Is that
happening and how do you manage
that?
So that, you know, the
building's gonna last another 5
years instead of fall apart now
so they're higher on the list.
Mr. Chair, that is the most
excellent question, and we do
have a solution to that.
Like that solution's already
been implemented through the
FMAR process.
And if I could articulate, I
know what the phrase is. It's
called the fad game.
It's letting our facilities just
run to failure.
Well, now there is a methodology
for us to tell whether or not
that district is maintaining the
investment over time.
It's the FA.
You were to ask me how a
particular school district was
investing in their maintenance
at a particular district.
I could tell you.
Are they maintaining that
investment so we had we now have
a method to kind of
Put the fad game to rest.
Um, and, and prevent that from
happening through the FMR.
Because the FM is constant.
If Mar does not go away, we've
been doing it now since 2011,
and it really shows whether or
not that district is maintaining
their investments over time.
And whether or not they're
playing that game.
We can call them to the carpet
if we see it.
A few years ago, we passed where
districts could
Demolish outdated buildings at
no cost to them that paid for
it. Has that been helpful on
them maintaining because they
now aren't getting a gigged for
a building that's falling apart
that really should have been
demolished that they're now able
to get that and kind of offer
their roles, or how has that
played out?
Mr. Chair, I really don't have
information to answer that
question effectively, but I
would be happy to look into it.
I'm sure that through the normal
process as you eliminate a
building that's no longer used
or housed, it probably does
reduce the impact on the
maintenance program itself, the
funding, um, the staffing levels
needed to maintain an empty
building, um, but we don't have
current data on that, but we'd
be happy to look into it.
Thank you. It's not necessary
that you go and generate a
report for me as we were passing
that, some of it was, it
actually reduces the insurance
costs for districts that they've
got building that's got, you
know, as a fire hazard and other
kinds of things that they can
get it off the roll which
reduces their insurance and
maintenance and other things for
a building that really isn't fit
for habitation, often it's only
used for warehousing and things.
Absolutely it's a method of
right sizing.
Uh, you know, on a basic level.
Let's get rid of the things
we're not using it.
Right size of our organization.
And kind of last and this is
probably really more rhetorical
of you all, but for my other
colleagues, you guys do such a
great job with the public
schools. Should we have
something similar for all of the
other state public buildings to
ensure that they're doing the
maintenance and the upkeep and
everything for all of the other
state buildings that we have, so
that we aren't spending extra
money.
Maintaining systems after
they've fallen apart instead of
doing preventive maintenance.
You're welcome to comment, but
you know, that might be
something we want to look at is
standing up.
You know, either a a parallel
facility or maybe even working
together with the two, but for
all of the other state
buildings.
Mr. Chair, members, absolutely,
we are always willing to share
the tools and things that we've
created that other
organizations, whether it be a
state agency or another state
across the US can be successful.
So absolutely, we'd be happy to
share that.
Mr. Chair, members, we would
definitely continue to want to
be the trailblazers and what
PSFA does. PSFA, um,
Solves problems that others
don't.
We definitely
And by
Um, and if you don't mind, Mr.
Chair, um, I just wanna add a
couple of things, uh, Mr.
Tillerson has done a great job
in writing this information. Um,
two things.
Yes, we were a staff of 56, but
Mr. Tillerson's staff is the 3
who handles the maintenance for
the public schools.
So they do an amazing job. Um,
finally, I just wanted to kind
of put this out there that the
uh public school capital outlay
fund can support another
distribution such as House Bill
505. I just wanted to put that
out there and if you need any
more information, great lady um
bye bye now.
Thank you, Senator Stewart,
yeah.
OK.
Mr. Sherman, I just wanna remind
us that this, uh, what we've
done in New Mexico is now being
looked at across the country as
some states who've as Larry
said.
have reached out to do use our
best practices, so, you know,
kudos to us for for.
Public school facility authority
in all the work.
Kudos to them.
Yes, and thank you. And again, I
think as a state we really ought
to look at all of the other
state government buildings from
the courts and the museums and
everything else, and whether we
ought to have a similar agency
overseeing the at least the
maintenance side.
Of that and, and working with
those directors and others cause
I think we probably are.
You know, throwing some money
away and not doing maintenance
where we should, and here's a
great model that we may be able
to stand up a, a parallel system
for other state buildings.
Way outside my knowledge based
on how to actually do that, but,
you know, get, get smart people
working on.
Again, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Uh
In committee, uh what is it? 12.
40, you want to push on through
and finish or take a short
Short lunch break or just
Push on through, are we able to
do that, Simon?
So
OK.
Take a 5 minute break and what
needs to go to the bathroom and
get some more coffee or anything
like that. We're gonna check and
see if the next presenters are
here and ready.
And
Yeah.
Sure, yeah, if you wanna go get
a snack or whatever, yeah.
OK.
Yeah, so that'd be great. We're
gonna take 5 10 minute break and
grab a snacky or whatever.
Yeah
Earlier I get home, the happier
I am.
Larry, thank you, yo, you do
such a great job with all of
this, and I love that the
majority is on the carrot side,
you know, that tends to be more
effective except for the people
that really dig their heels and
and kind of say we aren't,
aren't gonna.
But as I think about it, if I
knew how to do it, we need the
same thing for all of the state
buildings.
Yeah, well, I mean, you look at
all of the government buildings
here in Santa Fe.
You know, that have maintenance
people, they're working on all
these things and if they're
doing great, it doesn't cause
them to do anything else, but
here's a way of analyzing how
well you're doing somebody else
looking at all the systems and
we've got a number of older
buildings and ones that are not
being maintained.
Mhm.
Sure.
Mhm.
I remember those days
He
Well, you know, in some states
actually call themselves
commonwealths because
The people of New Mexico own all
of this.
You know, and, and you've got to
maintain the things that you
own.
So it
If you actually look at the
total value of all the
buildings, all the roads, all
the infrastructure.
OK
OK, we've got most people back,
I think Senator Padilla will be
back in a little bit. He was
running off to grab a snack.
Um, so
With that, we're going to
continue, and this is um
Upgrading high school performing
arts facilities, uh, Terry
Davis.
Presume that is you. If you
would please.
Um, there we go.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing us this time today, um,
I'm gonna.
Skip our introductions so we
don't have everybody in the room
you quite get.
Um,
So
Uh, we'll let them introduce
themselves when they are, um,
when their turn to speak, so to
speak, to speak is up and we'll
bring you in that way.
My name is Terry Davis, uh,
co-executive director for the
New Mexico High School Musical
Theater Awards were an
all-volunteer organization. Um,
and today we've received
guidance from my co-executive
director, also a volunteer,
Laura Mees, she's on Zoom today,
supporting our efforts.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, did you know that
students enrolled in arts
courses are more likely to
attend, be engaged in, and
graduate from school?
And that
Um,
And that teachers in schools
with higher levels of arts
education report greater
parental engagement.
Also, students who take multiple
arts courses show greater
overall academic success.
You also know that uh through
the arts,
Students gain confidence in
their achievements and show
improved writing abilities and
more aspirations for higher
education than their peers. This
is especially true for students
from financially challenging
backgrounds as arts education
helps level the playing field
for them.
You also know that several
surveys tell us that 70% of
companies say creativity is the
primary skill they seek when
hiring.
Performing arts offers direct
and indirect lessons in
creativity every day.
This is part of the backdrop we
want you to consider as we make
the case today for our proposal.
One final statistic that is
central to this conversation.
Any high school student body
breaks into two nearly equal
halves.
Athletes or those who take part
in athletic activities of any
kind in their school, they make
up approximately 55% of the
student body, and non-athletes,
those who do not participate in
any sports activities, make up
approximately 45% of that
student population.
There's an unknown number.
Who participate in both athletic
and and non-athletic activities.
So any school that spends
capital project,
extracurricular, and
discretionary funds solely or
predominantly on facilities and
equipment for its athletes, is
ignoring the other half of its
students.
Importantly, students noticed
this and instantly calculate the
value they have been assigned in
their own schools. That
calculation critically drives
student engagement results.
If schools are only willing to
engage with some of the students
for their interests, sports. Why
should the other students engage
with their schools at all?
The funding we seek is for
significant a significant
segment of that 45%, those who
participate in the performing
arts.
Funding performing arts upgrades
makes students in those programs
as excited to come to school as
funding sports facility
upgrades, excites athletes.
We want to make something clear,
very clear. We're not telling
you that expenditures were
athletes is bad. And if I may,
If you would let me know, how
many of you have attended the
state high school basketball
championships in the pit.
Thrilling games, aren't they?
Two teams
In each division, competing to
be the champion that year. It's
pretty compelling stuff.
How many of you know about the
New Mexico Allstate Festival,
the music festival.
In January.
Have you attended?
Some
Um, that's a great, uh,
situation also, student
musicians from all over the
state gather at Pope Joy to
perform in one all-state band or
orchestra singing an all-state
chorus.
Um, there are other ensembles as
well. It's also very thrilling,
the same use of that word.
To hear excellent young
musicians play.
I dare say the same thing
happens in May when our program,
the Enchantment Awards, brings
the best musical theater
performers together from high
schools across the state to
perform in Pope Joy Hall. Again,
Thrilling. These are different
uses of the word thrill.
Expenditures for young athletes
give us one kind of thrill,
expenditures for young
performing artists.
Give us another.
That's the metaphor for what
we're proposing.
So here's our proposal.
Allocate $20 million from the
public school capital outlay
fund to upgrade performing arts
facilities and equipment in New
Mexico's public and charter high
schools.
The fund would be made available
for different needs in different
schools.
Such as equipment updates to
bring analog or older digital
devices, light boards, sound
boards, lighting equipment,
sound equipment, projectors,
maybe video walls up to current
standards.
Curtains and other soft goods
rigging and any structural
changes to accommodate technical
upgrades.
Support facilities such as
rehearsal rooms, scene shops,
dressing rooms, or similar
spaces.
Tools, equipment, pre-built set
stocks such as stairs,
platforms, wagons, doors and
windows, or the materials for
basic set stock to give schools
the essentials for theatrical
and related productions, and
other theater or performing arts
related needs that are
identified by individual
schools.
The funds might also be allotted
in such a manner that would
accommodate needs for
non-capital purchases.
This list was created after our
survey of high school drama
teachers who use and most often
manage and maintain their school
theaters. In too many instances,
their schools did not have
appropriate facilities for 201st
century performing arts
instruction, especially for
technical theater students.
These are the schools that
Responded to that survey so far.
For example, teaching lighting,
uh, teaching students about
lighting controls on an analog
board or for analog instruments
is pointless.
If there are still analog boards
in use in New Mexico's high
schools. Lighting equipment in
collegiate and professional
circumstances, film, concert,
theater.
all digital.
Students must know how to
program a light board to make it
and the instruments it controls
fully functional. There are even
people in the industry whose
only job it is to program the
hundreds of cues for live
theatrical dance and music
events.
None of that can be accomplished
on an on an analog board.
Digital light and soundboard.
All right, so these are the
kinds of lights that we're
talking about.
In our survey,
Uh, teachers reported that their
facilities need
Digital lights.
And sound boards to replace
analog equipment, intelligent
moving in LED lights, Standard
equipment in theater and film
that can only be fully operated
with digital boards.
Uh, sound boards as well.
They also need new microphones
and speakers to improve live
audio and to allow students to
work with industry standard
equipment.
dedicated shop space to allow
schools to build and store sets,
costumes and props.
You see here that they're
Building and painting sets.
In the hallways or
On the stage itself, which is
Not a great practice.
Um,
They need news a new stage
curtains and other soft goods to
replace those damaged by wear
and tear or dry rot.
And the dressing room
facilities. Some schools have
none. Others need upgrades.
They need repairs to or
replacement of dangerously
damaged stage floors.
They need proper tools, basic,
but costly set stock. We talked
about stair units, platforms,
casters, doors, windows, and
they need safety equipment.
They need computers for scenic
lighting and costume design labs
and for video and audio editing
with the appropriate software.
And they need rehearsal space
for the drama program, which
would free up more time on the
stage for all the performing
groups in school. There's an
array of repairs to school
facilities such as fixing leaks.
Fixing broken seats, uh, taking
care of inoperable exhaust
vents, electrical circuits
damaged by lightning,
non-functional microphone jacks
on the stage floor, and much
more. These upgrades would bring
high school facilities and their
equipment into the 21st century
and address some of the
inadequacy of these spaces as
both academic and public facing
facilities.
It'd be much more of a match to
other high schools in the
country, such as this one in Van
Buren, Arkansas.
Pay attention to the lighting in
particular. Well we don't
recommend the lighting design
necessarily. It shows what's
available in other high schools
around the country.
Our students cannot do this with
the equipment they have now.
So they're not keeping up with
other high schools across the
country, which means when they
go to professional
circumstances,
Or on to college.
They're behind.
Their peers across the country.
That they put everything into
that.
So.
In that lighting design.
All right, um, high school
auditoriums in New Mexico serve
as theaters.
Concert halls
Assemblages, rehearsal rooms,
technical theater laboratories,
dance recital halls, classrooms,
community gathering sites, town
halls, and in some cases,
churches.
All of these performances and
presentations require technical
support.
At this point, uh,
I'm looking for our uh
co-presenter, Reid Mszewski is
Reed on with us?
Yes, I am. Thanks, Terry. I was
just getting my class all set.
Ready to go, go ahead.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman,
Thank you. My name is Reid
Miszewsky and I am the head of
theater and film at Santa Fe
High School.
It's a position that I've held
for the past 14 years.
Being the theater program at the
namesake school in the oldest
capital city in the country.
We take great pride in providing
a totally immersive performing
arts department allowing
students to learn theater, film,
Dance, choir, band, orchestra,
and guitar.
We attempt to allow students to
become fully immersed in the
performing arts and to provide a
college-ready curriculum while
also spending equal effort on
the casually interested students
as well. We produced 3 to 5 full
productions a year. We have
multiple dual credit college
level film studies classes and
have produced hundreds of young
artists, many of whom are still
pursuing or maintaining a
professional theatrical career
since their graduation.
Our 3-quarter thrust theater has
had thousands of people pass
through its doors. As we provide
college level quality
instruction and productions that
are recognized as some of the
most diverse and professional
level plays in the state.
We operate as the other arm of
the school, the counterpoint to
sports, which is an important
and essential element of any
school environment.
We provide a safe and creative
space for students of any
background, socio and economic
status, religion, or identity.
But despite operating a
department of this caliber, I
receive absolutely no funding on
an annual basis for the
operational costs of my program.
I repeat, I do not receive one
penny from my district or the
state to help fund my program.
A student's educational
experience is only as strong as
the opportunities afforded them.
And while theater is an art, it
is also a teachable craft, that
is an invaluable prep for a
career in the technical and
trade spheres.
My students annually participate
in both the Lenic Theater
Student apprenticeship program
and the Santa Fe Opera Young
Artists Program, and here they
are immersed in career technical
educational programs using top
of the line digital light and
soundboards, and being
instructed by working
professionals.
It gives them an introduction to
a career pathway that is not
only available in New Mexico,
but is thriving.
They then returned to their home
base, to their school where they
can pass on their information,
and they must work on antiquated
instruments that were cutting
edge when I was in college.
And due to the size limitations
of these apprenticeship
programs, only a handful of
students can actually
participate, leaving out other
students who are equally curious
and or passionate about learning
these technical skills.
This is not equitable.
It does a disservice to the
workforce of our state.
A student who sees opportunities
here with professional level
instruction and equipment will
stay here in our state,
maintaining our level of
professional opportunities that
we so often lose out to other
state facilities.
And my theater, for the record
is fully functional.
While antiquated, we do the most
with it.
We have made it work, despite
having no upgrade to our light
system in almost 20 years.
What about the schools that
don't have access to even these
tools.
How many young artists are being
lost before we can even give
them a chance.
If New Mexico wants to be a
leader, we must support all
avenues of career and technical
growth in this state, and that
includes stage and film
technology.
In our backyard, we have
employment opportunities for our
young people, but we need to
make the investment to give all
of them, all of the tools that
we can to provide an educational
foundation that prepares them
for the future.
Please support CTE in the
performing arts.
And support our students'
future. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Reed.
Providing $20 million from the
public school capital outlay
Fund for Performing arts
facility and equipment upgrades
would bring our schools into the
21st century and offer students
real world experience in the
entertainment industry. It would
allow students interested in a
career in theater.
Um, the music industry or film,
many of the theater skills are
uh cross over into film, to have
the knowledge and experience
that comes from working with
current technology.
Students going on to
post-secondary education would
no longer start behind their
college classmates because their
high school equipment was
outdated, broken, non-functional
or non-existent.
But funding for the arts and its
facilities provide more
immediate academic results as
well.
Arts education improves student
engagement by providing multi
multiple ways of accessing
educational content.
You can't design sets or
costumes without geometry.
You can't design lights or sound
without physics.
Every theater project is a
history or sociology problem.
Or both
And
Every theater project carries
into some carry students into
some of the world's richest use
of language.
While it offers great practical
education advantages for most
students, studies have shown
that arts education delivers
even more benefits for those who
come from financially challenged
backgrounds.
I'd like to introduce at this
time, uh Mandolin Browning from
Aztec High School.
Hello, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. My name is
Madeline Browning. I'm the
instructor of theater arts for
Aztec High School and Kugler
Middle School, and the director
for the Aztec High School
playmakers.
My presentation today will focus
on how participation in theater
supports students from every
economic background in high
school academics makes them more
likely to attend and graduate
college and prepares them to
enter the world as well rounded
people.
I'll be including information
from peer-reviewed publications
as well as my own observations
as a theater instructor with a
decade of experience in public
and post-secondary levels of
education. I've also reached out
to current and previous theater
students about their experiences
and their insights will be
displayed on the slides.
According to national
statistics, low income students
highly engaged in the arts are
twice as likely to graduate
college as their peers with no
arts education.
And all theater students,
regardless of economic
background, have more
aspirations for higher education
and greater levels of student
engagement than their peers.
This is likely due to a few
reasons. Theater programs such
as the one in Aztec and many
others participate in state and
nationally sanctioned
competitions and activities,
such as the NMAA one A
competition.
Student thespians in those
programs must be academically
eligible to participate.
Academically eligible high
school students are much more
likely to attend college and
have the study skills necessary
to succeed there.
Since to engage in theater gain
confidence, leadership and
collaborative skills, time and
workflow management
capabilities, and they developed
their sense of self as they work
independently and as a team to
bring productions to life.
Theater and performing arts
internships, scholarships,
grants, and work studies provide
much needed economic support to
those students who may otherwise
not be financially able to
attend college.
Due to theater scholarships and
work study through uh various
theater departments. I never had
to take out a single student
loan through my undergraduate or
graduate degrees, despite
growing up in a low income
household.
The theater arts education
supports core classes by giving
students real-world applications
with which to practice and
supplement what they learn in
the classroom.
And students with greater access
to arts education show improved
writing abilities. Performance
reviews, self critiques,
character and script analyses,
and student written 10-minute
plays are a small sampling of
the ways in which ELA supported
an Aztecs program and many
others throughout the state.
Math and physical science are
also an integral part of the
theater education. Designing and
building sets utilizes in-depth
knowledge of algebra and
geometry, while strengthening
students' understanding of how
building materials and
techniques interact to create
safe economic and innovative
structures.
Social emotional learning has
quickly become a foundational
principle in our educational
systems and continues to grow
and transform policies and
procedures at school, state, and
national levels. Theater classes
have been shown to create rich
and promising atmospheres in
which students develop social
emotional skills with which to
help them understand and
interact with those around them.
In fact, according to the
Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, the students show
greater emotional and cognitive
empathy than their peers.
Telling other stories and
connecting with characters,
their desires, fears, successes
and failings, nurture students'
abilities to connect with each
other, and members of the
community.
I see this firsthand every day,
and feel it summed up best in
our theater troupe's mission
statement that the students
wrote, not with my input by
themselves this year.
Eric Cooper, founder and
president of National Urban
Alliance for Effective Education
states that arts education
enables those children from a
financially challenged
background.
Right, uh, backgrounds to have a
more level playing field with
children who have had those
enrichment experiences. In
particularly, he talks about
things that family is in higher
socioeconomic statuses do
commonly travel, visit art
museums, watch musicals, attend
concerts, participate in
community theaters, join bands,
take art classes.
These are not activities that
children from families of lower
socioeconomic statuses do.
Arts education in our schools
can quickly broaden the worlds
of those students who have not
had those advantages.
In Aztec, Peter students travel
across the state on overnight
trips while attending festivals.
They go to community theater
projects together and as predict
and to productions at other high
schools in our county.
They engage in workshops and
talkbacks with professionals in
the industry, and participate in
showcases and talent nights.
Lastly, Peter creates safe
spaces for students to find
creative outlets, create
lifelong friendships, and even
gives them a reason to keep
coming to school at all.
Many students in theater
programs across New Mexico feel
that theater arts classes are
the only places they feel free
to express themselves, to take
risks and be supported.
Investments in creating and
maintaining theater programs.
The classrooms, stages,
equipment and materials, are
investments in the hundreds of
students that call those
programs homes away from home.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madolin.
Our high school facilities serve
our students from the time
they're kindergartners.
Through their last days as high
school seniors, even hosting
graduation ceremonies for them.
Many students will perform in
our high school theaters as
elementary, middle, and high
school students singing,
dancing, acting, playing musical
instruments, orating and
debating.
High school performing arts
spaces are far too often
ill-equipped, outdated, and
incomplete facilities, in
particular for the many
performances they host.
That is also true of these
spaces as classrooms, rehearsal
rooms, and technical theater or
performance laboratories. These
subpar facilities hampered the
classes and performances there
are intended to host since drama
programs provide training for
students interested in working
in the state's booming film
industry, these shortcomings
become even more problematic.
Many schools do not have a full
complement of facilities and
equipment to suit the
educational and co-curricular
needs of their student,
performers and technicians.
Cases in point. Marshall Middle
School auditorium in Clovis used
for high school, community, and
touring shows.
Has no dressing rooms.
Mayfield High School has only 4
makeup stations in each of their
2 dressing rooms with no private
changing spaces or bathrooms, so
their students use the public
restrooms as cast bathrooms and
changing rooms.
Several high schools, including
Oregon Mountain High School,
Aztec High School, and the
Trisco Heritage Academy High
School, have no scene, prop, or
costume shops, or storage
facilities. How can a drama
teacher offer a proper
curriculum in technical theater
with no scene shot.
How can we expect any
performers, high school and
others, to perform in theaters
that offer no dressing room
space.
We would never build a gymnasium
without locker rooms.
The number of students affected
by this $200 million would be
significant. Consider this in
most schools, drama programs
involve more students than play
on any of their school's
football teams.
The number in drama is often
double the number of varsity
football players. When you add
in all students who perform
musical programs, band,
orchestra, chorus, jazz
ensemble, show choir, and dance
programs, the number of students
affected by the poor condition
of their performing arts
facilities, attended spaces and
equipment or lack thereof,
becomes extraordinary to
consider for each high school in
the state.
Given the wide ranging needs in
schools across the state, we
compiled a list of costs for
some of the most requested
updates.
These costs, some of which you
can see on the screen, are based
on our research and are intended
to provide you with an idea of
the expense for these upgrades
and serve as an indication for
the need of the overall amount
of funds requested.
These costs should not be
regarded as final for any one
project. Costs will vary for
each school depending on their
special circumstances,
priorities, and purchasing
processes.
And we make no recommendation
for any brands listed.
And branded item listed serves
only as a reference point for
cost estimating purposes.
There could be 3 different ways
for the state to distribute the
money. The first would be a
proposal process.
Where schools submit uh proposed
to either the PFSASFA or PED
possibly both, if non-capital
funds are included in this
allocation.
Which would be ranked by merit.
Not all school proposals would
be funded.
The second would be an opt-in
process where PSFA and possibly
PED sent letters to all schools
to tell them that if they are
performing arts program, they
are eligible for funding.
Once the schools opt in for the
funding, the state distributes
funds based on the SEG formulas.
And the 3rd
is an award process where
schools submit proposals to
spend a specified amount.
Submissions are reviewed and all
proposals that qualify are
funded, likely at a lesser
amount than indicated in their
request for proposals. This is a
process similar to New Mexico
arts.
We recommend that any requests
for applications for funds from
the schools or progress reports
after funds are received.
Um, bare the amount or bear the
signature of the drama teacher
for that school, those drama
teachers will serve as the local
experts on any facilities
upgrades and technical equipment
purchases. It will also verify
that the money was spent as
intended.
All all capital funds
distributed, we think should be
given a three-year window for
completion in case of unexpected
delays, though most drama
teachers will do everything in
their power to get upgrades done
as quickly as possible.
A side note
As we were researching this
issue and determining why so
many schools had insufficient
spaces, we encountered the
adequacy standards for public
school buildings and grounds.
Um,
All right, let me catch up here.
Mm
The only sentence included in
the standard specifically
pertinent to the performing arts
is this.
Dedicated art classrooms,
excluding performing arts, shall
have a sink.
Drama programs need paint syncs.
Thinks in dressing rooms.
Performing artists need
restrooms with sinks backstage.
Now obviously this doesn't even
begin to cover the other needs
for performing arts instruction.
We understand that the standards
are meant to provide very
general guidelines to school
districts of all sizes in our
state, but surely more guidance
for performing arts spaces could
be given to schools and the
architects.
Who designed them.
We hope this allocation is
provided is not a one and done
exercise.
In the performing arts, as in
all academic pursuits, things
break or wear out. Technology
advances, paint cans and nail
bus, nail buckets need
refilling.
And critically
This funding will not fix
everything that needs fixing.
It will, however, be a much
needed beginning.
Approximately 5 million people
are employed in the United
States in the performing arts.
Millions more sing, dance, play
music, act or create theater in
their communities as amateurs,
adding vibrancy to the lives of
so many. These performers,
professional and amateur, often
continued doing so late into
their lives. Bridging get
generations on those many stages
and demonstrating a love for the
work they do willingly.
That happens here in New Mexico
just as it does all over the
country.
We hope you will give the next
generation a performing artists
and the technicians who support
them. Better spaces and
equipment with which to explore
their passions.
We know they will repay it to
you many times over throughout
their lives as they apply what
they've learned in their high
schools to all the stages in our
state.
Thank you for your time and
allowing us to make this
presentation.
Thank you questions from
committee.
Lou Hun first and Tara. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Did you, um, do we have any
Mr. Chair, on
How we could uh take a an
inventory of
The resources that we do have
with through these uh school
programs.
And
A way of sharing maybe some of
those resources or are
distributed distributing those
that that exists in in in any
kind of ways that any of your um
Any of your thought or or
conversations as you were
getting your presentation
together, Mister Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lujan, um,
Part of the questionnaire was to
find out what the issues were.
We didn't necessarily ask what
inventory they had that could.
Take a while.
Um, you know, some schools have
a lot of set stock and costume
stock, some high schools have no
facility to store them, so they
don't have any or very little.
Um, we were sent a picture
actually from um Mandolin
Browning of the storage she has,
which is backstage.
And it's sort of behind this.
Fencing on the stage and so it's
That's her storage for all of
her set stock and props. So
it's, it's pretty minor, um.
Sharing resources, um,
The schools actually do a fair
amount of sharing on an informal
basis. Um, they're not as liable
to share equipment.
Um, there's a lot of reasons for
that. Um,
Probably because they're all
doing productions all the time,
um.
But um that's a harder thing to
do, especially outside of your
own district.
To say, yeah, that's just what
I'm wondering. I mean this comes
to mind as, as, as, and maybe
it's, it's because I'm just
trying to
get a point across that we need
the resources and it's, it's
well invested as.
As someone who is been a
performing artist myself and and
really supportive of like our
school here in Santa, performing
arts school here in Santa Fe,
and really the funding around
funding around that, so I just
want to say I appreciate your uh
presentation. I
I think we're gonna try to, you
have some good information and
good points about some of the
Some of the proposal processes
that you um mentioned in, I
think we should really look at
some of those, um, the types of
proposals as we've done for
other schools that we should do
for all of our schools.
I'm very big on on making sure
that we have the discussion and,
you know, between our charter
schools or, or public charter
schools and our regular public
schools and really having the
integration of looking at our
school system as a whole, I
guess it's really what the point
I'm trying to make here, so if
you've exhausted all the ways
that you've thought about how we
can come together to
To bring those resources to our
schools and it really hasn't
happened, I guess is my point.
maybe I was looking for an
answer from you in that, in that
vein. But I really think we need
to have a, a very principled way
of assessing what inventory we
have.
Who is prioritized in getting
those um those resources and
really having a more um
equitable distribution of them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Or a representative of a me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, you know, I, I look at this
and as I was watching, I was
thinking of my father who was uh
his uh high school English
teacher forced him to join uh
the thespian Society and uh and
this was a kid who didn't have
indoor plumbing and uh he went
on to be a teacher, a principal,
and a superintendent and
demanded that we um participate
in the performing arts and I, I
really credit him for for
lifting our whole family up.
But when I looked at this and uh
and thought about my community.
And um,
You know, we talked about makeup
stations, storage, uh, costume
shops, dressing rooms so
amazing, knowing we don't even
have a theater and um so my
question is, do we know how many
districts are performing arts uh
within those districts, the
ability to even have a, a, a
theater.
And uh and I can share that.
Sadly, in our district, we don't
have a theater because we walled
it in so that the wrestling team
could uh store their maps there
and we could have wrestling
practice.
So, um,
Do you have any insight into how
many districts there are.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Harmeo.
Uh,
I'm sorry you don't have a
theater in your school. Um, I do
know that there's a drama club.
And is active once a week, I
believe.
Uh
It is
An interesting reversal of
Toucanarry.
You can carry has a wonderful
performance space, as I
understand it, but has no drama
club.
Um,
We work mostly with dramas,
drama organizations within the
schools. So we're not as aware
obviously of what the music
programs have, and what they're
doing, what they have available,
whether there is a music program
at that particular school.
Um.
In our calculations, it, it
fluctuates every year. Um, there
are roughly 75 schools in the
state that have drama programs.
In any capacity.
and that would include Socorro
with its once a week drama club.
So, um,
It, it varies immensely, um.
All APS.
Schools had drama programs for a
very long time, and then
Highland about 10 years ago.
disbanded theirs.
Hm
Just as Highland came back on
with a drama program this year,
La Quva, abandoned theirs.
We don't understand why, um,
those programs are
Powerfully important to a lot of
students. Um,
But uh that happens.
And, and so that's that kind of
fluctuation we see.
And a routine basis. In the 75,
we're also counting a few
charter schools.
In that mix.
Um, most charter schools do not
have drama programs or if they
have them, they certainly don't
have facilities in many cases.
Um, there are some that are the
exception obviously to the both
of those rules.
and just
As a flip to what you dealt
with, Manzano High School
actually flipped a wrestling
room to be a black box theater.
So it can can go both ways.
So, so Mr. Chair, and, and I, I
thank you for that and I think
really, um, you know, I'm a
champion for rural New Mexico,
and um, and how can we get those
same amazing uh theater
productions in Socoro and
Magdalena and uh in all of our
smaller school districts as we
move forward, and I guess as I'm
sitting here, it reminds me of,
you know, how can you pull
yourself up by your boot
bootstraps if you have no boots.
And um and that's
I'm, I'm not a real proponent
all the time of we need more
money to spend in this area, but
I think, uh, when I saw 20
million, I thought, well, that,
that just isn't gonna be enough
um to fill this gap, and uh
especially when we start to
investigate where these gaps
have gone. I don't know if it's
post-COVID that things just
started to fall apart, losing
spaces. I don't know what
happened. I know my children, of
course, they're in their 30s
now, participated in stuff, but
now it's non-existent.
And so, um,
Uh, you know, I just want to
look at rural areas that do not
have these options, you know,
we're not really even talking
about um makeup stations or uh
costume shops or dressing rooms.
They, they really just don't
have the facilities themselves
and how can we backfill that for
rural New Mexico to be able to
have these amazing services. It
is really what I want to just
keep in the forefront. So thank
you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. uh
Representative Alco.
Did it, Michael.
Well.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, uh,
yes, uh.
Grant, we have a
Pretty decentility.
And the uh person who's in
charge of that facility is the
band uh director.
And he is in charge of that
facility.
And I guarantee you that if you
see one piece of paper laid on
that floor.
He will make sure it gets picked
up.
Good for him. He does a really
good job. One thing that I'm
wondering about though is.
As you're thinking about taking
20 million bucks.
How are you going to decide how
we're gonna distribute this
money. You're gonna have a
grading system of sorts.
Uh, how old did the decision be
as to who gets what, how and
when.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Valcon, um,
When we, when we proposed this,
we um
We're still debating the ways to
possibly do that. One would
essentially be a proposal
process where the schools would
propose what they were going to
do with the money, and those
proposals then are graded, um.
In all likelihood, not everybody
would be funded.
In that case, you run out of
money quickly.
Or could
Um
If you put a cap on it.
You might have obviously more
money to spend.
Over the entire state. The
second way would just be to say
you potentially qualify for this
money, if you have a performing
arts program of any kind, submit
for it, and then the SEG funding
formulas kick in to tell how
much money out of that 20
million, it's allocated to that
school. Uh, the third way would
be that the schools again
propose based on a number, a
target number for spending, say
we're gonna say there's $200,000
per school.
Tell us what you'll do with
$200,000 and everybody, everyone
proposes, and then you send back
and say, OK, we have more
proposals than we can actually
handle with $200,000 apiece, so
you're all get $150,000 but
you're, you get this money, tell
us what you'll do with $150,000
instead of the $200,000 you.
Originally applied for. Those 3
Process basically would would
get that done, I think, for most
of the schools.
Um,
And those are
Processes that I think I think
that the state has uh
essentially experience with in
in various capacities and so
could put them in place fairly
quickly.
OK, so one of the things that
I'm wondering about was there is
uh.
I've been to quite a few uh
different performances and uh
and uh.
You at Grant's High School.
And uh usually, uh, there's a
fee charged.
Mhm. OK, you pay to go ahead.
What happened? Where's that fee
going to?
It depends on the school, excuse
me, Mr. Chairman, Mr. uh,
Representative Alone, that it
depends on the school, um.
As uh Reid Mazewski.
Noted in his presentation, he
gets no money from the school
district at all, so any money he
charges helps pay back the
expenses he's had, uh, through
the year for his program. Um,
that's probably also true for
music programs and uh dance
programs if the school has one.
those kinds of
Income sources, uh, really just
barely cover. Um, we did the
survey back in 2018 to see what
high schools
had in their budgets, how much
budget they had, there wasn't a
single school, a single high
school that had more than
$20,000 in their budget.
Uh, and that was a private
school. Um, most of them are
making do with 5 to 10 to 15, as
that's those are 218 numbers.
So any, any penny they make at
the door, helps to cover those
spaces. I know an awful lot of
drama teachers right now who are
Preparing
Haunted houses on their stages,
because that makes money for
them.
Uh, it's not a performance, but
it might as well be a full uh
full on production, because they
put a lot of effort and time
into it.
Um,
That's where that
that that gate revenue goes,
essentially covers back the
expenses that the programs have
had.
So, um,
this money then go to when the
it's collected at the door.
There's money didn't go to the
schools and they budget it or
does it uh
Go to a separate fund.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Alton, that will depend on the
school.
Um, each school has its own way
of accounting for those funds.
Um, some schools set up.
Separate, uh,
Accounts, in essence, for their
drama program and their music
program so that as they get them
in, they get money and then uh
they account for those would be
similar to like the booster
clubs running the concession
stand at the football field,
that money is accounted for
separately and maintained in a
separate account. Um, other
schools.
Just sort of note that, oh yeah,
you had the $258 coming at the
gate this past weekend, noted.
Got it.
that's a that's completely up to
each school and each.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Stuart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation.
I certainly agree that a drama
is, uh, my daughter went to
Albuquerque High School. He was
very involved in the drama
department, um.
When I was in high school, it
was a long time ago.
Uh, I was very involved in
drama.
I was in the King and I and the
South Pacific, but certainly no
lead parts.
wash that man right out of my
hair. So, um
So yes, it's important and for
some kids it's really important.
So
I think you're on the wrong
track for coming and asking.
For capital out of the capital
outlet.
Uh, let me tell you why. Uh,
first of all, uh,
Drama can easily be a CTE
program.
Uh, so we put so much money into
CTE over the last 3 or 4 years,
and we are going to continue to
do that.
So this is a district and school
level decision.
As to whether or not they have
trauma in the their CTE courses.
And I'll just make this
suggestion to you.
You know, athletics is not your
enemy.
We don't fund
Athletics?
You know, all that stuff you
should, we have nothing to do
with that. That is a local
history, decision.
Um,
The
The public school capital
outlay.
Uh
is really the way we're what we
have now is a result of the SUNY
lawsuit from 20 years ago.
We have to focus on equity. What
you're asking for for 75 schools
out of the 1840 we have in the
state.
You know, creates issues with
that equity issue.
Here, here's another fact you
may not know. Right now our 89
school districts and are 100 or
so charter schools have $656
million in cash balances.
You know, to me, you know, if I
was a parent at one of these
schools now, my daughter was in
high school. I would make sure
that they had money in that
program.
I think this is a local issue,
um, just like athletics. I don't
know all those people that are
so into athletics, but they make
their voices heard, and those
school districts pay for it.
So, um,
You know, we could do this as a
uh individual legislator, you
can ask for help capital outlay
like that.
But
I just don't think this fits
into
Uh, uh, this overall purpose.
We've gotten in a lot of trouble
with our adequacy standards.
We've increased those over the
years.
Um, it didn't used to even pay
for things like um drama.
Uh, and we still don't as a
white eye in a minute.
So, um,
Some of the people that have
complained about adequacy, they
complain that well districts
like Albuquerque can build over
adequacy and they're right, and
that was a problem.
Uh, so, and, and they point
often to the see they've got a
performing arts center.
Uh, so,
So it's just, you know, I feel
your pain.
Uh, I agree with the importance.
Um, I wish we would, we would
fix these places and have better
facilities.
You know, I, I'm also
A bit of a uh community actress
and I've, I've acted in several
places in Albuquerque, and we
use a, a strip mall.
We had nothing.
And that was so much fun making
that strip mall into a place
where you could go and see
theater.
You don't need a good curtain to
have a good play.
Um, you, your, your teachers
sound really good and, and my,
my daughter's teacher was great.
And, and she often acts and
plays. She and her husband both
act in plays around Albuquerque.
So, um, so I just, I just think
you need to not blame athlete
athletics all the time.
It, it's not gonna work for the
public.
And that you got to find a
different place cause I just
don't think this will work
through.
Our uh
Our couple out like process that
we have now, except for asking
individual folks like.
Representative Jaramillo put in
some capital to help the drama
department.
There you go.
Uh, I haven't, I haven't done
that, um, in part, well, won't
go into that. But anyway, I, I
just think you're
Need a little bit of a different
redirection on how to uh to talk
about this, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Stewart, if I may respond, I did
not mean to give you the
impression that we
Think of athletics as um sort of
the opponents, the antagonists.
Um, no, in, in fact, we're
absolutely are in favor of what
athletics does for its students,
um, but 45% of those students
will not participate in
athletics.
So, in that case,
We are as a state, missing the
opportunity to help those 45%.
With student engagement. Student
engagement is a statewide issue.
Student engagement is a problem
that that drives so many other
issues.
Um, and including graduation
rates and and attendance and
truancy and issue, issues like
that. So that's part of why we
made the proposal. Um, the other
part of it is a lot of this is
capital expenditure.
Um, we're talking about
equipment that and, and
Rooms, in essence, that would
need to be built or purchased
that are that are capital
outlay.
Um, so that's
Why the route we've chosen is
this. Now, it could be, yes,
maybe TTE money would be the
better way to go in this. We're
not investigated that, so I
don't know that answer. Um, and,
and Junior Money would very
possibly be another option uh
for a lot of the schools and,
and getting these things kind of
uh get this done.
And those
$656 million sitting in various
bank accounts around the state.
Also enticing now. Um, so, um,
all of that's there, but I part
of this is also to say
It's incumbent upon our state,
we believe.
To make a statement that the
arts are important to us. We
know that the state doesn't fund
athletics per se.
But to say that the arts are
important in this state of all
states, um, is a really critical
kind of thing to say and the
performing arts now feed into so
much of what we do in our
economy. We have a nearly $1
billion dollar industry in the
film industry, we have students
who can't
Get through to get a job in
there because they don't have
any experience working on the
equipment that's happening in
film.
And yes, that's a CTE question.
But it's also a question of, are
we saying to our students, well,
we don't care about the arts.
And make your own way.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't, I,
I don't know how to, to answer
that. I mean, having the state
say the arts are important, I
mean.
We're trying to say school's
important and we've got a 40%
absentee rate, so we may not be
the best messenger.
I mean, it, this, this is an
important issue, but, you know,
I just, I just don't think
having us say anything is gonna
do anything.
Uh, so you should go to these
districts and ask for funding
for this from the cash balances.
That's a perfect use of cash
balances in my estimate.
Um, but it's not, it, it, your
presentation.
I'm sorry, but it really says,
you know, look at athletics,
yay, look at drama. No, we don't
fund athletics, the districts
do. So,
That's not a good argument for
us cause we're not putting that
in capital outlay either.
So, um,
Anyway, we'll take this offline.
I, I'll have more conversation
with you. Understood. Thank you.
Thank you. Other
I,
we already call on it so very
quickly please for a second time
because I've got some questions.
Just quickly, I, I really agree
with, with Senator, um Amy
Stewart's uh CTE comment and
looking into that that budget
item, um, but also like the
schools you mentioned within the
their own districts. One school
is closing down the program. The
other one is participating in
it. Could there be a lending
type of program or moving of
those resources.
Again, just something to think
about. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative
Uh, I
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think a
band and music, uh, and be part
of a CTE program. It depends on
the districts again, the
districts and the schools are
the ones offering the CTE
program.
Couple of questions and, and let
me kind of start off is I did
participate in drama as a senior
in high school and went to
various competitions and such uh
was helpful in getting over my
shyness and being able to speak
in public, um, when I was on the
school board in Las Cruces in
the 90s, the Las Cruces board
was recognized as the national
Uh, we got the national award
for the board most in support of
the arts at the National
Conference at the NF
The
National School Board Asso NSBA
conference. I actually got to
meet Henry Winkler was the one
doing the presentation at the
time back in the green room
behind it, so it was, that was
kind of cool. Um.
But that kind of leads to to my
comment that
Or, or let me put it as a
question, have you gone and
talked to the local school
boards and the superintendents
about this.
Mr. Chairman, uh, we, we as an
organization have not, um, our
organization works with all
schools in our program, um, so
we wouldn't necessarily be the
best proponents we can.
Back up any uh proposal from a a
drama department or um um
performing arts program to help
make the case or be there to
support them in that statement,
but that's then 89 presentations
around the state.
Uh, obviously, and we are a
volunteer organization, so.
The, and the reason is that's
where I think this really
belongs. And so potentially it
could be a presentation in front
of the New Mexico School Boards
Association at one of their,
their annual conferences and
they'd be as big groups, you
know, or a couple 100 of the
school board members 2 or 3
times a year.
Similarly,
Have you, the organization met
with the superintendents
association.
Um, we had our first foray
toward that this year, Mr.
Chairman, um.
When we attended as a as a
vendor in essence, the New
Mexico Council on Education
Leadership, um, at their
conference this summer. Um, that
allowed us to speak to a few
superintendents we were getting
our feet wet in the process and
knowing what that conference was
about. We didn't get to speak as
many as we would have liked. Um,
so going forward, I think we
would
Have a better chance next
summer, for example, at that
conference, of making a better
case for what we're proposing,
uh, generally speaking, which is
that performing arts goes a long
way toward this solving the, the
40% truancy rate or absentee
rate, um,
we all know that.
Athletics
Sorry to bring that up again uh
athletics brings kids to school.
At least for the 16 weeks
they're involved in that
particular sport.
Drama goes year round.
And the kids who are in drama
have the same circumstance.
They're coming to school because
of drama.
Yeah, and, and no disagreement
there, you know, absolutely, but
Or districts, the decisions on
how much money, what the capital
money gets spent on.
Uh, all of the fiscal agent who
actually has to sign off on
every single budget thing
eventually comes down to the
superintendent and the school
board, not individual schools
and you know, it concerns me,
you know, some of the comments
that we would have the
The drama teacher sign off on
any of the, the purchases.
Not their role, um, you know,
all you get the auditors are
gonna be going crazy if, you
know, they're the ones that are
making those choices, decisions,
and doing all of that, or if
they're the ones that an
individual school is going to
You know, lawmakers for capital
outlay without their
superintendent and board knowing
about it.
Superintendents and boards have
to be part of this process, and
I kind of started off with when
I was on that school board, I
think I was vice president at
the time, but that was a
commitment by our board and our
superintendent that allowed us
to win the national award for
support of the arts. Um, and
there are districts where, you
know, they're gonna be very
supportive and others where
they've got other priorities.
Uh, but it has to go through
that process, not around that
process. Uh, when
The, the gentleman from the
Santa Fe schools said we get no
support from the district. My
question is, have you asked for
it? Did you go to the board
about it? Have you talked to the
superintendent about it, that
the facilities people, they're
the ones charged within a
district to make those choices.
Um.
We pushed, you know, out of the
LESC to put millions of dollars,
I think where we started at 2 or
$300 million it got cut back by
finance and then never got
through, or much of it, but to
put money unrestricted into the
SCG because again, that's a
local decision as to whether
they need to spend that money on
the arts program or whether they
need to spend that money on
elementary classrooms or, you
know, whatever of the multitude
of other types of things.
That's why they're elected in
the local community.
And so I think it's misplaced
coming to legislators as a whole
to say fund this because our
districts won't.
I think that's a dangerous thing
to take the districts out of it
for us to then do that outside
of the the superintendents and
the local district, and the real
work on getting support for the
arts needs to be done locally
with those boards and
superintendents. I fully
understand there are some boards
that are going to be very
recalcitrant to do any of that,
and others that are gonna be
much more supportive of the
needs.
But that's where, where the real
discussion, I think lies not up
here, and certainly there are
mechanisms that local
legislators to support
The project at the local high
school to redo the curtains of
the performing arts center, you
know, there's money both through
capital processes and through
junior money, but even that, if
I said I'm giving this much
money to Oregon Mountain, where
I used to teach, to do this
without talking to the
superintendent and the board.
They get very unhappy it's like
well we got 20 million or
$20,000 to do this, and we
didn't know about it, you know,
what we, you know, how did that
happen, you know, they, they
start getting unhappy with us as
legislators, so they need to be
a part of the process from the
very, very beginning. This all
feels like going around that
process, which I don't think is
gonna bode well for the
organization for relations
within that district, much less
with relations of legislators up
in Santa Fe.
If that makes sense. But please,
if you'd like to respond.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you. Uh
At no time did we ever.
Anticipate going around the
superintendents and principals
of the schools and so forth. Um,
we only, uh, suggested that the
drama teacher sign off as
experts saying, yes, this light
board will work for what we're
trying to do here in the school.
Just
As as that level. Um, but again,
that is with the people at the
district when they're buying the
light board is this is the one I
need, not that one, right, not
something that even had or the
public school facilities
authority should be
be doing, right. Sorry.
That's all right. I appreciate
it, and I appreciate the advice,
uh, coming back, in essence, um
to say let's
See if we can't get this
accomplished at the at the
district level. Um.
My significant concern here.
Is that each of our drama
teachers are essentially
One person departments.
Um,
And they have 6
Well, 3 to 8 performances,
productions put on every year,
plus field trips and so forth.
By the time the year is done,
they're done.
They're very tired. They're some
of the hardest working teachers
in the schools, and to ask them
to say, OK.
One more thing, you gotta fight
for your own funding.
It's a really high hurdle for
them.
Um,
I'm not saying it can't be done,
and I'm not saying it shouldn't
be done that way. I'm, I'm
simply voicing an issue that
They already have a really,
really full plate.
And uh so to take that up as
well.
be difficult. And, and please
understand, sir, I don't
disagree at all, uh, having
worked at Oregon Mountain and
through a whole lot of these
things, you know, and I warned
people, it's like if you start
talking about changing funding
for the football, the football
dads, which are very highly
organized, will be there and
they'll be in front of the
school board to advocate and
don't mess with band schedules.
You know, those are things, you
know, and as a school board
member, you, you want to lose
your seat next time, mess with
the football dads or the band
schedule.
And the drama teachers maybe
need to mobilize the parents of
the drama kids in the same way,
because that's a much more
effective way of getting these,
but it has to go through that
system, not around that system,
and very much feels what you're
proposing is going around the
school board and the
superintendents to go straight
to the funding source for things
because they're too hard to deal
with.
And that's a recipe for for
failure from the start.
Thank you.
Questions, comments that that
for, do appreciate it. I don't
think, you know, I, I don't
wanna speak for everyone, but I
think everybody up here
recognizes the importance of the
arts that it keeps kids in
schools. It, it matters, it, you
know, it makes a difference.
Many of us did all of that. We,
we have brought back fond
memories of working with Mr.
Gaines down in Las Cruces High
School when I was there. I don't
know if you ever knew Mr.
Gaines. I don't, but he was long
term drama teacher there and
probably the most influential
high school teacher I had as far
as my future.
Your life. Um, and lots of
people participating in drama
have similar stories, so it's
not to discount that, but it's
With the funding and stuff into
a stronger mechanism, which is
through the local district.
Not just top down where the
local district is likely to, to
feel that they were not
included.
Thank you.
The other comments, not we'll
move on, I think, to the, our
last presentation.
Which is the funding formula
follow up.
Kelly Kurzwell and Mirkman Toya
update on research and analysis.
I think we are ready whenever
you all are ready, so these,
these begin.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the task force, um,
Kelly Carswell, uh, principal
analyst LFC myself, Mark Montoya
with LESC, um, we are here to
give an update on the working
group that was directed by the
task force and give an update on
what we've been researching as
far as the formula, what we
found and kind of some options
that we've identified.
Um, so what we'll do,
is on page 2 you'll see an
overview. We'll first review the
formula, give us an update,
reminder on how it works.
Uh, go through some of the
assumptions that the formula
does have within its workings.
um, and then we'll talk about
options to address some of the
deficiencies or items that we
think need to be focused on. And
Kelly will then present 3
options.
Um, or what we think could
possibly be a a path forward.
And.
Yes.
Yes, sure. Thank you.
No, you're fine.
Thank you, Chair. Um, and then
we'll wrap up with the staff
recommendation. So, as promised,
let's start off with a review of
the formula.
Um, so, phase two is it's also
um referred to. It starts off
with a simple division problem.
You have the assumed analyzed
cost to replace the facility.
Divide that by the assumed
annual revenue of capital,
additions can raise.
You then come up with the
unadjusted local match. Um, this
is a percent of the analyzed
costs covered by annual revenue.
And then you go ahead and
decrease that by a population
density factor, as you see it in
your notes there, that's made up
of um a breakdown, 12% points
for semi-6 6 points for urban
districts and no local match
for for uh districts above that.
assumption is that rural
districts need more support.
Um, again, the just a local
match after that calculation,
there is a maximum local match
of 94%, the state will always
pitch in 6%.
And then just to remind
everyone, we do have SB 131 in
place which is temporarily
reducing the local match for
some of the ships from 33% to 5
50%.
Well, let's dive in a bit to
that division problem that we
started with. Let's talk about
what that actually is made of.
So the assumed district revenue
calculation.
You start off with the land
evaluation for the previous 5
years.
And then you have a multiplier
of 0.009, which actually equates
to 4.5 per mL of 4.5 meals per
year.
And that'll give you your
assumed annual revenue for
capital.
As you'll see, there's a few
assumptions here.
For instance, uh, the assumption
that the school district will
take advantage of SB 9 and
partially advantage of HP 33.
We'll come back to these
assumptions a little bit later
when we dig in.
Next is talking to the other
part of that division problem.
We have the replacement cost
calculation. So we have the
maximum allowable gross square
footage pursuant to the adequacy
standards.
The assumption here is that
state statewide adequacy
standards accurately reflect how
much square foot it's how much
square footage students need.
And then we have, or am I
running slow? Do I need to catch
up?
So, um,
A slight 4, please.
Right there, that's it right
there.
Yeah, perfect. OK, and I'll be a
little more communicative about
slaves.
So on page 5, we have the
facility placement cost
calculation. Again, this is
based on square footage that's
uh pursuant to the adequacy
standards.
This is assuming that a
standards is reflecting how much
square footage students need.
And then we have the assumption
of the square footage cost. Now,
right now, that is at $307.47.
Now that calculation equates to
the cost to replace facilities.
We then
Oh.
Uh,
OK.
Um, I don't think I have the
most recent one. I think that's
we're having the
The mix up.
Essentially on the top you'll
see current formula phase 2,
facility replacement cost
calculation. That's the slide
that we're on.
right
One more where it starts off
with gross square footage in
that red box right there.
Right there, for, I'm, I'm
almost through it, and I
apologize.
OK.
Sorry, I, I do apologize for the
confusion. I'll try and wrap
this slide up and move on. Um,
so the cost to replace all
facilities, we then divide that
by 45 years, which we assume
that schools will pay that over
45 year even period.
That comes up to our student
analyze cost of facility replace
and then moving on to the next
slide.
She is a formula assumptions.
Yeah, I'm, I'm sorry, I'm not
sure how this happened, but
we're on the formula assumptions
with a big blue box.
Next.
Right there.
OK.
So, um, formal assumptions.
First off, we start with
affordability. Um, some
districts have trouble affording
their share due to lack of
support from local levels.
This again addresses the
assumption that the school
districts are taking advantage
of SP 9 and partial advantage of
HP 33.
Um, as we know, some are not,
um, taking advantage of HP 33 at
all?
And some not even espionate.
And then we look at the square
footage.
The state adequacy standards
accurately reflects how much
square footage a student needs,
that's the assumption. However,
minimum adequacy standards
cannot be used to construct a
functional facility.
But are still used in calculated
district's ability to pay for a
project.
Next, the cost per square foot
of $307.47. That's the
assumption. However, recent
construction costs are far above
that number.
Right?
Um, lastly, schools will be
replaced evenly over a 45 year
period. That assumption. Many
school districts build their
schools all at once, meaning
that they require replacement
all at the same time.
Now the next part is gonna be
the need for ability,
affordability study.
Re slide, and this kind of talks
to um a topic that Senator Perle
brought up earlier in the
presentation. Is there a study?
has identified the need for a
dedicated study.
To evaluate how much revenue
school districts can regenerate
for Capital Alley. This is
important because key components
of the revenue assumptions.
Rely on that revenue number.
Now, we need that to adequately
We need that number to
adequately determine what the
share of each school district
should be and how much the state
should be taken on.
So key areas of that research
would be
The accuracy of that 4.5 mil
assumption.
The current assumption of 4.5
mLs needs verification, as it
appears inaccurate in some
cases, in some cases too high,
some cases too low. A thorough
analysis is required to
determine whether the figure
actually reflects logistics
ability to raise revenue.
The bonding capacity
The methodology and
interpretation of a district's
bonding capacity varies across
agency.
There's no system in place to to
access real-time data.
This leads to a delay and and
inaccuracies in the information
available, which can negatively
impact school districts when
applying for funding.
Metrics outlined in the statute
such as quote bondage for
practical capacity, which is in
statute, apparently lack
definitions, and the parameters
for establishing these metrics
do not appear to be formalized.
Developing clear guidelines
would help ensure consistency
and understanding across the
process.
Revenue calculation.
The process of determining a
district's revenue is complex.
And it involves a coordination
between multiple agencies.
There are opportunities to
improve transparency.
And communication between
agencies to enhance the
timeliness of data.
Related to Dik Millevi and
available revenue. A clear
understanding of this process is
key to establishing what
districts can afford.
Additionally, the formula
calculates 4.5 mil assumption,
that's based on the salvations
which can vary from year to
year.
As a result, this may not
actually reflect the revenue a
district actually has available
to pay for the project with
that, I'll.
One moment, sorry about that.
All right, now I will pass on to
Miss Carswell to talk about the
options that we've brought
forward.
OK. Um, Mr. Chair, thanks, Mark.
Um, all right, so earlier in the
interim, um, in discussion with
you all on some of the issues
the council is facing right now.
Um, you all identified the need
for staff from these three
agencies to take a closer look
at whether some of these
problems could be addressed
through um adjusting or changing
the state local match formula.
Um, so we have spent some time
starting to do that work and
wanted to kind of give you a
status update on where we're at
and these three options are
That
So we wanted to start out by um.
Giving you an option of doing
nothing. Um, what happens if we
just leave the system as it is
currently. And I've kind of
outlined all of these options in
this format with a rationale
bullets and downsides. It's kind
of another way of saying these
are the pros and cons, um, to
taking these different routes.
So why, why might we consider do
nothing. Um, one, the formula
has always been imperfect and
it's always been a work in
progress, as I
some of you are very aware of
that.
Um, it's adjusting to changing
circumstances with schools, with
the state's finances, with the
needs that are out there, etc.
Um, despite this, uh, it needed
school replacement projects will
continue to move forward and
always has, um, the public
school school capital outlay
Council has tools in addition to
the formula to address some of
its deficiencies and address
issues like affordability on a
case by case basis. Um,
additionally, you all have
already implemented legislative
changes to address.
Affordability and um just kind
of demand for uh the funds
services, um, recently that have
provided across the board
reductions to the local match
for districts.
And those remain in effect and
will be in effect through FY 26.
What are some of the downsides
to going this route. Um, one,
PSFA staff have identified um
over probably the last year and
a half that there are some
districts that are having
difficulty uh meeting the kind
of initial criteria that make
them even eligible for
consideration for a waiver or a
reduction of the local match by
the council, um, despite in some
cases, good faith efforts by
those districts to raise local
funds for their projects.
Um, additionally, the across the
board reductions will expire
before the next 60 day sessions,
so not this coming one, but in
2027, um, leaving less time to
study alternatives to the
current formula if that is still
something you wanna do. Um, and
that could require fixes to be
done in a short session. Again,
not impossible, um, but you all
had previously expressed a
desire to do something as
significant as this in a longer
session. Um
You know, another reason we
might not go this route and this
is kind of what we thought when
we started this work, was that,
well, why not change some of the
formula factors that we know are
not reflecting reality and at
least at face value seem
relatively straightforward to
adjust.
So option two, this is probably
one that we met, we spent the
most time doing some actual
analysis on, um, and that is to
just kind of tweak the formula
by adjusting some of some of its
factors that fall into that
category of, you know, we kind
of know they're off base and
they seem like they shouldn't be
that hard to change, so why
wouldn't we do it?
Uh, the two formula factors in
particular that we looked at
within that category are the
cost per square foot and the
allowable square footage
factors.
Um, so these are some of the
cons to this approach that we
identify it and I'm gonna kind
of show you some of our work on
this, um, after I give you an
overview so you can sort of
better understand how we
identified some of the cons
here. So the first one is that
the across the board reductions
that you put in place with
Senate Bill 131, um, have a
similar effect on the local
match as making these tweaks to
the formula.
So, um, because of that, if we
adjust these factors now while
Senate Bill 131 is still in
effect. Um, you might kind of
make an overcorrection to the
problem, shifting the cost
burden of school replacement
projects too much to the state.
Um, and, you know, I would say
whether it would represent that
or not is a little bit of an
open question, but um, you know,
we might want to exercise
caution, um, in shifting the,
the sort of balance of cost
sharing too far in one or the
other directions.
Um,
Also, uh, we found that though
these would seem like
straightforward adjustments.
They weren't always, and that
adjusting these factors in some
cases doesn't actually help the
formula more accurately, uh
reflect district's ability to
pay, um, like literally at all
in some cases, uh, which kind of
raises more questions of why.
Um, and finally adjusting any
factors may be premature, um,
before we improve our
understanding of some of these
dynamics that are in the
formula.
So now I'm gonna kind of take
you through um what we did and
uh some of the effects that we
saw.
So, um, essentially, uh, uh,
PSFA staff did analysis on um a
range of possible adjustments to
these factors, um, for the
purposes of discussion, uh, in
our work group.
And where we kind of landed of
sort of a sensible seeming way
to adjust the assumptions about
um allowable gross square
footage and cost per square foot
were adjusting the allowable
square footage up by 15% and
adjusting the cost per square
foot assumption up from a little
over $300 to $450. Um, the
reasons for that is that um 15%
for gross
Footage is about where PSFA
expects to end up uh with the
revision of the adequacy
standards that they're doing
right now. So they expect to
see, you know, that kind of
general increase um in what's
allowed, and then the 450 cost
per square foot.
I, um, the national average for
school construction right now.
Um,
In New Mexico, uh, currently,
the average is a little higher,
more around $500 per square
foot, and you can see in the box
here on this slide, um, the, the
current cost per square foot
estimates for a standard based
projects range from $390 to over
1000.
So, um, when we did adjust the
formula, uh, when we did adjust
these factors in the formula,
what effect did we see? Uh,
first we saw on average the
statewide on a statewide basis,
the local match would be 53%.
And how does that compare to um
what's in place now. It would
represent a 19% reduction in the
average local match relative to
the phase 2 formula on its own,
and an 8% increase.
In the local match formula on
average relative to the phase
two formula plus the across the
board reductions implemented by
Senate Bill 131.
Um, you could probably kind of
surmise in these numbers that
some districts would benefit
from these adjustments and some
would not.
So, uh, we saw that 43 districts
would see a decrease in their
local match relative to the
status quo. So that is phase 2
plus SB 131.
45 districts would see an
increase in their local match of
between 1% and 47%, and this is
assuming that sort of these
changes would supplant SB 131
not be done in addition to it.
Um, and 22 districts with a
maximum 94% local match under
the phase two formula would
still have a 94% local match. So
those factors, um, essentially
aren't changing things at all
for those districts,
interestingly enough.
Um, so I wanted to just give you
some examples, um, so on this
slide you can see some example
districts who would see their
local match increased um under
the $450 per square foot and 15%
gross square footage adjustment.
And then on this slide you can
see some example districts that
would see their local match is
decreased.
Um, again, under the same
assumptions.
So, um,
Again, this is assuming that
these formula adjustments were
made in place of the SB 131
solution, not in addition to it.
And so the districts that would
see an increase in their local
match, essentially what that's
telling you.
Is that um these districts are
seeing a bigger benefit from SB
131, then they would see under
these um hypothetical.
Formula adjustments.
And these districts, by
contrast,
Um, would get more benefit from
SB 131.
Uh sorry, more benefit from the
formula adjustments than from SB
131. Um, and you can see for
some districts, um, the
differences are quite minor, uh,
which is kind of making the
point that SB 131 is having a
similar effect.
In practice.
Um, one thing that we learned in
starting to look at these things
is that the square footage
assumptions in particular, um,
need additional study and
analysis for us to sort of
understand what's going on and
what a good solution to it might
be.
Um, so we saw this in
particular, for example, with uh
recent standard-based awards to
microdistricts, where the
formula's assumptions about
gross square footage are so far
off that the 15% adjustment, um,
which is not insignificant to
this factor, especially when
paired with the increase in the
cost per square foot
assumptions, um, did very little
to make the formula more
accurate in terms of what these
districts could afford. And this
table is essentially showing
show
you why in 3 examples. Um, so
for districts with so few
students, um, these districts in
all cases were moving towards
combined K through 12 schools,
so a single school, um, for the
entire district and the the
third column here titled Gross
Square Foot Performula in
formula is telling you what the
formula is assuming, about how
big that school should be, and
then the actual is what that
school was designed and being
Built to.
So, the percentage departure
from the formula is over there
on the right, and you can see
it's quite significant, um, you
know, one of the questions this
kind of raises is that are
there, in some cases where the
formula or whatever methodology
we're using to calculate the
local match needs to treat some
districts or some projects
slightly differently. Um,
because, you know, you can't
build a school for an entire.
12 population at 27,000 square
feet um and have it function
essentially. Um, you might see
some departure, uh, you know,
for other districts, but this is
when we're able to identify, um,
pretty easily and, you know,
essentially we just need to look
at this stuff more.
So, option 3,
this is what I'm kind of calling
the status quo but better
option, which I realize is a
little bit of a contradiction in
terms, but status quo plus. Um,
so this would be to clean up the
waiver criteria and extend SB
131 and then we're gonna kind of
pair it with some direction you
could give to staff at the three
agencies to continue the work
we've started.
So, um, why might we do this?
Um, in some ways the rationale
is kind of similar to what I
outlined at the beginning with
the do nothing option, um, PSCOC
does already have tools to
address the issues with the
formula on a case by case basis,
um, you know, recently, the need
to do so has kind of become more
acute and amped up because of
the increase in construction
costs. Um, but the council in
dealing with this to date has
shown a willingness to grant
waivers, um.
After kind of careful
consideration of the district's
finances, um, and evaluation of
its ability to pay, uh, as well
as looking more closely at the
costs and specifications of
individual projects.
Um, so given that, uh, if we
also look at clean cleaning up
the waiver criteria, um, as PSFA
staff had previously
recommended, um, this would
remove a barrier that is in
place for some districts that
are kind of stuck that have real
needs and have put in effort um
to raising local funds to
essentially get to the point
where the council could
determine the need for the
project and the need for a
reduction in the local match,
and still sort of impose
reasonable expectations.
on the districts from the state
in terms of, you know, sort of
starting to answer the question
of what the kind of standard for
a good faith effort looks like.
Um, and finally extending SB 31
would provide continued relief
for all districts across the
state, while providing staff
with additional time to uh
develop solutions to the
deficiencies in the formula,
including, um, you know,
potentially throwing it out
altogether and looking at a
whole new way of doing it, um,
or, you know, basically keeping
what we have and looking at just
adjusting things, um, but giving
us time to get a better
understanding of all the concept
sequences of doing that and
bring um kind of solutions to
you all that uh everyone can
have more confidence and in
terms of the effect and why
we're doing it.
Uh, the main con to this is that
it delays implementation of a
real solution, um, on the
formulas issues to the 2027 60
day session. So it kind of keeps
the blunt instrument of SB 131
in place and kind of delays uh
um possibly more precise one.
So, um, I just wanted to kinda
give you some evidence of some
of the things I just said. Um,
first on PSCOC's willingness to
approve waivers. So this is
showing you the trend in
waivers, the blue bars are the
approved waiver amount by fiscal
year and then.
Sorry, those numbers are kind of
little. The orange numbers on
top are the number of waivers.
So, uh, interestingly, the
amount.
You can see an FY 24 versus FY 6
is obviously way different. The
number of waivers was the same.
So, you know, this is kind of
illustrating to you, um, that
cost, the cost of construction
is driving a lot of this.
Um, this slide you have seen
before, um, but essentially this
would be the proposal for
changing the waiver criteria,
um.
First, basically you get rid of
Criteria C altogether. Um, the
reason for that is in practice
it's essentially duplicative
with criteria A.
Um, and then for criteria B, you
just eliminate two of the, um,
two of the eligibility criteria.
So what would remain is, um,
this is the option for small
districts with fewer than 800
students. Um, essentially the
expectation is that they have um
at least a 7 mL rate and then
they can be considered for the
waiver.
Um, and this is kind of the
addendum to option 3, which uh
if you go this route and
continue to be interested in
further work on the formula, um,
that you could direct to LFC
LESC, and PSFA um to continue
this work, um, complete
additional study of the formula
and proposed solutions to you.
Um, the rationale for this, um,
some of this I already covered,
formula is complicated, it's
imperfect on multiple fronts and
solutions that seem
straightforward.
often aren't, um, and could have
unintended consequences. Um, the
second bullet, maybe I should
have put first, but, uh, you
know, just a reminder, the
formula is really the foundation
of the state's public school
capital outlay system.
Um, and is, it is an attempt to
remedy a constitutional claim
against the state. So it's
important that we get it right,
um, as best we can do that.
Um,
You know, I, I think I mentioned
this already that our work so
far has kind of raised as many
new questions as it's answered,
um, and, you know, we think that
SB 131 plus adjustments to the
waiver criteria and maintain an
adequate status quo, that the
council can continue a
addressing critical needs that
school districts have that
school districts have in terms
of moving projects forward while
addressing um the kind of unique
affordability issues that we're
seeing.
out there right now. And then,
you know, just kind of the the
same downside um I reviewed
earlier that.
It delays kind of real solutions
to the formula till 2027. Uh,
and Mark will wrap up.
Thank you, Kelly. Sure members.
The staff recommendation would
be 3 and 3A. Um, we waiver
criteria.
And he thought he wanted to go a
little more time to, to continue
to work on this.
Peskov, the task force.
Could direct LFC LAC and PSFA to
develop a timeline with
deadlines for additional
analysis and proposed solutions.
As well as staff welcomes early
guidance from the task force, a
preference for preferences for
tweaking the existing formula
versus exploring entirely new
approaches to calculating the
state and local match.
With that, always sta for any
questions or comments.
Thank you very much appreciate
and store.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Boy, great work and great
explanation. So thank you.
You know, I, I think if we do
this option 3 that we extend the
The 131 for another couple of
years, are you suggesting that
we
Uh, it's someone like Bieber to
do a study? Are you saying that
we continue with our great 3
staffs, uh, to do it, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Protem, I
think for now we would suggest
that we can continue with the 3
staffs, um, with the potential
that, you know, like we might
come back to you at some point
with the need for um some
contract work.
Um, but at this point, I think
we can take this forward at
least for the new for the near
term, um, with the three
agencies and we could kind of
determine the need for
additional support later, um,
especially if we're talking
about, you know, really getting
something ready for the 2027
session.
Well, so, Mr. Sherman, I, I
still think the formula is good.
I mean, yeah, we're dealing with
things we never have before, the
cost of construction. I really
like to changes in the waiver.
That's been a problem. So to me,
making those little waiver
changes, uh.
Means that I think we can go
forward for a number of years,
and we might see in the next few
years, it's just that waiver
change will make enough of a
difference.
Uh, to shine more light on it.
So I really support what you're
suggesting and thank you both
for your work.
And who's left out. Oh yes.
Three of you for your work. You,
Iris.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, could I
give one quick response to that?
Um,
So I think, you know, one thing
that we've started to see in
this to your kind of point about
like, well, actually is the
formula good? Um, it's really
hard to develop a formula you
can apply to the very diverse
school district population we
have in the state, with all of
these complicated considerations
and make it just work all the
time. Like that's difficult. Um,
so, you know, there's, there's
things in here like the
assumptions about local taxation
rates.
That
we know don't necessarily
reflect reality, but they do set
an expectation that's kind of
like a policy expectation from
the council and the legislature
in terms of, you know, what
districts are doing at the local
level to bring some skin in the
game to the projects. Um, and
so, you know, like, do we want
it to reflect reality for
districts that are doing less,
maybe not, um.
So, you know, I, I think that's
a, a valid question to ask too,
like, well, actually, is it good
enough?
And Mr. Chairman, that, that
really is the area of study that
I, I think we really need to do
that because we keep
Hearing that now it used to be
OK for districts and now it's
just really not, so I think
reality is catching up.
To what we propose. So, so thank
you for focusing on that area of
the, of the formula.
Thank you
Thank you. Represent, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This just
requires a yes or no. Can we get
a copy of this report?
printed copy.
And seeing nodding heads, I
think that's a yes.
That represented. Thank you, um.
Leach and I, I was worried that
our public members or whatever
that aren't legislators, you do
know you're allowed to ask
questions and I want to make
sure that these guys have been
very quiet, so please, yes,
Chairman, thank you. Um, I just
get excited when we're talking
about bonds. So, um, not really,
but so I just wanted to mention
something Kelly and Mark that
came up um at the last PSCOC
meeting related to the waiver
piece that I think we want to
look at as well. So I, I really
appreciate the, you know, the
local commitment on the mills,
you know, and being.
You know, uh, bonded to 10 mLs,
but one topic that did come up
with PED and the council was
Sort of some of timing issues
around that where we've got um
school districts bonding, but
it's several months before PED
cer certifies the tax rate and
so we're sort of school
districts are left in limbo
because they don't quite have a
calculation that shows the 10
mLs, but
They might, or that that's what
they bonded to and things
changed in the interim, so I
don't really have much more to
say, but I do want to look at
that because something that came
up at the council is whether we
should be in any waiver
legislation for statutory
changes looking at even some
small changes to say, you know,
to the best of their ability,
they have bonded to the 10 mills
versus it must be exactly 10 mL
at the time of certification
because if that's the case, I
think we are having some
districts really struggle to
meet that waiver criteria when
in
Many cases, to my understanding,
they're not even close to being
able to afford their match
regardless of whether they melt,
they bond to 10 or not. So I
just wanted to share that with
the task force for their
awareness, but that is something
that came up that I think we
should look at. I like the, the
3 and 38 option, but that's just
a little tweak that we might
want to discuss.
Thank you, Chairman.
Sure, if you don't mind, um,
remember Lee, I think that's a
great point. I think when I
spoke to the need for an
affordability study. That's one
of the aspects that we're
looking at is the timing and the
information that's available and
how we can actually integrate
that into our. I think that's a
wonderful idea.
Other questions?
And my, I'm the question and I
don't know how relevant, but the
Supreme Court's going to be
essentially looking at
Whether our formula is adequate
or not, on November 7th, this is
looking forward to legislation.
Does, is that going to affect
things or is this the type thing
that regardless of how they
rule, we ought to be doing
anyhow.
Um, Mr. Chair, so I would say
the recommended option, um, is
probably a good one in light of
that,
um, cause, you know, you're,
you're not making changes to
You're not making many changes
to the status quo except for the
waiver criteria.
Um, and
You know, like,
The answer to your second
question, um,
I guess I would sort of leave
that to your judgment, really,
um, but, you know, like we have
gone through various iterations
of this, um, while continuing to
be in this lawsuit and um at
this point it seems like it's
anyone's guess when it will not
exist anymore, so.
Well, and, and thank you and
I think, you know, at least, you
know, the people I know sitting
on the committee here, we want
to do what's right, regardless
of whether there's a lawsuit
telling us to do what's right.
And it seems like option 3 and
3A are continuing to tweak it so
that it works for more of the
districts and more of the
students. Um, but I think it's
continued evidence, though, if
Supreme Court, if you are
listening, yeah, we really are
trying to, to do what's right
for students in districts,
whether we're being compelled to
do it by a lawsuit or not.
Other questions or comments from
anyone?
I'm trying to influence their
judgment, yeah.
Sure, may I just ask for, so,
um, I, I think for the three
agencies, you know, we could
come back to you with a sort of
general work plan with some
timelines um at your next
meeting if you would like that,
or we can do it next interim.
Um, we just kind of need to know
if you want us to do that now,
um, so you can approve it and we
can start. I think the next
meeting is our last meeting, is
that correct?
And so, you know, if we actually
were going to be looking, is
this what you're asking about
endorsed legislation from this
committee or specifics for
legislation or am I
misunderstanding? So, um,
Well, so we do need that. So if
you all want to develop
legislation to endorse on the
extension of one SB 131 and the
waiver criteria, um, you know,
LCS I guess all four of us need
direction on that. And then um
the other part is this kind of
staff work going forward, you
know, if you want us to come
with a work plan with some
timelines before this interim is
over or if you'd like to start
that next interim.
And, and
I'm sorry.
Would that require a memorial?
I'm being asked. I know Senator
Stewart did because she carried
the SB 131, is that right? Uh,
maybe the right one to start
working now between in the
November meeting on getting
something for endorsement.
By this committee
Um, and so I think the answer is
yes and yes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
So do you all want to have us
ask you to have the timeline by
November 7th, or do you want to
wait till next interim.
You need us to formally say,
please do, or um
You know,
I would be, I mean, it's really
up to you. I think going into
budget season like we're
probably not gonna be able to do
a lot of work on it starting
till next interim. So if it's
good enough with you that we
wait, that's probably workload
wise good for us, um, but if you
want it sooner, we will do it.
So Mr. Sherma, it seems to me
that we, we, we should wait till
next interim, but, and you 3
agencies get the bill prepared?
For
November 7th, that's our last
meeting, so that would be good.
Yeah.
Very good. Anything else?
If not, thank you very much. And
again, very informative,
appreciate the, the work and,
and coming with kind of what
some options and the goods and
bads of, of each of those is
very helpful. Um, I think that
concludes our work for today. We
never did get a forum, so
November 7th, hopefully we will,
uh, that's gonna be right after
the election, so it may be an
interesting meeting,
um on the agenda. Oh, is there
public but there's no one signed
up for public comment, so thank
you.
I appreciate it.
Well, Mr. Chairman,
public comment.
You know, if we don't have a
quorum, most committees then
we'll have to go to the ledge
council to get approval for per
diem.
And so for
Also of you are here, thank you.
Because now we're in this
complicated time where we'll
have to see because this is a
very different committee than
most of the others with our
public public members which we
so like. Thank you so much. But
so it may not be the same. We
never reached the, we needed a
Republican member of the House,
uh, for a subcommittee. I don't
know that we'll have the same
criteria for this. I'm just
warning you all
That get a per diem out of this
that you, you may not for a few
months. It may be late coming.
Um, do I remember that we think
the Supreme Court is going to be
starting at 9 o'clock on the
7th. So we're gonna schedule our
meeting to begin early if in
fact that remains on there, so,
uh, travel plans, you may have
those traveling might come the
night before as opposed to
trying to make the, the
The trip up, you've only got 2
hours. I've gotta come 4 hours.
So
Yeah.
But, but we're gonna try and
have that as the first item is
to just watch what's going on on
the monitors and then kind of
formally start the meeting after
that.
Uh, but so people who wanna,
wanna see because that very much
affects the business of this
committee. If there is nothing
