Uh, the only item of note for a
request of funding at this
meeting is Des Moines combined
for the teacher housing, and
again you can see the 1.4
million requests there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members now
moving into the award schedule
detail. Uh, I'd first like to
know, uh, for the 4th column
from the left, you'll see uh a
lot of the AO3, A07 SSTB so um
this is work we had been uh
wanting to add all of the, the
previous bonds that each of
these projects are associated
with with their awards. This
information is pulled directly
from.
Aaron just uh consolidate it
into the projects to show all of
the different bonds and awards
they have received. And so I'm
happy to just show this meeting
we did complete that work, so
all of the highlighted and we'll
just keep up with it in the
future.
I'm staying on page 12, if you
turn your attention to the
bottom of that page, the
highlighted row for P20007. This
is again Des Moines, the request
coming for this meeting. So if
you follow it to the right, to
the red borders, that's
currently where we're at in
time, uh, approaching the end of
this fiscal year, moving into FY
26 pretty soon, um, but the
request for Des Moines is the
1.4 with the waiver included.
And with that, um, Mr. Chair
members I stand for any
questions you may have.
OK, thank you for the report.
um, questions.
From the council.
We do have one on, uh, you
mentioned on the uh
Project status
Report that the 4th column is
the one that identifies all of
the different bond issues. I'm
surprised to see that.
At least on the first page,
there are multi-bond funded, I
guess.
So there's, there's a mixture of
funds.
In each of the projects from
different bond.
Mr. Chair, members, uh, that is
correct. Based on the, the way
the award phasing works from
phase 1 and 2, they normally
will go on whatever, usually the
most recent bond is so when
design is awarded now about 2
years down the road, we add the
construction to that future
bond. So that's where the, the
different items that we have no
other questions. Thank you for
the report.
And we'll move on to the consent
agenda.
If we could have a rundown on
What's included?
Mr. Chair, members, I will give
you a rundown on each of these
items, um, also just a reminder,
there are some uh
representatives from the school
districts that are on this
consent that would like to speak
following the consent agenda.
Item number one is uh an item
that we need to address, uh,
Um, this is the PSCOC meeting
minutes from April 14th. If you
can uh go to page 20.
I am going to read for you.
This uh top of page 20, the 2nd.
Uh, line where it starts to stay
mention that FBT was a design
team, and Franken was the
geotech and contractor.
We need for clarifications, we
need to scratch out that Franken
was the geotech team, because
they were not the geotech team.
We are going to replace that
with an owner provided
geotechnical testing firm was
contracted to verify soils were
placed and processed per design.
The contractor failed to
coordinate testing for
specifications. That is the
clarification of her um
these meeting minutes.
And before I move on, I'm gonna
request any comments or
questions from
Oh, so you're correcting the,
the record.
Mr. Chair, that is correct.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll move
on to item B, um, are for the
special PSCOC meeting minutes,
um, that were approved that need
to be approved, uh, from the
council. Uh, this is where
Hobbs new middle school and
Heiser was, um, approved for
funding.
Item C, Mr. Chair.
This is for Des Moines teacher
housing.
Subcommittee approval for 3
manufactured teacher housing
units, the cost of breakdown was
approximately $5,500,000 for the
actual homes, uh, about 633,000
for site work.
20% for soft costs and which
totaled 1.4 million.
Uh, also approved on this uh by
subcommittee was 100% waiver.
Item D, Mr. Chair, is for Anne
Parrish Elementary School in Los
Lunas. This was an award
language change, subcommittee
approval to amend the language
of the standardba award from a
partial replacement and
renovation to a full
replacement.
Uh, with the enrollment of 540
students. No additional funding
was requested at this time. The
current award, uh, that was
provided to them was for 67,893
gross square feet.
The district and the design
professionals have indicated
that they are going to strive to
design within those parameters
of the original award.
Um, as they don't project, uh,
needing additional square
footage at this time. Uh, the
estimated cost at this time is
approximately $40 million.
Item E, Mr. Chair and members,
is a BDCP category one.
Uh, the, what this did is the
motion reauthorized funding
already approved by the PSCOC
for the last two districts in
the state, which include Gallup
McKinley and Hema's Mountain.
Um, equaling 188,000 and 104,000
respectively.
Item F, Mr. Chair, is BDCP
category 2.
This was for additional award
for Clayton schools in the
amount of $412.
Finally, Mr. Chair, uh, item G
was a recertifications of SSTBs,
which certified Hobbs Middle
School, Hobbs Heiser, um, from
the special.
Meeting that happened in April,
as well as the Des Moines
Teacher housing.
And with that, Mr. Cherry stand
for any questions
we don't have on the consent
agenda, but if anyone would like
to.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Really
small thing on the on the
minutes correction. So are we
correcting, um,
We're essentially correcting the
the information, but this is
what Mr. Girkin said during the.
Uh yes, Mr. Senna.
um
The statement that I made was in
reference to
The design team, the contractor,
and the geotechnical together.
OK. Mr. Chair, I don't have a
problem fixing that. I just, I
just wonder if there's a way to
indicate that that we're that
we're correcting the record to
make sure that we're not
misidentifying the firm, um, but
still keeping intact what
actually was said at the meeting
because the minutes, the purpose
of the minutes, right, is to
capture what happened in the
meeting. We we're not going back
to to change what he said. We're
going back to just clarify.
Appreciate that
Mr. Chair, Mr. Senator, make
sure that that is addressed
correctly. Great. Thanks.
Yes, good. Um,
I, I, I did notice that uh in
the, um, um,
The one for An Parrish.
Um, that
We were, um,
We we're going to design to the
67,000 square feet, I think.
Um, and the, the new calculator
would have allowed them 70,
almost 75,000 square feet.
So are we setting ourselves up?
I mean, that, that kind of um an
interesting cause it's usually
the other way. We're usually
That is a limit, the design
calculator and, and now we're,
we're well below that, Mr. Chair
members, this was a
conversations that we had, uh,
both with the design
professional and the district
that currently there is no need
um for the extra square footage
that may change. That's why I
said as of now, um, that may
change as they continue to do
their programming, um, but
they're going to strive to try
to uh utilize the original award
square footage.
I mean
Real quick, and I think uh this
is addressed at the subcommittee
meeting, Madam Director, so
under key points, uh,
Arctic team decided to proceed
with the manufactured housing
homes, we decided, well, it was
mentioned then as the
subcommittee that these are
modular, correct?
So we could just maybe kind of
correct that that these are Mr.
Chair, Mr. Romero will
definitely
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, just a
comment, uh, uh, Iris, um, in
looking at the recertification
and I talked to Nick about this
a little bit before there's some
language changes I think we
need. I don't think it requires
amendment right now, they're
minor, but it, it unexpended
versus uncertified and that kind
of thing, so we'll, uh, board of
finance if uh council's
comfortable with it, we work
with staff to make those minor
changes and we
Can share revised uh
resolutions as we as we provide
those. So we've looked at and we
just haven't had a chance to get
them over. Thank you for that
information. Anyone else?
No, no, just thank you for, to
the awards subcommittee for the
work that they did in the
interim, and there was no uh no
assignment to the uh
AMS committee, but, uh, in the
case, I'll.
With the
Vote all those in favor of
approving the consent agenda,
please indicate by saying I.
All those opposed.
Consent agenda is approved.
And uh he said we have some
see some familiar faces in the
audience.
Welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee on behalf of
the Des Moines Municipal
schools, we do just would like
to thank you for the 3 teacher
houses that you're helping to
find and it will be instrumental
in the re the recruiting and
retention of teachers that are
high quality for the um District
of Des Moines and we appreciate
it very much.
We appreciate you.
You're bringing that forward and
being part of the pie
implementing.
I am
with the early childhood
department funded um the city
there to build the town, to
build the childcare center,
which also will help you with
teacher recruitment, and I just
don't know if the school has any
support or involvement in that,
just out of curiosity how that
project's coming, it's right
next to the school, so I've been
up there to visit. That's a
good.
Question, Miss, um Gerginsky,
um, we are supportive of it.
It's separate from the school
because the city has taken it
on, we've agreed if they get it
um up and going that we would
help with a meal per, you know,
preparing of meals and um the
special ed services, you know,
as needed and those kind of
things, but the school doesn't
have any interest in managing
it, I guess it's, you know, it's
separate, it's the city's
project, but it is looking
better. It is good, um.
I toured the playground this
week it's set up and it looks
nice, so thank you for that and
I hope that they get it going so
thank you for that and I hope
that they get it going yeah and
superintendent and been trying
to work with them too, and we
visit our march it was.
Not looking good, so it's good
to hear it's going, but the
playground did look nice and I
know all the materials are
purchased and ready to go
inside, so great to see that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Morning, Mr. Tariff members of
the council. My name is Susan
Chavez, and I'm the acting
superintendent for Lia schools,
where A parish is currently
located. I have the principal
Aparish here with me, Miss Lisa
Begay, and we were both like to
thank you on behalf of our team
here from most us,
we are very, very excited about
this project, this is what is
best for our students at A
Parish Elementary. So thank you
very much.
Thank you for being here. So
yes, my name is Lisa Begay. I'm
the principal at Anne Parish
Elementary and this project's
been in the making for several
years now, and my teacher is
going to be greatly excited to
know that we are going to be a
total rebuild because um it's
what's best for kids and this
will allow us to have our
continuous um instruction
continuing on without displacing
our students into portables or
any other areas and so we can
have a seamless move into a new
school, so we really appreciate
this.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. We hope that the
project moves along quickly. We
know it's gonna add a
Steps to this like.
You know, going to a full
replacement, but again.
We'll work with you on this.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, uh, before we move on
to the next item, we would like
to introduce
Mr. Chair, members, uh, we are
very pleased to introduce
Ferrando Baeza, a native of
Demming, New Mexico.
The very strong design.
professional background in the
southern part of the state.
Be able to assimilate quickly
and is uh
Self-motivated. Welcome.
And Mr. Chair, um, coming in the
next meeting in June, we'll have
a full, uh, personnel update.
All right, we have, uh, next on
the agenda, uh, for
informational purposes, project
status report.
You know, we've been working on
this for a while, so again.
Appreciate the, all of the work
staff has done to bring this
forward and get it fully
implemented.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the PSUC council had
caught me off guard. It happened
so quick. Um.
Adam 5A this morning in your
books is an update to the PSFA's
project status report, managed
by our agency's field division
with recognized new staff and
SMEs and with new staff and SMEs
comes additional.
Opportunities to improve our
processes and have additional
newbies looking at our products
and tools and making
recommendations that we haven't
seen before.
This group reports up to our
deputy director of capital. It
includes a PS PSR definitions
page, exhibit A, your books.
Executive summary and a sample
set of the updated PSR, which
you can expect to see more of
moving forward.
I want to begin with a brief
definition and history of the
Project status report.
Uh, first defining what it is.
It's a high level customized
report.
That we've used previously to
report funded project statuses,
uh, both internally at the PSFA
and to the council routinely to
make informed decisions.
Gives you the opportunity to ask
the next questions, allowing
opportunities further to drill
down into projects based on
industry standard criteria.
PSFA's repository for project
management is currently referred
to as the construction
Information Management System
Sims.
Our current vendor is Trinity
Unity Construct, I think we all
know it formally as e-Builder.
Um, PSFA staff of RPMs uses this
tool routinely.
Day in, day out, weekly, monthly
to manage the intricate details
of project management
assignments.
Management of these projects is
rolled up into the customized
project status report which we
are presenting this morning, of
which a sample is provided in
your materials.
The last time we presented this
report to the PSCOC was in 2023.
We recognized both the gap in
reporting and acknowledge the
necessity of providing the
information to the council so
that you can make informed
decisions, and on behalf of the
PSFA we'd like to extend our
sincerest apologies, uh, for
these delays in providing this
tool.
I was recently engaged into this
project to provide support and
quality and process improvement
that I'm excited to move this
forward.
The
agency's field division with
some of my recommendations, team
recommendations, guidance and
direction. We've developed a
plan of action, uh, presenting
today for the full
implementation of this report
moving forward.
The reasons for the gaps are
many. I'm not going to get into
the details, uh, unless
absolutely requested, um, but we
did have some logistical changes
in that the vendor made,
creating some challenges and
roadblocks, and uh affected our
ability to modify the report.
Some key points for your review
this morning as of May 1, uh,
you should be aware of these
things routinely, and that's
what the PSR is for.
Um, the PSFA currently has 160
active construction projects, 64
standards-based projects, 72
systems, 11 pre-K, 8 teacher
housing, and 5 measurement
verification, um, pilot programs
in place.
We also use Sims to manage
district facility master plans
uh across the board, across the
spectrum of New Mexico school
districts, and with that, Mr.
Chair, members, I'll turn it
over to Mr. Jason Gala for some
additional details and
production uh statuses of the
updated uh pro uh project status
report.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members, um,
Jason Gauna, I oversee the Sims.
Yes, thank you, Jason. Uh.
With Jason's guidance and uh
coordination with Turnbull Unity
struct, uh, we did go through a
training process with their
people.
To help us understand the
schedule module.
And how it feeds into the PSR.
Mr. Ramsey Hood, who is a recent
addition to our regional manager
team is uh exceptional young man
with a lot of technological
skills that do not possess.
Um, working with him, uh, the
intention is this week for him
to schedule time with each of
the regional managers
individually.
And get them started.
With
Building these schedules for
each of those standard standards
projects.
Make sure that they understand
how to use them, because we will
then need to also
train our design professionals
in how to maintain it once the
design professionals for now, we
are going to implement the
schedules with as many updates
as we can from the date of
award, the original schedule
submitted with the applications
and included in the MOUs.
Um, and then build them through.
Whatever stage of construction
or design that they may be now.
This will help us to track.
Where any delays have come in.
And also be as accurate as
possible.
The intention is to have those
standards projects.
Uh
Online and operational.
Within the next 30 days.
And then to bring in the systems
projects within the next 30
days.
Uh, we'll keep track of how the
system is functioning and as
Jason said, if there are any,
any hiccups or any problems with
the way the data.
Uh, displays when we print it
out.
We will work with tremble to
correct anything that we need
to, but we do not see any major
Uh, issues for us to be able to
make this a standard thing that
On a monthly basis, the regional
managers can work with the
design professionals in the
contractors to make sure that
those schedules and progress are
updated properly.
The manager's reports that are
included in the report you're
looking at today.
Have just a little more
information.
Uh, we're not gonna drill down
doing a lot of into a lot of
minutia, but
Basic things like design is
progressing as scheduled,
instruction is at this
percentage and is moving along
fine or where any delays might
be coming up.
So it, it will take a little bit
of time to implement.
Uh, but we feel very, along with
the executive summaries that Mr.
uh Mr. Tillotson has been
providing as well.
Uh, we think that you guys would
be very happy with what you see.
And I stand for any questions,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, if I may really
quick, um, we've created a
timeline to full implementation
for this tool, um, creating a
sense of urgency to re-engage
this report with a team of SMEs
and the vendor towards full
implementation, as Mr. uh
Gherkin had just expressed uh
May of 2025 at this meeting,
we're providing a sample set to
you, the council on this new
platform with definitions and
expectations in June, we expect
to bring to you a PSFR PSR
version, which is
is inclusive of all 64
standards-based projects, and
then by July we'll provide a
full PSR inclusive of all PSCOC
projects.
a few more items I want to
express is we've created a
policy and procedure for this
particular statute-driven
criteria to help support the
agency and revitalize the
expectations for full
transparency, and then moving
forward in addition to that,
we've added it to several other
documents as a reference because
it crosses over into other
aspects of what we do and how we
do it.
I'll give you a prime example as
we progress and provide you with
the maintenance program status
report.
There is alignment between that
document and what is provided in
the project management side of
the house. Um, so they kind of
work together hand in hand, and
I know many of our other
departments, including finance,
use the tool as well, and with
that we stand for any questions.
Well, thank you. I think uh
again we all recognize this is a
lot of work goes into this.
And uh the information is
critical to us and to you all
too.
Make sure that our projects are
moving along and and assign
staff to help work with those
that are being delayed for any
reason. Questions?
A
Thank you, Mister Tur, not so
much a question. Um, I just
wanna thank staff for putting
together the timeline. I think
it's really helpful to have that
transparency to the council as
to when we can expect an update.
I also really appreciate the
comment on um incorporating this
into policies and procedures,
it'd be helpful to kind of see
are those actually, because I do
have a question, apology so
um are those uh policies and
procedures for the PMs and the
RMs, like, can you go into that
a little bit more about who will
be like reviewing this and
updating this. I think you said.
It's the RMs and the PMs, but
can you uh talk? Uh I briefly
mentioned, uh,
I, I apologize members in the
chair, um,
This will require, as we move
forward, the design
professionals also being
involved, so yes, um, at a
regional manager level, it will
be uh implemented.
Immediately following a war.
Um, it will be updated by the
RMs as we move into design.
When design
Begins, the design professionals
will be required to provide
their own schedule.
For each of the phases of
design.
And they will be required to
maintain
Tracking of their progress.
And then as we move into
construction.
Contractors will become involved
as well.
And be responsible for their
part of.
Schedule. Now, the, the regional
managers will monitor.
Make sure that those updates are
made.
And when any delays are
encountered.
We work with the central
coordinators myself and anyone
else who needs to become
involved to take corrective
action and get us back on
schedule.
Um, so,
The regional managers will be
monitoring and overseeing and
making sure that these updates
do take place, but it will take
the cooperation of our design
professionals and general
contractors to make this as a.
And Mr. Chair, Miss Leach, yes,
it is inclusive in the policy
and procedure that ownership is
in the field, but there's also
tie into other aspects of our
organization to include
Executive teams being
responsible for the overall
accountability, so that it
doesn't fall off track moving
forward, so yes, it is included
in the policy and procedure.
Thank you, and one question kind
of on the system. So I know at
DFA we have um the you know,
CPMS system for capital
projects, and it is
self-reported as well, like um
entities are are expected to go
in there, I think at least on a
quarterly basis and provide
updates. Is there something in
the system that will trigger to
your uh PMs and RMs.
whether um updates have been
provided by the contractors,
whether it's the design team or
the construction team cause that
might be helpful as a trigger
for um the, you know, the, the
folks in the field to say, hey,
you know, you were supposed to
be at least confirming or
updating on a monthly or
quarterly basis. We haven't seen
that update. That might be
helpful, a helpful tool for them
to make sure that the
self-reporting is actually
happening because anytime you
have self-reporting, you're not
always sure when, whether it's
gonna happen or not. So that
might be a useful tool, so I
don't know if this system has
something built in where they
can be monitoring whether the
the contractors have gone in and
made those updates.
A misleads members the
The responsibility for updates
is, is kind of, it's a shared.
Situation there is there are
contractual requirements for our
design professionals to provide
these updates to the schedule.
Um, as they progress from one
stage of design to the next.
Those phases typically take 2 to
3 months.
However, we do monitor the
progress and there is
communication on a regular basis
with those design teams to see
where they stand.
And try and overcome any
challenges that come along.
On a monthly basis, the regional
managers will be required to
update schedules that are that
are or make sure that the design
teams and contractors are making
those updates.
And again, those are required by
contract to be handled on a
regular basis. So, um, it, it is
not fully automated in there,
but we do have the opportunity,
and I believe, uh, we have been
discussing the possibility of,
of instilling or creating
triggers based on timelines that
will prompt the design
professionals to update the
schedules and the general
contractors.
That is not something we have
ironed out completely, but we
believe we have the Mr. Chair,
members, um, to add to that,
there is a submodule in SIMs
called we call it ball in court,
that allows us to see who has
current ownership in step
processes within construction
within the construction program,
so yes, it is there. It does
need to be enhanced.
Thank you, Mr. S. Yeah, I just
want to think this stuff again.
I think this is really, really
critical for the work that we
do, so I'm really excited to see
it and again, just want to
express my uh gratitude for
presenting a timeline and you
know specific deliverables that
we can expect and and regular
reporting as it helps us just
keep on, uh, keep track of the
work that you guys are doing, so
I look forward to hearing more
about it, um, at AMS next month
and uh appreciate this
presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Other comments.
Yeah, I, I feel like I might be
uh
I'm just, I, I, I would like to,
I, I'm not really understanding
the format, and so I wanted to
make some
Just ask some questions to see
if I'm clear on it. So, um, in
this, in this format where you
have um
Design projects and like demo
projects and stuff like that,
the
Um, project development is not,
not uh, not applicable.
Um
I I wonder about that sometimes
with the, like on item 3, it
says that for the Cuba
Independent Schools that design
development was not.
Not applicable, but yet we're in
design development and we're 75%
behind. Um, I just
I want to understand, so if
you're a
If it's the design award.
Then, then those like on the
later ones, those that have uh
Project development. That's
applicable and so you have a, a,
a schedule for that. I'm, I'm
also not understanding the, the
month that is below each
section, um.
Is that why why would that be
zero? I don't, I don't quite
understand.
How this, how this is formatted
and so it just in order to for
it to be clear, I, I'm
I'm not getting it and I'm
pretty familiar with eBuilder,
so I, I, I think we, we should
probably
work through this a little bit,
so
Cause I'm, I'm, I am a simple
guy, so it needs to be um
I should be able to understand
it pretty straightforward, uh
straightforward understanding of
it.
And uh the other thing I was
gonna actually say is um the
manager report, um, I think.
You know, for the most times
when, when projects are
proceeding.
Um, on schedule,
man manager's report could be
pretty brief.
Um, but when you have a project
that is
Lagging
And this is when we really,
really need to have a.
It, it needs to be visible to
us, um, not that we're gonna be
the ones to cure the problems,
but it just needs to be very
visible on our radar screen that
these are are projects that are
struggling and that they may
need support, whatever.
Um, so anyway,
I guess this is really a
comment. I don't really expect
that you would answer those.
Comments, I mean those questions
right away because I imagine
there.
They're probably technical.
But if you would, um,
Next time you have another draft
that another update of this, if
you could pass it out to us so
we can make a comment and maybe
we can.
This forward comments to you.
OK, Mr. Chair, members,
absolutely we will take that
into consideration and um
Just a reminder, this is draft.
We are in the process in the
throes of uh finalizing and
making it better, we will also
provide a definitions page on
how to read the document and
understand each one of the
criteria that's established.
Yeah,
if I may just to follow up on
that excuse me, I think it might
be helpful because I know this
is coming to AMS in a little bit
more of a formalized uh process
this next AMS subcommittee
meeting, it may be helpful to do
kind of like a little training
on how to to review uh the cause
I agree, um, you know, some of
it's a little less clear,
especially for folks who aren't
in eBuilder too. So it might be
helpful to have that uh at the
next AMS in addition to the
updates to the report. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Real good.
Thank you, great comments.
Anyone else?
Again, thank you for your work
on this, and we look forward to
it, we we understand the key is
to have the system and to keep
it up on a regular basis, so
that's gonna be the challenge.
And again, uh,
If you need additional resources
or anything we can do to help
make that.
Uh, please let us know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members.
Mr. Chair, remembers that
concludes our presentation.
Um, our next PSURC meeting is
scheduled for June 11th.
I'm glad this was a short one
because come June, I believe
it's gonna be a pretty long
meeting so just prepare
yourselves.
Oh, go ahead. Oh yeah, Mr.
Chair, um, and that is the day
of the, uh, government to
government, and so myself and
Secretary Paddy, I don't know if
uh directors center will go
cause it's um all the education
lead agencies in the the
governors and presidents of the
23 tribes, but here in uh at the
Santa Fe Indian School, so.
We've, uh, we've seen
announcements of that, but
there's no detail.
It's, it's our twice a year, we,
it's a required statutorily in
the Indian Education Act.
In the, well, we can talk about
it, I mean I don't know that Mr.
Chair remembers that we need to
look to rescheduling, we can
also do that as well.
But again, I would have to work
with everybody's schedule.
And preferably
on versus earlier because our,
our materials are already due
next Friday for that meeting.
Yes. And Mr. Chaney, so, um,
Iris, I know uh the
certification is coming up. If
there's any way we could get
that a little bit more ahead of
time than just the board
packets, especially maybe um
Cali and uh Charles and I to see
that, um, because I know we have
some questions in December with
how you guys were looking at
Project readiness. So if we
could see that a little bit
early, and then I should work
with, um, with Matthew on uh
continually kind of updating
what we anticipate having
available. So, um,
Uh,
I'll probably have an update on
that here in another, what's the
date, another week or so, and
then again in June, um, but
yeah, if we could just get that
ahead of time so we can make
sure we have uh we have enough
time to review it and, and throw
some questions your way. And
this is for AMS, correct? Uh,
yeah, and yeah, exactly, but I
think, I think the
certification, I don't remember
if it comes to awards or AMS,
but um I think it would be
helpful for it to go to both
subcommittee chairs to review,
um, the, the certification of
what you
Uh, we anticipate the council
requesting for need. And so we
can align it with what we have
available and also just make
sure that we're getting updates
from you all on the work you're
doing to, uh, confirm project
readiness. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Director Lee will make sure we
get that. I'd like to take this
opportunity to
Introduce uh someone in the
audience here, and he is uh Toby
Velasquez, the state parks
director, and uh he also happens
to be uh the region 2 NMSBA
president.
It serves on the uh
He's sitting in and probably
wondering where all those park
projects are going on.
again, thank you for being here.
Uh, unless there's any other
business to come before us, I
would entertain a motion to
adjourn.
Someone
We've got several
Emotions and
And all in favor, please
indicate by saying I.
I was a posting is adjourned.
Thank you for being here. Thank
you.
Yeah
Yeah
that
Yeah.
I
