Senator, please turn on your
microphone so everybody can hear
you.
here in a second. Good morning.
Uh, pleased to be here this
morning, uh, Pat Boone sender.
Uh, New Mexico Senate District
27 all of Roosevelt, all of
Dubaca and parts of Chavis,
Curry and Lee.
Um
Pleased to be here this morning
to see what we can get done for
the.
to the people who stayed in New
Mexico. Thank you, Senator. So
we'll go to Representative
Cullen and then work our way
outward and then come to the
vice chair. Good morning, your
representative. I'm Catherine.
Good morning. My name is
Rhiannon Chavez. I'm the
superintendent for Cuba
Independent School District, and
I'm.
Good morning, Ashley Lee, uh,
the director of the state Board
of Finance, uh, here
representing DFA and.
Good morning, Cindy Montoya from
New Mexico School for the Arts
representing charter schools.
Good morning, Amanda Louaris
with the public Padilla.
Good morning. I'm Bill Souls
from, uh, District 37 down in
Las Cruces, where a beautiful
organ mountain desert peaks are.
Happy to be vice vice chair of
this group.
All right. And again, good
morning, folks. My name is
Andres Romero. I represent House
District 10, which is the far
South Valley in Bert Leo County
and parts southeast Albuquerque.
So, um, we'll wait till we have
a quorum in order to take action
on the agenda and the minutes
from our previous meeting, um,
but we will have our director
and our manager PSFA you all
would.
Make your way up.
Good morning
the task force.
I don't have a whole lot to say.
I'm gonna go ahead and um hand
it over.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the task force, um, today I'm
gonna be providing us an update
on the changes that happened to
the adequacy standards.
The GSF calculator and the.
So in front of you is what
you'll have a presentation in
regards to all of this. Um, so
in the late
Uh, 2024, early 2025, this task
force was presented with
materials concerning the
adequacy changes and the capital
outlay formula. Today I will
review how those actions related
subsequently updated the maximum
raw square footage calculator
and the capital out. So, on
slide 2, what we will do is we
will begin by examining the
adequacy standards, including
their history.
This will then be followed by a
discussion on the history and
purpose of the maximum GSF
calculator.
And then we will adjust the
history and purpose. Finally, we
will conclude with the domino
effect resulting from the
changes adopted by the PSCOC.
Moving on to slide 3, the
adequacy standards were
established in response to the
1999.
lawsuit leading to the
development draft by the PSCOC.
From 1999 to 2001. In 2002, the
PSCOC adopted the initial
version of the adequacy
standards.
Between 2002 and 2004, the first
assessments and rankings of the
schools were in 2008, the first
standards-based funding awards
were granted based.
Moving on to slide 4.
The adequacy standards serve.
To establish the minimum
acceptable level of physical
condition and enrollment
capacity for school buildings.
They provide a benchmark for
evaluating any existing or
proposed public school building
and defined minimum sizes for
select space types.
In accordance with PED standards
for evaluate
In accordance with PED standards
for
each school against a consistent
set of minimum requirements as
outlined by the adequacy
standards.
Additionally, the PSFA gathers
data on each school, including
the age and condition of the
school buildings and the
building systems, space
utilization of space defined
within those adequacy standards.
Like 5.
This table outlines the history
of changes to the adequacy
standards.
The update that took place in
January 2025 represents the most
significant revision since 2007.
Move on to slide 6.
Modifications made to the
adequacy standards have had a
cascading effect.
Consequently, the maximum GSF
calculator.
Which is a component of the
adequacy planning guide.
He required document updates.
Align to with align with these
changes.
This calculator establishes
expectations regarding the size
of the school facilities and
delineates the limits of state
fund the values produced by the
calculator derived from the new
minimums.
Set by the updated adequacy
standards.
Incorporating specific
assumptions related to special
education students specifically.
Various types of specialty
classrooms and additional
unassigned.
GSF
Which is a comedy space is not
defined by those adequacy
standards themselves.
Along with the 30% tar.
Let us examine the graphs
presented here.
On the next slide on slide 7.
The dashed light in that graph.
Indicates the GSF at enrollments
cord prior to the update to the
attic.
The solid lines represent the
current calculator of the same
data set, so we're comparing
The old values that were
determined by the state to those
new values.
As anticipated, the new
calculator yields.
raw square footages that exceed
those of the previous.
versions.
And that is expected because we
are identifying that school
facility students.
Statewide
Um, the GSF changes from the
previous calculator to the
current are as follows.
Elementary schools on average
could have seen up to about a
10% increase in their GSF.
Middle schools, a 7% increase in
their GSF.
schools of 5% GSF.
Increase.
A crucial element to note in
these graphs is the smoothness
of the trend lines produced by
the current calculator.
This methodology employed to
develop this calculators
grounded in the statistical
function.
That reflects the assumptions
outlined in the previous slides.
This approach mitigates many of
the fluctuations observed in the
values generated by that dast.
by those dash shooter.
And it ensures GSF equity across
all GSF values.
Ultimately, a new concept
regarding the maximum allowable
GSF calculator has also been
approved.
A combined school calculator.
This tool has not been available
before. The combination
calculators consider the new
adequacy standards and the
unique characteristics.
Associated with each specific
adequacy stamp.
For instance, the adequacy
standard calculations within the
facilities assessment database,
which is the tool that the PSCOC
uses to prioritize funding are
distinct.
pre-kindergarten and
kindergarten students require at
least 15 square foot per
student.
Students in grades 1 through 5
need 36 net square foot per
student.
Well grades
6 to 8 require a 33 net square
foot.
And students in grade 9 through
12 meet 130 square foot.
In the past, when the district
evaluated a combination
facility.
Value derived from the previous
ro square footage calculator was
based solely on the highest
grades served.
This methodology does not
recognize the uniqueness of the
adequacy standards that apply to
different grades. The creation
of this combinations will
calculator and its trends was
significantly influenced in the
manner Akin to that of the
elementary middle.
The main differences stem from
the integration of all relevant
agrades being served.
As well as the addition of a
second gym.
Whose dimensions of our
determined by the potential
grade levels of that combined
school.
A minimum floor area of 55,000
gross square feet has been
established based moving on to
slide 8.
The final component of this, of
these three pieces is the
capital outlay formula.
Essentially the state local
match.
This section provides a
historical review of the formula
itself.
In 2001, the identified projects
were entirely funded by the
state.
By 2003, a state local matched
cost sharing arrangement was
implemented.
In 2018.
SB 30 modified the ratio of the
state to local funding,
potentially enabling the state
to finance a greater number of
projects by deliberately
increasing the local match,
while reducing the state match.
The transition from the existing
formula phase one to the new
formula.
Phase 2 has been gradual.
Over this shift
Overall this shift has led to an
increased local matches and
decreased state matches.
As anticipated.
In 2023.
SB 131 reduced local matches by
1/3 or 1/2 for school districts
with 200 students or fewer.
As well as another 1/2 reduction
of the local chef for pre-K
projects.
The inability of a school
district to cover the local
shares of projects is the
foundation of this legislation.
Recently, SB 82 extended the
provisions of SB 131 until 2028.
It's night.
In conclusion, the state local
match formula was created to
provide an objective method for
calculating local match
percentages.
Current calculator determines
local match percentages in a
manner that relates to a
school's physical space
requirements.
Including the estimated cost for
repairing or replacing
infrastructure to a district's
capacity to finance these. There
exists a direct relationship
between a school's physical
space needs and the maximum GSF
provided by the calculator.
Which has been updated in
accordance with those revised
adequacy standards.
Lights 10 and 11.
Uh, describe the domino effect.
Due to the features of the
current state local match
formula, the updated adequacy
standards have increased the
maximum GSF.
Which have resulted
In a decrease in all local
shares throughout the state.
The following slide and a half
illustrate the alterations in
state local matches from FY 25
to the current FY 26.
As the state now recognizes a
broader school footprint.
This has resulted in a higher
cost for replacements.
Well, a component within the
state local match formula known
as the land of the Aluations has
only seen a slight increase in
most districts.
The smallest and most
disadvantaged districts
experienced the most significant
change in their.
Final slides, slide 12.
What are the subsequent steps?
EFA is presently working in
conjunction with legislative
finance committee's program
evaluation team.
To assess how accurately the
capital outlay funding formula
reflects the financial
capabilities of the districts.
Furthermore, the LFC evaluators
will seek to pinpoint additional
areas for enhancing efficiency
and accountability within the
capital outlay funding formula
system.
Until, until then, the
reductions from SB 131 will
persist until 2000. With that
being said, um, if you have
questions, I will try to.
All right, members question.
Thank you, Mr. uh, and just as I
was looking at it where you
indicate the domino effect.
But when you look at the largest
districts, Albuquerque,
essentially unchanged, Las
Cruces essentially unchanged. I
hadn't gotten to Santa Fe and
changed.
The majority of the districts
and students and where the money
goes other than out to the
little ones.
Doesn't change much through all
of this. And so it really is
something that I think and I
think the intent was to help the
The smaller rural districts that
have a more difficult time with
buildings. Is that accurate? Am
I reading that correctly?
Um
Mr. Chair, members
Uh, to Mr. uh, Senator Sewell's
point, yes, uh, what's occurring
is within the capital funding
formula, there's this like land
valuation to square footprint
ratio that has to be met.
And what's happening is since we
identified a combination school
at a minimum of 55,000 square
feet for the smallest schools.
What we're saying is that.
You need a larger school, but
you don't necessarily have the
way the uh the means to fund it
based on your land evaluation,
so the state's gonna come up for
with more of the portion for
funding that project. And those
larger school districts, they're
typically not combination
schools, it's only a 10%, 5%,
7%, or a 5% increase. So the
ratio
That this new facilities were
saying they need to be, doesn't
necessarily overcompensate for
the fact that they can fund it
themselves.
So the smaller smallest
districts with low land
evaluations that we're saying
you need a larger facility.
Definitely helps him.
But in those larger school
districts.
Your footprint isn't large
enough to the fact where the
formula is accounting for the
state having to step in and
provide additional funding.
Um, I hope that answered your
question.
Yes, and, and I think it
confirms kind of and sort of
what the point of the
legislation was.
was to help those smaller
districts that don't have the
ability to raise enough money
to, to make the
The modifications they need to,
and as I look at these numbers,
that's exactly the effect it's
having, having, you know, when
we say it's a domino effect, it
almost sounds like this is
rolling all the way through when
it really is doing exactly, at
least from what I read, exactly
what it was intended to do,
which is to help those smaller
rural districts I'm looking at
Questa and Moschetto and all of
those that have fairly large
shifts in the state local match
to assist them in catching up.
Where, you know, even when
they're taxed to to the max, it
takes, they never get enough to
build a new building, you know,
unless they're able to save up
for 10 years or so, and so.
At least as I read this, this
looks like it's doing exactly
what those laws were intended to
do here when we've got lots of
money, I suspect we still do in
the public school facilities
Authority that over the last
several years we worked on
trying to push more of it out.
Mr. Chair,
Senator directly to speak to
your point, it's exactly what
happened, we say you need a
larger facility via adequacy
standards.
So we update the calculator to
say, OK, your calculator value
now represents your adequacy
standards. This is how it's now
a 50. OK, Senator Booth, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
probably just haven't been
paying close enough attention
and that might have just been
answered, but uh,
In the title of this of this
presentation talking about
adequacy standards and
Um, I know adequacy, um,
Suggest uh
A minimum amount of learning
space for every student.
Um
But maximum means just the
opposite, um.
Limiting the amount of space. So
really, which one are we really
talking about here? Are we
talking about a adequacy or.
Mr. Sheriff Senator Boone,
essentially they're, they're
working in conjunction, what?
The adequacy standards defined
as the minimum to directly to
your point.
The calculator itself is saying
that within.
Um
Considering the adequacy
standards.
As well as some additional
assumptions.
Um, some additional square
footage, you should be able to
create a facility with um.
The GSF calculator defines that
and also defines an equitable
way, the part the the limits the
participation of that state
funding, because some schools
may want to build larger than
what the current calculator is
defining.
Um, the council, the APG itself
define those spaces that they
would not fund, such as an an
additional auxiliary gym or an
elementary school, and then
that's when the conversations
and PSFA to determine. Mister
Chair, uh, thank you, uh.
I, I understand that. I
understand that that adequacy
needs to be.
Certainly what, what the.
What the word says, but I come
from one of those school
districts that, that is
Reaching, you know, I mean,
we're, I'm from Eli, I mean,
that's my school district
because he lied and that we show
to be down 11%, which is not at
the top and it's not at the
bottom, you know, but it, it, it
appears, but, but uh anyway, I
would just think that we would
need to.
At least think about erring on
the side of being more adequate
than than.
than just afterward. I mean, I
would think that we would need
to work towards uh the maximum.
So anyway, that's just my
comment and my question. Thank
you.
Others get inspired.
All right. Um, I did have a
question, um, so the, the final.
Actual hearing on um.
Was it Senate Bill 82, there was
a house floor amendment that got
um adopted into the bill and it
took the um adjustment for the
local share from 800 students to
1200 students, would you be able
to talk about the effects of of
that amendment, please.
Mr. Chair, uh, yes, what that
did is that and so that opened
up the capability of districts
to be able to qualify for a way
around 26 schools to up.
And at this point, have those 9
school districts.
Thank you all.
Other questions?
All right.
Cool. Thank you.
I don't know if we have Mr.
Tillotson, Mr. McCurdy, if you
all are ready.
Good morning, Mr. Tillerson.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
My name is Larry Tillotson. I'm
the
Deputy Director of operations
and quality assurance at the
PSFA before you start, good
morning. Do you know if Mr.
McCurdy is here or plans to
McCurdy.
OK, so you'll be. OK,
so I'm here on his behalf. I
used to run the maintenance and
operate very familiar with the
infrastructure that's been
built.
Uh, in your
Packets this morning are two
presentations, one of them is
the public school maintenance
update.
Received it in the booklet
format. Within that is also a
presentation on what is called
measurement verification.
Let me go to that presentation
this morning.
What's at stake,
I'm pleased to be here this
morning.
let everybody know that I'm
always exciting to
Uh, meet with y'all and give you
the updates on maintenance in
New Mexico.
What's at stake in the platform
of public schools.
Over 62 million square feet of
public school assets is what we
manage from day to day, week to
week and month to month.
Uh, serving over 89 public
school districts, 2
constitutional schools and 105
charter schools.
That includes elementary,
middle, high schools,
combination schools, pre-K's.
Our public school capital outlay
impact over time is session this
morning with uh the PSFA staff.
I believe it's $1 million. We've
invested in public schools
across the
Time frame since 2022 when the
PSFA was spawned out of the
lawsuit.
We
Still provide the facility
information management system,
uh, to all New Mexico school
districts, and I think we're in
the realm of well over $6
million of investments and
helping New Mexico school
districts maintain their
properties.
Um, and then maintaining our
investments is, is no doubt
important.
Uh, it costs money, and the more
we can assist New Mexico school
performance improvement and and
methods that will reduce those
costs, the better our outcomes
will be, um, it does cost money
to maintain roadways, utilities,
playgrounds, fire protection
systems, HVAC systems, but if we
can do that in a more proactive
way long run.
Our maintenance program at the
PSFA. We like to call ourselves
free consultants to all New
Mexico school districts with a
primary mission of the
requirements.
In preventive maintenance, use
of the facility information
management systems and assisting
them in building more preventive
type maintenance functions
instead of reactive maintenance.
We have best practices,
performance measures, both.
Internally at the PSFA and
externally for New Mexico school
districts, who strive for, uh,
goals so that they can help um
improve their facility
conditions on a on a day to day,
week to week basis, and
ultimately being good stewards.
Our core functions are driven by
statute.
I'm planning facility
information management system,
very specific and uh
requirements that school
districts have to meet in order
to, number one, get funding.
We want to know that they're
being good stewards of, of
maintaining their current
investments before we give them
a $50 million school.
Otherwise, the money will go to
waste.
Um.
Ros again defined by NAC or
administrative code, preventive
maintenance facility information
management system and a part of
that is energy management, and
we'll talk about a few of those
things in just a moment.
Maintenance in New Mexico public
schools. Let's talk about
Preventive maintenance, driven
by statue, all New Mexico school
districts, including charters
are required to have on an
annual basis.
Um
What we provided the PSFA so
that they can be successful in
this realm is a free template.
This Template gets better over
time. We provide one to public
schools. We provide one to
charter schools so that they can
be successful in their programs
from year to year.
Those PM plans might include
their mission and vision, uh,
statements, their goals that
they want to meet on an annual
basis.
Maybe they want to improve their
staffing, maybe they want to
improve their, uh, ability to
manage more preventive versus
reactive maintenance tasks.
Uh, it includes how they want to
manage their training programs.
Inspection schedules for
critical building systems and
equipment.
Uh, with the ultimate goal of
reducing life, health, and
safety issues in their
respective districts.
Of course, some of the p.m. plan
benefits over time, uh, include.
Improved building system
reliability.
The buildings work when they're
like they're supposed to, when a
teacher walks up to an HVAC
system and turns the switch to
cool, like cooling system works
in a reliable format. When she
asks for heat,
Heat comes out.
When it rains outside, we have a
good uh feeling that the, the
roofs are, are gonna uh keep us
relatively safe inside. Uh, we
build quality educational
environments. I think that's one
of the most important factors is
building and maintaining
environments that are teachers
and students can thrive in.
And then ultimately, another
wasp.
Because if we don't do good
maintenance and we choose to do
poor maintenance, if we can
reduce those costs, but the
districts are more successful.
Vims.
The stands for the facility
Information Management System.
It is a computerized maintenance
management software program that
the PSFA has been providing to
all night since 2006.
These tools and resources are
basically a work order
management system.
It helps districts manage their
reactive maintenance tasks. We
all have reactive.
This is the sprinkler head that
pops off in the middle of the
night and when you show up in
the morning, the grounds are
flooded.
This is the fire alarm system
that the district chose not to
take care of.
Uh, through preventive
maintenance tasks and now.
So that there's a tool there to
help them manage these reactive.
The second module is called
preventive maintenance Direct.
This is our primary module that
we sell. This is our methodology
that we want districts to pay
more attention to. This is being
proactive.
Approaching your systems and
doing maintenance on them from a
preventive maintenance
standpoint.
Uh, it just allows them to
create schedules.
Uh, signed and manage staff to
maintain their assets over time.
And then the 3rd module is
utility module assists.
New Mexico school districts and
collecting utility billing data.
That they can look at those
details. Where are the util who
are are utility companies.
It's important to know your
facilities, how much are they
billing us on a monthly basis.
Uh, on a quarterly basis, um,
are there any anomalies that we
have to pay attention to? Are
they overcharging us? Are they
undercharging us? Do it, do they
owe us a check at the end of the
day?
And then this whole program
leads into their development of
a quality energy management
program.
Which is designed to reduce
costs.
There are advanced modules
available through the vendor
currently called Asset
Essentials.
These take the first two modules
maintenance direct and prevent
preventive maintenance direct.
Quite simply, it puts them on
steroids.
The opportunity for advanced
reporting and advanced analytics
are available to meals, and
currently we have about 5 to 7
New Mexico school districts.
That have felt that they're
doing the first program very
well.
And they've migrated to these
additional advanced modules
because they're ready for more
reporting.
They're ready to look at more
analytics as it comes to
reporting uh functions.
They don't, um, we don't pay for
that additional asset on their
own, but it's very um good to
see these districts, and they
want to advance their
maintenance programs to higher
levels.
Sims over time is definitely
brought um
The table, um, the opportunities
to reduce um costs by reducing
those reactive work orders and
doing more.
Maintains the investment better
over time.
Uh, it reduces unnecessary
expenditures through better
planning.
And then ultimately for the
districts it generates action.
Our facility maintenance
assessment report, the FMAR.
It's been a tool that's been
implemented at the PSFA since
2011.
I simply a little bit of history
here.
2011, when I first started with
the PSFA, the council asked a
very good question.
To what extent are our
environments?
Are they taking care of fire
alarm systems.
HVAC systems. Are they taking
care of the FA is a tool that
we've used to measure that. It's
gotten better and better over
time.
FA combines three elements.
The state statute required
preventive maintenance plan.
And the use of the facility
information management systems
work order system, including
energy, uh, and including
utility direct.
Those two account, they're
important.
But they're not as important as
#3.
The actual facility conditions.
Number 3 accounts for 80%.
And it determines how well the.
New Mexico school districts do
have access to this database,
it's repeatable. Everything that
on is is repeatable by the New
Mexico school districts. During
an assessment,
22 important building categories
were reviewed.
deficiencies are identified
deficiencies are simply life,
health, safety, or property
damage.
That could be causing harm or
that it's about to cause harm or
FA findings can be used to
determine deferred maintenance
and oil.
Pain
On any of these.
Functions is available to all
all the maintenance team at the
PSFA.
We do have what's called a
facility manager and operational
certificate program, which is
brought much success with the
state of New Mexico.
All New Mexico districts are
encouraged to be a part of this,
this committee.
And we drive.
How to do your PM plan better,
how to use films to a better
level, how to respond to your
Fmar.
We're teaching now these New
Mexico school districts and how
to, um, up the ante if.
Some of the FA goals we
established early on in 2011, we
wanted to determine the general
level of maintenance.
How well were facility?
We wanted to bring opportunities
for districts to um
Respond to their FAs so that
they could make improvements to
what we found that was broken.
We also wanted to help New
Mexico school districts with
their long range capital
planning efforts, many of the
things that we find, uh, to
include, for example, a
nonworking fire alarm system.
If they're not maintaining it
and our assessors identify it's
not being maintained, it's gonna
reduce the light equipment.
So if we can get them early and
on board with
The concepts of preventive
maintenance tasks for that
required component, it's gonna
go a long way to me, and then we
wanted to help them with.
Basic systematic fits of of
preventive.
Some of the performance ratings,
quite simply, high school, um, 0
to 100.
100 being outstanding
maintenance performance, 90
being good maintenance
performance.
80
I'm sorry, um, my apologies, 100
being outstanding, 90, uh, uh,
in the good realm, 80 in the
good realm also satisfactory is
the recommended performance
level, we have currently
established for all 91.
Many people ask why 70? Well, 70
is the break point where
If
They're getting
70% scores on their FAs. This is
the level where
Building systems will.
That's the break point. If
you're doing good maintenance,
at a 70% level,
Your HVAC systems will last that
useful life, right? If you're
doing 80% maintenance, your HVAC
systems will last particular
system based on industry
standards. So the higher we get,
The better we get.
There's a
There's 2 numbers at the very
top of the 0 to 100 rating.
65, nationally.
That is the current national
average of maintenance across
the districts throughout the
nation.
teetering between an F.
And a
And
see.
Rating de-rating across the uh
the United States.
However
Here in New Mexico, I'm actually
proud to say that since the last
time I reported to, we've made
additional improvements.
We're now at 76 across the state
of New Mexico.
Our facility managers are taking
better care of their
investments.
They're taking better care of
the educational.
Some of the deficiency factors.
Again, they're defined as life,
safety, health, and property
loss multipliers.
They, they take away from the
score greatly.
Minor deficiencies are things
that are about to happen.
They're that
dirty air filter that hasn't
been changed that pothole in the
parking lot that's starting to
perform.
It's that one very first light
that they get in the main
office.
Um, that's starting to blink and
say major deficiencies are
defined as things that are very
problematic.
It's that supervisory.
It's the HVAC systems, the belts
or the belts are squeaking, uh,
the, the uh swamp coolers are
leaking. It's the filters that
we find that are 12 months out
of date.
That are just full of of grunge
and grime, if you will.
Those are major deficiencies and
we do.
To date, we have completed,
we're now in cycle number 4.
Our cycles typically take about
5 years apiece with our current
staff and workloads, it takes us
5 years to do a complete
assessment of the entire state.
Uh, we'll talk about the cycles
in just a moment, because one of
the cycles was short-lived.
It was only 2 years, and I'll
give you the details of that.
So out of the 4 cycles, we're in
the 4th cycle now, currently,
we've done 370 FAs across the
spectrums and 2 state charters.
Our highest rating this cycle, 4
38%.
I couldn't tell you this story
back in 2011, cause we had
nobody performing in the
outstanding category.
We had nobody performing in the
good category.
Uh, so we're making some
progress in the state of New
Mexico. Our highest district
average and what a district
average is, is if a school
district has 10 FA, another
charter schools. It takes and it
doesn't average over all those
for the district average, our
highest district averaged this
time around is hobbs School
District.
Um, performance rating.
And what that tells us is
they're taking extreme care.
We do have some low performance
ratings still?
I don't think these will ever go
away, but we can encourage them
to get better through our formal
means, uh, 39.324. We have a
high school that's in very poor
condition.
Uh, and then the lowest district
average is currently 44.5 92%.
The FA cycle of the 307 that
we've completed thus far.
23
And the number you see in
parenthes report in September of
2024 that I presented to
counsel.
23 poor performance ratings
currently.
32 marginal performance ratings
and
These, by the way,
Our focus areas for PSFA.
As we walk across the threshold
of our offices every morning.
Our teams are focused on calling
these districts.
Um, setting up meetings.
Having that discussion, hey,
your PM plan is not current.
Your FMA didn't do well. Let us
help you and make some
improvements.
We encourage them, we coached
them, we train them on how to
get better.
102 satisfactory performance
ratings, 124 good performance
ratings, and for the first time
ever we're seeing more and more
districts migrate to outstanding
performance levels.
No work to be done, no doubt.
Of the deficiencies that we've
seen in this cycle, we currently
have.
370 minor deficiencies and 320
and I think you probably want to
know how we encourage these New
Mexico school districts who
Fix it.
To take care of currently have a
process in place called the 60
day response process or by a
district can
Once they get their reports,
We also reach out to them quite
often during this period.
We encouraged them to fix what's
broken.
If your fire alarm system is not
working like it should, you
shouldn't have a, you can't have
an occupied building.
Let us show you how to fix it.
If your HVAC systems were
recognized as being in poor
condition, just use uh air
filters as an example.
Maybe our assessors recognize
they haven't changed air filters
out in a system that requires
quarterly updates in over a
year.
We'll be on the phone with them
encouraging them to fix that.
What they have to do is they
actually have to use the FEMs
work order management system.
It serves two purposes. Number
1, if they're not a user of fis,
we use that as an opportunity to
provide some training.
On the phone, we'll just say,
hey, Mr. and Mrs school
district, let us show you how
to.
How easy it is with the hopes of
encouraging them to use it more
and more, if they're non in at
the end of the 3rd cycle, FA.
Which was 2 years ago. It ended
in 2022.
These were the statuses of
performance regarding.
We had 2 districts performing.
We had
About 19% of the state was in
was performing good maintenance.
35% of the state was in the
satisfactory realm.
We still had districts
performing poor and marginal
marginal and 13% in the poor
categories.
But we're always gonna have work
to do.
Here's the good news.
This is our current rating in
the 4th cycle.
You'll see that we're, we have a
serious reduction in the poor
performance categories over
time. Those have migrated into
the marginal and the
satisfactory performance. What
I'm trying to say here and
articulate is our districts are
getting better at improving the
educational environments over
time.
They're paying attention.
Our response rate goal.
For districts that receive FMAs
is 25%.
We're trying to shoot to
encourage about 25% of the
assessments that we do, and grab
onto them.
And have and and encourage them
to pay attention, fix what's
broken.
That they don't have deferred
maintenance down the road. We'd
much rather than fix the system
systems issues now.
And have it become problematic
later on.
So far, 74 of the 37 school
assessments done, uh, have
responded to their FAs improving
facility conditions.
There's opportunity there we're
we're gonna be pushing hard in
the next coming years, we're
going to be raising our goal to
25, 35, 45%, reaching out to the
school districts and encouraging
them to fix what's broken.
Who's paying attention.
The public school districts that
are really actively engaged in
improving facility conditions
through that 60 day response
process are listed here on this
page.
They run a pretty lengthy list
from Alamo Gordo all the way
down to carry and Tullarosa.
These districts have responded
to their FAs and their facility
conditions improving, making
repairs to what's broken,
creating formal processes and
preventive maintenance tasks in
preventive maintenance direct.
So that they can manage these
things on a routine basis vers
versus on a reactive basis.
And then we have several charter
schools that are responding to
their FMRs also improving
facility conditions over time.
So additional performance
statistics on the FMA this
cycle. Again, our goal is 70%.
of New Mexico is currently at a
76.65%, which is above the
recommended threshold, that is
very good news.
State charter schools.
Kudos to the charter school, um,
group in New Mexico. They're a
little bit above public schools.
Uh, a little bit of competition
going on there, if you will.
They're currently operating at
77.23% satisfactory performance
over the spectrum of.
Our cycle history over 4 cycles.
The FA inaugural baseline.
Story. I had to write that story
for the end of report, and it
was not a fun story to have to
write.
57% of our New Mexico school
districts were recognized.
Actually, we were recognized as
managing poor maintenance across
the state of New Mexico.
It was not a good story to for
me to take home to my parents,
if you will.
Uh, we were not taking care of
the investments.
current
And
Old investments, uh, so that was
a 5 year cycle that was we call
our baseline cycle.
FA 2 cycle was short-lived,
you'll notice it's 2015 to 2017.
We still ran it as far as we
could.
We made some improvements to the
infrastructure and maintenance
across the state to 60, um, and
then our database failed.
Our, our IT department quickly
had to go to work and rebuild
the the um.
FA database so that we could
continue to move forward. They
did that successfully, and we
opened up F Mars Cycle 3 from
2017 to 2022. And for the first
time ever, finally exceeded the
recommended satisfactory
statewide performance level
rating of 70%.
And we pushed 71%.
Here we are today in cycle 4.
Currently active, 2023 to 2027,
and we are
Very encouraged by the continued
improvement, now it is 76.656
performance level rating, and
that is all 307 school um
School assessments reporting
over the span of those 60 New
Mexico school districts.
We continue to make
Great strides in improving
facility conditions through our
maintenance programs across the
state, and what that benefits is
two things.
Life cycle of our building
systems and the educational
environments. Here it is in a
pie chart.
I think this is a, a really cool
By chart.
This was back in 2011 to 2015,
where New Mexico was recognized
as doing poor maintenance. Look
at all the red and look at all
the orange.
Now, we did have some pockets of
quality in the state of New
Mexico, we had 3 good
performers.
We had 17 satisfactory
performers, the majority of our
state was failing, and with
regards to maintenance.
Taking care of our investments
over time.
Here's the good news
This is where we are today.
The pie chart.
Um
The pie chart indicates today
that we have a lot of districts
performing better maintenance
across the board. We now have 26
districts reporting outstanding
maintenance.
124 good maintenance uh FAs.
Um, 102 satisfactory. We still
have some work to do, no doubt,
little bit of orange and red
left.
But our teams are focused on
meeting with these groups.
On a daily, weekly, monthly
basis, we're doing to help
improve their educations.
Importance of maintenance in
this.
There's more work to be done.
We, our goal is to emphasize the
value of establishing more
preventive proactive maintenance
means versus reactive. Reactive
is gonna happen.
But if we can reduce the
reactive and push more towards
preventive, we're gonna save
money, improve efficiency.
Improved facility conditions.
We'll see a reduction in
unnecessary capital expenditures
over time because they're taking
better care of the facility
conditions.
So there's two ways to affect
the FCI.
Either you dump a bunch of money
into it.
Which I know our buckets of
money are not endless.
Or we do better maintenance.
And what we're encouraging New
Mexico school districts to do is
better maintenance.
So combined with the money we've
put in over time, the $3.1
billion of investments and good
better maintenance.
We're coming out successful at
the other end of the chute.
We've reduced life health safety
issues over time.
We've increased efficiencies and
morale across the state of New
Mexico, and we're seeing that
because more and more districts
are applying for the annual Ben,
and what that means is continued
success for New Mexico public
schools across the spectrum of
our education. Our goals for the
next coming years are to push
hard.
We're gonna push districts to
the next level.
We want to encourage 80%
statewide performance ratings.
We want them to be paying better
attention and maintaining the
educational environments.
We've created tools over time to
help support this.
Our staff does
Incredible outreach to New
Mexico school districts on a day
to day, week to week and month
to month basis.
One week after the FAs sent.
And monthly thereafter, we're
calling them on the phone
saying, how can we help you
improve your FA. What can we do
to help educate you to a better
level.
Our site visit and our quarterly
regional meetings with the
districts continue.
We want to encourage them to be
a part of the New Mexico public
facility Managers Association to
Garner that
Camaraderie, if you will, of
their, um.
Sister districts, their
neighbors.
We want them to leverage the
NMPA NMPFMA group.
Provide uh because we provide
education in that platform.
We currently have a really
Um, robust educational.
Program that we've implemented
across the state of New Mexico
that includes 8 modules, one of
them is how to improve
maintenance and operation. We
have advanced instruction sets
and educational tools and
resources to help all 91 New
Mexico districts and charter
schools be successful with their
maintenance programs and
maintaining our investments
moving forward.
And then
Ultimately, we want to share
performance rating improvements
and maybe set a competitive
stage amongst our school
districts so that they can all
leverage one another and get
better.
I do want to give a, a brief
shout out if I could to Hobbs.
Hobbs really steps up to the
plate, and they actually still.
All their sister districts, and
they asked them, how can we help
you improve your F mark.
How can we help you improve your
facility maintenance, uh,
assessment report and the use of
films.
They actually have engaged in a
very, very high level of
continuous success of of our
great state and and maintenance.
In closing
You know, in 2011,
The council asked PSFA to
measure maintenance
effectiveness across the
spectrum of our great state.
Like a one
Indicated very poor maintenance
across the board.
Here we are in cycle 4 and so
far so good. We are at a 76.6%
performance rating and heading
for higher success stories.
This is clearly an indicator
that New Mexico school districts
are performing facility
maintenance to a much better
level than they did 15 years
ago.
We're excited to be a part of
this, uh, this process.
Do you want to talk about
something that we implemented
quite some time ago.
We've never really pulled the
trigger on this because we never
had a good measure of
maintenance performance.
Written in New Mexico
administrative code is an
opportunity, an incentive.
For districts to drive for
better, more improved
maintenance are called exemplary
maintenance.
A few years ago, we created the
criteria for exemplary
maintenance.
The criteria included you must
have F Mars consecutively better
than 90%.
We want to know that you're
taking care of the investments.
You have to have a current and
approved PM plan on file with
the PSFA.
And that's just not annually
when.
They have to have an historical
rating of being good stewards of
updating their PM plan on a
routine basis, instead of just
when they ask for funding.
They have to be using all three
facility information management
system modules to a 2.0
performance level or higher.
That means they're not just
managing their work orders.
They're managing the costs of
those work orders, collecting
labor, material, and contract
costs.
It means they have to be running
schedules on not just one
system.
They have to be running
schedules on numerous systems to
include HVAC systems.
Roof systems
Life safety systems.
Playgrounds, athletic fields.
They have to be tracking a
preventive maintenance work
order completion rate of above
90%.
And what that means is, if a
school district is managing 100
work orders on a monthly basis,
they have to be getting to 90%
of those work orders and closing
them out and fixing what's
broken.
They have to be collecting
transaction rate.
They have to be collecting
labor, material and contract
costs.
On all work orders above 100%.
They have to have a report.
We, we encourage New Mexico
school districts to report
routinely what's happening in
maintenance, much like we do
with our report to the council.
Let the council know, let their
boards know what's transpiring
in their maintenance programs.
Are we doing well?
Are we not doing well?
Why are we not doing well? How
can we get you to the point
where you are doing well.
And then candidates must show a
two-year historical performance
of they've got to prove it.
These are not easy numbers to
get to, but we're excited to see
for the first time ever.
Just this year, we awarded the
very first school district with
a 5% 5% reduction in local match
because of their exemplary
maintenance program.
And I'm excited to say that was
given out to the Hobbs School
District.
Um
Good job, Hobbs.
In summary
No doubt we're
Looking
Year over year that there's
reduced capital dollars and it
makes those.
Makes it very clear that we have
to do better maintenance to
maintain our facility conditions
better.
We've invested well over $3.1
billion into the capital
infrastructure.
through the council over the
past 23 years.
Maintenance efforts are critical
and to ensuring the delivery of
good quality educational
environments for our students
and staff.
And to provide those safe
functional learning and teaching
environments.
We've created many tools over
time to help support districts
in these realms, um.
Include the facility assessment
database.
Continued assessments that we do
to help New Mexico districts
understand where their
shortcomings are.
Where they have to put their
capital money into.
We have the construction
information management system
that helps them manage their
construction projects over time.
We have the facility information
management system, which we've
now invested $6 million into to
support New Mexico districts
with the maintenance management
work order system.
We have the FA.
If Mar is a tool is used to help
them understand where they could
be doing better in the
maintenance realm.
And then last but not least,
we've always had the facility
master planning, the FMP, and
Project Maintenance management
to support New Mexico district.
And on behalf of the maintenance
team at the PSFA, my name's
Larry Tillotson.
Um, so on behalf of Jeff, James
and Chris.
Mr. Chair members I Right. Do we
have questions, Senator Stewart,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What a
great report.
I've been waiting for this for
many years. You know, we've been
so bad at maintenance, we've
done all kinds of stuff. We put
a chunk of money in just for
maintenance a few years ago, so.
I'm just thrilled that all this
work is uh making us uh score
higher, but I, I do have a
question.
Also, we've been talking about
this that we like the way that
you presented this, or I, Sarah
Souls and I like this, uh,
suggestion is to number the
pages, because now I want to
refer to a page and I'm just
gonna have to tell you what it
is.
If I can.
Yeah, it's the FA performance
ratings.
So you say that it's 65%
nationally. I thought that the
FA was a New Mexico invention,
um, and that all of this that we
have been doing is really things
that we've developed. So how in
the world can you get a national
FA on an assessment report
that's designed for New Mexico.
What am I missing?
Mr. Chair.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, great question. Um, there's
a group, a nationwide group, um.
21st century schools. It's a
nationwide conglomerate, all all
districts across the spectrum of
US schools are engaged in this
whole program.
They measure metadata on behalf
of all 50 states, and they come
up with their own nationwide
number.
Uh, it relates to maintenance
performance. They probably do it
in different ways in different
formats.
So I, I just equated that to an
FA score.
I am familiar with we we say the
FA is ours, you're absolutely
correct. Uh, the FART does
belong to the state of New
Mexico. It is actually being
emulated across other
States, currently, Maryland
actually uses arts.
You recall Mr. Bob Garrell as he
migrated over into that state,
he built that at PSFA for that
state to be successful.
They have their own FA, which
they stole from us.
Um
So that's where that number
comes from.
Um, and, and Mr. Chair members,
I do apologize with my, my
daughter coming up here this
morning and um she raised, hey,
your, your PowerPoint's not
numbered.
Next time, absolutely.
Uh, it's a great PowerPoint.
It's got a lot of information,
so I appreciate it. So, so 65%
nationally, so that's a a
national average, according to
the 21st century schools, yes,
and they actually produce a
report every
They're getting ready to do that
again.
We're excited to
Plugging our numbers, which is
better than all.
So much better than when we
started 2011. It's really
shocking. I mean, it, it just
says so much for the public
school facility authority, um,
which I just think is one of the
best things we've done over the
last 20 years, so, um, so I'm,
I'm curious now though, so, so
did they put our 76.8% scored
this year into their
calculations, do they collect
these?
calculations from the different
states. Is that how they come up
with their average.
Stewart, yes, they do.
And we'll be a part of that. All
right, well, I'm just very
impressed with our work through
this public school facility
authority, so thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You and results.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First,
just a real quick follow up, do
they put out the national
rankings, it'd be nice to see
New Mexico in an education area
ranked highly. I mean, is there
such a ranking that we can put
out in the press and, and brag
about.
I don't know yet.
OK, Senator Souls, I, I will
find out though.
That would be a nice thing to
point out, you know, some areas
where we're making real progress
in education, and I think we are
in many other areas, but one
that we already
It appears, you know, and just
on an average, if ours is at 76
and the national is down in the
60, we ought to be pretty near
the top, I would think.
Um, and so that'd be nice to be
able to put out and brag about,
and then Mr. Chair, Mr. Souls,
um, there's opportunities for
us, for also us to do
presentations.
At this national level. So
we're, we're, we'll be, we're
encouraged to quite possibly be
engaged with them this year.
Thank you, and I just wrote a
little note here that said that
we need to have you presenting
at Education commission of the
states and some other things
next year about how we're doing
this so that we can continue to
lead the country in the great
maintenance programs that have
been established here and how
we're doing it and, and show the
increase and I suspect there'll
be a lot of interest from other
states on how to do better
maintenance of of all of their
buildings. So thank you for
that. A couple of questions.
The districts that are not doing
well.
Is there
Is there a unified theme behind
it or is it all over the place?
In some, I'm thinking a few
years back we had heard that we
know the turnover of
superintendents and, you know,
superintendents may be getting
pressure from the board to do
other things instead of putting
the money in there, uh, is it
lack of uh maintenance
supervisor who has the knowledge
and ability, what kinds of
things are, why are the
districts not doing well.
there's a litany of things that
could be
cause
Um, through our formal processes
at the PSFA, we do have the
opportunity to put our finger on
exactly what the problem is.
Many times its staffing levels.
Having the effective staffing
levels to be able to main, we do
have a robust staffing model
that we can provide to all.
Based on their square footage,
it tells them.
How many maintenance people, how
many custodians and how many
grounds people grounds people
they need to maintain the the
investments as a baseline.
Now, many of our school
districts were still working
with those challenges.
Other challenges
would be um supervisors not
having the stateless realm to
manage all what's.
So an example would be as we
move forward with $50 million
schools.
Um, if we don't have enough
staff to maintain that type of
investment automatically taking
off in a deferred maintenance,
but we do have uh additional
tools to help districts
understand our FIM's tools are
designed to assist them in
understanding their facilities.
From
Life safety systems to HVAC
systems investments.
It's just a matter of getting.
Thank you and, and you point out
a, a real concern when we
underfund education in general,
the money goes into the district
and they've got to make
decisions about whether they put
someone in a classroom teaching
or hire someone to do
maintenance and often the
pressures are build the
classroom, build the classroom,
well, we can put off the
maintenance. We can put off the
maintenance, um, and I think
that rut gets back on us when
we're a wealthy state with
plenty of money that we aren't
putting enough
money in so that districts are
able to do both. They're having
to make double decisions about
do I put off maintenance or do I
put someone in a classroom, you
know, and, and how do you manage
all of that. Um, and so, you
know, I, I don't think we can
completely separate if a lots of
it is a personnel issue from,
you know, hiring another
teacher, putting social workers,
counselors, you know, EAs, all
of those are part of the
decision as well as the
maintenance portion of it, and
we need to make sure that
districts have
The financial resources to do
both, not to have to make tho
those terrible decisions. Um,
last question.
Yeah, I was interested in the
pain of the carrot side of
quality
Maintenance where it's a 5%.
Um, bonus on the state local
match. How many districts?
Qualify for that currently.
How many are on the cusp of
being able to qualify. Is that
an effective, um, carrot for
districts to push a little bit
harder in the maintenance area
because it's gonna save them.
$100,000 in, in capital on their
next project.
Mr. Chair, Senator Souls.
Currently you have, we have one
New Mexico district that
recently qualified and was
provided. They met, they
received that uh they're going
to receive that.
5% reduction
They've worked hard for it.
There are 3 other New Mexico
districts that are on the cusp
of that high maintenance
performance that will be coming.
In the next 1 or 2 cycles with
our funding cycles.
And asking for that.
And I will say it is well
deserved.
By, by doing outstanding
maintenance.
They are extending the life of
their facility systems by
anywhere from 378 years longer.
The money can be put back into
the educational environment
versus maintenance.
Um, so they're really, um, by
doing better maintenance and
they're receiving that exemplary
maintenance. Thank you, the last
part of that is that an, an
adequate incentive for districts
to do that, or is that so far
beyond where most districts are
that they're not even looking at
it, are there other ways that we
might put an incentive for, for
quality maintenance, because I
think we all do understand that
in the long run it saves us
money, but that takes a longer
vision.
Mr. Chair, Senator So, you're,
you're absolutely correct. We,
we haven't really brought that
to the table yet in the
additional incentives that we
could provide New Mexico
districts, I think right now
we're just encouraging them to
do better.
Um, but it's, it's still there,
it's available, it's a goal that
they can all um um strive for. I
know Hobbs has been striving for
that for the last 10 years.
And uh for the first time we're
able to successful way.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lanier.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize to the committee for
being a little bit late. I
I'm not used to this Santa Fe.
I can't even blame it on that.
Um.
Thank you for the presentation.
It it looks great. I love to see
the numbers. I do have a few
little questions, um.
You know, if you drive around
the state, you can tell that
our, our school systems are
getting better.
Not in not only inside the
buildings, but.
Outside too. So, so I appreciate
all the work that you do.
So on the
On this page, I don't.
This one
I was looking at it and
One of my first questions is,
Are we incentivizing people with
poor maintenance.
In other words, are we having
Some school districts go, well,
if we don't do our maintenance,
are we gonna get extra funding.
From the state.
Is there a way that
You see what my question is, I
don't understand. It almost
looks like the worst your school
is maintained, the more money
you have.
Mr. Chair, um,
Senator Lanier, um.
You're correct.
And if I'm not mistaken.
There's an actual terminology
for it. It's called the fad
game.
New Mexico school districts have
Come up with a methodology that
if I don't maintain my
investments, I'm going to rise
in the ranking quicker.
I'm gonna have more of an
opportunity to apply for funds
for my dilapidated school
because I didn't maintain it.
Well, since the inception of the
FAR, there was really no way for
us to communicate.
The council.
The investment
Now that we have well over 15
years' worth of data, I can tell
you today if that district has
maintained their investment over
time.
And one of the criteria that we
have for applying for funds, is
they have to be maintaining
their.
The last, I want to say 4 or 5
years, we've actually plugged in
the FMA as a criteria. You have
to have a 70% Fmar.
Before you can ask for funding
from the council, it's a
recommendation. It's not written
in statute, but we plugged that
in because we want to know if
these districts are maintaining
the current investment.
Before we give them the new
investments.
Much like why would I give my
daughter a brand new Mustang if
she's not going to maintain it.
I want to know and I want some
encouragement. I want some proof
that you're going to maintain
the investment or you're
maintaining the current
investment.
Before I plug in some additional
monies. The FAR is a tool that
can be used to tell.
If they're maintaining the
investments over time.
We now we provide that to the
council on a quarterly basis
through our maintenance program
status report.
Provide a very detailed
spreadsheet high level on how
this. Thank you. And Mr. Chair.
I'm kind of like Senator Souls
was talking about the incentive
part of that, though.
What, what's the incentive for a
school district that may be on
the lower half.
What's the incentive for them?
To up their maintenance program.
There's a lot of inherent, I'm
sorry, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lanier, there's quite a
bit of incentive. Number one,
improving facility conditions.
Improving the educational
environment. If you're doing
poor maintenance, you're
actually wasting a lot of money.
You become good at a lot of
things, putting out fires, but
you're not being efficient with
your resources. You're not being
efficient with your staff, and
you've probably got a staff that
their morale is probably pretty
low.
There's a lot of encouraging
things that we can do as we
drive districts to do more
preventive.
Not to mention the 5% reduction
in so would there be, Mr. Chair,
would, would there be a like a
And Sin program just throwing
something out there.
Of an award for a maintenance
manager at school districts.
They
I mean, you use the example
Hobbs, so if we just stick with
Hobbs.
You know
Obviously that
Young man or young woman is
doing a great job. So is there
an incentive? Is there an award
for that? Is there something we
can do as a committee to
Mr. Chair, Mr. Lanier,
absolutely, and we do have
what's called the annual Israel
rewards that we give out on an
annual basis that are just used
with we used data.
Make the determination.
We, for the last 7 years now, we
have given an award to facility
plant manager of the Year.
Uh, we do that every year at the
fall conference in October, all
New Mexico districts can apply
for this, but we fall back on
the data.
Is the data indicate that this
facility manager started off
with poor maintenance, and they
took their district to good
maintenance in a short period of
6 months, they would be eligible
to win an award. So we do have
an award program through the
annual Ben Luhan Achievement
Awards. We also provide New
Mexico school districts that are
performing in the outstanding
and good categories with routine
awards for their performance.
There is an award performance.
Great, thanks. I'm so glad to
hear that.
Mr. Chair, and then
When you were talking about the
program.
So the is it the FAR program or
is it a different program, for
example, we all use PowerSchool.
You know, through the state.
You were talking about a
maintenance program. Do you have
that for?
Every school district.
Or is that something they have
to purchase?
Mr. Chair, members of the
facility information management
system. uh, it's the work order
management system, we provided
that to all 91 New Mexico school
districts since 2000. 91
districts have an account, a
live account.
That's great. I, I appreciate
that. I, I think that
streamlines a lot of things, so.
I appreciate that. Mr. Tay, and
so back on this one, I just
wanna know over there on the
outstanding, the top outstanding
school.
Aztec High School.
Aztec School District.
That's my school district. I
hadn't mentioned that. Come on.
We finally get to be number one
on, on something, so, so that's
where I retired from, so that
was just kind of an inside joke.
But in all seriousness, when you
look across there, the one thing
I do notice is when you go to
the port column,
Most of those schools, if not
all of those schools.
Or of the smaller school
district.
Is that, is that a problem?
Um, and I've got some ideas of
maybe what's going on inside of
there, but.
But I want to hear your
explanation of why those are
kind of the smaller schools.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier.
If I could just articulate one
thing really quickly. If you
look at the 3rd cycle data,
there's a litany of schools in
the poor category.
There's 12 currently.
Right now in the news cycle,
there's only 4.
As we progress and we meet with
these school districts, we find
what's called the small school
dynamic.
And a lot of times, many of
these smaller school districts
don't have the.
Resources.
Staffing levels to effectively
manage their large.
Um
School District.
Or even small school district,
if you will.
We have methods to help them
streamline and do things
quicker.
Um, through the preventive
maintenance program that we have
the FIM's tools and resources.
We have some cheat sheets to
quickly help them get there. We
also have opportunities where we
can teach students how to close
work orders to help support the
maintenance program, and these
students also learn a skill as
they progress into their
graduation time frames. Who
knows, maybe they become the
next maintenance person for the
district.
Um, but we do have methods to
assist smaller school districts
and and improving their
performance just like, well
great, I can, I can, Mr. Chair,
I can cross off a couple of my
questions there. I wanted to
know if
If it was, if you had an intern.
Type program because I think
that's great. I think it's
fantastic for the smaller
schools.
And
You know, some of the smaller
schools, I know some of us, we
were LFC trip to the small
school districts.
And the microdistricts.
And that was one of their
problems is being able to entice
people to come to work in those
small school districts.
But they have to travel so far
or something like that.
I'm, I'm glad to see that
you're, you're working towards
that direction of trying to fill
those gaps, because I do think
there is a gap.
I think there's a reason Hobbs
is number one.
And we, the smaller schools.
Or in the middle to the bottom.
And
You know, I, I don't know if
Hobbs is because it's in the
middle of the Permian Basin.
And they get extra funding or
exactly what.
But I, I do think there's some
discrepancy.
Mr. Chair.
Senator Lanier, just one more
comment. We have what's called a
training program.
Through the New Mexico public
facility Managers Association.
The PSFA used to own this
program. It was called the MAG.
Maintenance advisory group.
We would meet with New Mexico
school districts on a quarterly
basis and we'd listen and we try
to find methods to help them
improve.
Whatever challenges they were
having at the time.
This program has now been
transferred over into a series
of
New Mexico public facility
manager. It's actually run by
the we provide training to New
Mexico public facility managers.
In the arena of films.
PM planning and a litany of
other things.
Homs is also engaged, they
provide, um, we have 8 modules
that anybody can attend free of
charge.
Help shore up their skill sets
in the area of maintenance and
operations, safety, OSHA.
Um, and a few others.
All right, well, thank you and
Mr. Chair, just, just in
closing, I appreciate the work
that you're doing. I, I'm a firm
believer that.
Um
Nice facilities.
Help kids learn.
When they're proud of their
school, it's a little buckle
down and and do the work. So I
appreciate the work that you're
doing and it's a very nice
report. I appreciate it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
and I apologize for missing most
of your presentation. Um, so
just two quick questions. So I
want to kind of follow up on, on
um Senator Lani,
the state gives every school so
much money, but do schools get
outside money.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sariana said that right. Yes,
the schools do receive
additional monies through
legislative appropriations. I
say that right?
CFO here can help me out on
occasion, uh, SB $9 are sent to
school districts to help manage
their maintenance and operations
programs over time. Uh, so yes,
they do get additional funding
to help support that.
Public, do they get any from
private industry or anything
like that?
I
Not aware that they receive any
private funding. OK, second
question. Um, I used to teach at
Monzano.
And from October to March.
We had more people with broken
ankles and and knees, and it
was, it was dangerous because we
were right on the foothills, a
lot of black eyes, I came to the
session twice with a broken
ankle. It, it's just a dangerous
area, and it's, it's black eyes,
you can't see it. Does that, is
that?
Kind of accounted for anywhere
in this maintenance.
Because I don't think it's
really the, the custodians or
the maintenance, it's just.
The way the school is set and,
and it's just dangerous, but
I went to Monzo you
Mr. Chair, representative Sarna,
yes, we do have as a part of our
FMA process, one of the things
that we do do evaluate for and
on is roadway parking.
We look at the conditions of the
roadway parking, parking areas,
areas, bus drop offs, school
districts as a part of the FMA
process. We identify any
problematic areas in minor or
major deficiencies, and we
communicate those back to the
districts on a regular basis.
We tell them what's wrong, but
it's up to the district to
respond and fix what's broken.
But we do encourage them
routinely.
through that 60 day period. Hey,
what are you doing? What are
you? Yeah.
All right. Thank you. Appreciate
it. Thank you.
Other questions, folks?
So I, I did have a question and
it's.
Um, along the lines of Senator
Representative Sarana was um.
I was wondering if you could
kind of walk us through, um, the
report and the folks that you
have on the ground and what
exactly they're looking for at
um a particular schools cause I
think you've given us a good
amount of information, um, in
bits throughout, but if you
could kind of walk us through
what this looks like even down
to like coordination with the
the school district maybe ahead
of time. Absolutely.
We have a group of assessors at
the PSFA.
Uh, in addition to the group and
the maintenance team, which is 3
people currently.
That go out and do assessments
at they reach out to the school
districts 2 weeks in advance and
say, Mr. and Mrs uh school
district were coming.
We need a ladder, we need keys
to your facilities. We're gonna
be looking at
29 facility conditions.
Uh, to include
Walls, floors, ceilings, stairs,
the life safety systems. We get
on the roofs of those
facilities.
We look at the parking lots. We
look at the site utilities, are
they being maintained. If we
look at 22 different categories,
and we, that's a part of our
report.
The assessors take that report
and findings, which are, by the
way,
What we assess for.
is made available to all 91 New
Mexico school districts. They
have the same tools that we've
created. In fact, we encourage
our team, take the document and
say,
Maintenance people
We're coming, here's what we're
looking for.
Here's the assessment criteria
repeatable by you.
I think that's an important
factor that we miss is we want
any tool that we use to measure
facility conditions, whether it
be the fat or maintenance, we
wanna, we wanna make sure
they're repeatable by the school
districts. They can produce the
same in our assessments.
We take the information back,
after we look at the systems, 29
different systems.
We put them in two separate
reports. One of them is the FA.
Which measures um
Long term
An age of building and equipment
and systems and maintenance.
Maintenance is only 22 systems.
We compile the two separate
reports within a week's time.
Within that week, it's sent out
and provided to the
superintendent and all
maintenance people at the
district.
We also have written criteria
that about the 60 day response
period, you have 60 days to
respond or fix what's broken in
your facilities through the um
the facility information
management work order ticketing
system.
that's offered equally across
the board to small.
And we follow up during that
time period we're following up
with the district.
First week
30 days, 45 days, and 60 days to
garner their attention.
Hey, reminder, you've got a
Some issues at your school
district.
Here's what you can do, fill out
a work order in that category.
If you make improvements to
what's broken.
We go back into the FA.
We improved their score because
of the
What
What they've done to improve
those facility conditions, and
I'll give you an example.
We had a school district, um,
chili capital of the world.
Ah, shame on me, shame on me.
Um
One of the things that our
assessment recognized was lack
of fill.
The fall material in the
playgrounds.
Well, they followed up with the
formal work order. They couldn't
do it overnight. It took about 3
months for them to coordinate
this.
They didn't do it for just the
one school site.
They reached out to a company
that provides this material.
They just didn't do one school,
they did 3 additional schools,
and they refilled that fall
impact material on the
playgrounds.
We took their poor maintenance
rating, and we raised it to a
good, we removed the minor,
actually it was a major
deficiency because it was down
to dirt level hard dirt.
Um, because of the efforts that
they made.
They provided a a regular.
They did it through FIs, the
work order management system.
The team at the PSFA is able to
get into the account.
You don't have to go to the
district.
We can just validate through the
work order system.
They made those improvements.
They collected labor, material,
and contract costs.
In this case it was well update,
uh, and make improvements to the
playgrounds, and we upped their
score. So they went from
literally a poor
good, in a short 3 month period
of time.
And a district can do that in
any category.
Does that answer your question,
Mr. Chair? It does, and I, I
appreciate it because I'm gonna
attempt an analogy and you can
kind of correct me if I'm wrong
in thinking about this, so it's
almost we have when, you know,
looking at a house or buying a
house, usually a home
inspection.
So this is like a standardized
school inspection. It's the
equivalent, so it does that
sound about right? You're
absolutely right. Yes, sir. So,
so I guess that makes me wonder
as far as the folks that are
evaluating these schools is if
The actual employees looking at
these schools have knowledge of
all sorts of different um
maintenance, like, you know,
looking at the foundation,
looking at the windows, looking
at the HVAC system, looking at
the plumbing perhaps, um, or so
they have general knowledge of
those and and expertise, not
necessarily expertise, but
general knowledge of those
areas, or are the folks that are
looking at this school
specifically have expertise like
somebody.
is an expert in HVAC or Mr.
Chair, excellent question, uh,
within the PSFA we do have some
specialists on board, uh, for
example, one of our assessors is
comes from the window world.
He's got, yeah, that's his
specialty from a previous job,
he knows and he understands
Windows.
And he's really helped us create
the criteria of what we look at,
look, and then he takes that and
he educates our internal staff
to a better, higher level.
Um, we've taken our subject
matter experts over time in HVAC
and written the criteria into
the FAR concept.
So when we go out, we're all
looking at the same things.
Again, repeatable by us and.
Cool, that's, that's really
awesome to hear because I know
especially in Windows, there's a
particular science to the way
the glass is created in order to
reduce uh um heat perhaps inside
or encourage the absorption of
heat inside depending on your
climate, so so I certainly
appreciate that. Um.
Other questions, folks.
Um, so Mr. Tillotson, you do
have
The measurement and verification
presentation.
I was wondering if that's what
you were gonna delve into next.
Mr. Chair, yes. OK,
cool. I think we're ready for
that presentation. Folks, if you
already closed your book, um,
it's on page, whatever. Um,
after they, after the their uh
contact information.
right? So just go through.
Oh please, Mr. Tillotson,
whenever you pull up your copy.
Within your
Mr. Chair members within your
presentation is a
Phase measurement and
verification program.
But I'll go into.
Currently
Parents taught me at a very
young age, you can't manage what
you don't measure.
Important to create and drive
things through performance
criteria.
Simple measurements.
Um
As we move into the measurement
and verification program at the
PSFA. I'll start off with.
Since 2006, we provided a
utility.
Management feature to all 91 New
Mexico school districts through
what's called the facility
Information Management System.
That was basic
Energy, Bill, collection through
billing statements.
And in the hopes that they look
at the data on a month to month
basis.
And create to look to find those
anomalies, is the is the utility
company overcharging us.
Are they charging us for
something we don't have.
When they just filled our
Uh, they're charging us for
overcharging us or
undercharging. Do they owe us a
check or do we owe them a check?
You know, one of the things that
I always say about utilities is
if you don't manage utilities,
The utilities will manage you.
M and V quite simply is the
process of planning, measuring
and collecting and analyzing
data for the purpose of
verifying and reporting.
Energy savings with an
individual facility in this case
a public school district.
Resulting from the
implementation of energy
conservation measures.
Over time, what we've seen at
public schools is
Districts are now installing
more complex systems.
Or complex HVAC systems.
Where maintenance technician can
go into a computer.
And he could manage all the
different components.
Of eating and cooling.
From his laptop.
Well, it's important to create
methods to measure that
information routinely.
On average, nationwide over $8
billion is spent on energy.
In the United States, 30% of
that is wasted.
In New Mexico, the analysis we
did last year.
$95 million was spent on
utilities in 2024.
I'll go back to that statement.
You don't manage your utilities,
your utilities 2006, we've
definitely partnered with many
school districts, we've learned
from them, they've learned from
us, um, through what's called
FEM's Utility Direct, basic
utility billing energy
management tools.
In 2014 are field department
through
Um, an engineer that we had on
on site.
Launched what's called a pilot
program for the PSFA really take
a look, a deep dive, look.
into energy and water
efficiency.
What was done was real-time
energy devices were installed on
energy, water.
Systems at a school district to
start with.
In an effort to collect
real-time data.
What I mean by that is school
district can log into these
systems.
And see what they're currently
using from minute to minute,
regarding water.
Energy, that pilot program was
short-lived.
We went into pilot 2 a few years
later, we wanted a pilot 3, a
few years later after that.
In each phase of the pilot
program, we installed devices at
more and more school districts
across the spectrum of New
Mexico schools.
Well here we are in 2023, 2024
and pilot 4. This program
was
Transferred from the field group
into the maintenance and
operations team at the PSFA.
I am a certified energy manager
in the maintenance realm.
So we took it to a different
level.
We decided to install
Well, we decided to come up
first initially with goals. What
do we want this program to meet.
We took the vision into reality.
And the good news is, our pilot
program consists today of over
166 buildings.
Banning 5 New Mexico school
districts and well over 8.4
million square feet of space.
And over 1500 m.
In our school districts. We have
now partnered with the Gallup
McKinley County School District.
Los Lunas, Farmington.
Vero Public schools and hobbs
school districts.
And there was a reason why we
chose these districts.
These districts were chosen
because they have the
infrastructure and energy
management.
Hobbs, for example, and
Farmington.
They have energy managers or
teams of energy management on
site.
Previously, we were installing a
lot of these tools and resources
at school districts that didn't
have the infrastructure.
Man
Well, you install them.
And there's nobody there to know
how to use them.
It's not going to be used.
We came up with a different
approach.
The vendor that we've
Contracted with his mountain
vector.
Mountain vector provides a
really cool energy management
platform again that takes it to
a whole new level of energy
management.
Every year, billions are wasted
nationally at schools because of
undetected fault system.
One of the new things that is is
embedded in this system.
Is there's real-time
notifications that staff can
receive on their cell phones,
telling me, telling them that
there's a water leak somewhere.
That you just had a spike in
energy use at your school
district.
Um, in New Mexico, again, we
spent $95 million on utilities
in 2024.
We have to come up with me in
that use.
Access to real-time metered
utility data is important. It
can result in a 5 to 15%
reduction in energy and water
use over time. That was one of
our goals to reduce
Um, costs and, and energy and
water over time.
BSFP's goal is to garner value
from these advanced systems, and
uh open up opportunities for New
Mexico school district districts
to better maintain their
investments over time.
And as energy management has
grown, um.
It has really been taken to the
next level with this pilot
program. I'll talk more about it
in just a moment. What I wanted
to share was a testimonial from
Hobbs.
Hobbs is currently using this
measurement and verification
system.
And they provided a really good
quality statement.
This program. Uh, it's there in
your books for you to review.
Aaron Cook, the director of
facilities from Gallup McKinley
County Schools also provided
some input into how well the use
of this pilot tool energy
management tool has benefited
their district.
The goals that we established,
well, of course we want to do
some energy conservation and
cost savings across the spectrum
of these 5 school districts.
There's an opportunity to
integrate these programs into
what's called STEM.
Science, technology,
engineering, and mathematic
programs.
Why not teach students as early
as middle school and elementary,
the value of maintaining energy
in their schools.
Teaching them a trade, so when
they get out and graduate, they
have somewhere to go or
something to do, that's, that's
beneficial to their career
pathing.
We wanted to establish
international benchmarking and
research standards, we want to
be able to compare our
elementary schools with not only
elementaries in the state of New
Mexico.
But nationally at other schools
across different states.
And then, of course, we also
want to maintain our capital
investments of of especially our
new facilities that are coming
online with these advanced
features in HVAC.
The current scope is 166
buildings that we've implemented
these tools at across 5
districts, includes Gallup,
Farmington, Los Lunas, Hobbs,
and Bert Leo.
Right now we have currently 7
months of data being transmitted
to a live system we call
cufflink.
It allows districts to get into
these systems and look at their
platforms daily.
You can actually see when their
cafeterias being opened and the
cafeteria staff are turning on
the gas.
You can see the gas you start to
rise as they're preparing for
morning breakfast or morning
lunch.
And it's a really cool tool that
districts can use to manage
their use over time.
It also shows them that, you
know, our utility companies have
what's called peak demand.
They're charging our school
districts.
More money during these times of
peak demand at lunchtime when
it's hottest.
And the cooking staff is working
at full bore, um.
It really gives them real-time
data information on how their
systems work and what utilities
are being used right now in the
state of New Mexico in the last
7 months, we've recognized over
$378,000 of savings.
A couple of school districts
have had the opportunity to find
um
Water leaks
In their facilities that they've
been able to take care of
quickly.
Without this system, they
wouldn't have found those water
leaks quickly.
It would have festered and gone
on and on, and they would have
had to wait until the utility
bill came in.
And then they find it.
How much utility waste was
recognized. How much cost was
wasted over that that long
period of time. These new
systems in M&V um helped New
Mexico districts come up with
faster issue resolution, they
can find the problem quickly,
uh, and then also gives them
opportunities to take action
moving forward. SEM is really
important. We've got 2 New
Mexico school districts really
taking M&V to a whole new level.
Santa Fe, uh, schools, um, and
the Albuquerque Public School.
District.
They're using the M&V program to
a very high level, not only
manage energy management, but
their HVAC systems across their
new schools, as they come
online.
These tools open up complete
public transparency. There's
custom dashboards for districts
to use and and get the community
engaged that they need to
advanced benchmarking, in
comparisons with not only
elementary schools here in the
state of New Mexico, high
schools, but they can look at
what other utilities in high
schools in Texas are spending
compared to what we are.
Automated data uploads, it makes
life a lot easier, instead of
having to wait for that utility
bill, and somebody type in what
we're spending, what our usage
was for electric and gas and
water, it does it automatically
for you, and then we can compare
historical data.
One of the things we want school
districts to know of is more
about their utilities.
Who's your utility provider?
Are you getting overcharged?
What are you spending on a month
to month basis? Is there
opportunities to reduce your
costs? Is there opportunities to
embed these systems into your
educational programs and
platforms.
Um, for your schools.
What we've seen in the last 7
months is
Success.
Our school districts, we meet
with them every 2 weeks, we log
in.
We chat with yellow, we chat
with Farmington, we provide
education on how to use the
cufflink platform.
We've built a strong foundation
for them with regards to their
energy management programs.
Um
So I think these 5 school
districts are seeing a lot of
good benefit to this and helping
them maintain their utilities
over time.
We are getting ready to move
into what's called phase 2.
Phase 2 is just
A portion of the initial pilot
program we started in 2014.
You want to activate those
systems that are already there.
across the state of New Mexico
with managing utilities and
reducing costs.
And with that, I stand for any
questions.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of I can
make one more comment.
We do have a request, um, that
was just recently approved that
our
AMS, or one of our subcommittees
that's being um gonna be talked
about at Wednesday's PSCOC
meeting.
At the PSCOC meeting, we have
the vendor who provided a litany
of inventory, and I would be
happy to provide that to you at
the next uh about.
things that are happening, but I
wanted to give the council.
Respect to look at that and
evaluate. Thank you so much for
that question, folks, Senator
Souls.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, this
is wonderful. Uh, I hate pilot
programs cause usually it's, you
know, something like, here, take
some money, go away, don't
bother us. This seems incredibly
successful. How do we move to
full implementation. I mean, I
appreciate 20 districts, but we
got 89 districts, um.
What would it take to do that?
Is it a personnel at your
office? Is it at the district
level? Do we put state funding
in specifically to move towards
the smart systems, how do we
move the full implementation.
One of the things I find the
legislature, I'm impatient.
How do we do things quicker?
Mr. Chair, Senator Souls, that
is an excellent question.
And we've thought about it.
One of the things that we would
need internally is
infrastructure.
One energy manager at the PSFA
to assist in as this program
continues to grow.
We've already seen benefit and
value.
But it is a platform that needs
to be infrastructure for public
schools.
As we progress and we meet with
New Mexico school districts that
already have this Santa Fe is a
prime example. Santa Fe.
Us this program and they've paid
across the board just by finding
the overcharges from utility
companies.
There's value in it, but we
still have some work to do with
encouraging school districts to
see the value in that energy
management platform, so they
would need infrastructure as
well. And as we progress, we
have ways to teach them.
We're um
Bringing this to the Mexico
public facility Managers
Association at the next meeting,
which I believe is this week.
See and gauge interest.
Uh, we do have interest in
Gallup. Gallup wants to
Install these at all their
school districts moving forward,
as they build a new schools or
improve their facility
systems-based processes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
When you say new or
First, is all new construction.
done with these new systems in.
Um, so that we don't have to
retrofit and what are the costs
to a district to retrofit, are
they reluctant because that cost
and where's that going to come
from, which gets back to kind of
my question about state funding,
and you also indicated it's
gonna require some manpower at
the facilities authority, is
there going to be a request for
extra FTEs this next time in
order to do so.
Mr. Chair, Senator Sos, yes,
there is a request that will be
made for additional resources
for the PSFA staff.
Um
And Mr. Chair, Mr. Souls, could
you repeat your previous
question?
Oh, if I can remember it, uh,
what is the reluctance of
districts, why are they not
knocking on your door and
beating it down if this is going
to save them money, which in the
long run at least puts more
money into classrooms. What's
the reluctance for districts or
are they knocking on the door
and just waiting for their turn.
Mr. Chair, Senator So, there
have been a few knocking on our
door, uh, like I said, Gallup
wants to advance this. I believe
that.
New Mexico school districts
really don't have the
infrastructure to know yet the
value as a whole.
Some of them do. There's some
pockets of quality, definitely.
The advantages of maintaining
your investment, we are prepared
to start educating our facility
managers in that realm as we
move forward with the, the
implementation of phase 2.
Thank you. And I'm looking in
Stan Ros is not here, who often
has the ear of lots of the
superintendents, uh, you know,
as something that they ought to
be looking at um and just
Concern, you know, if it's going
to be an initial cost to the
districts. Is there a way that
we can incentivize that.
Through uh state funding or
other kinds of things similar to
when we essentially demolition
of buildings we made free. Yeah,
we'll just cover that cost
because it was to the benefit of
everyone. It seems like
You know, if the state has a
mechanism for just covering the
front end costs to put these
systems in as an incentive for
districts to do more, but it
sounds like also there's a lot
of education.
Just of, you know, they're not
aware what this is gonna do and
how it's gonna save.
Mr. Chair, Senator Souls
currently the the pilot program
as we're managing it at the
PSFA.
I
There's no upfront we're doing
it.
On our dime, if you will, for
these districts. As we move
forward with districts that come
online or going through
construction.
For new schools.
Is a part of the local match
process.
If they choose it.
Um, there's an opportunity for
them to say yes, there's also an
opportunity for them to say no,
but as we hit those school
districts, we're going to
encourage them to, yes, if.
And Mr. Chair, and uh Larry, you
had indicated there's an
opportunity to say no.
Why? When, I mean, are there
downsides to doing this that are
going to make it difficult for
the districts, you know, why is
this not just part of the new
building code for schools.
Actually bring up a good point,
building code, there's current
building codes that say that was
all investments as those.
As technology
Catches up with our
construction.
Um
With regards to
The school district saying no, I
think it would be just be
infrastructure.
And we, we plan to circumvent
that by educating them.
And the values of building a
quality.
All right, Ms. Matoya, please.
Thank you for the presentation
and I just have a question,
comment.
Um
You know, we get a lot of good
ideas on how to improve schools
and each great idea comes with
an implementation, an
administrative side, and so it's
finding that person.
Who can take on that task,
right? That that already doesn't
have a job. So what does it
involve? Does it involve
understanding how to use a
computer database, um, because
in a small school district, it
might be difficult to find that
person.
But to your point about
incentivizing it, if you could
show that there would be a cost
savings, and they would have.
Funding
To cover that cost and do more.
Is, is where I think
administrators would be willing
to go that extra mile. It's at
first glance.
that you're thinking about, I've
got to find a person out to do
this.
And so I think that's
That's something that pops in
people's head, maybe as a knee
jerk reaction.
But that's the reality, I think.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, um.
Miss Matoya, you, you are.
Spot on.
With your recommendations. One
of the things that we do in our
maintenance program.
is we constantly get into the
Fins system.
We're looking at
The District's performance every
quarter.
We look at their performance and
maintenance direct, preventive
maintenance direct.
and utility direct.
One of the things we look at in
utility direct is
Are they collecting data from
utility billing the basics of
energy management, collecting it
through a billing statement.
We can tell which districts are
and we.
As we reach out to New Mexico
school districts, providing this
report routinely, we also know
Which districts have energy
management, energy managers on
staff.
We also know which districts
have an energy management team
versus that energy manager.
So we have some data to help us
in moving forward with
encouraging districts, but
sometimes it does take a team.
Sometimes, depending on the size
of the district, they might have
one staff just devoted to it,
because they can afford it at
the front end.
But there is value in energy
management, and there is
definitely cost savings that
will pay for.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation,
um.
I'm, I'm really excited about
the STEM infrastructure
classroom, um, tell me more
about the dashboard and what it
does. I have 11 schools and I
recently went to a couple that
said, I think they are using
energy efficiency stuff in their
classrooms and we were talking
about this are really hot, so
when they call the district,
they say no, they're not that's
not what we see, but as a
classroom teacher, I, I think we
would know better. I, we would
know if it's too hot versus what
they're seeing, so does the
dashboard, tell them that or
Does it work with?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Sarana, the dashboard is
amazing.
It is a color coded dashboard
that gives them full-time
information that they can modify
or change to look at every hour,
every 8 hours, so they can go
down to the minute and it
automatically graphs the use. So
what an opportunity to be able
to train um students.
In the realm of energy
management knowing how to read
these types of reports so that
they can create a platform as
they graduate and, and go into
a, a, a career path and energy
management.
As we're progressing with HVAC
systems, some of these things
are complex.
The opportunity for staff to get
into them from one source is
tremendous. That's also a part
of energy management moving
forward, and as we're building
these things, we want to also
make sure we're building in the
infrastructure.
Maintain our better used to
start training our students,
how do you guarantee accuracy,
again, if the if the teacher's
saying it's too hot in my
classroom and and APS is saying
no, it's only 74.
It's not, you're wrong. Well, I,
I would leave the teacher
because I'm sitting there with
30 kids, but how do you know
it's accurate or how do you
fight it, if it is accurate and
they're still telling you that.
Mr. Chair
Representative Saina, that
that's a a a tough question to
answer. My daughter goes to,
well, my daughter many times
they, they, the end of the day
and get home and they say, Dad.
It was hot in my classroom. I
would encourage, I encourage her
to go back to her teacher and
plug in a work order.
the maintenance department
because they, they have that
opportunity.
Teachers can do that if they're,
because what it does is it
starts to create a a document.
It can't be deleted.
And then over over time, whether
it be a week, a month, there's
a, there's a history.
Of of a district not taking
action.
Of a school that's too hot.
Then escalated.
Beecher says, no, nothing's
being done, hey, where's my
principal?
Where's my superintendent?
Um
It's a tool that can be used to
Bush
and make things to the list of
things for teachers to be
trained on as filling out work
orders. Right.
Others, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
again, thank you for this.
Kind of exciting pilot, I think
it's exciting.
Um
I guess my question is,
And if essays were with
Districts that have energy
issues.
Does the uh talk about using
something like solar come up.
Anywhere I know Sue Cleveland
has 3 geothermal wells behind
it, um, that produced heating,
cooling, electricity, um, they
also have a whole array of solar
panels outside that probably
came in a few years ago from the
federal government.
Um, you know, I have solar
panels on my house, I pay a
couple of bucks a month, and the
fee that I need to pay, and
that's it. So there, you know,
there's a way to use what's
available here in New Mexico,
and I just wanna know if there's
a conversation about that with
the districts.
Mr. Chair.
Stewart.
chairs in the way your name, um.
I know we've had some discussion
at the PSFA.
Uh, about solar. I know some
school districts are migrating
to their own solar panels.
Aztec is one for panels on. This
would be a platform.
Good work congruent energy
management.
Energy management is not just
looking at your utility bills
anymore.
It's integrating your, your,
your
Um, complicated HVAC systems and
your solar into all this one
source.
They can look at and help you.
As far as discussion, I think
it's probably something we could
bring to the table more to
discuss.
Um
Do know that the measurement
verification that is being done
at the APS level.
They're, they're looking at
methodologies where they can
measure these new energy
efficient school buses.
Energy bus.
I don't think they're there yet,
but they're having that
discussion early on for.
Um, but I think it's definitely.
Well, thank you for that answer,
Mr. Chairman, I was hoping we
were going to hear from the
director today, about the $60
million now, uh, in PFSA or
electric.
Bus.
So, uh, I know that's a lot of
work getting it started out so.
I'm so happy that directors up
here about to answer my
question, Mr. Chair, Senator
Stewart.
We will be getting out the
application and the.
And uh see who is gonna show
interest.
And we're just requesting
questionnaire as well as some
quotes, if they're looking for
the infrastructure closely hand
in hand with PED, uh, to get
these dollars out the door.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I thought
they were out last week, um,
cause what somebody told my
staff was, oh, that'll go out
this week, and that was a week
ago, so.
Is it now. This week, for sure.
Mr. Chair, yes, ma'am, it is
this week. There was a change of
direction as we were working
with PED and so they won't be
out this week.
OK, can you tell us anything
more about uh that change of
direction or how you see this
working and can we get this
funding out within a few months
to start the school year.
Mr chair Senator Stewart, yes,
we can definitely get these
dollars out the door. The change
of direction was more along the
lines of, uh, whether or not it
was going to be facilitated from
PED side or from PSFA side.
And so it came to a conclusion
that PSFA will spearhead it,
we'll just use the information
from PED that they're sharing
with us in order to get it out.
So we were determining whether
or not to do a questionnaire,
um, or just a letter of intent.
Um, I think there was a
miscommunication as far as
The interest, the initial
interest being that PSFA was
under the assumption that wasn't
going to be a big interest.
We're just going to request a
letter of intent from anybody
who wanted.
to request the funds along with
their quotes. Um, now it seems
that there is a bigger interest
and so in order to be um
Strategic in how we send out
those dollars, we'll use the
questionnaire and possibly
depending on the interest, uh,
utilize a scoring mechanism.
So again, we'll wait to see what
the interest looks like.
Oh, great.
the time asking you what's going
on,
Mr. Chair. All right, great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Other questions?
All right. Well, thank you so
much for pulling double duty
today and presenting both. We
really appreciate the work you
do and your presentation here.
Um
So
Some good news and some not so
good news. So we're so
efficient, we're ahead of
schedule, which is awesome. Uh,
the not so good news is we're
ahead of schedule. So the folks
that we do have for our panel
discussion, um, aren't ready
yet. So, um, we're gonna take a
break for about half an hour
till about 11:50, so that we can
hopefully get all the folks
online and ready to go, if you
want to get a little something
to eat in preparation for that,
it'll also give us time if there
is public comment, which may
for once, so in the history of
this committee, we will have,
that would be awesome. Um, to
have at one o'clock as well, so
we'll let those school districts
get prepared. We'll come back at
11:50. Hopefully, we'll be able
to have them before noon and not
have to wait the extra 10
minutes.
We'll see.
Co. Thank you, folks.
