OK, we have a motion in a second
to approve the agenda as
amended.
Uh
All in favor, please indicate by
saying I
post.
Mr. Chair, members, there's no
correspondence.
Did you have a sir, Mr. Chair,
members, I want to uh use this
time to introduce some new
members of the PSF-18. I want to
first introduce Mr. Sean Murray.
He is the new deputy director of
Cat. Welcome Mr. Murray.
Good.
Thank you and welcome to all of
you.
We appreciate the work that you
do as well. Thank you.
Mr. Cherry also want to publicly
announce um that Matthew
Schimmel is now our permanent
CFO. He was at the capacity of
acting CFO.
Congratulations, man.
Thank you. And then finally, Mr.
Chair, and unfortunately, she's
not with us today, but our legal
staff attorney.
Um, has a really tired and we
just want to wish her a
wonderful retirement and she
spent 7 years with our legal
topics and so we just want to um
All right.
So next we'll go to public
comment.
I understand we have some public
comment this morning, so anyone
wishing to make public comment,
please uh.
Please I
Hold, hold on. We have someone
here in the office.
I mean, here in the uh
Meeting room.
Yes, go ahead.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the commission. My name, my
name is Michael Ogas. I am the
founder and superintendent of
School of Dreams Academy, did
authorized charter school in Los
Lunas.
Uh, we're, we finished up our
17th year of operations there,
uh, I'm basically here to put a
name to the face of anything
else with the commission.
Uh, we have a pre-K through 12th
grade model. It's a Steam model.
We have approximately 500
students, about 120 employees,
uh, that, that's 500 families
that have chosen to be a part of
our school from the Valencia
County area and, and we're very
established school in that area.
We do that all in 35 portable
buildings and our facility
conditions.
Uh, with the NMCI ranked soda as
number one on the NMCI ranking,
and we've been there just going
on our 2nd year now.
Uh, and, and we understand, uh,
the, the nuances and we, I'm
learning every day about some of
the things going on with charter
schools and, and how that
creates some complications, but,
uh, you know, we, we are in dire
need of a new facility, and I
talk to anybody I can about it.
Um
I know all of us. I know all of
us want, you know, excellent
learning conditions for our
students, they're all public
school students.
And uh we just, we want the same
for us. We are, are hoping,
we've been working very
diligently with the PSFA for a
number of years now, and they've
been extremely helpful. I want
to tell you that, you know, uh,
they, they have run across some.
Some, um, I don't want to call
them roadblocks, but some issues
that have come up that that
don't quite fit with charter
schools, so with that in mind,
you know, I just want to give
them kudos for all the work
they've done with us.
Uh, bottom line is, um,
We would like to eventually get
before the PSCOC to present our
case for a new facility, being
that we are the number one
ranked school. Our FCI score, by
the way, is 85.
Uh, so that that really puts us
in dire need. I have plenty of
handouts and things that I've
given to different groups over
the over time. And if anyone
wishes, I certainly could
provide that, but I just wanted
to put a name to the face,
School of Dreams Academy. Uh, we
are number one on the NMCI
rankings, and we hope to be
presenting before you someday
soon. So thank you, sir.
Thank you for being here this
morning and for, uh, alerting us
that you'll be coming forward.
And well. Anyone else in the
audience that would want to come
forward.
Morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. How are you?
I'm good. I understand we have a
district on the line. If you
want to allow them public
comment. Um, I don't mind we'll
take those in the audience first
and then we'll go on. OK. Well,
Mr. Chair, thank you, um, and,
and counsel, uh, thank you for
giving me the opportunity for
public comment today. Um.
I wanted to come up.
A few months ago when I first
resigned and do this, but.
Schedules have been such that I
wasn't able to make it until
today, so.
Um, I did just want to come up
and, and thank you and thank the
council. Um, thank you for your
guidance and your leadership.
I've learned an immense amount
from each of you about the
different facets of our state um
through your eyes.
Uh, and because of that, I've
learned so much and I've grown
um professionally and personally
from this experience.
I'd, I'd also like to take this
time just to thank PSFA staff.
Um, I didn't really have an
opportunity to say thank you or
goodbye to them and.
Um, thank you, staff for
Uh, everything we did together,
um, and for the honor of working
alongside of each of you.
Um, my decision to resign was
not very easy at all. Um,
however,
For a number of reasons, I
decided it was the best thing
for me to do was to move on, um,
and I have moved back into
private.
Uh, the private sector.
Um, but I wanted you all to know
how much I care about this state
and about this agency, uh, and
the mission.
Of the agency and the council.
Um
I, I believe in the mission of
serving the districts and
providing them with
Um
The, the best possible
facilities that we can put these
students in.
Um, and in my current role, I'm
gonna be
Um, very thankfully provided
that opportunity to continue to,
to serve the districts, albeit
from a different standpoint.
Um, for me
Being the deputy at PSFA wasn't
a 9 to 5 job, um.
It was
A, a passion out of a desire to
help districts be in the best
facilities they could be in.
The work that you do, that this
council does and this agency
does, uh, is very important.
And I just feel very lucky to
have been a part of that, even
for a small amount of time, um,
for the 3 years that I served as
deputy, so.
Again, Mr. Chair, thank you very
much um for the opportunity to
serve this council.
And to, to serve our state.
Hello, Mr. Chair and members.
Nice to see you again.
Um, if I may, I would like to
take a quick moment um to also,
um,
See a few things that I think
are important.
Um, for me to say and for you to
hear. Um, as you're aware, I
ended my employment at PSA at
the end of March.
This is a very difficult
decision for me to make, and I
was very sad to leave my piece
of a team.
Um, many of who are in this room
right now.
Um, and it was very difficult to
leave the important work that we
have achieved together, the role
of programs manager at PSA was
my dream job.
And it was the highlight of my
career, assisting school
districts to improve school
facilities is my calling.
And I will remain committed to
this mission, although from
alternative position going
forward.
I wanted to thank all of you for
your service on the council, and
your approval of so many
important programs of works that
I diligently worked on over the
past 5.5 years.
Of my tenure here at Pea Bay as
programs manager, I saw the need
for a replacement of improvement
in school, um, and each school
brought forward for
recommendation, and I appreciate
the respect given to me as I
presented and to the schools
that were in need. I am grateful
for the opportunity to have been
part of something that was so
important, and that matters to
so many across the state, um,
furthermore, I do think, um,
given
The current situation, um, I
would like to take another
moment to just um state as the
subject matter expert on
adequacy. I think it's important
to state and for everyone here
to know and understand the
adequacy standards are intended
or existing school facilities to
be measured to determine
deficiencies in schools in sizes
of spaces. They are not intended
to design new schools too. Those
are minimums to measure, not to
design.
The artists could see, um, is
not intended for new facilities
to to be minimized. This
adequacy standards document
clearly states it is not to
limit.
The size of new facilities. The
maximum allowable square footage
calculator is intended for that
purpose.
And the council and PSFA have
not micromanaged eligible space
square footages up until this
point. The precedent has been
set in countless projects up
into this point to allow that
maximumlo. Um,
And in addition, the educational
spaces must adhere to those
minimums. They cannot go smaller
than that, otherwise, they will
be deficient.
Um, not adequate, uh, awarding
up to the maximum allowable
square footage is inequitable to
those schools that have um are
coming forward in the future.
And lastly, I think it's just
very important.
Um, to say the search for the
new director is important to the
staff.
The staff culture and
environment is a very important
and I wish that you please take
that in mind, think about the
staff while you're. Thank you.
Thank you and again, thank you
for your service. I know you've,
we have someone on, on the line
and I'm not sure.
That is, I think I can read it's
uh Catherine.
We may have to move along if we
we're not able to get to board
member Charles Long on Miss
Chrysler is, are you able to
help with it?
OK. Thank you. And uh we
appreciate your concerns and
we'll certainly look into those.
We've already had a brief
discussion on that this morning.
Thank you.
All right, so, uh, moving on.
On our agenda, item Roman
numeral 3 finance, the uh PSCOC
financial plan.
Mr.
Chair, members, good morning.
Uh, if you'll turn your
attention to page 8 in your
e-books, I'll start with the
executive summary for the PSCOC
financial plan, going over the
key points and uh let me start
by apologizing uh the award
language changes as shown under
the table for fiscal impact,
those were tabled in the
subcommittee, so I apologize
that they're still included in
the executive summary. So the
reflection of the table for the
net chain should be 0, as
there's no funding requests for
this meeting and there's also no
fiscal impacts.
Uh, we'll talk about other
updates and then I'll take you
through the financial plan and
I'll also discuss a few other
items. Um, first, FY 28
estimates have been incorporated
into both the sources and uses
detail and the PSCOC fund
projection uh award schedule
detail. So as we've moved
through the pages, I'll show you
where those exist.
Line 2 for SSTB notes for FY 28
has been added with an estimated
value of 407.4 million and then
line 3 for the SSTB notes for FY
28 has also been added with an
estimated value of 438.7. These
numbers come from Board of
Finance's projections, um, at
our subcommittee, we discussed
this with uh the director and so
we should be receiving updated
projections uh for the next
meeting. So we'll present those
as we receive them.
Uh, finally line 32, this is an
item we're adding and you'll
hear about it later in the
meeting for approval. Uh, this
is a 2025 measurement and
verification also knows it as
MMV. Phase 2 for FY 26, uh, with
a value of 1.2 million or $1.3
million.
So you'll hear more about that
request, but we have included it
in our uses on the financial
plan as well as it will be um
included in our bond with the
recertification this meeting as
well.
Now moving forward, Mr. Chair,
members, to page 9. This is the
sources and uses detail. Um,
I'll just touch on some of the
high
And that the changes that are
affecting this. So there's a few
items that are highlighted as
you'll see on the far right side
for FY 28. Again, these are just
the supplemental severance tax
notes, um, updated for July and
January for that fiscal year.
And then finally line 32 has
been updated to show the
measurement and verification MMV
phase two, using, uh, our, our
fund for 1.3 million.
Um, I'd also like to address and
just take a moment to talk about
the uncommitted balance. Um, so
this is something I'm planning
on presenting every single
meeting going forward and
discussing the status of it.
Um, so as you're aware, we are
doing a very large effort of
bond reconciliation, um, the
entire team at PSFA is working
on this. So where we're
currently at at this point is
the, the finance team, um, Kadir
Lloyd.
Uh, Torrance Mendoza and Natalie
Chavez all worked very hard to
convert our previous spreadsheet
into a, into the database. So
I've collected all three of
their data, um, started
incorporating it into the
database and have been running
the scenarios and I mean, I'm,
I'm very proud and the, the hard
work they did and how great the
data looks. So everything that
I've been able to put into um
the pivot tables or power pivot
in the data model.
is looking really good, so this
is the first step into us having
a a way to centralize and
analyze the bonds with
comparisons to share with the A
codes that are set up, which is
also known as department IDs and
share. Uh, these are items that
are created with the budget
against the MOU, um, and can be
against multiple bonds. So one
project can be certified on
design or construction funding
because it was happening in
different years.
Um, so with that, we are able to
compare with share.
Also with eBuilder, also known
as Trimble or Unity Construct.
So we're able to look at not
only the the fund level and
project funds in share, but also
the total project overall in the
fund, so we'll have 3 different
mechanisms to, to verify this
data as well as the data against
Board of Finance.
Um, the goal with this project
and, and where we're at and this
will be something that we share
with uh Bona Finance. I'm hoping
this week to share the draft and
as well as our vendor real-time
solutions, who's creating an
online platform for our bonds to
track and we're also going to
have dashboards available.
But was born to finance the way
our bonds work is it looks like
we have, so we've sold 3.3
million based on uh the report
from Board of Finance. It shows
that we've expensed 1.4 million.
So what that represents is
during the project as we incur
expenses through pay
applications, invoices, what
have you. Um, those are drawn at
board of Finance because we
float a negative cash balance.
And so we uh send the draw to
Board of Finance with the
expense recognize and then
receive the
Avenue, so then it matches up.
So part of this effort is
verifying that uh the revenues
and expenditures for projects
have been received and so
potentially if there was maybe a
draw we missed or an expense we
missed or a reimbursement we
missed. That's something, that's
one piece of this that we're
reconciling. Um.
The, the main piece of this is
the 1.7 or 1.8 billion that's
shown, uh, at that level showing
as remaining. So this number is
not completely
Uh, and then this is part of
what the project is, is
entailing in the end goal.
is to show what that amount is
actually broken down to because.
At the board of Finance level,
it shows the expenses, but it
also doesn't show how much money
we've encumbered, how much money
we've certified against the
bonds for the projects to then
be used potentially if they
haven't been awarded yet. So
creating the databases
streamlining the way that we're
going to be able to analyze each
bond, compare whether the data
exists in evil or in Cher,
especially with the older bonds,
we have items going back.
There's 33 active bonds at board
of Finance over 12 years going
back to 2013 is one of the
earliest ones and some of them
are broken down into separate
with uh public school capital
outlay, uh, another piece is
teacher housing appropriations,
uh, so they're, they're broken
down with potentially like
subcodes, but uh our goal is to
reconcile all these amounts so
we can truly see what is
actually uncommitted and what
may potentially be tied in a
bond that we need to free up so
we can have a true value for our
uncommitted balance, um, as
we're
going into uh the changes with
the big beautiful bill and, and
other items happening in DC. We
just want to make sure that we
have this number as accurate as
possible for you all, so we can
make decisions and if this is
funds that we need to look at to
to help supplement other items
around the state. We want to
make sure that you have the, the
most accurate data available.
Um, so with that, uh, apologies,
I'll keep moving, page 10, Mr.
Chair, members, this is the
summary of changes since uh the
June meeting, uh, as you're
aware, there were no, uh,
funding action items that took
place at the last meeting. And
for this meeting, again, there
are also no funding action
items. Uh, the final piece, the
final plan, the financial plan
assumption and summaries, uh,
this is just the uncommitted
balance in how it's changing.
Um, so it's shifting out. So in
the, the next meeting, I'll
update this with FY 28, but this
is reflective of line 38 with
the sources.
and uses detail on the previous
page.
Now moving forward to the award
schedule detail updates.
Um, so as you notice it a little
bit smaller. It's not, I think 5
pages. It's just about 2 now.
Um, so what we've done is as
we're, we have just entered FY
26 fiscal year 26, starting July
1st, FY 25 has closed, so the
window as you see, for the
projects as denoted with the red
border indicates where we're
currently at in time. So we are
very beginning of fiscal year
26, but we're in
Calendar year 2025, quarter 3.
So all of the items shown here
are items and projects that we
anticipate future out here, uh,
funding requests.
So with that, uh,
Any item and so this is the
point I wanted to clarify with
this is that this, uh,
Going along with the, the
updates that are happening with
the ESR, the project status
report, are going to, to move
together so we can see active
projects and then future
projects and where the funds are
going to line up. So as you'll
note, there may be projects that
are still actively in
construction or other phases,
but are not looking for future
out year at this point we
haven't received any indication
that they're going to need any
supplemental funds. So those
projects are not shown here.
There's, they're still included.
It's just in, uh, they're just
not shown in the breakdown
because we wanted it to.
focus on just the projects that
are going to be coming for an
award.
Um
Our, our goal with the
2 quarters you'll see, and this
is what we base the bond sale on
for 2025 Q3 and Q4. Those
projects theoretically, that's a
6 month window before our next
bond sale. So our goal is to
align the financial plan to give
council a better understanding
of what projects are going to be
coming forward and give us a
roadmap of the next 6 months,
and these are the projects that
are going to be ready. I mean,
so we can work with them and and
make sure that when they're
presented to counsel that that
we have a, uh, you know, the T
T's crossed, I's dotted.
So
With that 2025 has phased out
because that fiscal year has uh
completed, although the summary
of that is shown on the sources
and uses detail, but again,
just, just wanted to to
highlight that was just a minor
change, but we wanted to clean
up the document just to make it
a little easier to read.
Um, and then moving forward to
page 12 again, just a
continuation, we've added uh FY
26 as we move into the new award
cycle and uh with that, uh, Mr.
Chair members of Sanford, any
questions you may have. OK.
Thank you.
Other questions on this?
Miss Leach.
chair, you know, I'm gonna speak
on the financial plan. So, um, I
don't have a question uh also
pretty common for me, but I just
wanted to thank Matthew, uh,
You know, there's a lot of work
that's going into this, um, and
there's always more work to be
done, but I think I'm really
hopeful at this point that we're
gonna be moving into a phase of,
you know, looking at actual
enhancements and, and
improvements versus like
deferred reconciliation or clean
up. And that's something that I
would say, you know, I feel more
hopeful now than I probably have
been in, in quite some time to
be moving in this direction and
Um, you know, just want to thank
him and the financial staff. Uh,
this is just, uh, really
exciting and I look forward to
working more closely. uh,
Matthew did have, um, the vendor
me with myself and staff to look
at the new systems and, you
know, it's built by the same
vendor that we're using, uh, and
I think there's just, uh, it's
gonna be not just an extreme
help, but something that's sort
of a jump off point for
additional enhancements,
dashboards, transparency for
legislative team for Board of
Finance and for the, the council
as well. So just wanted to
really say I'm excited for this
and look forward to hearing the
updates on all of the good work
they're doing. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Liu, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
apologize if you've already had
discussions on this, but.
It's been a while since I
Looked at this land.
Um
I can't help but notice that.
There's a lot of legislative
appropriations.
That are not for school
necessarily for school buildings
being made out of the fund.
And I see that, you know, your
estimate.
For the out years on SSTV
capacity is.
Pretty close to half a billion,
um, on a consistent basis.
Uh, and I think that what you're
doing with this bond
reconciliation process is really
good. I think it's always good
to know.
Where expenditures are happening
and.
Keeping a track of the balance
that's still sitting in the fun.
But I, I'm a little curious to
know.
Is
Do we have
Maybe a longer term forecast.
Or is there a plan to look into
the.
Future, given that we know oil
and gas is not gonna keep at the
pace that are we creating a
problem by
Building a lot of schools right
now, knowing that in the future
when we may have less capacity,
those are gonna be up for
replacement as well, is there?
Uh thinking about.
How much we need to be replacing
on an annual basis.
Given that a lot of the capacity
from what I can tell is being
sopped up with legislative
appropriations rather than
schools, I think.
Maybe we need to be thinking
more strategically about.
How many schools we can actually
expect to replace on an annual
basis.
And then
Pacing that in a way that
doesn't create a huge liability.
save
Um, I'm thinking too far ahead,
um.
I don't know. Is there any
Thought into longer term
planning on.
As far as this financial plan
goes.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu members,
absolutely. So this is something
I've I've had multiple
discussions with the executive
team about doing a 5 year plan,
or uh especially our bonds
coming from board of Finance, we
receive a 5-year schedule of
what the outyear and projections
are. So looking at what our
projects are, what we have in
the pipeline, and then also
building in and looking at that
future capacity to look at and
also providing this information
to the team of this year we have
a window of to to do this much
for awards we estimate.
Design phase, which is 10% of
the project to cost this,
awarding now, future out year
for these projects is estimated
at these intervals. So we want
to make sure looking at the out
here that we're spending or, or
using based on the need.
Using as much of our, our bond
capacity as possible for these
projects, and I absolutely
agree, and that's something I
think that we would need to
discuss with task force
regarding the appropriations, we
have seen an influx.
From that, uh, there have been
discussions based on the sunset
of the offset.
that this is something that is
starting to come up more and
more. Um, so I do believe this
is an additional conversation,
but uh with counsel and task
force for us to determine um if
there's some sort of mechanism
in place to make sure that the
funds are going through the
normal.
Uh, PSCOA.
Instead of going just direct
appropriation.
Uh, Mr. Lew I apologize.
Hopefully that answered your
question. Um, let me know if I
need to click. Uh, thank you,
Miss. She now that's a good
answer. I just.
I remember a time when there
were hardly any legislative
appropriations cause there just
wasn't capacity, I think, you
know, speaking on
foreshadowing.
It feels like when there's like
available capacity.
There's a tendency for the
legislature to want to say,
well, let's tap into that fund,
so.
Um, I'm just wondering if
there's a more strategic way of
saying this is actually how much
we expect to replace.
We don't have to use the full
capacity.
And we want to pace ourselves so
that we're not.
Um
Creating a large liability.
Decades from now that we won't
have capacity to replace at that
point, so.
Make sure you comments. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Um, had a question.
You, you're talking about
legislative appropriations.
Uh, in general or from the fund.
Because there are
Uh, you know, uh, uh.
Requests that from the funds
some that aren't appropriate,
um, thinking of a safety outlay
funds so I'm not sure how that
works, but are you, which
Are you talking about?
Oh, capital outlay in general or
from the fund.
Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm speaking
particularly to the from the.
I can't speak on behalf of
legislators as a whole, but I do
know that there is a tend, from
what I'm seeing on these
financial plans, there there
appears to be this ongoing trend
of.
Using this fund's capacity for
uh things that
All outside of what the statute
allows for.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you for your
questions. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I don't
think I have a question, but I
just wanted to connect, I think
the conversation we're having
right now, the one hopefully
we'll have soon about.
Um
Maximum square footage and and
and.
How we use this money because I
think
Um
One, obviously we want to be
consistent.
Um, and how we apply the rules
that exist.
I am also very concerned about
long term planning.
And how the decisions we make on
every project.
Have this sort of domino or
ripple effect.
On every other project that we
may or may not be able to afford
to build into the future. And so
just, I just wanted to again
mention, I think the importance.
Of prioritizing projects.
Because as districts are coming
to us with, you know, and, and I
don't hold it against them that
they want to come and build.
Essentially the biggest
buildings that, that we will
afford that we can pay for and
give their students the, the,
you know, the
The best experience in terms of
uh facilities.
One, I just want to make sure
that we're, and I know staff, I
asked this question all the time
and staff is assured me that
we're always trying to reach out
to folks.
Maybe not come to the council
already and and making sure that
that the the schools with the
with the most dire needs are
being replaced.
And just to emphasize, I think.
One that we don't want to
necessarily get too, too tight
in the way that we apply those
rules, because that's not the
point of the rules. I know we
heard about that in public
comment today.
But also I think it's important
for districts to recognize that.
For every $5 million extra
dollars that we spend on a
project that may or may not be
necessary, and that's probably
subjective, necessary.
Over the course of 10 projects,
that's a whole other school we
could build for a district that
that needs it.
And so I, I again, um,
I don't know that there's a
right way to do this, but I just
wanted to make sure that we're
connecting.
This conversation about long
term planning and and and fiscal
um.
Projections
And aligning that with, again,
that prioritization of projects.
And some sort of um
Forecasting around the need for
projects too, right? And not
just basing that on.
The 10 districts or whoever,
however many who have raised
their hands and come forward
before the council because they
want to build another school,
and I think that's completely
fair. I'm not criticizing that.
But it is our job to keep those
things in balance.
And so, um,
I, I don't, and again we have to
be careful about setting
precedent and how we make those
decisions and, and I think the
recent changes have prompted us
maybe to to move a little
hastily.
through some of this, and I'm
gonna really appreciate that,
that.
More thoughtful conversation, I
think it's gonna be really
helpful because we just don't
want to end up in a place where
some district or school that
needs to be replaced very badly.
At the end of the day, when
we've spent all the money.
is still sitting with the school
that is, that is, you know,
below standards and and subpar.
Uh, because we weren't
thoughtful about the way that we
go about this, so just, just
connecting that longer term
conversation about facilities
and how we use the rules we
have.
Uh, and the guidelines.
To this, the inevitability that
we will not always be able to do
all the things we're able to do
right now.
Thank you, John.
I'll, I'll be quick, I think,
um, so I also think there's a
larger policy conversation to be
had here. Um, the way that the
program has always worked is,
um, you know, the council, uh,
you know, certifies need and the
Board of finance issues those
notes up to that need, and then
what isn't needed is swept to
the severance tax permanent
fund, uh, twice a year in
December and June. And so when
the council doesn't certify the
full amount that gets swept and
it's gone forever. And so there
have been
some other policy conversations,
um, around the severance tax
bonding program, or other
general capital, um, there was a
reserve fund that was created,
but I think, you know, there's a
lot of moving parts on this, but
there is probably a larger
policy conversation around that
because the way the program
always worked was that, you
know, the need that occurred
right then is what the funding,
what funding was provided.
But if we're looking at wanting
to, and when I say we, I'm
really talking about the
legislature, um, if they're
wanting to kind of look down the
road at uh uh.
Sort of a rainy day when the
money is not there, but there's
still need that could be, I
think, a broader policy
conversation on how the fund
works in general. Um, but that,
I mean, the severance tax
bonding uh program and the notes
program specifically which uh
traditionally funds uh public
school capital has been what
it's been for a long time, but
no one predicted, you know, such
an influx of funding. And I
think it's what's going to be
interesting is we may be wanting
to shift that policy as the
revenues actually start to
decline.
always kind of feel a couple
years late on having that
conversation. So I think it is a
larger conversation, um, I've
had some of that with the LFC
staff, uh, as well, but, uh,
something to think about and I
really appreciate the points
because it's about planning, but
it's also about what we need
right now, and that's a
difficult balance. Thank you.
And again, I think we're
fortunate in having the members
of the council, uh,
representatives from all the
finance lative agencies to help
us out.
Along with the users.
Public Education department and
um any other questions or
comments?
Now we'll move on to the consent
agenda. There are 2 items on
there.
One is the minutes of our last
meeting.
And an award language change.
Might, uh, elaborate just a bit
on that.
Mr. Chairs, it pertains to the
Albuquerque Preschool for NMSD.
This was to establish a design
capacity for 50 students, um,
when this was awarded, there was
no design capacity um
established. And this is doing
just that. Uh, we had
conversations with the school,
and they are currently uh
awarded 30,000 square feet and
they said
All right, this is a, the
consent agenda, so, um,
generally no discussion, and
they're very simple today, so I
would entertain emotion to.
Some of
motion in a second to prove
items under the consent agenda.
All those in favor, please
indicate by saying I. All those
opposed.
Those items are
Mr. Chair, the school is here.
Thank you for being here this
morning.
Uh
We look forward to working you
on with you on this project.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
council, uh, my name is Harold
Moya. I am the facilities
manager at the Mexico School for
the Deaf.
Uh, with me is Scott Mohan. He
is our director of instruction,
um, as, uh,
briefly discussed, um, on the
consent agenda, uh, we are just
identifying that our student
count uh is now expected to be
50 from 42. Uh, there are no
changes in our project other
than that, uh, the size of the
building, um,
All of that remains intacted,
and we are working with PSA to
continue through our design
process.
Um, we do stand for questions if
you, if you have any.
Uh, again, thank you for being
here. I don't know if there are
any questions, but we, uh, we
value the partnership with you.
On this project and we know
that.
These students are
Uh, deserve.
quality facilities designed for
them were successful in this
implementation. Anyone wanna add
to that?
Hello.
They give his share just one
question, um, looking at your
enrollment trends for early
childhood.
Looks like it's
was consistently declining all
the way up until the pandemic,
and then is.
Consistently been growing since.
Can you explain why?
Chairman and members of the
committee, um, I'll, I'll
briefly explain what, what we,
we believe may be occurring um
and Scott may have some more
details. Um, generally, we've
hovered around 27 students right
around there, um, after the
pandemic, I think a lot of
things have changed, um, most
importantly probably is the
affordability of Albuquerque.
Uh, there are a number of
families that we did serve in
rural areas.
That have um migrated towards
Albuquerque, um, they are uh
accepting services from us there
in Albuquerque. We do provide
services in Santa Fe as well,
but I think the just the
increase the, the move of
families to that centralized
location, I think has
contributed to that. Uh, we're
able to serve the children.
In our preschool as opposed to
part of our outreach. I think
Mr. Molan can probably explain a
little more.
Absolutely.
The early identification
So we've noticed that more
families nice and early.
Thank you.
Any other questions or comments?
Again, thank you for being here,
and we look forward to working
with you on this uh
implementation. Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Move on, on the agenda here and
we have uh the award cycle.
numeral 5 and pre-applic
applications received to date.
Mr. Chair, members as you recall
the award cycle was approved.
To have the awards open for 3
months starting from July to the
end of September with the
awards, the project's being
awarded in March.
Um, the request with that
applications that we received.
Um, every, uh,
Yes you see meeting. So as you
see right now, currently what we
have is uh 2 standard space
requests.
One from Mountain Air.
Um, school ranked, uh,
Mountaineer Elementary School,
ranked number 16.
We have truth or consequences.
Middle school ranked number 40.
Um, currently we don't have any
systems-based applications that
we've received, and we did
receive a reserved.
Um, we
Have an an anticipation of some
other schools coming for
standards, um, potentially Las
Cruces, Mayfield High School,
uh, Whites.
Also Mora is uh talking about
coming to apply for a combo
replacement.
Uh, Santa Rosa for a potential
combo K through 12.
Albuquerque, approximately 5
projects, but as far as we know,
only on the ranking.
Um, potentially Roswell, the
work on Robertson High School,
excuse me, Roswell High School
and Goddard.
Also Taos Middle School.
As it pertains to systems uh.
Uh, uh, projects.
Uh, we have Roy.
Uh, potentially coming for a
roof and HVAC.
Uh, potentially 20 schools from
Albuquerque.
Uh, or HVAC.
Animus and Socorro Saracino.
that's all.
And with that, I stand for any
questions. And the deadline is
September 30th, so.
It's probably received a whole
bunch by then.
questions from anyone? Thank
you. Um, did we do, uh, we had
talked last time about.
Uh, saying something different
in the application of when you
release the applications or open
up applications, encouraging
those in the top 100 and.
To, uh, to apply.
If we do something a little
different.
Mr. Chair, I believe we did what
we did and the email was pretty
uh robust indicating who was
eligible and
Mhm
Could you provide, uh, counsel
with a copy of those.
In particular
I don't know if we want the top
300, but that would be nice to
look at as I.
As I go out in my work too.
Some of these schools encourage
them.
Hello
Uh, just a curiosity, Mr. Chair.
Um, part of the local match
reduction reduced pre-K.
Um, matches by 50%.
And it still looks like I didn't
really hear a lot about pre-K
requests. Did you notice a
change in the number of requests
for pre-K.
following those reductions or is
it?
Still kind of the same amount
you're seeing on an inch,
we did see request since that
leg.
All right, if there are no other
questions.
Then, uh
This is an informational item,
so we'll move on to other
business.
Measurement and verification
phase 2.
Subcommittee.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, uh, I think,
um, I'm gonna have uh Larry
provide the information on this.
He's very thorough and an expert
in this, and then I can provide
some, uh, comments after that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members, good
morning.
My name is Larry Tillerson of
the PSFA. I'm here to talk to
you this morning about the
measurement and verification
program as we've implemented.
Implemented it at the public
school facilities authority. In
your ebooks is the potential
motion to progress to phase 2 of
the measurement verification
pilot or program, including
technology and software services
for selected school districts.
For a term of 3 years and the
cost of $1.2 million.
Some key points.
First want to define what
measurement and verification is.
And quite simply,
It's the basic energy management
platform on steroids.
M and B is a dashboard database
system designed to collect,
transmit, store, and display
real time electrical gas and
water data for school
facilities.
PSFA has partnered with
Vendor mountain vector energy to
provide an energy management
platform.
And software services proposed
proposal for PSCOC funded
schools.
facilities around the state,
starting with 5 school districts
as a pilot program.
Again, we are living in
currently the 4th pilot.
With pilot number 1 starting in
2014, and I'll go through some
history.
The goals of the program are
many.
Of course, improving school
comfort through the management
of um
Knowing your facilities, knowing
your energy solutions, knowing
your energy providers.
Reducing school utility costs.
Again my sales pitch here is
over time has been
Utilities are the 2nd largest
line item on school district
budgets.
I think in 2024, in Mexico
school district spent $95
million on utilities across the
board in our great state.
This system will help discover
the fault and leak detection
that may occur in district
utilities.
Our goal is to reduce school
utilities and operations and
maintenance costs. I think we've
all really been uh selling that
since the inception of
maintenance in 2005 at the PSFA.
And then of course, we want to
build in an infrastructure that
helps protect the state's
capital investments and assets.
This program will help us will
help us quantify the effects of
energy management and
maintenance.
Um, and then last but not least,
this will serve as a really good
Quality tool for districts to
integrate into their educational
programs moving forward.
Phase one implementation
included.
Farmington Municipal School
Districts, Gallup McKinley
County schools.
Hobbs, Los Lunas Public Schools
and Berlio Public Schools.
We now have it implemented at
these schools across the state
of New Mexico.
We have worked for the past
year, and when I say the past
year.
The measurement and verification
program was transferred from the
field group to the maintenance
operations group because we
managed the energy management
platform for public schools and
the um administration at the
time felt that it was a good
call to transfer that over into
the program. So
Work, we've worked with the um
MNV group for the past year,
implementing the tools to meet
the goals that we've identified
above.
Uh, which includes biweekly
meetings with all of these
school districts, very time
consuming. Our goal is to
provide training, outreach to
show them the benefits and value
of maintaining your energy
management platforms, uh, for
many reasons.
In your e-book.
This morning is a success story.
And as I recall, Mr. Chair,
members, uh, we had a great
conversation with Mr. Sali about
moving forward with this
program, to provide a success
story. The success story is in
your pockets. It highlights the
goals that we've created for the
school districts.
It talks about the platform and
how districts can use it.
Measure real-time energy
management across the board to
reduce costs.
Lao school districts to better
understand their utility
infrastructure.
Many school districts that have
implemented this program, pay
for their energy management.
Es.
Their energy manager the first
year with the identified savings
that they find.
With collecting energy
management.
Um
Again the first year.
What we're asking for this
morning, the motion is to
approve and progress to phase 2.
Which includes 2 additional
school districts.
Meters are already installed at
these school districts.
119 m total from previous pilot
programs. We're just following
suit.
And making sure that we've, we
know we've invested a lot of
money in pilots 1 and 2 and 3,
and we just determined that it
would just be better to focus on
revitalizing those versus
reinstalling it at new districts
across the board. There's some
reduction in costs there.
The vendor, uh, mountain vector
would be installing the final
piece of hardware to communicate
with what they call the
dashboard, they call in
collaboration with Mountain
Vector and continuing the pilot
program for recommending moving
forward with phase 2 expansion
of the measurement verification
to include 2 new school
districts spanning 119 existing
meters, and there's a list of
school districts provided in the
executive summary.
We do recommend staff that we do
recommend the staff that we fund
this pilot phase 4.
Um, for 2 years, I'm sorry, for
3 years.
And we do that for a few
reasons, and this is some of the
conversation we had at the um
AMS subcommittee about the
measurement and verification of
Mr. Chair, members.
Actually, if you're OK with it,
I can go through some of the
questions that were posed by by
subcommittee, um, notably the
first one was
We'll be adding the new
recertification for the $1.2
million to fund this program
through an older bond for
certification, adding it to the
financial plan, of course.
Some of the questions that arose
during the subcommittee meeting
were over the 20 districts
selected. Excellent question.
The meters were already
installed in previous schools,
and again, we were just
following suit to save a little
bit of funding and just go back
and reinstall the communication
piece necessary to communicate.
So those 20 were already
pre-selected from a previous
pilot.
Another question that came up
were why were we proposing a
3-year versus a 1 year, well,
quite simply,
31 year is not enough time to
really collect solid energy
management data.
The
Tell the story.
One year is good quality data to
start looking at things and
comparing it with other
elementary, middle and high
schools, not only in our state
but across the spectrum of um
schools across the United
States.
Long term savings, this was
posed.
Absolutely. The long term
savings that we're going to see
with this program, um, are
I've said it before, as
utilities continue to be uh the
a large financial drain for
public schools and the costs are
just increasing over time. It's
important to have a solid
program where districts can look
at their utilities.
Day in, day out, real-time
information.
You can actually manage the
utilities down a pretty robust
system. We've looked at Gallup.
Quite closely, and they're using
it to, you can actually see as a
as a the cafeteria res at a
school districts.
Walk up to the equipment first
thing in the morning, and you
can see them turn on the gas to
prepare for breakfast and lunch.
You can see the actual real-time
movement and use of gas as a
utility and how it's being used,
how much is being used.
Our goal is to, is for districts
to integrate these into a formal
energy management program to
really continue to see benefits
over time to maintain the
investments.
And, and reduce those high
utility costs that we're seeing
across the board.
Um
I think some of the other long
term things that we really want
to identify.
For purposes of this program.
Pardon me, um,
Districts will really have the
opportunity to continuously know
and manage their own utilities.
I think ownership is important
here. So one of the reasons why
the pilot we recommended a 3
year is after that 3rd year, we
want to hand the ownership over
to the district.
For them to start maintaining
their own assets and seeing the
value in this.
Now, because it's a pilot
program, there may be
opportunities for us to continue
to fund this. The districts come
and ask, I think it's an
important uh question that they
might have.
But our goal is to help them
provide resources and tools to
help them better maintain the
assets.
and reduce costs over time.
With that, Mr. Chair, members, I
stand for. Thank you for the
presentation.
Um, questions?
Can I
Yes, please. So, um, we
discussed this, uh, quite a bit
in AMS, um, because I know, you
know, it initially, it's been
kind of a bumpy process since it
started in 2014 and as uh Larry
mentioned, there's been some
concerns director Cilli
specifically wanted to kind of
see, um, you know, utilize this
period of time to kind of
evaluate the benefit of this
program, and I think um what was
really discussed at
subcommittee, uh, really was
born out of Larry.
His team's report that's in the
packets on the 6 schools that
piloted this, um, they received
direct 5, excuse me, uh, they
received direct, um,
Input from several of them, they
have specific case studies where
I think at least 2 of them, they
had a systems failures or issues
that were be able to be
immediately addressed, um,
identified and addressed because
of this system, so I, I, you
know, I think it was very clear
in subcommittee that this has
been a successful pilot of these
5 districts.
And there was kind of a broader
conversation to on um for the
benefits of energy efficiency
and energy usage at the school
districts in the long term
impacts it would have on their
maintenance programs, um, in
particular, I think the
legislature and the executive
has, you know, shown actions to
be supportive of energy
efficiency and and uh energy
usage.
And I think this is something
that we discussed being really
critical for our school
districts. We did ask the
questions on the 3 years and,
and it seemed to make sense
that, you know, you need a
little bit of data to kind of
evaluate the, the system, but
with the 5 schools coming in
very supportive that engaged in
this pilot. I think that was
really compelling. And
additionally, you know, one of
my big concerns was looking at
the history of the program and
it being bumpy, you know, it's
very clear that that the
transition of this over to the
maintenance team, um, was a very
good move to make, and they have
been um facilitating this very
closely, they've been monitoring
it very closely and are
dedicated to doing that.
Into the future, um.
You know, I think one of the
questions uh would be, uh, you
know,
You know, is this a long term
plan for the council, you know,
this pilot would expand it to
schools that already have the
equipment, so it's not going out
and making necessarily
significant new investment in
that regard, and maybe that's a
question to punt for 3 years
from now, but I think it is um
something that we want to think
about, but I think seeing the
usage, the fact that they're
going to be meeting so
frequently with the districts
and the vendor on, you know, on
their usage on the dashboard, I
think gave us a lot of
confidence that this program
could continue uh
And we could continue to see
some of the beneficial returns
that we, uh, saw with this 5
school, uh, pilot that was
managed by Larry and his team.
And I don't know, um, I know
Stewart, this is his bailiwick,
so I don't know if you wanted to
make some comments on behalf of
the subcommittee as well.
I, I sure would, um, having a
lot of experience at APS with
their energy management system
and how much effort they put
into that and the benefits from
that and I can, I can personally
verify that.
Um
The low hanging fruit and energy
management is in.
Monitoring what we're using the
expensive um methodology is
putting in high dollar.
Systems that are really
difficult to manage and, and
difficult to, to keep.
Uh, working and a lot of those.
Very expensive systems will
accommodate if there's a, if
there's something that goes
wrong, they will right away just
accommodate for it, and you're,
you won't notice that your
energy usage has gone up, unless
you're really monitoring it,
that you won't see that, that
it, it will maintain the
temperature in the room, like.
But then you're
Right away, you don't realize
you're using a ton of energy to
make that happen.
So I, I strongly support this,
um, pilot project, and I, I just
want to state that it's uh it's
something that I think is it,
like I said, the low hanging
fruit in energy conservation,
and that's the way to
Really address that. Thank you.
I have a comment.
So
I uh.
I strongly support
It's 100%. I like what I see as
far as.
It makes my life easy are
already doing it.
So or any type of code adoption
is.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I had a question about
Those projects.
That had avoided cost from it
does end up leading to a
systems-based.
Request to the council.
Mr. Chair, Sonny, could you
elaborate on that?
So yes, uh, Mr. Chair, so you
have an example here in your
success story about like the
Santo Domingo water main break.
I'm assuming this program helped
identify that before it became
more.
Costly
Sonny, you're absolutely
correct. This gave the school
district Bern Leo in this case,
Senator Domingo, an opportunity
through one of the automated
alerts that they get in real
time for the district to take
immediate action.
Typically when there's an
underground water leak,
sometimes it's not found until
the bill comes in.
And at that point, you've lost
potentially millions of gallons
of, of whatever the utility
might be and it and it's on the
district, they have no real
support infrastructure to tell
the utility company, hey, this
is on your side.
Not our side, but yes, they,
they had that opportunity. I
don't believe they came to the
council for any type of
Funding to repair that
particular water leak line, I
think they did it on their own.
And Mr. Cherry if I, if I can
ask, what is the goal of this
pilot, if the pilot were to
Conclude
What would the hypothesized
recommendation be to the
council.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu, the
recommendation would be to
continue with this program
because it provides districts of
tool and a resource to help
manage their utilities over time
to reduce costs and know their
utilities to maintain the
investments over time so it does
add value.
And I guess maybe just to press
a little more, Mr. Chair, I'm
sorry for belaboring this, but
We have a
Local match reduction provision
for a good maintenance, and I
think that's intended to protect
the assets that the state's
investing in.
I mean, do you foresee this
being maybe a requirement for
future systems based awards or
ways to ensure that.
I mean, I hear we're having
about 20 HVAC projects coming to
us potentially from a district.
Should this be part of the
requirement.
It should be much like the
maintenance program is a
requirement.
Energy because it's driven by
code.
should be a part of any
application moving forward.
Cause again, it gives us the
opportunity to help the
districts to teach them.
Show them the value in managing
energy.
Not only energy, but many school
districts, including APS have
integrated this M&V system into
their HVAC controls.
Yes, I would recommend that it
would be part of the. Thank you.
Thank you.
Questions or comments, we need a
motion from the subcommittee.
Yes, Mr. Chair, so the
subcommittee motion is a
recommendation for council
approval to contract with a
measurement and verification
vendor to perform MMV technology
and software services for
selected school districts for a
term of 3 years and a total cost
of $1,277,928.
I'd like to second that.
Second, it's a committee's
motion, but we appreciate the
support. All right.
Uh, unless there's other
comments or questions.
All those in favor of approving
the subcommittee recommendation,
please indicate by saying I
post.
passed and thank you.
Thank you for the presentation,
Mr. Chair, members, thank you
very much.
OK.
Next item is the adequacy
planning guide.
Update.
And we have a
Also motion from the
subcommittee.
And uh
We'll be handling that.
Leach, you want to do the motion
or do you wanna?
Uh
yes, Mr. Chair, I think uh with
similarly to the last item, uh,
we have staff experts here that
will walk through a quick
summary of this, and then I'll,
I'll make some calls. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members, I'm gonna go
quickly through the key points
with you.
Um, the adequacy planning guide
is a key document used to assist
in ensuring school facilities
meet specific standards and
guidelines.
It is intended for the design
and construction of new schools.
And provides best practices
based on national and local
school planning criteria.
On September 11th of 2024, the
PSCOC approved the request to
publish the revised adequacy
standards.
With approval for PSFA to make
minor technical changes after
the approval.
The updates made um by Miss
Ramos, who is in the, in the
audience today. The updates made
by Alisa Ramos to the APG on
April 14th of 2025, reflect the
improved changes to the adequacy
standards.
These updates also include
visions to terminology and
structure to enhance the clarity
and flow of information.
In addition to incorporating the
new adequacy standards, a few
other sections of the APG were
modified.
Section 3, policies and
procedures were added, where it
includes facility master
planning requirements, including
required sections and state
charter charter schools, FMP
requirements.
Also added the occasional need
for additional planning studies
based on certain circumstances,
such as the bisared specs
capacity utilization studies and
enrollment studies.
Furthermore, on May 28th of
2025, Mr. Valdez did a quick
review and included the
following updates.
Add some facilities not eligible
for PSCOC funding, such as
buses, as some districts have as
particularly for those that
served.
As Wi Fi stations during COVID.
Uh, online schools were, where
the students are exclusively the
online and do not access the
facilities for large group
instruction.
Following the June 12, 2025
meeting, staff facilitated
another review and made these
additional changes.
It clarified the tear
calculation. It added space for
special education services and
identified continuum.
Of special education services to
the best practices section.
Updated the bleacher calculation
and updated the GSF table in the
appendix.
Um, during the AMS subcommittee,
uh, Miss Leach asked if staff
could create a summary of
It changes section by section.
And I am so proud to um
acknowledge that staff did an
amazing job. Um, it is.
Part of your handout. I'm not
sure later on, um, showing.
Those revisions and a um section
by section, so Mr. Valdez and
Mr. Martinez did an amazing job
with that.
And you can ask any questions as
it pertains to that um material.
I'll continue to explain what
The timeline would be
Being that
Only that is only a portion of
the APG.
As indicated in prior um
meetings that it was going to
take a substantial amount of
time to
finalize that APG.
And with the direction of um
Miss Leach
We started that timeline to
ensure that it continues the
work.
So what we've done is we've
established a timeline of 12
months from June 2025 to June 30
of 2026.
If you see in the in your
executive summary, the chart.
We're following what was done
when um staff did round tables
around the state when they were
updating the adequacy standards.
So we're going to follow that
protocol and um
Partner with these particular
school districts in order to
conduct those round tables.
Um, as you see, that will be
done end of August into
September.
And from October to December of
2025, that'll give staff a
chance to compile and analyze
the data received from those
round tables and make updates to
the final draft of the APG.
Uh, we project to bring um to
present this draft to the PSCOC
for your approval January.
Um, then that allows from
February to March to do any
public hearings for public
comment.
and make changes based on that
public comment.
And we project to uh present the
final version in April 20 22nd
of 2026.
It kind of gives us a month.
To be flexible, uh, so that we
can possibly
Um, published by.
Mr. Chair, members, I just want
to say that this is the really
good stuff.
It is the number one thing on
our list.
Um, Mr. Chair, members, the only
comments I would like to make
about the exhibits, exhibit A is
going to be the red lined
version of the previous uh
adequacy planning guide with
the.
Um, changes that we may exhibit
B is then going to be the
version that is going to now be
available to those school
districts while we continue to
work on phase 2 and then the
handout itself was a summary of
the changes made between.
OK.
So we're not gonna go through
this page by page. Thank you. I,
I
only thing else I think uh we, I
think, uh.
Doctor Romero, Mr. Martinez, is
some uh summarize where we're at
very effectively, but we'll
stand for questions.
OK.
Uh, questions, maybe a comment
now and uh yes, Mr. Chair, just
a quick comment, um.
Thank you guys. You rock, um, I
think this is gonna be a really
helpful document even for
districts, uh, that are looking
to come for awards and start a
process, especially the
districts that are a little less
familiar with it. I think this
is sort of going to be also a
conversation piece as it relates
to what we discussed a little
bit early with the earlier with
the gross square footage
calculator. So I know there's a
lot more work to be done as
there always is, but I really
appreciate this, um, it came up
at task force as well, uh,
through some
Round table of superintendents
that was a little hodgepodge,
but um it did come up that the
adequacy planning guide is super
critical, so, uh, just validates
the good work of the staff, so I
wanna thank them for this. I
think this summary will be
helpful, um, certainly since
seeing it for the first time,
I'll go through it a little bit
more, but just wanted to thank
staff, um for this update. I
know it was a lot of work.
Would you care to make your
motion at this point?
Yeah, I can motion and then I
think there's some questions,
but I'll make the mission and
I'm assuming, yeah, so, um, the
AMS subcommittee recommendation
is for council to approve the
first phase of updates to
adequacy plan.
comments or questions?
Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the work staff. It's
really, really helpful.
I think this is going to be
really helpful for folks as
they, as they look through it.
Um, I know you were joking about
going through it line by line
today.
But I, I actually think it would
be useful for us to get a more
in-depth explanation of how the
guide is used and how staff.
Conversations go with districts
because I think the thing that
we're running into
In probably both of our
subcommittees a little bit is
Maybe not a, not a
Full alignment between
How we're interpreting the use
of the planning guide and and so
um I don't know if that needs to
happen in a subcommittee or
maybe it's just part of that
larger discussion.
Because I think, you know, as
we're reviewing projects and
awards.
We're seeing breakdowns of
classrooms and breakdowns of gym
space and breakdowns of bleacher
spaces, and we're kind of
getting an analysis of this is
above or below, and ideally
nothing's below, but when we see
above,
Again, to some of the comments
we heard earlier.
If something is above and an
allowable minimum.
But still fits within the
envelope of maximum square
footage, I'd like to understand
a little bit better about how
we're
Interpreting that as a group,
and then how we're communicating
that to school districts because
it sounds like there are at
least 2, if not multiple
interpretations of how that's
working, and I think that's
impacting.
Our conversations and then
ultimately our decisions and so
I think if we can have.
One comprehensive discussion and
get on the same page about.
What we agree
Is the use of these guidelines,
that would be very helpful so
that we're not
Trying to make those, those
interpretations one at a time.
both in the individual
subcommittees, but actually on
individual by individual member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
wanted to comment directly on
that cause there was some
conversation in AMS specifically
on that. So, you know,
We did discuss how we needed a
bit of a deeper dive on this,
um, as council members, and
there was conversation about,
you know, us attending the
hearings or things like that,
but something that we did, um,
Iris that you spearheaded um
previously on another topic was
a separate training on the
financial plan, so I could see
us doing something similar to
that where it's not really a
council meeting, but maybe
there's a couple of sessions,
training sessions to walk
through this and kind of
understand it. And I think what
would be really helpful, uh, you
know, I would propose, uh, as a
potential.
For those training sessions is
to maybe do some scenarios of
actual maybe even bringing up
projects that have come to the
council previously and like
looking at the square footage
and things like that and seeing
how that was interpreted, uh, to
help guide the the discussion. I
think that would be very
helpful.
Mr. Chair, I could very quickly,
I think that would be a really
great. I'll add that Mark and I,
uh, in our, uh, summer travels
with our interim committee, um,
Mark's breaking out his tape
measure, and we've been touring
schools and trying to get a sort
of more concrete understanding
of what the square footage
requirements look and feel like.
In usage. And so I think to the
extent that we can put council
members.
In those spaces to understand
what we're approving when we say
800 square foot for a classroom
versus.
650 or more, and the same thing
for gyms and bleachers. Um, that
would be really helpful.
I think I'm gonna take you up on
that and ask that you.
Uh, as you did on the others, if
you could work with staff to set
those up and we'd be happy to.
You know, uh, we have, we need
to be careful on the quorum,
maybe we could split up.
Uh, in two sections, but be able
to go through that or, or just
call it a work session and have
all all members.
And
thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
the longer I I look at these
things, the more I'm curious
about the history, um, just for
my curiosity, can you tell me
just as in how this 650 square
foot number was determined.
per se for
Pre-kindergarten, kindergarten
classroom and.
At one point, uh, in this, what,
what is the sort of process in
making a change to 1000.
Hoping it's not because
kindergartners are now 50%
larger than they used to be,
but I'd like to understand, you
know, how we got from.
Maybe a first and then how do
you get to be?
In this process of updating the
standards, members, uh, Mr. Liu,
um,
We, the standards were basically
established with the committee
that talked about
This, the needs of schools and
this was done almost at our
inception, um, right before I
actually got there, and those
are that 650 standard was in
place for quite a long time. And
then when we started having
these discussions, we actually,
to be honest with you, we were
told that kids were getting
bigger, so, um, that, that this
classroom sizes were not, you
know, a very, very effective for
them any longer. That was one
comment that came up, but it
really is because
Um, a lot of times the the
schools just needed that space.
They needed more storage spaces,
they needed um space for kids to
move around and as.
As their educational curriculum
changed and they did more
hands on teaching, um, as they
did more group instruction as
they did more collaborative
teaming with other uh students
throughout the the school, um,
they talked about having needing
additional sport footage in the
classrooms.
Um, particularly we've heard
that from middle schools and
high schools.
Um, in the high, especially the
classrooms are the ones that
changed the most, uh, we've kept
the other.
Uh, spaces at a minimum.
Um, because then the calculator
played that role that
established the maximum.
So those spaces that um the
school started planning, um, if
they wanted a lot bigger gym,
media center, they we allowed
them to do that as long as they
stayed within that gross square
foot calculator, but made the
space ineligible is when they
exceeded that row square foot
calculator. So if suppose you
had an elementary school, the
calculator said you had 50,000
square feet for your enrollment,
and you came in at 55,000, at
5000 over was ineligible.
The other types spaces are
ineligible or when the out of
planning guide prohibits them or
or does not allow them for
eligible funding and that's
usually sports spaces like press
boxes, concession stands,
anything that I call the game
day experience when you attend a
sporting event, you know,
concession stands, things like
that. Also athletic locker
rooms, which are a little bit
different from the Plock rooms
because they have training,
training rooms, film rooms,
things like that.
Not sure if that answers your
question, but um,
could probably take a little bit
more.
They were basically they were
established originally standards
established by a committee.
Of
Design professionals, school
district representatives.
Um
Yes space staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and.
I, I think it's interesting that
um
Kids are getting bigger and just
have a newborn and he is growing
exponentially, so I get that.
Um.
I'm, I'm curious since Jim Space
seems seems to be a big point of
contention, um, and I, I noticed
that.
Yeah, there's an explanation why
the bleacher space has been
adjusted. Um, could you maybe
just touch upon like how the
original.
Where footage was determined for
gyms.
Um, and then
If there's been any updates.
Uh, which
Which I guess authority or uh or
standard are you applying it
from? Is it the
PD
PE standards that are
sort of informing changes in
those spaces, or is it a statute
or a rule like.
And then
How was the original?
square footage determined for
gyms.
Mr. Ris, um, um, gyms are, you
know, they, they do play an
essential role in the school
curriculum.
Um, for PE.
Um, and there are many ways that
a student can earn PE credit PE
is one of those also first
patient now with um
Now they can participate, uh, if
they participate on a school
athletic team under an NMAA
sanctioned event, they got PE
credit.
So, you know, when we talked to
the districts, they also tell
us, well, we don't, we not only
use gyms for PE, we use them for
assemblies.
Or in elementary schools are
used for productions for plays,
things like that.
Um, they're used for.
Or at nights, things like, um,
and things like that where they
have large group gatherings.
They basically those types of
spaces. We still have schools
that um in the state where uh
Jim plays a dual role of the
cafeteria.
And the challenges that
presents. In terms of the
history, uh, those were the, the
standards that we've had, um,
since I've been working with
them in terms of a 2400 square
foot elementary gym, 5200 square
foot middle school gym and 6500
square foot high school gym.
Um, and those
When we talked to districts and
um they, they say that they need
more space just because they,
those are very minimal sizes,
and when they get their tire.
Class in there to do activity,
it presents a challenge in terms
and when especially when they do
it depending on like if they do
a volleyball unit or if they do
a a basketball unit and they
have um it's, it's just they
don't they can't really use
those spaces as effectively as
they could if they were a
little.
The districts didn't request
additional.
square feet in the adequacy
standards because they did have
the flexibility of if it fit in
the bucket, turned about it.
So kind of back to what Mr.
Sinner was saying, I think.
That was the that was a process.
If it fit in the bucket, then it
was fine. I think what
transpired was, we have a new
calculator now.
But then we had these existing
projects that were given an
initial award coming for the
additional square footage.
That's when I believe uh
subcommittee.
War subcommittee started asking
the questions.
Well, why are they needing the
extra square footage?
Show us where are these spaces,
and that started showing the
trend.
And I think
On top of that,
We have some school districts
with declining enrollment.
That are asking for footage.
Um, then we had an influx of
waivers and then legislation was
passed to open it up even more.
So I think that's where this
conversation stemmed from.
was the fact that we had a new
calculator.
And we were responsible to
provide the information to the
subcommittee of where these
spaces were.
What was the reasoning? Did they
attempt to um fulfill the
initial award and the contract
that they signed for that award.
And show us that where the
spaces aren't enough, and the
trend started.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Li, to
Try to uh answer your initial
question, uh a little more uh.
Precisely, the, as Mr. Valdez
had mentioned that the
committee.
Established that 650, that 1000
was determined by programming of
current control when when they
kind of figured out, oh, hey,
you have more technology and you
also got to be able to do arts
and crafts within that
kindergarten classroom, and that
kind of led to an additional
growth.
Thank you for that explanation.
I was just worried that the 3
point line getting moved back
might have been a contributing
factor, but it's good to know
that you're looking at
Actual educational uses. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Good question.
All right.
Other questions or comments?
No.
We have a
Subcommittee motion.
Uh, all those in favor of
approving the
Motion, please indicate by
saying I
follows a post.
we'll move on to recertification
of SSTBs. Thank you for the
presentation.
Mr. Chair, members, again.
Uh, if you'll turn your
attention to page 259 in your
e-books. I'll go over the
quarterly lease assistance
status report, although, um, I
probably should have retitled
this. This is a more of a
summary of FY 25 lease
assistants and when we we're
currently at.
So looking at the key points as
or in fiscal year 2025, now
we're in fiscal year 26, a total
of 105 lease assistance awards
were granted, totaling 23
million, 108,712.
Oh, I'm sorry.
I apologize, Mr. Chair, members.
I got ahead of the the following
point. So we'll, we'll, let's go
back a little bit. Let's go to
page 255.
Um, so now we'll look at the
recertifications of SSTBs.
I'll start with the potential
motion. Uh council approval to
adopt the resolution
notification, certification and
reconciliation of unexpended
bond proceeds as follows. SSTB
21 SD certifying the net amount
of $1,277,928 to be used for the
measurement and verification
phase 2 program continuation.
Uh, under the key points, you'll
just see a breakdown that we're
certifying these funds on 21 SD
but we are not uh decertifying
anything at this time just
because there was availability
again in uncommitted balance in
that bond.
And with that I stand for any
questions you may have.
Straightforward.
On action we've taken.
Um
Not in all those in favor of
approving the recertification,
please indicate by saying I.
a post.
passes go on to informational
items.
And um
First is quarterly lease
assistant status report.
Mr. Chair members, uh, so
apologies, I was too excited for
this one, but we'll go back to
259 and start over. So this is
uh the quarterly lease
assistance status report, uh, or
more so the FY 25 summary of
where we're at with the lease
assistance. So in fiscal year
25, we awarded 105 lease
assistance awards totaling
$23,108,712. Uh, the original
share budget associated with
that was 25.4 million,
reimbursements to date as of the
materials due, uh, and
I think this is actually a day
after I apologize. Uh, July
10th, 2025 was $22,531,462.07.
Uh, the PSA is actively working
with the charters, charter
schools to invoice the remaining
577 when I checked this morning,
that amount is, is under 500,000
now. Um, so we have until DFA's
deadline to submit any uh
vouchers or invoices is July
29th. So Harry Royal, uh, a
member of my team has been
working diligently to reach out
to the, the charters, make sure
that we're getting them paid. So
on the exhibit, I'll take you
through that momentarily. You
can see that those amounts that
will potentially be reverted are
just the remaining.
Lease assistance, so we want to
make sure that all of those
funds go out and then we're,
we're really not reverting.
Any of the actual like awards,
so.
I'd also like to take a moment
to shout out Amy Smith, um, with
her hard work and then uh Miss
Alisa Ramos, who we have in the
crowd for everything they've
done with the least assistance.
So looking forward to the FY 26
starting. So as of this point,
we're estimating about
$2,291,288 to revert back to the
bond. So again, we will decrease
the budget and share, um, and
then do a, a decertification so
you'll see it with the the
research uh and one of the
following meetings, decertifying
those funds, adding them back.
To the funds so we can then use
them for um any other projects
like M&B or other items that
come up.
With a stand for any questions
you may have.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Um
Given that I'm understanding the
remaining amount to be invoiced
is actually lower.
Would it be appropriate to.
Make this motion contingent on
the actual reversion.
Or is, is that just pennies?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu, this item is
informational, so there's no um
voting going forward, but I can
provide a full breakdown with
the financial plan, but the, the
two, the 2.3 million is
reflective of uh unencumbered in
share. So we set up the the
budget, but the 577 comes out of
the original, so there's a
portion of that that potentially
will go back, but we are looking
at the 2.2 going back.
The question, thank you for the
That is report.
And uh
We move on to the next item,
which is.
I'm here.
Grow square foot calculator
discussion.
That's right.
We took that off the agenda. OK,
I see.
I have a handout on that.
For you
For the three of you.
He's one for you if you'd like.
Go ahead and move with this and
Just remember, if you'd like to
pick it off and then you can
turn it around to me whenever
you're ready. Yes, sir, Mr.
Chair, members, um, as you are
aware, I have resigned and I
first want to thank you, uh, the
council for the Opportunity.
To be part of the PSCOC mission.
I am
Proud to leave knowing that I
dove into this role with the
sense of curiosity and vision.
Asking to learn and then it
involving staff to establish
best practices in order to
maintain transparency.
Consistent, so I leave knowing
we continue the good work, and
I'm excited to see. Thank you.
And I should mention that uh.
The director and I had
Several discussions prior to her
submitting her letter.
And uh we
You know, my, my intent was to.
Uh trying to talk her out of it.
And uh
We
Discussed the strategy on that
and some.
Some uh
A plan of action to make that
happen but in the end, uh.
It didn't uh
Uh, workout.
And again, I'm very disappointed
that we weren't able to work on
board.
But it's her decision, and she's
moving forward and we thank you
so much for the energy that you
brought to the position over the
last year and a half.
Uh, you had many, many, uh,
challenges, uh.
Uh, many of which you uh.
Based in and uh.
Defeated and and move forward.
We thank you for
For all of your dedication. I
know you worked long, hard
hours, as many of your staff
does you know that uh weekends,
nights.
Uh, some of your emails, uh, uh,
the dates on the time and date
on those were.
Really, uh
Extraordinary. So again,
Uh, thank you.
Uh, for your service.
And uh I, I should mention that
you, you have agreed to stay on
until we find a replacement, and
we're hopeful that we'll have a
transition period.
Yeah, with that and uh.
So thank you for
Or not just, uh, you know, to
leaving us out there and uh we
appreciate that and that says a
lot about your passion.
So what I've handed out, uh,
I've worked with uh
With uh Nick or uh personnel
director to come up with a
timeline. This is very similar
to the timeline, uh.
Or the uh the director's search.
Uh, that we've had in the past.
Uh, it's in draft form.
Uh, I think we've uh figured in
all of the items that we figured
in last time.
Um, what I'd like to do, um, as
we did in the previous search is
a point a a uh committee, a
search committee.
Uh, and what I'd like to do is
have a 4 member committee which
will be made up of the two.
Um
The subcommittee chairs.
Uh, myself and I've asked the
Secretary of Education if uh.
If she will be able to sit in on
that.
Uh, herself
And uh she's getting back to me
on that, so, uh, if she is not
able to, I, I do want that
participation. I think it's very
important and like again it's
similar to the committee that we
approved last time, just to work
out some of the details, uh,
depending on the number of
applications that we receive
will determine if there'll be 2
rounds of application and uh
then you can see, but we have uh
put in your uh possibility of of
two rounds.
And if, if we do have as many as
we did last time, uh, it may be
necessary for that to sort of
screen and and move forward.
But again, I want to thank Nick.
Uh, for helping with this.
He's also uh provided to us a
copy of the posting of the.
Uh, job, uh.
That will be uh
Advanced
And announced.
And you can see it's very
similar to the one that we did
just a few. Seemed like just a
few months ago, but it was in.
Uh, I don't think there are any.
Um, major changes here, but if
any of you see anything that we
need to change and please take a
look at these and, and get to,
get, get it and get back to us
very quickly, I think, uh.
Nick has indicated that we want
to post this.
As soon as uh.
Let's see.
Tomorrow
Tomorrow, yes.
So, anyway, take a look, um,
I've, I've looked, I've given
one.
a good review of this, and I
think that we're.
to go move forward with it, but
so.
Uh, questions.
Mr. J, just a quick question. I
know, um, I think it was a
couple meetings go, NiCU
reported on being able to post
on uh like more external
websites and we've had the
opportunity to do in the past,
is that still the case and will
that occur here?
Yes, with the chair and members,
uh, yes, there is, there's
opportunity still, um, we're
having great success with
ZipRecruiter.
for the executive director
search I wanna expand to
monster.
To our website, which is a
great, uh, provide us great
return and also use uh a paid if
we can afford a paid option on
indeed we flood those 4 avenue
and LinkedIn, we should be.
We should have a lot of response
in this short amount of time,
yes.
Any other questions or comments
as we move forward with this
task, thank you Mr. Chair. I
just wanted to say thanks,
Cyrus.
Yeah, I, um.
Taking as someone who's who's
recently stepped into a new
role. I know that's always
difficult and, and
Working with staff and making
changes and learning the
processes that you, that you're
not familiar with and, and
working with us is probably
always fun, um, even though I
try to make it fun. Um, I got to
serve as a subcommittee chair on
an interim basis, right, right?
Last fall, and um Iris is always
willing to listen and discuss
what was happening in those uh
subcommittees, making sure that
She was responsive to our quests
as a subcommittee members and
trying to, you know, help staff
understand what it is that we
were looking for.
Um
These aren't easy jobs. I think
the
This particular job is
It's complicated.
show every
every time we meet, we've all
got individual questions. Every
district has specific needs.
Um, our funding structure in the
way that we pay for for capital
outlay in schools in New Mexico,
um, is like so labyrinthine, I
think most people just would
like, you know, roll their eyes,
their eyes would roll into the
back of their heads and just
like give up and so I just, I
just wanna say thank you for all
the hard work.
Um, and, and good luck, and from
what I hear, you're gonna have
some some fun times ahead, so I
appreciate everything you did,
Iris. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Mr. Chair, a member of the
council, I, I also wanted echo
and the same sentiments.
And say thank you, Iris for your
job and.
Uh, and the tenure that you've
had here, this is, again, it's
not an easy job. You have 9
different bosses, very
political, a lot of, a lot of
money and ability to
just thank you and good luck.
Ortiz, thank you for that.
Right
Well, let's not to forget that
she's not leaving today.
This is informational, so we'll
get back to you as we make any
changes to the.
To the uh
timeline and we call and we'll
check with your uh
Especially the subcommittee
members if you're.
If you're available on those
dates.
Then we move on then to the.
the next POC PSCOC meeting
August 27th.
to come before the council.
Not then I would entertain a
