Again, thank you all for joining
us. We really appreciate it, um,
just members, um, basically our
um panel is going to be sharing
their um issues their insights,
their experiences with um some
of the changes that they've
undergone. What's changed for
them, what's positive, what may
have been negative, um, where we
could be going, yeah, some of
this, exactly. Um, so be on the
lookout for that, um.
Folks on Zoom at the school
districts, if you would give us
about uh I'm, I'm gonna give you
all about 10 minutes, so please
stay within 10 minutes, um, so
that we can have a healthy 20
minutes at the end for questions
from our panel, um, if we don't
have questions, everybody's
quiet and you wish to make
additional statements, um, tell
us additional things, please go
ahead and do so, um, so that we
can maximize this hour that we
have together, but again, thank
you all for joining us. Uh,
we'll start off with
with uh Mr. Martinez, because I
see you right there just turning
on your microphone.
situated your camera rather, um,
so Mr. Martinez, Rio Rancho
Public Schools, if you would
please, thank you so much for
joining us.
Um, hi, everyone, um, and, uh,
just wanted to, so I'm Patrick
Martinez. I'm the executive
director for facilities and um I
was kind of, I, I know that the
invite was initially sent to our
superintendent.
And so, um, I just wanna make
sure that I'm understanding
fully what my role is in this. I
know that it's a panel
discussion regarding the updates
to um
Uh, some of the adequacy
standards as well as the square
footage calculator, am I correct
in, in, in that.
You, you are at the right
meeting, Mr. Martinez. Yes, just
wanted to make sure, um, and so
I, I think, um, and again, you
had said 10 minutes, so, um,
And I apologize, um, I'm just,
uh, are you looking for just
kind of what, what we see as um
some of the, you know, what's
worked well from the uh the
updates or, you know, where
we're struggling.
Both what your experiences are
positive, negative things that
you might change if there were
things that were working before
that aren't now any and all.
OK, well, and you know, I
apologize. Unfortunately, I'm,
I'm somewhat new to the role, so
I don't know that I'm gonna have
a ton of experience, uh,
directly with some of the
implementations, I can tell you
that in the recent, um,
In the last year, we've, uh,
we've applied for the PSFA
funding, which has been directly
related to where some of our
schools have ranked.
Um, and, and what I can say is
that um
You know, having that
information as far as the, uh,
just how the facilities are, um,
evaluated, has been helpful, but
also some, a little confusing at
times when we're looking at
Uh, how
Uh, you know, they may rank in
one year versus another. Um, and
when it comes to planning
purposes, um, I, I know even the
updated ones, I can tell you
just cause it's kind of at the
top of our list right now, um,
some schools that we may have
been planning for being ranked
at a certain level and then, you
know, they're kind of being
pushed out of that.
threshold, um, it's, it's a
little bit, uh,
Well, it's it's, it's
concerning. It's kind of hard to
plan when we're, when, you know,
things seem like they're ranked
as far as uh being able to be
funded.
Um
Again, I, I apologize. I don't
know that I have a ton of
experience, uh,
Just in this role and so I don't
know how much I could bring to
that, but I definitely wanted to
be a part of this meeting, so.
Um, I, I think that's kind of
where I am at right now.
Cool. Thank you so much. Um,
we're also joined by
Superintendent Crabtree in
Alamogordo.
It's a superintendent. Yes, so,
hey, good afternoon, uh, Michael
Crabtree Superintendent, and I
have Scott Picklin who's in
charge of our Capital LA
facilities here today. So thanks
for having us.
Um,
I started that I got uh chime
in, um, you know, we're in the
middle of a design right now for
our middle school and I know
from, you know, comparing from
before to now, it's been
beneficial on the adequate
standards change and the square
footage calculator as we feel
like it's definitely uh gave our
design professionals and us some
space to, you know, to do
adequate classrooms within the,
the guidelines for what our
teaching and learning
instruction means today, uh, so
we, we, we have positive
feedback with the changes and
feel like it's a
it's, you know, adequate and,
and we're close to where we need
to be for sure.
OK
Uh, good morning, Scott Ficklin.
Uh, good morning, members, uh,
Senator Souls, just a couple of
minor things that we've noticed
kind of through the design
that's that's benefited um Alan
Mauerdo Public schools and
potentially benefited the whole
state and a whole is, you know,
the increase in the, the special
ed, uh, classrooms, so 450
square foot to 800, uh, the
larger CTE classrooms from
60,050 to 800, uh.
Of course, um,
I think they're they're still um
a lot of work to do, um, not
only on the adequacy standards,
but I, I would also um like to
see the um adequacy planning
guide, uh, updated to, to go
along with this to help us
better.
You know, cause ultimately we're
giving a a square footage based
off the calculator and design
professionals and school
district had to figure out how
to pack our educational delivery
into that girls square footage,
and sometimes that doesn't work
out for us, and having that
latitude to be able to go to the
counsel or, or go to PSFA and
give justification for larger
spaces, um, is what we've seen
as of late, um, and, and we do
appreciate.
that, but, uh, like I said, I
think there's still some work to
do, um, we think that the
updates are great, uh, I think
that, uh, prior to this, it was
very
Tough to design a school, given
uh the total gross square
footages, so the gross square
footage calculator increase was
big for us, not only us but
other school districts to build
um sufficient adequate space for
all school districts.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you all so
much. We appreciate you being
here again, uh, members were
still waiting on Superintendent
Gonzalez from Penasco, um, but
we'll open it up for questions.
All right, Ms. Montoya, please.
It's not a question, chairman.
It's a comment from Matt Paul
from the charter school who
couldn't be here this morning,
he's with his young son.
a medical emergency, um, but he
said that he was disappointed
that the committee subcommittee
didn't provide for CPI increase.
And he believes that that was
stated in the law.
All right, thank you.
Other questions from members.
We don't have any gentlemen.
So we appreciate you all being
here and giving your testimony,
please keep in touch with our
committee.
As we go through the interim for
additional experiences you all
are going through, um, with
these changes in the next school
year and looking into the even
next school year, um, as things
evolve, so thank you all so
much.
I think we do have
Superintendent Gonzalez logging
in.
told.
Oh, there you go.
Promoted to panelist.
I remember those terms.
Go and see superintendent yet.
Hey man, thank you. Oh, all
right.
Well, please, I asked folks, um,
to keep their comments within 10
minutes about um the recent
changes, um, I think you're well
aware, so I'll give the floor to
you, superintendent.
Gonzales, you're muted.
I apologize. I just, um, stepped
out so I'm not completely comp
um prepared. I don't know if you
want to start with somebody
else. I apologize for that. We,
we already started with our, um,
other two.
Um, school districts, if you
want to take a moment and
collect yourself.
I do apologize. I have my notes,
so I'm trying to find where I
place them.
No worries. I'll just make a
quick announcement for members,
we do not have a quorum, so
we'll have to hold off any sort
of action until the next meeting
we'll just roll all that stuff
over till September.
Stuff to do in September.
Double duty.
Uh, September and I forgot the
date.
Mm
Nothing in August.
to start a school.
Good night.
There we go, thank you about
more.
I'm just gonna, I guess my
biggest question that I have
now, and I apologize, I just, I
can't um find my notes here. Um,
So with the current changes, I
mean, we've already received
funding, um, for
Our our new school to build our
new school. Is that gonna affect
Any of that, um, and then
concerns of like with our SB 9
and stuff like that, you know,
we really need that.
We need to make sure that we
have that funding.
Superintendent, if you wouldn't
mind restating your question.
So my biggest question is, um,
our concern with the changes, so
we received funding for uh, you
know, to build our new school.
I just want to make sure that
that's not gonna affect any of
that.
Mr. Chair, members, um, I would
have to look to see what they
got awarded when they got
awarded. And if the new
calculator was already applied,
I'd have to do that research,
the answer might be forthcoming
from our director.
And if you want, Miss Gonzalez,
um.
While you look for your notes on
this, um, mind talking about the
PSFA process at your school
district has gone through some
of the challenges, some of the
things that um you were most
happy with throughout that
process, I think that would be
helpful for us here on the task
force.
Yes, absolutely. Um, so, uh, I
mean, I was very fortunate. I
walked in, um, and my
predecessor, uh, superintendent
Sandiar had already gone through
most of the process in obtaining
funds, um, and moving forward
forward with uh building our new
school. I was, um, once again,
fortunate enough to sit uh in a
lot of those meetings with her,
um, I
For me, I guess one of the
biggest concerns is.
And I understand everybody's
busy and everyone, I mean, we're
busy as well. We have a lot on
our plates, uh, but the timing
and responding to emails, um,
in, in order for us to keep
moving forward, there's some
things that we're still waiting,
um, with PSFA. I know there's a
lot of different faces, um,
With the individuals compared uh
that we're currently working
with compared to who we started
with, so.
I mean, we're still getting to I
guess get reacquainted um with
the new people.
Um, I'm gonna say PSA has always
been very helpful and
And I guess everything that
we've asked for, like I said,
right now, the only thing that
I've seen is there's just been
like a
A long delay in responses.
However, I, I also understand
that you're in the process of um
Filling positions.
All right, thank you for that
question, member.
All right. Um, I had mentioned
before, we have a quiet group
after lunch. Um.
Oh, director, please.
But I do have a responses it
pertains to Mr. Picklin's
request on the APG update.
Um
Director Leach has really been
spearheading and and uh advising
us on getting that piece moving
forward.
Keeping in mind on Wednesday you
will vote to
Um
Amend the APG with the latest
adequacy standards done as
staff.
Scrub the APG based on the
already approved adequacy
standards, so that piece has
been updated along with some
additional items um that were
real quick kind of technical
corrections.
So on Wednesday, the PS.
Incorporate those changes.
And there is a timeline for us
to do statewide round tables.
Um, we're looking to have the
school districts.
Kind of mimicking what was done.
When the adequacy standards were
done and took that information.
So that is the goal of uh PSFA
is to start with those round
tables, gather the data from
those uh collaborations, uh, and
All right, 19 years.
Anything else follow ups. Oh,
Senator Stewart, please.
Mhm.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
so I wonder if our director can
uh or someone from EFSA could
respond to a superintendent of
Gonzales, uh, that she's not
getting responses on these um.
Process that she's going through
for the school in Penasco.
I might not be saying that
accurately, but the last thing
she said was she just, it seemed
a slow process that they've sent
emails they haven't gotten
responses from, so maybe you all
could respond to that.
Yes, Mr. Chair Senator Stewart,
forgive me, I didn't hear what
she had said. I was kind of
looking for some information for
her so if you don't mind, uh
super. Yes, so it just seems and
that.
And once again, I'm very aware
that, you know, different places
right now and but we've had that
a little bit of a, a leg, I
guess with the responses from
PSFA, um, with some of the
emails that we currently have,
um, ongoing between our um
It gets our advisor, uh, as
we're moving forward with the
process of building a new
school.
So we're, so we're kind of like
on a hold, we're so we're just
waiting to get a response from
PSP.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, Stewart,
um.
Uh, superintendent, I apologize
that you are experiencing this.
And um we have a solid team
currently. Uh, we are looking um
to fill one or two positions,
but we have a solid team, so
I'll have to look to see um who
you're trying to reach out to,
what your question is, and get
to you, um, get your answer as
soon as.
Thank you.
misspoke as far as it, uh, the
APG update, the last update was
in major changes. Now there's
been some technical corrections
through uh up to this chairman,
I think I still have the floor.
Is that correct?
Uh, I apologize, but we are
struggling up here to remember
what APG stands for.
Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart
adequacy planning.
So you're redoing that now
because of the changes that
we've made and so that's what
you refer to, you, you're not
quite ready with that. All
right, well, thank you for being
responsive to superman and
Gonzales. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
Others
All right, again, thank you all
so much and please we encourage
you to um follow along with us
this entire interim.
As we move forward. Thank you.
Um, we'll move to public
comment.
Talking slowly to give some wait
time to our folks.
They get that together.
And see if we have.
We
You know.
OK.
Well, cool.
Um, I did want to say before we
adjourn for, I don't know,
holiday, I don't know. Can you
call it that? August break
because a lot of us are in
schools, um, so we'll be
returning back to school, tend
not to have meetings or at least
when I chair like to not have a
meeting in August because
school's back, we're all very
busy, um, with the beginning of
school and then come back in in
September, um.
But I did want to say thank you
to Director Romero, um, who will
be leaving her position at PSFA
I think at the end of the month.
Um, so thank you so much for
your service and your work, um,
on behalf of um PSFA, um, on
behalf of the schools around um
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you.
infrastructure that has been
built for
over 20 years and it is one of
the best programs, um, out there
nationwide and to be part of
that has been such a. Thank you.
And with that, we'll see you all
in September. Thank you, folks.
