To order
Uh, could we and welcome
everyone here on a uh Wednesday
morning.
Uh, bright and early.
So again, uh can we uh call the
rope, please.
Randolph Terry.
completely.
you know?
Pres.
John Senna.
Yeah.
He
He.
confirmed.
Thank you. We have uh an agenda
before us. Are there any
adjustments to the agenda?
Mr. O'Meara.
Mr. Chair, members, there are no
adjustments.
So I would entertain a motion to
approve the agenda as presented.
So moved 2nd.
Motion in a second.
Those in favor of approving the
agenda, please indicate by
saying I. I.
I was opposed
The agenda is approved.
And
OK.
Just getting started.
We have, uh, next on the agenda.
Um, correspondence.
Is there any correspondence to
come before us today, Mr. Chair
members, there's no
correspondence.
And we'll move on then to uh a
little public comment.
Is there anyone in the audience
wishing to make public comment
at this time.
Anyone wishing not will move on
then to the finance uh report.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members, you'll turn your
attention to page 8 in your
e-books. I'll take you through
the executive summary for the
financial plan. Starting with
the key points for the award
year to date updates, this is
reflective of lines 34 and 36 on
the sources and uses detail, the
net change we present this
meeting is $14 million increase.
Uh, first, the uses for these
items include an out of cycle
update, uh, Des Moines mascara
or Des Moines combined is
requesting teacher housing
construction funding with the
state match of 198,000. A local
mass reduction of 1.2 million,
bringing the total request to
1.4 million.
Next, uh, just highlighting, um,
some actions that took place at
the April 24th special PSCOC
meeting for hubs, uh, the two
items below are just a recap of
what was awarded at that meeting
and has been incorporated into
the financial plan.
First, the new middle school
received an award language
change in construction funding
requests, uh, the state match
for that was $31.2 million. They
also received a waiver of $14.1
million bringing the total
approved to 45.
For a million dollars.
Next
Kaiser Middle School also
received an award language
change in construction funding
requests, the state match for
that was $33.6 million. Uh, we
will also be engaging with the
district to discuss potentially
the use of an advance and uh
when they will need it. So I'll
follow up with that once we meet
with the district.
Next, moving on to a word
language changes, uh, for Los
Lunas and Parrish Elementary is
requesting an award language
change. There's currently no
fiscal impact. Um, the details
can be found in the consent
item, but this is a new
construction instead of a
replacement rental.
Uh, finally, uh, Mr. Chair,
members, moving on to page 9,
for other items, we have an
update to line 12 on the sources
and uses we've added BDCP back
for their $10 million based on
clarification we received from
council and other members uh to
incorporate that and then we've
also met with uh the broadband
group earlier this week and
we're discussing the logistics
of transitioning them out of
PSFA and to do it in their own
item with the bonds and so
we'll, we'll follow up with that
information as we go through and
get to the end of the fiscal
year.
Thank you.
Uh, now, Mr. Chair members,
moving on to page 10, uh, taking
you through the, the actual
financial plan, starting with
the sources and uses. First
you'll see line 12 BDCP is
highlighted with the two items
in FY 25 and 26 or 26 and 27,
excuse me, highlighted for the
10 million. This is just where
we've added back, uh, the future
10 million that they will be
receiving from the fund, uh,
that we will certify on future
bonds. Moving on to page 11,
this is the summary of changes,
uh, since the last meeting and
the special meeting, so the
meeting on the 14th and the
meeting on the.
5th. Uh, first, the two hops
items have been added from uh
the special meeting just showing
the total amounts that we, they
were approved for. Also Santa
Rosa Anton Chico received $1.5
million in Gallup Indian Hills
