to how wild these microphones
are.
Representative Cullen, good
morning.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm uh Representative
Catherine Cullen, uh, District
57, northern part of.
is
Johnny Benavi, public member
from Grant County.
Alright, welcome.
And
Mr. Chair, Senator Pat Boone,
uh, Senate District 27, Travis
Curry to Marca Lee and
Roosevelt.
All right. Thank you for joining
us. We'll swing over here. Good
morning. Good morning, Amanda
Lois Public Education
Department. Good morning, Ashley
Lee, um, State Board of Finance
here on behalf of Secretary.
Good morning, Lee and Andy,
director of leadership
development for CES and I'm a
public member. Chairman Debbie
Serignon, I represent House
District 21 in Bernamillo
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Vice
Chairman, members, uh, Derek
Lente, District 65 representing
parts of Sanival County, San
Juan County, and Rio Riba
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, uh,
state Senator Mimi Stewart,
District 17 in Albuquerque, it's
the.
East Central gateway and the
International. Alright, and vice
chair.
Good morning, Bill Soulles,
state senator, uh, from Las
Cruces District 37, the East
Mesa side where the beautiful
Oregon Mountain Desert Peaks
National Monument is located.
All right. Welcome, folks. So my
name's Andres Romero. I
represent House District 10,
which is as far south as you can
go in Berlio County and parts of
southeast Albuquerque, um, happy
to be able to chair this
committee once again. I chaired
it a couple years ago. Um and I
noticed that there are a lot of
returning members, which is
awesome. Um, and some new
members as well. So, um,
For each item will have our
presentations. I'll keep a
running list of um folks that
would like to ask questions. So
please go ahead, get my
attention, all that sort of
stuff. I'm a high school
teacher, so I'm used to
distractions. I'll put your name
on the list, um, and then we
will go down the list, um, for
questioning once Q&A happens um
Simon's away. I'll call on
representing me Moya to
introduce herself, and then
we'll get to our staff for our
committee.
introduce themselves as well. So
representative, please.
Thank you, uh, Representative,
uh, Tanya Mirabalmoya District
7,
blend and eastern part of
Valencia County. I am also a
high school teacher, so I'm
trying to find a day that I'll
actually have some uh quiet time
this summer, but it seems to
fill up pretty quickly, but, uh,
pretty excited about this. I,
uh, I, I am, I love the fact
that I get to be here and in
education because I get to think
about all things, education and
see it from all sides, so it's
pretty exciting. So thank you.
Fill up quickly and go by fast.
Uh, so Simon, please, if you
would.
Hello, Simon Suzuki, I am a
staff attorney with the
Legislative council Service and
will be lead staff on Pescuda.
It's my 2nd year working with
the task force, uh, really
learned a lot last interim and
look forward to the work we're
going to do this year. Thank you
very much.
Cool. Alright, so director,
please, um, I don't believe
we'll get to committee business
after our first presentation.
Please, director, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members. Uh, my name is Iris
Romero. I'm the executive
director for PSFA. I'd like to
introduce our new senior
projects manager, Mr. Matthew
Kirkin, and also with me today
is our CFO Matthew Schimmel. So
I'm excited to present to you
to, uh, kind of give you a heads
up of what's transpired over the
last fiscal year or fiscal year
25, um, on our agenda today,
we're gonna do a quick overview
of the organizational structure
for those of you who are fairly
new, uh
To the committee as well as a
list of the programs the council
currently um spearheads and
awards. Also, we're gonna talk
about the new awards that were,
uh, the new projects that were
awarded in fiscal year 25, as
well as talk about a couple of
the uh projects that were
completed during the fiscal year
as well. We'll give you a
listing of our current active
projects. And finally, we're
going to kind of excited to do a
few spotlight projects to let
you.
No, uh, where they are in their
uh construction phase.
On your next page on the
organization.
Just a real quick a brief
overview, um, many of you know
this, uh, organizational flow,
uh, but we are public school
facilities authority, we are
considered staff to the public
school capital Outlay Council.
Um, so what we like to consider
ourselves our data collectors
and we work hand in hand with
our districts and other
stakeholders to prevent to be
able to provide um complete and
robust, uh, packages for the
council so that they can make uh
the best decisions possible for
our districts and stakeholders.
What I do want to mention is
currently PSFA um has gone
through a bit of a transition.
We've lost some key
members within the organization
and um a lot of our departments
that um
in charge of ensuring that we
got new projects also, um,
ensuring that our projects are
moving forward and have a really
in-depth view of the businesses
of uh PSFA. So right now we are
working on, um,
Filling those positions,
ensuring that awards or projects
stay stay getting awarded and
making sure that our schools are
still moving forward um in those
construction programs. So, um, I
wanted to mention that we're
kind of in a transition period.
So we're trying to ensure that
all businesses moving, um, as
quickly and efficiently. Um, a
couple of the positions that we
are currently looking to fill is
actually we failed our senior
projects manager.
physician who is in charge of
our field, uh, department who um
is in charge of the regional
project managers. They are
regional managers that work hand
in hand with our districts in
those construction projects. The
other position we're looking to
uh fill is our program's
manager.
Uh, we had a wonderful, uh,
programs manager who just had
her eyes dotted, T's crossed,
and she went off to do um other
things and so we're looking to
build that and um that position
is in charge of um the new
projects coming forward when we
open up the new awards cycle.
And I'm happy to report that we,
uh, just recently hired a new
deputy director of capital
operations, uh, who will start
July 1st. So all that to say,
these are key positions that
were just really working uh to
transition and get ready to move
forward for the next fiscal
year.
Um, let's transition into the
public school capital outlay
council who is administers the
dollars in the fund, and they
are in charge of awarding these
projects. And then finally, as
the task force, uh, you're
tasked to oversee the council
and the business that we do.
On your next page, Mr. Chair and
members.
Um, here's a list of our current
programs that the council is
able to award.
Number one, being our standard
space program. This is, um,
where it involves school
replacement, new construction,
additions, and this is the
biggest, uh, program, um,
biggest program that we have.
The second one would be the
systems-based programs. This is
when a district is in need of a
new roof or HVAC system. The
different systems within the
facility.
Then uh we can offer the pre-K
program, which, uh, includes
facilities, uh, renovations, and
additions and uh any district
that has a pre-K program
qualifies for this.
Uh, we also have our teacher
housing pilot program, uh, for
housing that includes the rural
and tribal areas with no
available housing for teachers.
So, uh, we have, still have that
program going. Lease assistance,
this also helps, uh, charter
schools with their lease
assistants with their uh
facilities that they uh have a
LPA uh with.
And finally, as you may know, in
order for a district or charter
school to qualify for a public
school capital outlay funding,
they need to have a 5-year
facility master plan.
So, uh, one of the programs is
we, uh, the PSCOC can award
funds to assist in that
endeavor.
On your next slide, Mr. Chair
and members, here is a recap of
the new awards that were uh
granted in fiscal year 25 to
include 4 standard space
projects.
14 systems-based projects.
You teach your housing and one
pre-K.
And we'll go over those a little
bit.
Further.
Next slide is your list of
schools that received a
standard-based uh award for
fiscal year 25 to include
silver, which they are uh doing
a cliff combined school. There
is the ranking and it is a
replacement school.
In Bloomfield is consolidating 3
of its schools, Central Primary,
Nabaani, and Mesa Alta Junior
High and consolidated school,
and this is a replacement
school.
In River Rancho received two
standard base awards, one for
their Lincoln Middle School, uh,
which is for a planning study,
systems upgrades and partial
renovation, and the rear rancho
High School, which was ranked
number 99 planning studies
systems upgrades, special
education classroom additions.
Next slide is your list of the
systems-based programs, uh,
systems-based awards that the
council awarded this year. Um,
and it includes 5 district.
that got awarded for demolition
and the remainder um was
anywhere between needing a new
roof, fire alarm systems,
plumbing, exterior walls, roofs,
drainages, and that included
Amagora High School, Clayton
Junior High, Eunice High School,
Grants High School, Hatch Valley
Middle School, Logan combined,
Ruidoso High School and Silver,
two schools within Silver
Harrison, Schmidt and La Plata
Middle School.
Of those teacher housing awards,
we have Corona, who had two
teacher housing duplexes awarded
and hatch 5 teacher housing
units, along with uh Rio Rancho
Shining Star preschool received
a pre-K award.
Here's a list, Mr. Chair and
members of the task force of the
projects that we were able to
close out this fiscal year. It
included one standard space um
project.
And 9 systems and that there is
your list for that.
Mr. Chair, members, I do want to
have a a side note that PSFA has
um been in an endeavor to close
out several projects over time,
um, that, or sometime there was
a lapse in a time frame where we
weren't able to um close out
projects on a process level.
These pro these projects were
completed, but internally we
needed to do uh some process
type of cloth.
And uh PSFA staff has done a
great job on catching up with
those with that endeavor and um
Miss Ashley Lee as the chair of
the AMS Committee, um, has
really spearheaded and, and
assisted PSFA in getting those
done. So, um, we're happy to say
that we're making progress in
those areas and ensuring that we
have policies and procedures in
place of that, uh, we can
continue doing those in a timely
manner.
I want to then take you to the
next slide.
Here is your list of our current
active projects.
Um, that's include 62 standard
space semi to systems, 11 pre-K
8 teacher housing.
43 FMPs.
measurement and verification,
and we still have the 66
broadband projects. The last 3
are um older projects impact 8
out of adequacy and schools, uh,
school security where these are
um in more of the process close
out uh step in closing this out.
So these are pretty much almost
done, so, but I wanted to make
sure you saw the complete list
of what we have as current now,
we're gonna go ahead.
and go to the next couple of
slides where we're excited to um
briefly talk about some active
projects that are currently
going on, and so, um, I, I have
Mr. Girkin with me that if you
want any more in depth
information or questions regard
so first of all, we have Gadsden
Riverside on track center. This
is a pre-K, um,
Project with the GSF of 19,259
square feet, uh, with an
enrollment of 114, um, again,
this is serving pre-K and you
see a little blur below
indicating kind of where we are
in that project, and it's just
exciting to see um how these
projects are moving forward, um.
Lots of them on track, um, under
budget, and so we're really
excited to share these projects
with you. Recently, um, Os
Heiser got awarded their
construction funding request.
Uh, this is Hobbs, it has a
prototype middle school
initiative going on. It, it's
helping them, um, with their
enrollment and the fact that
their enrollments has increased
over time, so and they've seen
the most efficient way possible
to address this uh increase in
enrollment was to uh take on
this prototype school as well as
uh do a procurement method of
Construction management at risk
and um that is designed to
ensure, to help with costs and
and labor as well. So we're
really excited to see that the
this got awarded in conjunction
with a new middle school, what,
what they call it right now is
Hobbs New Middle School. So they
will be facilitating both of
these projects at the same time
under that Seymour um
methodology.
We also have Gallup Tohatchie
High School. This is uh close to
58,000 square foot facility
serving grades 9 through 12.
Um, the enrollment is 300, uh,
looks like the construction
funding was awarded in December
of 23, and currently their
project is ahead of schedule.
Next we have Grant's Bluewater,
um, what I heard, uh, this
morning is they will be
utilizing the new facility for
the uh new um school year now in
the fall, so we're excited to
see that happening on their
23,000 square foot new facility
serving pre-K through 6th grade.
We have Las Cruces, Columbia
Elementary School. They are
87,000 square foot facility
serving 3 K through 5th grade.
Uh, with an enrollment of 752
students. Uh, the construction
began in February of 2024, uh,
Despite some challenges with
their existing site, the project
team has begun their home
stretch and stands at
approximately 85% complete. A
major district realignment or
follow the full occupancy
expected in October of 2025.
Then we have Demi, My little
school, another pre-K facility,
uh,
A little over 13,000 square
feet.
And we have this vital pre-K
project nears completion. It's
at 70% complete.
And uh we're excited about this
one, a new
The new construction will aid
Demi schools in the goal of
providing safe and
And finally, Mr. Chair and
members, we would like to
spotlight Albuquerque sign
Language Academy. They recently
had their beam signing, um,
ceremony, um, so many members of
the community within Albuquerque
got together and um our chair
Joe Gui was able to speak as
well as Secretary Padilla from
um public education department
just to see the communities come
together for this amazing
project. Uh, it's a new facility
of over 61,000 square feet.
Serving kindergarten through
12th with the anticipated
enrollment of over 300.
Um
Instruction for Asla's new
facility started in September of
2024 and the anticipated
completion date is June 19th of
2026.
And Mr. Chair, members, um,
thank you for allowing us to
give you this update of what's
been transpiring over the last
fiscal year, and we will stand
for any questions.
Great. Thank you for that
question, folks.
Mhm
Don't be so representativearana,
please. Thank you. Thank you for
your presentation. Thank you,
Mr. Truman. So I'm new to this
committee. How, how are these
numbers designated? What, what
are the numbers telling me? I'm
sorry, which number? The numbers
you have different projects with
numbers on them, it just, um,
Mr. Chair and representative, is
it the rankings? So we have a
database, it is called the
facility assessment database
where we have a group of
assessors that go out and assess
these facilities.
Then they bring that data back
to our uh that manager.
Uh, Mr. Andrew Martinez, and he
plugs in those numbers, and then
the ranking is generated based
on that, those assessments of
those facilities.
Um, Mr. Chairman, are those
rankings somewhere on a website
or something so we can see them.
Mr. Chair Representative
Sainada. Yes, ma'am, I can send
that to you. It is on our
website, OK, and it is
considered the facilities
assessment database of that, OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman, one more
question. When you build new
schools. Do you have any kind of
monitoring for like toxic
pollution, we have certain areas
of the state that's pretty toxic
and those, I just wonder if
there's any kind of sensors
built into the school to, you
have a new school in Hobbs to
really monitor how, how clean
that air is, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Chair, Representative Soana,
uh, thank you for that question.
Um, this is something that is
very site-specific once a
project is is designated, if
it's an existing school, we have
a school required data that that
lets us know if there are any uh
toxic substances within the
building that would have to be
dealt with prior to any
renovation or construction or
new sites.
Um
I live outside of Cuba, New
Mexico, and we're doing a, a
pre-K facility up there, um.
When they do the geotechnical
testing of the soils. They, they
do what they can to make sure
that we don't have anything that
had been buried there
beforehand before we build over
it, and then when we have
situations where
Things like uh radon or or a
possibility.
Uh, their testing methods to
ensure that we have those uh
addressed.
Uh, we have one site that is
that is suspected of, of radon
and so we made preparations
during the design for collection
points where venting of the
soil's out.
Out through the building instead
of into the building, uh, or
being taken care of during the
design process.
With any luck, we won't have to,
uh,
Drop a fan and some pipe down
through there, but uh we have
access points located in case we
do need to be able to do that.
So we take uh
Both the, the soil conditions
into account and we also think
about things like radon.
And, uh, anytime we're doing a
renovation, we make sure that we
have all the hazardous materials
that might have been used during
early construction, anything
before 1983.
Uh, to make sure that we provide
a very clean, safe, and
question. Um, sort of, Mr.
Chairman, so I just worry about
hobbs mostly because of all the
um extraction sites and the, the
ozone is so high in that area,
it just, I just want to make
sure something is the schools
that are, that are there are
monitored in some way and
reported on because I would like
to see what's happening in that
area as far as um the emissions
because, because we are having
more oil wells and more, more
extraction and like I said, the
ozone is, is very high in that
area.
Thank you.
So.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, as I did some
quick calculations, it looks
like costs are moderating a
little bit, the ones out in
Grants and uh tohacheli or it
looks like those still are up
around $1000 a square foot where
the Hobbs Las Cruces, the
various other ones look like
they're 5 or 600. Is that
accurate? Um, and it's nice to
see those two very expensive
ones are ahead of schedule and
under budget because I know
we've been very concerned about
that, but if you talk a little
bit.
about what's happening with the
costs and things of that sort,
and is it starting to moderate a
bit. Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Souls, it is stable, um, what
you see here is a lot of these
schools were awarded.
COVID or during COVID, um, but
what we're seeing right now is
things are are about the same
over the past year. Um, we do
see uh costs a little less
around the I-25 corridor. And
obviously, as you get more to
the rural areas, uh, depending,
it could be anywhere between
800 $900 per square foot. We
haven't seen that drop yet. Um,
so that's kind of what the the
dollars that we're seeing.
Thank you. I just know over the
last couple of years that's been
one of the biggest concerns as
to why and whether it was the
cost of labor or materials or
both or
Just cause there weren't any
other bids out there and
therefore high bids were were
winning or not, but it looks
like things have stabilized a
bit and aren't continuing and is
inflation catches back up, it's
actually moderating the prices.
Thank you. Thank you.
Other questions, folks?
Alright. So I did have a
question, um, about the building
considerations for we have a
pre-K facility we have
elementary school, we have
middle school, we have high
school, um, with all sorts of
different building needs. Could
you talk a little bit about the
differences between pre-K
facilities, uh, elementary,
middle, and high school.
Um, Mr. Chair, members, um, we
have an individual with PSFA
that works very well with our
school district to track their
enrollment, um, as well as their
organization of the um of their
entire district to ensure that
they're not doubling up in areas
such as if you have a pre-K
program in one of your
elementary schools where, and
the council does a very good job
to ensure that we are doing our
due diligence.
to make sure that um we're
tracking that one area, um, as
it pertains it kind of outside
of
Uh, the programs you indicated,
uh, Mr. Chair, um, is such a
CTE. We're seeing a lot of CTE
where a middle school is gonna
want CTE programs, and then is
there going to be similar CTE
programs in the high school. Are
there, do they have access to
community colleges that also
have CTE, so we have to really
take a look at the district as a
whole to ensure that, again,
we're not doubling up and that
there's a clear path.
For these programs moving
forward and Mr. Chair, I'm
hoping that
Answers your director, it, it,
it does.
Definitely in part and part of
what I'm wondering as well is
the actual physical space, so
like the dimensions of
classrooms, for example, comes
to mind when we've talked about
pre-K classrooms, the need for
that, perhaps additional
bathrooms when you talk about
CTE additional uh uh plumbing
may be required, gas lines and
this sort.
Yes, Mr. Chair, um, members of
the task force, keep in mind we
and this will come in a later
meeting for task force. Uh, we
have a new calculator that
Are, um, fad manager, Mr.
Martinez, Andrew Martinez,
really looked at the spaces
needed within each facility, and
I know a lot of the core
classroom space has gone up.
From um 6:50 to 800, uh, excuse
me, was it 900, 800 square
square feet. So a lot of this
stuff, a lot of these spaces
were looked at looked at within
the past 2 years where we had a
committee who went out and did
round tables.
Um, to look at the adequacy
standards and have those
conversations. And so the
adequacy standards were updated
as well as the uh new calculator
that looked at
For classroom spaces. It looked
at the need for additional
spaces for um
Special ed
Uh, and it really looked at
those spaces to see what the
needs were for each of the grade
levels. Cool.
Thank you for that.
No other questions, folks.
Cool. Thank you all so much for
being here. We really appreciate
it. Thank you.
All right, so we'll move on to
our second agenda item.
Well, Mr. Montoya, are you
ready?
We'll give it a moment
presentation gets distributed to
everybody, and then once it
does, Mr. Montoya, please.
Alrighty. Oh, we'll wait till it
gets distributed and then once
it does, then we'll go ahead and
get started. I'll wait for the
green light.
Cool. I think everybody's got
it. Please. All righty, Mr.
Chair, members of the task
force, uh, my name is Mark
Motoya. I'm a senior analyst
with uh Legislative Education
Study Committee. Today, I'll be
providing a brief recap of the
session, specifically public
school capitality bills that
passed, and a little bit of
background on what those bills
do.
So starting on page.
You.
I know this number's probably
fresh in everybody's mind, uh,
legislature was pretty busy.
Approximately 1,328 legislative
items were introduced.
195 items passed.
Approximately 126 K through 12
education bills were introduced
and approximately 48 of those
education-related bills passed.
Uh, I just wanna quickly plug
our post session review, um,
every piece of civilization
that's related to education is
included in our appendix, and
there'll be a brief breakdown,
hyperlinks, all the data you you
might need.
So on page 3, you'll see the 6
legislative items that I'll be
covering today.
All of them relate to public
school Capital Alley.
And we'll start with Senate Bill
48, Community Benefit Fund.
So SB 48 established the
Community Benefit fund.
And it will be administered by
DFA Department of Finance
Administration and authorizes 8
types of projects aimed at the
following goals listed on slide
4. These include items such as
cutting greenhouse gas
emissions, and increasing
notable energy use, the support
and sustainable transportation
through EV infrastructure and EV
purchases, electric vehicle.
It'll just climate change
impacts on health, agriculture,
land ecosystems, promote green
economy by developing climate
resilient industries.
And also we'll invest in
workforce training to support
climate and sustainability goals
across sectors.
Subsection A, paragraph 6 of the
bill states it's for the
assistance of public entities in
the purchase of electric
vehicles and related charging
infrastructure to reduce the use
of combustion engines.
SP 48 also requires DFA to
consult with
The energy, minerals, and
natural research department, ME
for the utilization of a data
tool to identify communities
that are experiencing
disproportionate burdens and
climate change, energy, health,
housing, legacy pollution,
transportation, water,
wastewater, and workforce
development.
House Bill 2, which is also
known as a general Appropriation
Act, also allocates $60 million
to the PSFA public school
Facilities Authority.
From the community benefit fund
for electric vehicle charging
infrastructure for school
districts, including the cost of
upgrading from diesel, fuel
vehicles to electric school
buses, and that expenditure is
good through FY 26 to 28.
This allocation was made
contingent on SB 48 or with SB
48.
Next, we have Senate Bill 82.
This was endorsed by both
Bascudi and Alisi and made
several amendments to the public
school capital Ali Act, and the
bill was designed to extend
fiscal relief to school
districts and allow them to
continue as needed construction
projects.
This will also allow LESC and
its partners, LFC, PSFA to
continue to look at the state
and local match and find
improvements on how to fix that
that formula.
So what SPD SB 82 does is two
main things. Uh, it extends a
temporary local match reductions
of 33 or 50% for dishes with
less than 200 students or men.
And that was established by uh
SB 131 back in 2023. It extends
that through 2027.
And as I set up, uh, above, it
will continue to allow districts
to access local match reductions
and continue with needed
projects.
But it also does is it demands
and eliminates certain statutory
waiver eligibility criteria for
districts, uh, to qualify for
local match waivers and
reductions.
On page 7.
You'll see a breakdown of what
those changes were to the
criteria. Um, A, the school
district cannot, so it'll be
able to call for audition if it
meets these certain criteria,
and they fall into two buckets.
There's A, the school district
cannot afford its local match
using it's all its resources.
has insufficient bonding
capacity over the next 4 years
to provide the local match
necessary to complete the
project and has levied a
residential tax rate of at least
10 meals. The other way it can
qualify is the school district
has fewer than 1500 men.
And has levied a residential tax
district uh tax rate of at least
7 meals. And we did provide a um
visual here and kind of breaks
out exactly what happened with
that bill.
I will now move on to Senate
Bill 280.
280 granted in New Mexico
Military Institute, eligibility
for the public school capitally
funding mechanism through PSCOC.
SP 280 amended the public school
Capital Alley Act by adding to
the Mexican Military Institute
to the definition for
constitutional special schools.
This definition included New
Mexico School for the Deaf and
New Mexico School for the Blind
and visually impaired.
The addition makes Nimi eligible
for capital hourly funding
through the PSCOC award process.
Guess you'll see funding for
school infrastructure is based
on standards or systems-based
awards in which qualifying
projects receive state support
to cover a portion of the
project costs.
Now, one thing I will note,
although SB 280 did allow Nimi
to access the PSCOC fund. It did
not account for some things that
still need to be established.
Nemi does not currently follow,
follow New Mexico's statewide
adequacy standards or special
purpose educational facility
adequaccy standards.
It does not serve students with
disabilities, which is outlined
in the latter.
And applicable standards will
need to be created for Nimi to.
Um, probably be assessed.
So just to kind of put into
context what those two standards
do. The statewide adequacy
standards, they speak more to
educational space and special
schools, they do, uh, talk about
housing, but neither I talk
about uh military institute and
all the facilities that they'll
need to operate. So that's
something that will need to be
established before they can be
fully implemented.
And then on page 9, just a quick
overview of what standards-based
awards and system-based awards
are, I won't read through that,
um, but they're there for your
benefit.
Moving on to page 10.
Senate Bill 401 Broad Bat for
Education. The Senate Bill 401
transferred the broadband
development and connectivity
program, also known as BDCP from
the PSLC to the Department of
Information Technology,
specifically the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion,
Obi.
The Chancellor of BTCP includes
all associated responsibilities,
such as the implementation of
the statewide education network
along with personnel and all its
resources.
SB 401 authorizes the use of
servan's tax bonds proceeds for
education, technology,
infrastructure. The bill
requires Obai and PSOC to
develop a related state works
statewide standards and
establish a statewide education,
technology network with grant
support for school districts.
Oh,
it also allows Obi to certify up
to $10 million in ser tax bonds
annually for education
technology infrastructure
projects. SB 401 also carries a
sunset date of July 1, 2030.
So at this point, um, we'll need
to review that fund and see if
it would be something that would
be extended.
HB 128. This one doesn't quite
fall under the PSLC, but it
still provides capitally for
schools, so I figured it was
perfect that I include this. So
HP 128 establishes the local
solar access fund under the Mexo
Finance Authority and MFA.
try to write gas for solar
energy systems, including those
with energy storage, the
eligible local governments,
school districts, land grants,
Mercedes, and Native American
communities.
HP 128 included criteria for
NMFA to prioritize projects,
including minimum eligibility
requirement eligibility
requirements, brand caps, and a
focus on hiring New Mexico
workers.
HP 128 allows for grants to be
awarded to eligible entities or
various New Mexico councils of
government.
Uh, we'll also add that HB2
provided $20 million to support
this new fund.
And uh grant can be used for
planning and design, technical
assistance to apply for federal
or other funds, and it also
allows for NMFA's administrative
costs to implement this one.
Lastly, we had HP 450.
Caper Ali projects.
H 450 made a total of $120.4
million in direct outlay
appropriations to public
schools, public education
department, and higher education
department, and this also
includes $50 million which was
appropriate to PSFA for school
security, career and technical
education equipment and school
maintenance and repair.
The distribution methodology for
the $50 million will be
proportional to the FY 26 SB 9
distribution amount, which is
calculated by PED with a minimum
of $100,000 to each district for
security CTE and general
maintenance repair needs.
SFA will administer the
distribution and communicate
each school district's Catholic
distribution amount.
The distribution will not affect
the local match of the schools.
Our affect any potential case to
see um awards. A full breakdown
of 450 is included in our
post-session review LASC
website, and we'll talk about
every school and the amount that
they received, including HED and
PSSA.
And then a quick plug.
to page 13, you can review all
our documents that are available
on our website, which includes
our quick guide, post session
review, um, a lot of other
briefs that we provide and of
course bill analysis.
We also have our dashboard on
page 14, which has a lot of
great information on our, on New
Mexico schools.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, I will
stand for any questions or
comments.
Hm
Thank you for the presentation.
Questions, folks?
shy bunch represent Saana,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
had a question. Thank you for
the presentation. I just had a
question on 128, and you kept
saying if they were eligible,
what makes what makes them
eligible, do you know?
I actually have a
chair represents. Let me look
real quick. I have the analysis
up real quick.
See if I can get that for you
quickly.
Representative, I might have to
do a little bit of reading.
Would you mind if I get back to
you.
That's all I have. Thank you.
Other questions, folks?
Um, I did have a question for
you, um, on page 8, so the SB
280 for Nimi, um, when you say
that
applicable uh standards will
need to be created to address
Nimi's unique purpose and
structure, um, whose shoulders
is that ultimately going to fall
on in order to come up with
those standards, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, I believe that really fall
on the shoulders of PSCOC and
their PSA and and do we have
about a rough deadline about
when those standards will need
to be made. I see the director
coming up.
chair
Mr. Chair, right now we don't
have a timeline. What we do see
happening those uh creating
those standards during the
interim, um, because it's way
too soon to open it up for them
for the July uh new awards
timeline, so it probably
wouldn't be until the following
fiscal year, when the uh
application that will give us
about a year.
Oh, OK, so give you a good
amount of time to really think
through what those standards
would be. OK, cool.
No other questions, folks.
Didn't inspire anybody? OK.
Cool. Well, thank you all so
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you.
I know, jeez.
All right, Simon. And leave
Europe with our work plan for
the interim, so we'll give it
all.
So we'll sign all by time for
Simon. So we need to approve at
least the agenda for today. So
can I have a motion on agenda
approval.
All right, thank you,
representative. Do have a 2nd,
2nd. Any objection to our
agenda, good cause it's too late
to revise it. So yeah, an
agenda.
All right.
I in
Please work plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So it
looks very similar to um the
work plan that the task force
approved last year and part of
the reason for that is because
there are statutory
requirements. Um, so in general,
um, a duty of the task force is
to monitor the overall progress
of bringing all schools up to
the statewide adequacy
standards, um, developed, you
know, through the statute.
Monitor the progress and
effectiveness of programs
administered pursuant to the
PSCOA and the public Capital
Improvements Act, monitor the
existing permanent revenue
streams to ensure that they
remain adequate long-term
funding sources for public
school capital outlay projects,
and oversee the work of the
PSCOC, the PSFA as they perform
functions pursuant to the PSCOA,
particularly as they implement
the statewide um base process
for making grants.
Awards. And then additionally,
the statute does give the task
force room to look into other,
other issues, um,
So it depending on the chair and
the the desire of the rest of
the task force membership, um,
We could spend some time looking
into the developments in the
Zuni lawsuit, uh, review changes
to the public school capital
outlay system, um, which we kind
of already did today thanks to
Mr. Montoya from LESC examined
the impact of inflation on
school construction, maintenance
costs, and the ability of the
current funding framework to
respond to changing costs.
Receive an updated forecast of
supplemental severance tax bond
proceeds and review the
long-term trends and severance
tax revenue along with a range
of upside and downside risks
review the expenditure of
federal funds and possible
additional federal funding
opportunities and I do believe,
Mr. Chair, that there are
several um committees that are,
are working on, on those things,
this interim as well. And
address the sort of catch-all
address whatever other.
She's come up for that members
um find important.
All right. Questions members.
Senator Pinto,
please of the committee.
So we talk about constriction
costs and square footage and
some of the schools that are
under budget and.
But
How many do we factor in how
many schools are signing a
waiver and overcrowding our
classrooms.
I
I'll defer to Mr. Romero,
Senator, Mr. Chair.
Can, can you elaborate on your
question.
So my understanding is that, you
know, the best practices that we
have, you know, a student
teacher ratio and a certain
amount, I believe it's like 20,
a little over 20.
But yet we're overcrowding our
classrooms up to 10 to 30 kids,
and there are schools districts
that do have waivers, do we
factor that in?
I mean, we're, we're building
and we're saying wow, this is
the square footage, we increased
the classroom size, but for
school to increase their
classroom size when we're
presuming they're gonna have 20
kids and yet they're packing the
classroom with 30, there's still
not enough room.
Mr. Chair, Senator Pinto, um, as
I mentioned earlier, we did, uh,
work through a new calculator
that increases the size of a
core classrooms. As far as the
waiver, I guess I'm, I, my
question back, is that a waiver
to increase the number of
students, because as it pertains
to PSA, um, we don't monitor how
many students are within those,
um, those classrooms. We build
according to what PE.
These requirements are and uh we
don't want the facility is
built, then the districts, I
guess go from there.
So we're still building schools
and we still have the inadequate
capacity and then we're still
having waivers and we're
building these new schools and
we're still overcrowding the
classrooms. We're still not
meeting the standards. We're
still kind of, you know, with
this lawsuit too, it seems like
we're just um doing the same
thing we've been doing.
that's on you. Senator Pinto, I
would like to have this
discussion further with you and
no specific school districts so
that we can.
Explore that.
Other questions, Senator
Stewart, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, my only question is how are
we moving forward with the
continued study of this formula.
You know, we're, we're kicking
the can down the road.
we keep this at the 2nd bill,
Senate Bill 82 that we've passed
to have those uh
Local matches reduce state
matches increase. We keep saying
we're doing it temporarily until
we can study it, so how is that
studying planning can happen. I
mean this involves, let's say
finance committee, the SFA
PSCOC, all three of those, and
so I'm just uh
I'm always impressed by the
staff of these committees. Uh,
it was really the staff that
came up with this just brilliant
waiver changes that I think will
make a huge difference. But kind
of what's the plan for having a
bill by 2027 that sets the
formula in place and if, if, if
I may, Mr. Chair, so, um, so
this is the time when the task
force can have that.
conversation, um, we could
Um, uh, amend the work plan to
address that. We can prioritize
that. The legislative council,
um, the, the task force could
also request that the
legislative council um approve a
budget, um, to, to cover
additional costs if that's
necessary. Um,
So Mr. Cha, we would like the
work plan to reflect a priority,
um, like the one, the pro tem is
raising that could
These sort of worked out today.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I, I, I'm,
I'm looking forward to hearing
from LFC, but I, I, I don't know
that we have to do much. It is
the staff from these groups that
are really looking at this, try
to figure out what works long
term with the money we have,
with the needs we have from all
our districts, so, um, I would
like us to at least on our work
plan, have reports about it, not
necessarily we have to.
do anymore, but that we get
reports from these staff, I see.
Oh yeah, see, nodding his head
and.
Here from LFC.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart,
so I do have an update for you
on that. Um, so, uh, within LFC,
we're gonna dedicate a, a couple
of folks on our evaluation team
to do some initial work on this
question, kind of digging into
the various formula factors and
kind of the technical issues
that were still sort of unknown,
um, one last interim, uh, you
all decided to do a temporary
extension. So
So, um, the idea is for that,
um, that to kind of provide a
foundation that builds on the
Bieber study that then the three
agencies, uh, can use to kind of
take forward in that work. So
we've had some initial
discussions with LESC on scoping
for that project, um, and then,
uh, the evaluators will be
engaging more with PSFA soon. So
the goal is to have that report
completed by like early fall.
Um, and then for the 3 agencies
to kind of come back together
and use it going forward to um
make some recommendations. So I
think we should be in good shape
to
You know, have something for you
guys to workshop, um, next
interim for the 2027 session,
um, and certainly the evaluators
could come provide a report to
you on their findings, um, this
fall with, with the three of us
as well.
Alright, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, if we could hear from
Mark also.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Stewart, as Kelly said,
we have met, we are trying to
scope out how we're going to
split up the work, but
essentially what Kelly said was
correct, we know, certainly
we've presented on some of the
factors we know are absolutely
wrong, um, but they're still
continued work on other factors
and with the.
Kind of the implementation or
not sorry, the effect that they
have and seeing how we can
either fix those or change those
factors correctly address what
can actually be afforded by
these districts. So that's what
we're doing now. We're
continuing to dive into that.
It's still a little bit of a, I
won't say a fact finding, but
really diving into every element
of the formula. This session,
um, and then just want to know,
you may remember from our work
plan that was presented at our
last LEC meeting. I will be
working on that and providing
updates during the interim on
that as well.
That's great. uh, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that. I feel much
better about this now, um, but I
do think that we ought to put it
on our work plan to have a uh at
a minimum report in the fall
from from our three excellent
staff who are studying this, so
thrilling. Thank you. Yeah,
that's definitely something we
can do and uh um have it we have
2 dates, one in October 1 in
November, so whichever has that,
that would be great. But Miss
Leach, please.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you, um,
so, um, sitting on PSUC and the
AMS subcommittee chair, I've
been working as Director Romero
mentioned very closely with the
staff and other council members
and LFC staff on um the balances
of the uh the the post school
capital outlay fund. Um, and
there is a very large balance,
about 1.3 billion uh balance in
that fund. And so I don't know
if this is really um.
Maybe it's more of a report out
because I know there's a lot of
good work being done by
stuff, but kind of
understanding, you know, what of
that balance is committed to
active projects. What if that
balance can maybe be recycled
for new projects. That seems
very micro level from like a
data standpoint, but I think it
ties into the larger
conversation around the funding
formula around um waivers and
things like that. What do we
have in that fund to support the
most in need districts and how
can we be assisting those top
ranked districts that are maybe
small and struggle to come
forward for fun.
What could we be doing to ensure
that those districts come
forward and can receive funding,
and we're not leaving money on
the table each 6 months when we
have a supplemental severance
tax bond sale, you know, how can
we ensure that there's, we know
how much funding we have, how
much funding we might need in
the next uh couple of years and
make sure that we're
prioritizing that for projects
that are most in need. So I
think, uh, you know, there's
been a lot of conversation
around unspent uh capital
funding, and I think uh PSCOC
has
The largest balance of anyone's,
so I think it would be helpful.
I think it lines up with a lot
of the work that PSFA staff are
doing and uh the counselor doing
to make sure that we can
identify funding availability
and make sure we're making sure
we're in a good spot to uh be
assisting those most in the
districts.
Definitely. Thank you. uh,
Representative Bee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. I have a question and
maybe even a request regarding
the work plan and it's regarding
the uh teacher housing pilot
program that we have going on
currently, uh, just a few weeks
ago, I was a part of a coalition
that went up for LFC to Moscaro
and, and visited their their
school there and beautiful brand
new school being built and they
had a number of teacher housing
units that were also being built
as well and knowing that those
benefit primarily a large
portion of rural school
districts, can we look at
Are there accomplishments being
made? Are there limitations
being had, uh, are there further
opportunities to be had as well,
um, or is, is this program
running to to scale or should it
be reimagined in some way so
that would be one request I
would have, Mr. Chairman, thank
you.
Great. Thank you.
Take note of our 3 requests. So
working group report out, a
discussion on balance, um, in
terms of project and the balance
of the fund and then teacher
housing. That sound about right?
Other questions, comments, oh,
Senator Solis, my bad. You're so
close, I almost forgot. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Uh.
Certainly one of the roles that
this committee is oversight of
the public school facilities
authority.
But I always like and wanna make
sure that as a committee that we
stay focused towards the end as
to what legislation do we need
to pass in order to make the
processes, the systems, the, the
whatever work better, um,
because there's an interim
that's bipartisan bicameral,
it's important as we come
through that those uh priorities
get onto the list, and so I want
both members but also the staff
we work with, be thinking about
what do we need to fix to make.
It worked better, so we have
appropriate buildings, good
buildings for our kids to learn
in all the time, cause that's
our real bottom line. And as
legislators, we need to know
from you what's not working and,
and what legislation and what it
ought to look like. And so
certainly by October or November
that we ought to dedicate a
meeting or a part of a meeting
to go through.
Drafts of legislation that have
already been pre-drafted and
work out the language so that
it's pretty well geared greased
to go through the 30 day session
to, to fix things. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. So one of the things
I'll point you to in the work
plan, it's the 3rd page is.
Or our, our meeting dates, so,
um, we did tentatively have
something scheduled for August,
but we decided to take that out
and move it to November, um, so
that we have a little bit more
time as LESC as LFC as the other
interims are doing their work.
We have a clearer picture headed
into the, the next legislative
session of what we may need to
do and have that sort of
discussion so that we can have a
meeting that's a little bit
later, um, when the picture is a
little bit more.
clear at looking at legislation,
should we have it, or where
we're going to go in the 30 day
session, so that's the reason
we're going to skip an August
meeting, um.
And instead have one a little
bit later. Uh-huh. Oh, Senator
Stewart.
So Mr. Chairman, on this draft
interim.
Uh
So in in July, the draft interim
has the scooter on the 9th, but
our, but we're moving that to
the 14th. Is that correct?
Yes, it was um changed to the
14th.
Others represent Saano is that?
Oh, OK.
Uh noticing the discrepancy is
good, the teachers.
In the building noticing that,
all right.
Right. So, um, I made note of
the 3 requests. That's
definitely something we can add
into for agenda items for our
next meeting, um, but I would
take emotion on our um
Work plan.
Senator Stewart
move that we adopt our work plan
and meeting dates as presented.
All right. Thank you. Do you
have a second?
All right, seconded by
representative Sarana and
objection?
Thank you. And if folks, as you
kind of digest the information,
look over it, um, if other
things come up, please reach out
to Simon, please reach out to me
with any sort of requests that
you have, um, for topics, um,
districts that you would like to
bring forth that are having
issues. Um,
Please reach out. Simon, did you
have any last words to say? Um,
just one thing, Mr. Chair, and
uh to Senator Soul's point, um,
so the legislative members are
pretty familiar with opening
requests with legislative
council service, um, the public
members of the task force, um,
could also request legislation
on behalf of the task force, and
you could do that, um, as as
soon as you have an idea, um, so
the, the sooner we get the
request, the more time we have
to work on it and we'll have
Uh, you know, everything worked
out by the fall when the task
force is ready to review things.
So, um, you will have my email
and can uh contact me there or
by phone. Um, and with that,
that's all I have, Mr. Chair.
All right. Great.
Any final comments from any
members?
All right, I believe that's our
work for today. We'll see you
all in July.
Oh, we got something.
Oh, that's my bad. I'm a little
bit rusty. Thank you. Um, so we
do have public comment. Um,
So this is on one maybe in the
building, uh, the other one
online, um, but
Kuore MacGyver.
I've mispronounced your name,
please let me know. Correct me,
so I do better.
But the way our public comment
will work is you have up to 2
minutes to address us about your
issue.
No, no, it's gone. All right, we
had LESC staff
set for public comment, Director
so no, no, no, you didn't want
to just come up here and talk.
OK. That's good. We'll hear you
later on this month.
All right. So I guess not.
That is a meeting, yep.
All right. Have a safe trip
