Um, Mr Chair members. We knew
there might be some public
comment and we're trying to
connect them on the telephone,
but it seems like it's not
working.
The system here.
If you turn to page 13, I am
going to kind of follow the flow
that try to be as effective and
efficient as possible. Being
that we have a big agenda. So on
page 13 key points are there are
some inclusion of new systems
based projects totaling
approximately 9.5 million.
And a phase one standards
project of a 2.5 million.
Along with this new standard
space project is a million for
second phase funding.
Um, this is also what we did is
actualized 150 million of Phase
one and two out your funding,
which includes eight projects.
A lot of these will be are on
the agenda for label.
We also heard from the council
that you wanted to see what the
reversion is. Were versions are
going to be discussed. Um, that
is a
Collaboration and a combination
of work with the project. Close
outs, so we'll be talking about
re versions.
As well as again honing in on
the TPC cost per square foot.
Um
Trying to just hone in this
financial plan to give you a
better estimate.
Of what can be expected. Both
are for new awards coming
forward as well as phase two
funding. So again, I'm going to
reiterate how excited I am.
Ah, that we've been able to
collaborate very closely with
our field team and Mr
Strickland's team.
On really honing in on
timelines on cost cost per
square foot.
Um, in order to create a
financial plan that you as a
council can feel a lot more
confident and comfortable in
making the decisions that you
need to make, um projects.
If you turn to page 14
I'm going to go through a couple
of points.
Um The first item I want to talk
about is in your sources.
Fiscal year, 24 estimate.
Line three.
393 million is what we are.
Requesting for the December bond
sale.
Uh, we can talk about that more
in depth when we get to that
topic, but we've been working
again very strategically with
filled as well. A finance and
Miss leeches department and how
to strategically sell these
bonds. So again, I'll talk more
about that as we get to the
agenda.
Um, the next item is the 4.5
million.
Which is three versions that we
are going to be reverting based
on the project. Close outs work
that we've done already, so if
you want to get more detail
about that, let's uh jump to
page
22. Yeah.
This page is a detail of
district project number.
Project description, the bond
that it actually affects.
Total award amount.
What was expanded and the amount
of the reversion
As you can see, Um the majority
of these are, uh, facilities.
Master plans. F MP projects
Security projects, some systems
projects as well as a couple of
pre K and standards based
projects.
What we heard in subcommittee
is, um, in the future, they
would like to hear like to see.
maybe give some ideas as to why
they're reverting. Um so we're
gonna look into that in the near
future right now. We're really
trying to play catch up.
On those projects. Close outs.
So, um
We really didn't dive that deep
into the whys. But in the
future, we will start doing
that, as requested by
subcommittee.
What the next step is for. These
is to decertify these amounts so
that those funds can go back
into that particular bond. So
that funds those funds can be
used for a
Um, I'm going to pause after
each topic in order.
Mr Chair. I don't have questions
on reversion, but
Um, I'm just wondering, And
maybe this is like a question
for Ashley is that amount equal
to the
Madame Cheron, Miss Cars. Well,
just keep in mind for the June
bond sale.
Um, it's a as much Miss Leach
mentioned. It's about, um, the
same amount, but 100 million of
that goes strictly and this is
estimated high goes towards PDS
initiatives, so that whole
amount is not for
Um, gonna go ahead and move
forward and go back to page 14.
The next item I want to talk
about is Row five, which is
operating diversions. We just
finished. Uh, the audit, which
at this point, I'm not privy to
discuss, um
Happy happily to announce some
some great things that came
through the audit. But based on
that audit, there was a fund
balance in the operating budget
of
Approximately 1.7 million
cumulative over a few years.
Um, it wasn't on the financial
plan prior be trying to figure
out if we can use any of those
funds for
A bar that we're weak. We are
requesting later on in the
agenda.
Uh, After further research, I
realized that we cannot get back
to
To the so That is why we put
that on there. So we got an
additional 1.7 million
The next item I want to go to is
further down fiscal year 24
We are going to go to grow 31.
Again. This is has been a work
in progress.
Where we heard the council
wanted to know.
Um, what's coming down the pipe
later on and based on the
climate of the construction
industry.
What we were representing on the
financial plan was not true and
accurate, um, again based on
what's going on, So what we did
is we worked again very closely
with field started estimating,
um, definitely a lot better, so
I want to jump to page
Page 21.
We had mentioned last meeting in
October, about
Actualizing and and presenting.
A cost per square foot.
Well, it's been again a working
process and
Prior. We were using Mac.
Well when they come in for their
words, Obviously, these awards
are at TPC. Total Project costs,
so we revamped our spreadsheet
to include TPC Keep in mind and
I will continue to emphasize
this. These are still estimates
Things will change. Um, this is
our estimating tool and we're
trying to get our best estimate
for you.
Or what I want you to refer to
is.
Call him G.
Which was the original cost per
square foot at the time of the
award. So if you have a 19
fiscal year 19 project on here,
reflected by a P 19
That was the cost at that. That
was the estimated cost. At that
time we realized we can't keep
putting these estimated costs on
the financial plan when things
have changed drastically.
So again working with Mr
Finland's team, um, came up with
another estimated cost of column
I
Which includes TPC.
Call him J is the percentage
increase. Keep in mind, there's
some high percentages here and
what we heard in subcommittee is
they want to know Um why, For
instance, 14 75% increase
sounds.
Crazy, which is but there's not
not reflected on here is the
fact that it went from a system
so you'll see some of those high
increases and there is rationale
as to why they're that high.
Others are the fact that the
cost of the other thing I want
to talk about is column K.
Which is the cost per square
foot difference in dollars.
Then, um, column l.
Is an indication of whether or
not there have been talks about
possibly coming for a waiver for
phase two funding. And if so,
call him. M and N reflects the
estimated cost of that.
Um, waiver.
And at what point
They may be coming for that
waiver, so these numbers filter
in to that summary page. So,
with that topic, I will stand
for questions. Thank you.
That we continue to track the
costs from estimated costs.
Mr Chair based on
On that comment. Um, once an
award comes or a project comes
for that phase two funding it
gets taken off this spreadsheet
and put on the actual financial
plan, which is the awards
schedule, and that represents
the actual costs.
Mr Chair. Just, um, When's the
next? Um STB capacity estimate.
Gonna be
Incorporated into the overall
planning.
The other.
Let's go ahead and eat for two
back to page 14.
I want to bring your attention
to grow 30. I'm going to defer
to Mr Schimmel to walk you
through those numbers.
20
We look at if the district
currently what the data we have
qualifies for a wave or not.
We're currently waiting for the
new bond information. So once we
get that these
Potentially will
Um, Next in columns M O and Q
Uh, we've added, uh
For the districts that have
indicated that they will be
requesting or needing a local
met reduction. We have accounted
for. Excuse me, potentially what
those local match numbers will
look like for the district's
requesting again, even if
they're not eligible at this
time, they maybe with new data
as we receive it.
Um so
The items in black, those all
tied to the financial plans over
accounting for balance.
Um
Going back to columns A and B.
you'll see the two districts in
red, Honda and Melrose. These
two districts have come for pre
application since the last
meeting. Uh and then also,
you'll see PICO so lions 1315
1617 or italicized. Those
districts have indicated that
they will be coming.
Uh, Forest Standards based
project but have not submitted a
formal application at this
point.
Um, finally, I wanted to touch
on call him I for the estimated
total project costs were
currently estimating it's still
at $500 a square foot. This is
something we're going to be
going back to the house and
reassessing of this number is
too high
Focus on is row 34.
Both of those are representing
any projects already captured.
Um
What I do when you're 25. There
is an estimate of a negative 22.
We have time.
And again, I'm going to
emphasize last week.
Mr.
This is going to paint the tool
for the regional managing to
counsel.
For, um, whether it's in this
fiscal year or if maybe
Again in an ideal world. That
would be great. We do know that
part but at least because
directing
How and the best way for the
district for them obviously to
get funny, So I mixed to use
that tool. So with that being
said in hopes that we can come
sooner or later.
Also, there are, um
Balances and older bonds of
either bulking those amounts
altogether or how it just the
lower amount, such as
references.
Um so and we have approximately,
I'm going balances.
As of now, again, that's a
working document. It is always
moving.
And just wanted to mention that
as far as that negative not set
in stone it again. This is a
living document, and this will
So with that said, I am going to
quick question on the reverse.
From older, Uh, bond issues. Is
Close to closing out a
particular issue. Excited to
really
Finalize the close out Our old
projects from 2006 2011. We
don't really want to touch those
older bonds that gets cleaned
out.
From about 2008 balances and
where they're not going to be
needed and
Um, Mr Chair. Iris. What's the
timeline for? Finished? Mr.
Chair, Ms Cars? Well, we are
diligently working on that.
Any other questions.
All right. We'll move on to the
Consent agenda. We have several
items on the consent agenda.
Like to ask Marty CA to review
those. Certainly Mr Chair
members all come with a
recommendation from the
subcommittee.
Well, both subcommittee section
So Mr Chair members. The consent
agenda contains several items,
and one of them is the FY 24
Systems based awards to
Albuquerque, which is about 11
schools total
Um, Additionally, Clovis is on
the consent agenda. They had a
systems based award as well.
For Marshall, Sixth Grade
Academy and Sandia Elementary
School.
Um, After that, we have a
systems based award to West Las
Vegas Luis Armijo E s. And that
is a demolition award.
Um then we have assistance based
of war to Los Alamos for the H
V. A C system at Los Alamos High
School.
Um, Additionally, it's the least
assistance awards for the
charter schools.
Um, facility Master plans
Awards.
As well as a award to this
accord. All school district for
Sarah Serena Middle Middle
School, and that is construction
funding.
And then we have the organ
Mountain. That's cruises
Construction funding award for
systems and additionally, that
is H B. A. C.
And then we have the 2023
Broadband deficiencies.
Correction unit Category two
Network equipment awards, and
then we asked for a
Extension cord HB 505 awards
where we had a few scraggly is
coming in Mr Chair members. That
is, that is all the items and
the thank you for that. Run
Extension cord HB 505 awards
where we had a few scraggly is
coming in Mr Chair members. That
is, that is all the items and
the thank you for that rundown
Generally on these consent
agenda items, there's no discuss
to approve the consent a general
I had make a request to just
pull the core request with the
new waver off the consent agenda
and get a little bit more
information. We have pushing
through approval of them. Except
that, um, making a motion to
approve all accept that
I'll second that Mr Chair second
to approve all the consent
agenda. I don't h
For discussion.
Following this all all those in
favor, please. In the capable
those a post
Um
Mr Chair. Thank you had asked
that the Super Internet Just
give a
An overview of how that, um,
that whole project is going to
look and what the new wavers
going to fit into the larger
project and your larger vision
there. Alright, Mr Chairman,
Committee members. Um, I am
I'm not sure I'm understanding
everything. He just wants to
know how the project came out
came along and to being, uh,
we've been working on this for
quite some time. Um, think about
2.5 years. Um
Finally got to the place where
we've got our design down and
Did our bed and the construction
costs of shot up so much. Um,
it's
I think it was around 300
something we were talking about
it at the beginning, and it's
now 527. These are
580 square feet.
And so it's quite a bit more
than what we thought it was
going to be in the long run, so
our portion of it jumped up
quite a bit. So we did write a
letter to P s, R P. S. C O C to
ask.
For a waiver for the other
amount. That way we would not be
able to or would be able to
Complete the building without
any kind of hardships. Um,
Like the rest of our maintenance
and building needs in the rest
of the district.
Um, I was informed the other
day. That request was denied for
the main reason that we weren't
up to the 10 mil bonding level,
which is required by statute.
Um, we the reason we didn't do
anything else with bonding was
because we just had the SP nine
election in November.
Um and we told our community we
wouldn't be raising taxes and
because that s P nine bond has
been in place for years.
So for us to come back right
after the election and say, Oh,
we're gonna raise the taxes
because we need money for
The new middle school. I felt
like we would be really
destroying our trust that we've
developed with our community.
And so that's the reason we were
asking with PSC SC two to extend
that, um
Um, waiver for the extra
funding.
We? We're not real. Sure, it's
gonna be awfully awfully close.
I feel like we're going to be
short at least 1.5 million
towards the end of the project.
Um, hopefully maybe some of the
construction costs will go down
and I'm not sure what will drug
on we'll find some say cost
savings along the way with
With different portions of the
building. But right now we're in
a position where little
concerned about what's going to
happen with Mr Chair.
Superintendent. Um maybe this is
a question for Scott. How much
of a contingency
Madam Chair or Mr Chair, Ms.
Cars? Well, I believe it's 20%.
So
The one set aside. We had we did
have
2000.
That was
We've kind of
I can't really exactly remember
what we've got at that going.
There was some capital things
that are going on some of the
buildings. I don't I don't have
them all listed out in front of
me, but we went ahead and
started moving toward on those.
We do have the the additional
funding that we're just put out
for the
CTE and the security
Funny, so security stuff we've
already spent. We haven't done
much with the CT, although we do
have plans for those funds,
This just this last year is fine
If that's what you remember the
CTE was about 600 something
1000. The security was, um
660,000 something like that.
All right.
Unless there's additional
questions. Then we wish you luck
with your project. You can you
can balance if you need it.
Or you, Mr Chairman. I think
anyone that's no me very long
knows. I'm the cheapest
superintendent around and shop
for the best margins And so I
will be looking for cost savings
everywhere. I just want to say
is that district we appreciate
your support on this? We've been
looking forward to starting this
project for quite some time.
Thank you for all the psf a
folks that have helped us. Um,
just a great team, and we really
do enjoy working, actually.
Mr Chairman, Just Washington. Um
May be marked as abstaining from
this vote.
Okay, so we would need a motion
to approve this particular.
All move to approve this.
Thank you.
All those in favor of approving
Saraceno Middle School project
in coral. All those a post
And I'd like to allow anyone
that was included in the
consented general. Of course,
Albuquerque.
Schools close this and several
others, but
If not, that's fine as well.
Let's move on, then to the
awards cycle Item five.
And
I'm sorry.
Cruces.
Yes, Mr Chairman and members of
the council. I'm going.
Martinez. I'm the director of
construction last Christmas
public schools and behalf on
behalf of the district. I would
like to thank the council for
funding our project. Organ
Mountain High School H back, Uh,
renovation is gonna be a project
that's gonna tremendously helped
the district as far as energy
consumption and, uh
Efficiency and, um, comfort for
the students.
Thanks.
Go on to item rope pre
applications received Mr Chair
and members. As you know, this
is an informational item to
inform you of the most recent
pre applications we've received
since the last PS COC meeting.
Received a handful in the last
month.
For standards based we received
21 is for Melrose, currently
ranked number 62. Previously,
the district submitted a pre
application for a systems based
but upon PSF, a site visit and
discussion with the district and
the community, the district has
moved in the direction of
applying for a standards based
instead of a systems based
Secondly, we have a pre
application for Hondo combined,
which is currently ranked number
64.
We also have three systems based
pre application, the first for
Magdalena combined, which is
currently ranked, Um, 654, but
in the preliminary rank ranking,
it will move up to 208.
This is for a roof, exterior
windows site work and flooring.
Secondly, for McCurdy charter
School, currently ranked 328 for
HVAC and Electrical and lastly,
Gallup has applied for two Hachi
Elementary school currently
ranked 575 for back in lighting.
And we have to teacher housing
applications for Magdalena, and
from Aura.
As you know, we're making
Awards throughout the fiscal
year and we will be making
potential awards for these
schools as well as the
Remaining pre applications
through the rest of the fiscal
year up until June.
On the next page. We have the
current pre application list. As
of right now, these are all of
the pre applications received
that have yet to be awarded.
Those highlighted in purple or
the systems based awards that
you just made to 15 schools.
So next month. These will be
removed from this list.
Currently there are 46.
Um, schools on this list.
Once we subtract out these 15
made, um
We'll have 31.
Left, and we've also received
one pre application from
Artemisia, which did not, um
Make the deadline to be in this
round. So at the January
meeting, I will tell you about
the Artemisia application.
And on the following pages are
the pre application letters from
each individual district that I
just mentioned.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Pre application.
Questions.
Oh, no item Beat Roman numeral
Be FY 24 Capital outlay.
Awards overview.
Mr Chair and members. This is
another informational item. Um,
just to quickly give you an
overview of the 15 awards that
were just made in consent agenda
for the systems based
Um, applications, 11 of which
were for Albuquerque.
For a tricycle Elementary,
Longfellow Elementary. Wanna
Vista Elementary, Osuna
Elementary s Y Jackson
Elementary, Eisenhower Middle
School. Taft Middle School,
Pretty high school.
Highland High School, Scindia
High School and Valley High
School.
All were for either roofs and or
H back.
That we also made two awards to
Clovis for Marshall Sixth Grade
Academy.
And Sandia Elementary School for
the drain waste ventilation
system, as well as exterior
windows and doors and fire
alarms.
Another award was made to Los
Alamos High School for HVAC and
lastly demolition award for the
old Luis Armijo building in
total of those 15 schools. Um,
an awards just made the UM the
award would the total project
cost is over 24.6 million with a
state match of approximately 9.5
million and a local match of 15
million.
On page 148 on the next page. We
have the overview of all of the
awards made thus far by the
council.
In August, October and December.
Um, which indicates that in
total for phase one, the council
has awarded 29.8 million
With an approximate out your
cycle of 114.8 million for these
26 projects made thus far.
And on the following page on
149. We have the details.
summary of all of those 15
standards based applications.
I'm sorry awards, um, made in
consent agenda.
And with that, I'll send that
list aren't we are questions.
So now we'll go to our requests.
I'm a
high school.
We have a
Recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'll
make the recommendation and turn
it over to Scott. So that
recommendation, um on this is
that the approve to amend the
current 2018, which that was
initially made to Gallop
McKinley High School to include
now construction phase funding
for the replacement facility
square feet.
This wasn't to 12 state match of
15,000,050 points per cent of
the cost and a corresponding
local match of 12.6.
Mr Chairman members. I'm gonna
go to the key points here.
The enrollment for 2023 school
year. 2022 23 School year is 360
students pre K through 12.
Replacement facility is for a
total of six d 8815 gross square
foot, which is 11,000 about
11,000 square foot above the
allowable gross square foot.
The replacement facility will be
constructed on the property
between the current facility in
the existing
The middle school.
This site requires extensive
grading and stormwater control
improvements. The foundation
system consists of drilled
peers.
Sindical cylindrical, concrete
filled columns that extend about
25 ft below ground level.
Demolition of the existing
facility is a part of this
project except for the existing
Jim
The maximum allowable
construction cost per square
foot is $913 and the total
project
Cost per square foot is 1000 95.
And with that, Mr Chair members,
I stand for questions and as
well, I have miss Roxie Flanders
from Gallup schools here to
answer any questions as well.
The sheet shows $913 per square.
Mr Chair members. That is the
cost for the maximum allowable
construction cost is 913. The
total project cost is 1000.
Hmm.
Oh,
We would really like to thank
the council for helping us with
this school project.
The school currently as built as
oversized. It was when we had a
lot of industry and areas, so
downsizing the school is going
to help us maintain it better.
And it also gives us a better
quality school for our students.
To learn, and it allows us to
Had more of
Construction training or trades
programs.
And we have our kids going from
It's just we really need the
money to make our kids
Better to meet the future.
I understand that there was some
discussion.
On the
Yes.
And we've got every one of them
either.
In design or under construction
were working on
Several of them with a
We'll see es contractors on the
smaller systems.
To expedite them.
Some of the like to Hachi and
Red Rock.
The funding request was 2019. It
took until
Now with all the paperwork to
get us into construction cycle,
Red Rock started. I believe in
May. 2 Hachi started now.
We have
Three schools under design right
now, we've requested
For more school funding design.
I've got a team of three
Right now, my admin enough, and
we're currently searching for
another project manager.
We're using pro core
construction management
software.
Which is really allowing us to
maximize our ability to handle
the school's efficiently.
The nice thing about pro cores.
All of the contractors use it.
So they're used to using it. It
allows them to feed their r F I
s and stuff to our system and my
admin to feed them. Do you build
her?
And I think it's expediting our
ability to run the jobs in the
field.
We often have answers within
hours on on R F I s and M. C. R
s.
I think we have the ability to
manage our jobs.
Right now. Our big concern is
that the design time has gone
from one year.
And a lot of our design
architects are asking for a year
and a half to two years to
design.
I'm beginning to think that's
because there's so much
construction in the state.
That all of the architects are
meeting their maximum potential,
so they're having to stretch of
jobs out a little bit.
To manage all of our projects.
But I'm
I definitely believe the
district and handle the
construction process.
I have 47 years in construction.
I've got a bachelor's in
construction management.
And a master's in civil
engineering, and I worked
For about
40 years in the public sector.
Actually built there.
Several buildings here in Santa
Fe, and I built six of the
schools and gallop.
I think that helps me run the
jobs more effectively.
Mr Chair. What is the purpose of
the 11,000 square feet above one
of the issues? There is number
one. We think the score footage
for classrooms.
Is too small, so we've set a
standard
The district has agreed to 15%
Larger size classrooms, so we're
going to 900 square feet.
Also at that school basketball
is huge.
We've had a capacity of 800
seating capacity.
When we have the basketball
games.
They're they're swamping the
building. We can't get enough
room so we've actually built a
much larger
Gymnasium there.
We're doing that at most of our
Native American schools because
Basketball gets our families in
there, and we want our families
to be there to support our
Children.
And when we have a basketball
game, it's like the pit.
Those guys are rocking our gyms
and we want to keep our parents
and grandparents coming in and
being involved with our
students.
They fill up the pit as well.
Yes, they do. Yes. Quick
question, Mr. Chair related to
the, um
The fact that the district has
set a higher square footage. Um,
given the you know the number of
projects that you ghouls
Um, what is? You know? I would
expect all the schools are if
I'm correct. You know, the state
Um, I mean, it's local match.
I know that we just finished our
audit. I know that Giovanna inks
are deputy superintendent is
said she'll have complete audit
fundings. I know right now we're
Maxed out on our bonding.
Um eight to say this, but I'm
I'm director of construction.
I just asked for the money and
then I make sure I spin it as
quickly as I can. And as
effectively as I can to get my
Kids and new schools.
So I would have to
Really delay that one to her.
Okay. Thank you. I would. I
would just sort of flag that as
a issue of concern for the
council and PSF based out Mr
Chair at a just a question.
Maybe it's a mix for PSF, a
staff and, um, the district of
To flag where it's not an apples
to apples. Comparison. Um, it
wouldn't be fair to compare your
construction costs to the next
to we have in front of us on the
agenda.
The cost per square foot or
percent, and 56% of this cost on
the next two requests of why
Those numbers seem big. But why?
That wouldn't be Maybe an apples
to apples comparison. Why we
shouldn't be trying to compare
this project to those two
projects that one of the
differences with galloping
Kinley County schools as our
soil is horrible.
Any of the schools that we've
built in the last 50 years that
don't have the auger cast peers.
Grade beam and pier cap
foundations fell much quicker.
Also, I've been with the
district six years I've analyzed
are five schools that are
geothermal heat and air.
My maintenance costs on the
geothermal heat and air is, uh,
is a fraction of what it is on
any of the other systems, so
I've opted to do all of our
heating systems with geothermal.
They have a life cycle about 50
years with a 30 year retrofit.
So we're using all the R F or on
retrofits of new of older
schools.
And we're using geothermal on
the new ones because we think
we'll get a 30 to 50 year life
cycle out of our heating and
air. I'd rather spend the money
up front.
On a heating and air system
that's gonna last with
maintenance than the
Go with US cheaper package unit
system that I have to replace
everything to 50.
Mr Chair, Mr Turner, just to add
to what Roxy said. Um, you know,
this is what we've experienced
north of I 40 is, um, these
costs.
Hovering right around 900 a
foot, she explained.
Fairly well how, um, just the
systems are more expensive, but
the location
Is also a detriment to the cost
per square foot to Hachi is not
in Gallup.
It's outside of Gallup, so it's
very rural.
And all of those things
combined have created this
higher cost. Um, as you pointed
out the next to our
More, um, metropolis closer to
metropolitan areas and also
along the I 25 corridor, which
is why I think we're seeing
Less cost south of I've I 40
along the I 25 corridor.
Thank you very much for that.
Thank you. Yes. I don't like to
ask for you to clarify something
you said
You said that it's taken since
twin complete the paperwork.
What did you mean by that?
We requested the funny funding
in 2019, and it took through.
Um well, about a year and a half
ago, Lee awarded
Actually, you could help me
better. Uh,
Decker carriage we awarded to
Decker parrot.
Through an RFP, and it actually
almost took a year to get the
contract.
Ironed out through the different
changes in paperwork. I think
psf face fix that, but I think
we filled out that paperwork.
Four or five times to get the
contract in place for DPS to
design this school.
And then before that, it it just
seems like it takes that long
for my procurement office and
the P s a pay to work together
to get
The funding worked through and
to get me a final contract so I
can get to work with the
With the systems. One of the
things PSF has changed. We used
to have to do a feasibility
stuff study first, which took a
year and now the feasibility
stuff has been compacted into
our design.
So that's helping us speed it
up, probably by six months.
Martikan might know more about
how to help this. Um, Mr Chair,
Miss Patty. I just wanted to
comment that
This is in fact, it take very
long time but one of the the
actions that you allowed us to
do with super process
improvement was to do the things
that miss that Roxy just stated.
Get rid of the
Feasibility. Get rid of the
aspects combined into planning.
We worked really hard with
contracts because, indeed our
contracts we were going back and
forth back and forth. We fix
those. We streamline them, and
we improved a lot of the
processes within e builders. So
actually working with Gaelic was
one of the
Helped us recognize some of the
things that we needed to fix
internally and we have done
that. Mr. Chair, Mr Padilla.
Um, Martita. I, um it's
concerning to hear that.
Project can linger that long,
just to kind of get in place. So
again, I think it's a reflection
of how important um, that's
really was.
Sort of legacy projects that
we're stuck in the older
System that we have to consider.
Um if this project were to come
forth now compared to how long
it's taken. How long would it
take?
Um Mr Chair, Miss Leach, Roxy
indicates three years, but, um,
I would say that
When we eliminated the peace
ability and aspect
And I know that because we did
some studies on that.
Fixing the contract back and
forth. I can't tell you I don't
know how much time that saved
us. But ideally from the time of
award, an MOU is now to the
three weeks to get an MOU.
And then the contract back and
forth. I don't have those dates
in my mind, but just say it
takes us about
From MOU to the contract about
30 days to get that started.
Because we were so I don't know
the actual number. I'm glad,
Roxy says. Three years, but I
open it the open up that saves
some time to But again, we'll
do. Thank you for this
questions, Mr Chair. I liked
Roxy's reference of three years
shorter. I mean, really.
Four years. Those improvements
and I think again, you know,
however, the council can
continue to support
Um, improved processes. Mr.
Chair, Ms Padilla. Thank you.
On the table, all those in favor
as a post
Which passes Congratulations.
Thank you.
They want to.
Peralta Elementary School in Los
with US.
Recommendation.
The awards subcommittee also to
go ahead and move forward with a
construct mentally school.
Through six.
State match.
Thank you.
Right?
Mr Chair members. I'm gonna go
through the key points here
again. The current enrollment
for 2022 2023 years 248 students
grades pre K through sixth.
Replacement facility consists of
58,876 Girls Square Foot, which
is about 11,737 Girls, Square
foot above allowable.
The campus is directly adjacent
to make to New Mexico Highway 47
and Peralta.
During the design safety concern
necessitated look locating the
building further away from the
highway.
And also during the design
phase, the lost Blueness Board
of Education approved adding
gross square foot above that
proved maximum allowable in
anticipation of enrollment
growing to 500 students in the
near future.
The replacement caused R $496 a
square foot for maximum
allowable construction cost and
the total project cost.
Square foot is 596 and as well,
The district is here to ask any
questions. And with that, I'll
stand for your questions as
well.
Mr Chair members of the council.
My name is Tiffany McMahon. I'm
the director of maintenance and
construction through this
project. I've transitioned from
the supervisor of construction.
So I've been with the project
since we started programming
phases.
And Mr Chair members of the
board. My name is Sandy trace
sick and I'm fairly new.
However, I've been with in the
finance, so we wanted to first.
Thank you for the opportunity
for this project. It's been a
long time coming as you've kind
of seen the process that Roxy
has gone through. We're in a
similar boat. This project is
not only is it an elementary
school, which is pre K.
Through sixth grade. It also is
going to encompass our first pre
case center, which 150 kids of
those will be pre K and the
other 350 that were initially
building for, uh, the 200 will
be an elementary, which is
kindergarten through sixth
grade. We are looking to expand
this for a student enrollment of
500. Part of the process. In the
beginning of this was the
feasibility study.
And also for our district was a
boundary and enrollment study,
which has been really helpful
for our district, and as we look
at the necessity it is for us to
re boundary as Los Lunas has had
some substantial growth but in
different parts of our community
than what we've seen before. So
in part of this project is also
a future boundary study that
we're looking at.
With that boundary study. Uh,
what is recommended to us the
moment we start that within five
years of that change, we would
reach an enrollment of 500 out
elementary. So that would be the
150 pre K but growing our
elementary to meet that, so
that's what that boundary study
showed us. And those projection
numbers when looking at the
design.
We, um I thought it was
investment Trist to invest in
our future on this campus by
expanding the enrolled, um, the
adequacy in our core spaces to
meet that 500 initially and that
way in the future When we get to
those numbers, we can easily add
additional classrooms with the
way the new campuses being
designed or has been designed
for construction.
So we felt it was about the best
interest that we expand our
gymnasium. Our library. Um, our
cafeteria spaces to 500 adequacy
upfront, and then we would grow
the rest of the campus as needed
per classrooms. So with that, in
any questions that you may have
for us
First of all, thank you for
being here and you do have a
good history of building
facilities and open it up for
questions.
Um, Mr Chair. So on the
The 500 enrollment that
additional 150 students what's
allowable correct, So it's
looking at that anticipation
once we change our boundaries,
which were in the process of
reviewing we have the elementary
boundary study completed an
enrollment study. We're waiting
on our secondary schools, so the
board can look at all of that as
a whole district and make that
change. Should we continue,
which
It's inevitable for us to do in
the recommendation that we've
been given within five years of
that boundary change per out
that will meet a 500 capacity,
so that would be growing the
elementary side. The pre K
center would stay at 150 for
that campus. But what we would
see the growth as an additional
kindergarten through second, Mr
Chair. Sorry if I'm
misunderstanding, but
So you're still doing that you
think will justify the 500
number. The elementary boundary
study is complete. However,
we're in the process of, um,
welcoming a new board to our
district. So once they're on
board, we will continue that
process in how they would like
to go forward in where those
exact boundaries will change
study, But the school board
hasn't approved boundary
adjustment.
Not an official. Correct, okay?
Um And I guess Mr Chair the same
question for Gallup, You know,
Do you guys have other projects
in the pipeline and
Um, given that there is a
difference between sort of what
the state is approval have to
foot the bill for, Um, Do you
have the funds to cover that
you're required local match and
sort of any local match you
might be having down the line
for projects that yes, we've
we've had. Actually, this
project did start quite a while
and we have been able to save
Save funds, and this November we
had we were asked voters to see
if we could sell bonds again in
the future over four years, and
I wasn't sure you never know if
it's going to pass. So, um it's
now my responsibility to make
sure that any projects that we
do enter in that we will be able
to fulfill
So my first priority was to make
sure that I reserved money for
Peralta.
And just in case the bonds sales
in the future did that I had
that money ready with our last
bond sale, And so the majority
of that, so I have the money
reserved now, and we were
fortunate that our community did
vote to allow us to be able to
spend, um, to have those bonds
in the future, So I will also
have
Um
Okay, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I'm
sorry. Just one more question.
Um, I mean, given that there's
just such a significant Where
are those students? Couple? And
I guess I'm wondering like
Right. Is the district going to
have schools that are then under
enrolled, Or is there some
development? Let's go filling
those schools up. Like what?
What are kind of an answer that
for you, and it's it's a
perfectly legitimate question.
How are you going for 350 to
500? What we're seeing in Los
Lunas is a huge growth. We have
part of that boundary and
enrollment study. They did
evaluations of all the different
housing units coming in.
And so there's quite a bit of
development and part of that
might not be specifically in the
current boundary of Peralta, and
therefore we're needing to
adjust our boundaries. We are
seeing three of our elementary
schools that are reaching their
max capacity. So, according to
them on campus, they will tell
you that they're over capacity.
but that Max capacity is really
tight, and one of those schools
is neighboring Bosque Farms
Elementary, which is the
neighboring boundary to Peralta.
So we would see an adjustment
and getting some of those kids
that are we're reaching our max
at Bosque farms and bringing
them over to Peru out the
another item that the district
has already implemented is, um,
reevaluating our transfer
policy. We part of that
enrollment study was showing how
many kids were transferring out
of Peralta for whatever various
reasons.
Um and we have been working
diligently on making sure that
we encompass those kids back
where they belong in their
boundaries, So we're not seeing
a disparity within schools, so
that's something we're actively
doing now before the boundary
change, which is helping that
enrollment rise again. We also
anticipate, um, building the new
campus. Proud Elementary is one
of our older schools in the
district.
Which has a lot of set amount of
value. We have a lot of
employees that have worked for
us that have went to school
there and it's it's needing time
for that improvement just for
infrastructure. Um, innovations,
and I think that will also draw
a lot of attention to the campus
and driving.
Um parents wanting their kids
back at Peralta, Ala. Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, so is the
transfer issue. What's driving
the difference between the FAA
approved in the 250 actual
enrollment? It's part of that.
Yes, and they have the
statistics. For that. It's about
a 20% transfer out right now, so
if those kids were to come back,
we're adding 20%.
Right off the bat into that.
Into that campus and then also
changing the boundary would be
bringing. In addition, I have a
question about your pre case. So
you said that you're preparing
So a difference? What? What?
What are you considering the
boundary adjustment in there?
Part. Where are pre K where
we're getting All those 150
students is from other
elementary schools, So we have a
few elementary schools that are
our feeder schools to Valencia
High school. All of those
elementary pre K will now be
housed at Peralta Elementary. So
the likes of Bosque Farms
Elementary, Valencia Elementary,
Tomac Elementary Desert View
Elementary will now be housed at
Peralta.
And no longer at those school
sites, which will help us
alleviate some of that
overcrowding as well and
bringing those kids onto the
campus is primary where they're
coming from proud that currently
has one pre K class and I think
average are pretty quick classes
are about 20 students. Some
schools have to
So it just varies depending on
the enrollment questions, so
Uh, so the bond issue past uh,
recent. Okay, So are you
anticipating trouble?
Uh, if something goes over more
than what we estimate, worrywart
by nature, and so I wanted to
make sure had it not past that
this last bond sale that I would
have enough for what we in my
first task. Um
Got my promotion was finishing
the overall budget and then I
went straight to, um, going that
is already in in play and what I
am already told our community
about is something they're very
excited about. And very
From that.
We We we do we work with. We
work with
Just a little concerned with the
Consolidation of the pre K, Um
you said, your community is
excited about the project. I can
only imagine.
That the prospect of
transporting, um three k
students from throughout the
district
All all to one place might be
unpopular. I just wondered if
how much community outreach
you've
Talk to or that you've done too.
Inform the public about that. I
just, um, I know that
Greek, especially
Local schools.
Are very much appreciated Local
Um, break a programs rather than
being
Consolidates. You've done um
throughout the project. We've
done multiple presentations.
We've also done presentations at
school sites of the project,
along with DPS are architect
team has showed up to inform the
community of what we're doing
and had open house
presentations to let them see
what the facility is going to
look like and how it would
function We've also included are
various departments such as Our
special education programs are
Transportation Department, Our
security Department in designing
and under
Standing the needs that each of
them bring to the table and
creating this facility.
We also have, um
An award that for r G E for a
pre K center after this, uh,
that is still in the works and
looking at doing so that way are
East Side and West Side would
both have a pre K center that is
more adjacent to the existing
elementary schools so they
wouldn't be far from that they
would be within that area, um,
of our community that is easier,
easily accessible rather than if
you've been to Las Salinas
driving across the river.
To another side, So our
anticipation is that we would
have an East side and the West
side a hub GCS right now. We
were starting with
Um, Mr Chair, Mr Ingham, if I
could just, um China and also
that we're seeing this as a
trend. A lot of districts are
going to pre K centers.
Um, we just visited with the
district yesterday. That's
intending on doing this. Um some
of the advantages that they
point out of the ancillary
services to provide to those
three y four white students.
Um and having all of those
Pre K students in one facility
allows all of those services to
work so that they don't have to
travel around the district.
Very good.
Here we go Members. I also want
to say the projection for pre K.
Thank you for that information.
And
Again.
Little questions all those in
favor of approving
I
The post regulations. Thank you
so much. We look forward to the
project.
Expected.
Thank you. Columbia Elementary
School on this is right here.
Yeah, that, um we it was put
back on the agenda at least
summarize the discussion by the
subcommittee. Sure, Page 159.
I'm going to look at the key
points in some information, but
I want to for counsel knows why
we didn't make a recommendation.
In fact, we had to table this.
Um, we had some concerns.
And it had to do with size where
you heard the discussion prior
to this around Los Lunas, and we
had that discussion, actually,
as well. Um, but we have heard
from John some good information
around projections. The growth
that type of regarding this, um
Last cruises award.
We don't have quite as much
information and we felt like it
would
This quick, questionable to go
ahead and move forward with the
award without the information
that we needed.
So under the
You'll notice that for this
school year, this, uh,
elementary School Columbia has
an enrollment of 200.
We didn't know that the specs
and utilization 52 students. We
just simply knew that the
recommendation was 4 752
students, which was quite a job
from 225 to 752.
We did know, Um in the
subcommittee meeting last week
that there are two subdivisions
that are under development in
the tenant zone.
438 units planned and potential
use of 100 yielded 129 students,
but 225
Plus, 129 is still not getting
us to 752.
So we were concerned.
Um
We saw
A couple of bullets down that
the utilization study could end
up having us at 560 for still
not reaching 752.
So we were concerned about the
size of potential size of this
and then in addition, we still
saw that there was an increase
of the actual building so
The third bullet says the
replacement facility totals 101.
896,000 gross square feet.
But that's above
Substantially 14,600.
Gross square feet above the
allowable so
Not only is it above in terms of
meeting the needs of the
enrollment
It was above above that.
So we were pretty concerned in
terms of the size of this,
whether or not it's
Thank you And, uh, I'll explain
pretty late on Friday evening.
Leave it on the agenda was so
that
We hear from staff as to what
So Mr Chair members after the
awards subcommittee meeting, Um
Mr Valdez, PSP, PS facilities
demographer. We got together and
we call the district and we
spoke with Ms Gloria Martinez,
who is here in the audience as
well as some of the staff, and
we said that we had been at
awards, and there was some
questions that we needed
answers.
And there were four questions
from the subcommittee and one
was a breakdown of the 752
students. What was the above
allowable for?
What is the status of the
district district, Jean? And
will the students just pursed
from Columbia returned to
Colombia. So those are the
questions that we talked about
on the phone?
Um, so if you go to and then
they wrote the memo on page 163.
Um, to help answer those
questions that they had
The chart that you see on page
164. We've blown that up on page
167. So it could be you could
read it a little bit better.
But if you look at the, um
The second column.
If you include the zone changes
for Colombia Elementary school.
The second column of the box and
167. You'll see that the count
is 750 suit for students, and
this will be effective in the
2025 2026 school year.
So having that data helped us
with that information, but still
we needed to know. Where did
those students come from?
So
I'm going to start on page 171.
And this is information that,
um Mr Fawlty is created and then
I'll turn it over to him to walk
you through the whole the graph
on page 169.
Mr Podesta, we started 1 69 169
coming first, Mr. Chair members.
I'm going to ask Mr Valdez just
start with page 1 16 1, and then
we'll get to page 171. Mr
remembers and just give me a
little bit of history. Um, the
Columbia students are now at
Centennial High School.
And they have been there for a
while. And what's happened with
her enrollment at Columbia is
that they've actually dropped.
For pretty much each year since
they moved to Colombia, and that
was anticipated because part of
the issue with Centennial is
that they have actually
experienced their own enrollment
growth, so they needed to
recapture some of that space and
also their SETI program is also
expanding so again, they needed
to capture of some space. The
other thing with parents.
They've also started to send
their students to Arnada and
Dona Ana, which are adjacent
schools.
Jason tennis boundaries, so
those schools because moving
having to transport their
students from Columbia
Centennial, which is not that
close has been an issue for
them.
So I wanted to ask you to look
with me on that chart on page
169.
And this is they. Basically,
this is the result of the
boundary study that Los Cruces
initiated and what I wanted to
do is I wanted you to focus on
Highland Monta Vest and
Columbia. Those those
Those those schools in the
chart, and first of all, we want
to look at that green bar.
Because those are the numbers of
students are living in those
attendant zones.
And
We go over to look at the yellow
Bar. That's the capacity of
those schools and those
attendant zones so you can see
that Highland. They're more
students living the intendant
zoning. That school has capacity
to Vista. It's the same
situation.
And the district deals with this
in a different ways that I want
to point out that that capacity
number is capacity without
portable, so they deal with it
with fourth portables, but they
also balance out. They also send
students to from those tents
zones to the other attendant
zones in the in the district
where that that might have some
capacity.
So that is what so essentially
Then the other thing I want to
say is with Colombia. There's
also forage in 25 students
already living in that attendant
zone.
So if you take the 425 students
living in the Columbia tenant
zone and provide relief to Mono
Vista and Highland by
redistricting, those attendance
zones and these are adjacent to
Colombia. You could potentially
get up to the 700 number. Um,
that we're looking at.
About 754 students by by just
providing relief to Highland
Mountain Vista.
What I haven't played paid
attention to yet is the blue
Bar, which is the amount of
students that has projected as a
result of subdivision
development going on in these
attendance zones, For example,
manifesto there are seven active
subdivisions, um, going on, and
that's and that attendant zone.
Um Highland. There are Highland.
There are about
It's about three or three as
well. And then with Colombia.
there's 21 of them is actually
getting close to being completed
and one of them is still going
so the district is going to have
to come up with this
redistricting plan that takes
into consideration. Highland and
Mountain Vista, relieve those
schools and send those kids to a
Columbia with increased
enrolment number.
Now it's gonna be a
comprehensive enrollment
adjustment because you also see
Sonoma, which is facing
tremendous development
potential.
Development and you can see the
potential for them to increase
their their number of students
and that attendance zone too.
So the district sample look at
this comprehensively, but I'm
confident that the number of
students living in these
attendant zones
Will be enough to to
I felt as a 752 capacity school
at Columbia, if once the
district justice attendance
zones
In order to verify a lot of this
information about the students
living in attendance zones. I
took it went ahead and looked at
some of the census track data,
which is on page at 171, just to
verify the number of students
living in these attendant zones
and the central tracks don't
don't always match up with the
school attendance zones. Tracks
have their own boundaries, but I
was still able to identify a
significant amount of students
living in these attendants
zones.
So
A schoolgirl rebuilding Colombia
for 754, I believe will allow
The district to provide relief
to highland amount of support in
particular.
So, Mr Chairman members if you
look at page 171
And you add, you look at the
attendance zone adjustments and
you add the for 25 to 28 and the
101. You come up with 754, and
they said attendance zone
adjustments will take effect
when the school is up and
running.
They can't do it right now.
Because the students, there's no
school for them to go to. So we
have
After that discussion and
working with John and talking to
the district, we do have the
number of students that will be
attending Columbia Elementary
School and with with that, said,
John and I Sanford questions as
well as the district is
Is here.
Yes.
Yes, Mr Chairman members of the
council again. I'm going to some
of the director of construction
and abroad are designed
professional Raby health from
gravy, Hill and associates. We
did get all the questions from
the PSF A on Friday. We did
answer all of those, and I
believe you have them. There are
Superintendent did talk to you
on Friday.
And if there's any particular
questions that anybody has I'll
stand for questions. I'd like to
hear the part clarify, you know.
So if we don't if this is not
approved today, there's several,
um
Especially say issues that will
face the district one in that
right now we have several
schools that are over capacity.
We have Highland Barnabas to and
now Sonoma also, uh, also, we
have, um Oh.
The board. Sorry board approved
the
Construction.
Bid back in October. If we don't
approve this now we're gonna be
into like 90 days for the
contractor. He will not hold his
price. For those 90 days. The
district has been successful in
renegotiating some of those
numbers. We brought the
construction price down or down
now to like 530.
Dollars a square foot, which is
really great for for Las Cruces
area for a brand new school.
Um, I'm worried that if if we
again don't approve this now
we're gonna have to go back out
to Rebid. Those prices are going
to be, uh, lot higher than what
we have right now. And what are
we gonna do with all these
students? That community has
been working on this cool. It's
been five years since we started
this school, so I hate to push
it again further down the line
where
Hoping to open the school and
The fiscal year 2526 So that
way, like I said, the students
will be able to we'll be able to
get students out of Centennial
High School, which again we need
the space for the high school
students. That's not a good
space for elementary school
students to be there. Once we
opened the school do not be a
Columbia Elementary at
Centennial High School.
Um, there's a lot of interest in
the school and that the
community is is waiting for
this. There's a like, is that a
lot of tremendous goals growth?
There's a lot of development in
the area, so this is going to be
a major relief factor. Once we
opened the school, and like I
said, we need to do it now We're
ready to do it now. And the you
know the contract is ready to do
it now.
And we asked the council that
you re consider it and put it
And this is no reflection on the
subcommittee was great that you
were able to provide it so
quick.
Basically if
If, in fact, Mr Mr Chair members
of the committee if we if PSF A
if I had provided the
appropriate amount of
information I would have
recommended or I do recommend
today that we
Fund this project for the 400
listed in the executive summary
set. I'm sorry.
Let me I'm sorry 752 students
that is listed in an even though
we have two additional students
when we do the math on page.
Thank you, Martita and thank
you, John. Thank you like
indicated in an email. Um
Just smile because I don't want
to put the full council in a
place where we're having to make
decisions in council that's two
full event and take the time and
vetting the project. But I
really appreciate the
information I think you do. A
realist is really helpful. I do
have another Can you explain the
additional square footage above
what we're recommending? So
There's again to Miss Caldwell's
Gross square footage through the
design process and actually,
before we were even engaged,
there was an expect that was
presented or prepared and
approved by PSF A, which
consists of some design
perspectives. That would
actually, uh, persuade you to
believe that these are gonna be
going up and for example,
The expect has approved separate
from some of the other schools
Voice special programs at this
school that are very unique from
some of the other elementary
schools being funded. They have
a really strong music and art
program at the school, and they
have two additional classroom
needs there that were pushed and
brought through into the
programming and actually
identified and approved through
the expect process before we
were engaged, So to that extent,
this number that combined with
other
Pretty traditional. Would you
probably seen it sounds like
just listening to the
presentations this morning.
There's a regularity of there
seems to be an increase of
square footage of adequacy,
something that I would offer to
that is just a general
observation is some of these
numbers that were utilized in
the past were based on some of
the old adages of, for example,
a double loaded quarter and 8 ft
wide corridor for an elementary
school. As you know, a lot of
the 21st century designs for
elementary schools and most
educational projects today have
utilized things such as
Stand learning areas where you
take larger than just a corridor
and open up those areas so that
Teachers can bring students out
and pull them out in smaller
groups or let them congregate in
small areas. So those speeches
of design increase those square
footage requirements and that
has by by far we did a full,
very thorough and detailed excel
programming exercise that
identifies every space in which
there was additional above
adequacy per se in square
footage.
And that can be peruse that
anyone's leisure to see
identically exactly where those
square footages are. But if you
take the building apart, those
are some of the general areas
where they have been extended.
Yes, Mr Chair. You know, I would
just sort of echo the director's
frustrations and respectfully
disagrees to these questions and
Had time to review them.
Um, I got the response to the
district provided noon on
Monday. I've been in credit.
Ah!
The analysis from staff I'm
seeing for the first time right
now.
Um And you know, like our one of
my major questions was about the
number of students which
The response from the district
and not exactly answer. I think
the staff memo, so I have some
out. You know this
I guess so. My first question is
Was the contractor asked to hold
the price, you know, we did run
into this issue with the Los
Alamos projects to and were
successful in getting the
contractor to
Hold the price.
Um, in order.
To answer substantive questions,
which I think this project had a
lot of
Um, you know, we've been in the
position in this year of sort of
forwarding things when we still
had questions out of fear for
these things that
Might happen, um, without
necessarily knowing that they
will happen. I guess I wonder
like did we did we try?
So, uh,
Mr. Chairman of members of the
council. The RFP closed on
October 31st.
Uh, at that time we did ask the
contractor to hold his price
award recommendation was awarded
through the Board of Education
on November 28th.
Notice of intent towards is also
no. November 29th.
And, uh, current pending
approval.
From this meeting with the
council.
If we wait until a January
meeting, we're asking the
contractor to hold this price
even longer time and I don't
think he's going to do that. And
I don't think it's fair to ask
him to do that. We all have to
go back out for Reese
Solicitation. Which again you
know, we're worried that the
price is going to increase
tremendously. The our Finance
Department has been successful
in negotiating the price down.
A lot to where, Like you said,
We're down to $530 a square foot
which, like I said, It's
tremendous. You you heard some
of the other square footage.
Costs are a lot higher than
that. We just started our desert
hills, which is also a P s.
Psst project funded and it came
into believe it was like 708
$100, a square foot
Um, Mr Chair Superintendent.
Thank you for that. So the
answer is no like sense. The
subcommittee action, The answer
is no. The contractor was not
asked to hold their price.
He was asked to hold his price
for the 45 days, but not
additionally, which was one of
the requests of the subject.
Of this
No. And I finance committee felt
that asking him to hold the
price that he wouldn't and again
Like I said that was gonna be 90
days for him to hold the price
right, so and again,
respectfully like the request
was that that be explored and
that they'd be asked. Not that
we assume that they wouldn't do
it. I
In this case like I don't think
we're talking about
significantly set back the
project. You know, we were
talking about one month.
And again. We've had projects
this year where we have done
that. And the contractors have
worked with us, Um
You know, from our from our end
like we have a significant
responsibility to ask these
questions. And and we're talking
about What? Um, So you know, I
think our position would just be
that we should try and that we
have time to ask and answer
these questions.
Um, my kind of outstanding
question on the numbers is, um
How? How many of the 750 for our
students who are currently in
the zone but attending other
schools because Colombia
Elementary is not open, you
know, you mentioned that the
district was planning on telling
those students they had to come
back to their home school. But
can you kind of tell us a little
bit more about that process and
Does that actually mean they
will come back? Or, um
Are they going to have the
option to stay?
So, Mr Chairman and Ms Cards
cards? Well, yes. Okay. Sorry.
Okay, so the district is going
to be doing a redistricting to
ensure that we have the students
going to Colombia. And with that
completion, uh, they will be out
All the students in that area
will be told that this is the
school you're gonna have to
attend.
Again. There will be no more
Colombia at Centennial will be
able to reduce the overcapacity
of students at Highland,
Highland Elementary and at my
novice to elementary and we're
hoping, also Sonoma Elementary,
So that way we have the
designated students that will
occupy that school.
And then I'm sorry. Can I go
readdress something else? As far
as a, uh, not only asking the
contractor to hold his price?
Uh, the contractor has going to
be having a very tight
construction schedule. So
pushing this back any time frame
a month, Two months is going to
drag drastically impact the
construction schedule. We will
not be able to open the school
and the
Fall of 25.
Yeah, and that's that's also
going to have a major impact on
the schools in that area.
Mr Chair. Did the contractor
tell you that?
Yes. After the subcommittee, No,
this This is prior to that. Uh,
they knew we were coming here
and we didn't know at the time
that there was an issue that was
going to be tabled and he told
us that we're on a very tight
schedule right now, and if we
could do anything to help
expedite contracts, uh, anything
so they could start on
construction.
To make sure that it is finished
on time. Also, the district is
on a year round schedule. We
start school around July 18th.
So this this project would have
to be finished in about May
early June in order to, uh
Furnish it and get all the
teachers prepared and moved over
to the new school to open it up
on time for 2526 school year.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
just want to comment that I'm
not going to be voting to
approve this project just
basically on principle out of
the up, But I do appreciate you
providing us a timely response
to our questions and, um,
appearing some questions that
might
Being, um, not address the sub
community process, But I think
we are looking at this for the
first
Allowing this project to move
forward. Get about 99.
Um
Mr members. I've understanding
your question. Are you talking
about the number of students
that I found in the census track
data versus the number the
amount of capacity that we have?
Yeah, that's the numbers on
trying to add up.
Versus the functional that we
might have it.
So really all of its bases.
I don't know if this is my
question that even with Mr Mr
Church members
What? We we've actually talked
to the district's planner about
that, Um
And again, like I said, the
district's going to be doing a
comprehensive
Reject redistrict green of all,
They're not only the schools
that you're seeing that chart,
but they're looking at all the
other schools. There was a lot
of schools that have not
included just because they are
in other parts of the district.
The district's comprised of sub
areas, and they're not
contiguous the Columbia
boundaries, but they're going to
play a role because, like I said
that
If you look at it with the
Sonoma alone, it has the most
development pressure. It's over
there on the East Mesa.
Um Las Cruces is similar to
Albuquerque and that all the
growth is concentrated in one
area is putting pressure on
them, particularly Sonoma. So
the district is going to have to
look at that eventually. Um, if
you recall, we actually
increased the desert hills.
Capacity and that project to try
to help out to relief Sonoma.
What the district's planner
said, is
In opening a spreading their
spreadsheet here.
That eventually, the district
might need a new elementary
school on that Southeast Mesa
side.
Probably within 10 years and
that could help further
alleviate some of that the
overcapacity area and there's
some of the schools that are
now, um, experiencing
development pressure.
Um, but that's
It's a few years away.
I don't know if I answered your
question. Um Hmm. Mr. Chair, Mr
Valdez. I think so. Maybe I
would look to our subcommittee,
um, chair to see if now that we
do have this information if at
least all of those concerns on,
um
And the number of students were
completely satisfied, and they
even have outstanding need going
forward. Um, I think looking at
the chart on 169 the entire
district.
Functional capacity.
There is a difference only
Highland Monta Vista, Colombia
Significant need to increase
capacity.
Um
Yeah, I'm sort of mulling.
rather members of the council to
sort of talk through or there
there again. It's I think it's
Trying to meet the need of the
district. Taking that very, very
seriously. I think all of us on
the council want to support
districts as best possible, but
also knowing that we need a
possible way so
So I'll just speak from someone
who is not on awards committee.
Um, our committee. Our
subcommittee does not get all of
the
So it does put us at a
disadvantage in that we don't
see all the information that's
just the way this council is
structured. So when things come
to full council
And half of us have not seen
that information. It's
difficult we really rely on the
committee was actually tasked
with reviewing projects, so I
just want to
Let that that that's being said
in general for for all of the L
E A s that come up here to
understand how? How That affects
half of this. This Um um
That being said, you know, I
think that the situations that
the district's find themselves
in terms of timing how that
affects cost how that affects,
actually alleviating a lot of
the burdens at the school level
In terms of overcrowding. I mean
that those are real issues that
schools are navigating everyday.
And, you know, I think that the
council does need to work to
make sure that
Our decisions are timely and
reflect those concerns because
these are the things that are
actually affecting.
Kids in schools.
Educators and families. So you
know, Mr Chair. I don't know the
best way to to deal with this
because again.
We rely on
We do have additional
information today that was not
provided then which you know,
hopefully could help us resolve
those concerns so that we can
move forward and I am very
sensitive to the timing of these
things and the in the actual
consequences of the timing.
They're not simple.
Sort of
Consequences. They're
significant.
Um, as was described by the
district, so I really want us to
think about that. I understand.
there are perspectives in terms
of processes and principle.
And I get that we do We do. Ask
our partners at the
District level that you guys do
respond to us when we have
questions. We really do need
that information and we need it
in a timely way.
And when we make specific
requests of your contractors,
please, you know, follow through
with those requests that being
said, I am very sensitive.
To the actual issues and as to,
you know, the the impact on
On students themselves. So you
know again, I think I go back to
awards like considering that
Do we have enough information to
approve this project today?
If if we do not What can we do
to try and expedite on approval
so that we're not significantly
impacting this project in the
overall timeline?
As well as the cost. The current
sort of, um
Agreed upon, uh
Cost with the contractor, so I
really think we need to be aware
of that. I do think the current
cost is lower than what we have
seen on many, many projects, and
I'm concerned about a major
spike in the cost per square
foot like that's significant
So, Mr Chair. I think it's a
question for you. In terms of
timing, could we if we cannot,
if awards cannot support this
Today.
And maybe they can. I don't
know. We have to go back to our
chair.
Um, and members of that
subcommittee, But if we can't
prove it today, how quickly can
we approve it? Because I do
really want I am very sensitive
to the issues presented by
Let me reassure the council and
and the melon tent and
And keeping it on the agenda. I
just wanted to have that
opportunity if the information
provided was sufficient.
So the bottom line is
Is that the subcommittee had
questions.
I was informed that they had all
been answered by the end of the
day.
Called it
In the eight Friday evening to
to to contact that so I I asked
Marty Ca, please.
Given the information staff is
indicated that they would
recommend be approved.
And I think that
Ah!
The subcommittee is the
Information sufficient.
If not
As chair of the council. I don't
want to override that.
That case.
The critically involved here and
the consequences so
I guess that's where I'm at.
Uh,
Well, one more question.
Probably help with the decision
support with this. Are there
other pending projects following
this, um this is getting at the
extra dog beyond your local
match percentage, the amount of
growth square footage that's
over, Um, adequacy. So in terms
of
What we foresee, uh, with
districts asking for waivers or
other part other amount of
dollars.
Are there other projects that
are Mr Chair, madam?
Ornament. No, we are not doing
any other projects after this
one. We're trying to finish this
one out. We have enough money to
finish this one out, but we
don't have any additional funds
to bring any other projects to
the council. But there's one
other point that I would like to
bring to the council's attention
that it in August of 2021.
We came to the council to, uh,
modified the enrolment. We were
asked to do a feasibility study,
and then it's back steady, and
at that time, the it was
approved to do the 752 students.
And we had all that information
and all that information should
be. You know, at the council's
disposal, and I know a lot of ur
new because, like I said again,
we started this project five
years ago, and we're at this
point now where we want to start
construction already to start
construction, and we look
forward to starting it as soon
as possible. But like I said, we
we did abide by all of the
processes that the council and
PSV required of the district.
So it's not just now that we're
saying Oh, now we need 752
students that has been the
approved enrollment back since
2021.
Is very helpful. Um, I think
that the district has done do
shape that you're bringing your
local match partner with the
state in this, uh, that study
that was done. This is sort of a
lesson for all of us and for
staff in terms of providing, so
we have a good, solid, strong
recommendation and supporting
our district this, but, um,
well, I'm would be wonderful.
Um, but I I will recommend that
the council um
The state matchup.
Miss Mr Chairman. I just clarify
my comments real quick.
Um So I, um I want to just make
clear that I understand both the
chairs, concern and the dusting
and cost and procurement.
And all of that, Um, So you
know, I I understand that and
those comments weren't made like
were intended to. Um and I think
you know more more specifically
like
Mike and in line with what the
director is saying, Um
And you know, with with the
subcommittee process and the
sort of time we have between the
subcommittee meetings, it's
really limited when we don't
when we have outstanding that,
um
You know, kind of the
This sort of reasoning. We're
following right now again, for
sort of not being able to wait
it sort of
If I follow that logic, it kind
of makes me feel like if we ever
have substantive questions about
the projects that come to awards
are kind of like our hands are
tied. We don't have, um, if we
can't try to work, um, you know,
maybe
Um, again to the director's
points, like wanted to try to
kind of better anticipate, Um,
some of these questions so that
we have the information in that
short time period we have
between to try to, you know, at
least have, like, 30 minutes of
discussion or something like
that. Um, and again, like I also
found the staff.
And so I hope that helps
clarify. Um, where I'm
So
I have to reiterate, um
We, uh Mr Diaz spoke about how
we don't have information as,
uh, The other subcommittee.
Nice bit quite a bit of time
last night trying to discern
The information that was put
forth for today from the awards
committee. And it was an, um
I really I have to admit myself.
I resist, um, making snap
decisions. Those almost always
turn out poorly for me
personally.
Um and I got to say two things
that are also traveling to me.
The one that you were unwilling
to ask the contractor to
Um, negotiate with you about
extending the yo.
Um, that sounds like a pretty
discreet ask.
And I don't think that that's
reasonable to just say we don't
want to do that Ask does, it's
just asking a question.
And so that's troubling to me.
The second thing that's
troubling to me is that
We just discussed it. You have a
big shortfall in the in your
Capacity in the very near
future. And you just stated you
have no plans for any
additional we talked about.
They're saying Well, we might
need a new school. You don't
have any
You're not making any
Plans for for that need.
And and no capacity to fulfill
that need
So I'm
I just want to say that it's
It is troubling to me just to
come with last minute decisions.
And not have any time completed.
So I'm going to reserve
judgment.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Could I
clarify a few?
Points. One is that we were not
given these questions until
Friday morning.
And as soon as we were given the
questions we convened as quickly
as possible to get the answers
to the questions.
And about asking the contractor
to hold his price another, you
know?
Timeframe from 45 days to 90
days.
Our purchasing and Finance
department has successfully
negotiated with the contractor,
a major reduction in the in
their bid price, so they felt
that it was
I should say not within the
district to go over there and
ask him again to hold a price
and additional timeframe to 90
days. I think that's being
unrealistic for a contractor to
hold his price that that long of
a time frame Realistically, it's
3060 days that a contract will
hold his price. He was already
holding it for 45 days.
Um
So those are my points that I'd
like to make. And I'm sorry.
Another one. Maybe I misspoke on
the district asking for another
school. We don't have plans
within the next year or two
after that, then? Yes. We're
doing another facility. Master
plan. We're going to start this
this next year, and I'm sure in
the facility Master plan it will
address that we need another
school in the East Mesa.
Uh, complex. But, you know,
right now in the future within
the next 1 to 2 years now, we
will not be coming back to the
council for another school at
that time frame.
I want to. First of all, thank
everyone for
Anywhere, but so we have a
motion by the subcommittee
chair to approve the
Okay, just to members body
again.
Thank you all for your
consideration, particularly the
council. We will attempt not to
put you in these situations
again. Mr Chair. If I can just
add. I think Miss cars well had
Really good point about timing.
I think maybe we should look at
the timing of our subcommittee
meetings so that we do have
sufficient time to ask for
additional information and to
get clarifying.
Um, questions addressed, Um,
whether it's our subcommittees
are pushed out further in
advance, or that we make a point
on the staff side and and our
side to to meet in between that
timeframe to address these
issues. I think I agree. It's
very important that we do that.
And we have the opportunity to
see the information go back and
forth, which we do in
subcommittee, as you know, and
for all of our district
partners. We do a lot of work in
subcommittee, um and in between,
so it's really important that we
have that opportunity. I and so
I asked that of staff.
Okay. And on behalf of last
Christmas public schools, we
thank you for approving the
project, and we're going to be
diligently working with PSV to
get this completed for the 2526
school year. Thank you. Thank
you so much. Mr. Chair. I need
to
Next. We have other business on
the agenda.
Started with a budget adjustment
request.
Mr Chairman, members, um
The agency is requesting a
budget adjustment request to
increase our, um contractual
services category. 300 by
$75,000. Some key points are
number one. We came around the
time of the initial fiscal year
24 request.
Um
Because we knew that the request
was insufficient In that
category. We were advised or
first of all, denied and then
advised to continue operations
to see where we're at and come
back at a later time. So here we
are. We are requesting again. A,
uh, bar.
From our
Vacancy savings, which is
$177,739 for the approval of
$75,000 bar for our 300
accounts.
Recommendation. Yes, Mr Chair
members. Uh, M s sub committee
is recommending approval of this
request to clarify and to share
information with some of our
other M s and committee members.
So the reason this was our
consent is that there was an
outstanding question on whether
the bar would come from another
budget category this year.
Or if staff could tap previous
year operating budget balances
that had not been reverted.
Um, And so we had some
discussion on that and had
requested that staff go back and
reevaluate that Iris did come
back to me and and note that,
um, she had re reviewed the
statute and that it really
didn't come from the motion was
then adjusted to have this being
approval of the bar of 75,000
from vacancy savings, so moving
it.
From the 200 so really that
again follow up with this.
Questions if not
All those in favor of approving
the budget adjustment Post move
on to
The certification of
Bond proceeds for the
Yes, Mr Turn on a question, but
a comment I just wanted to note
there has reviewed these and
work finance, which should allow
this to happen in favor. Please
indicate by saying that bond
sale
Mr Chair members. This is a
request for the December
certification of bond sale, as
mentioned during the financial
plan presentation. We are
requesting to sell $393 million
worth of bonds. Um, we have
taken a strategic approach as to
how to
Um, sell these bonds were
working again very closely with
our field team to determine the
timing of out of cycle. Um,
phase two funding and during
that work
We came up with the list of
projects that are on your
executive summary. And so with
that, Mr Chair, the subcommittee
is recommending approval of this
request to adopt the
certification and resolution to
sell 393 million.
$65,845 in. We just wanted to
provide the authorities describe
her process to the full
counselor with actual upcoming
meet in the next, Um
And as I mentioned question
earlier, this is about half a
school year. So with that I
recommend this request.
Not all those in favor. Please
indicate by saying, I
post
Recommendation as well from the
subcommittee.
Yes, Mr Chair members. Um some
committee has a requirement
recommendation. That's two fold
on this item. So it is standard
And of course, I will differ in
a moment to stop to give further
explanation, but it is standard
for the subcommittee to
recommend the release of the
conditions Index.
Um and we are still recommending
that the recommendation a note
that yes. You see, removing or
Pacific staff will rely on
January 1st. They'll be have
been awarded funds so they will
be But the second piece of this
past process So the council is,
um
We're recommending that the
council approved that the staff
closed the FY 24 capital funding
applications will be processed
and potential awards will be
made through the remainder of
capital funding application with
and thresholds and requirements.
Excuse me, will be released at
the March meeting.
And again, I'll have staff
elaborate on this. But the
recommendation and the basis for
this recommendation is that it
does provide secure to prepare
for the next year and care
members. I'd like to turn the Mr
Chair and members in regards to
its Miss Leach just spoke to
with the potential to close the
application cycle at the end of
this year and reopened in March.
Or suggesting this for a couple
of reasons. Most importantly,
We would like to, um, realigned
the opening of the SCLC funding
programs to occur after the
legislative session.
I think this year was a big
legislative year for us. We had
sp 131 that
Kind of change Some of our
funding rules. It removed the
offsets that reduced the local
shares, which were great, um
But we
Open the eligibility for the
funding programs prior to that
legislation, and so our thought
is to move it after the
legislation, therefore, we could
align the eligibility rules for
that year with anything that
happens at session.
Um, we may not have opened the
eligibility quite as wide this
year. Had we known that
For instance, offsets would be
completely removed. Um
We also have been in many
discussions with the financial
team discussion in the, um out
your scenarios for funding big
projects, and we would just like
some additional time to align
with that so that we can make
sure that our eligibility
criteria are set at a number of
schools that we could
potentially afford.
And so, um, those are the main
two reasons we would like to
just temporarily put a hold on
applications again. There. We've
had them open all year long.
Um And we would close that, Um,
December 31st and then at the
march P s C O C meeting reopened
them upon approval from the
Council of the new eligibility
requirements for the
Several funding programs. We
have
With that I stand for questions
and wonderful to see the
improvements that have
collaboration. Iris, Um
Refreshing to see finance
all those in favor of approving
additional that as well.
Yes, Mr Chair. Um, fellow
members of the subcommittee is
recommending council approval of
the FY 23 P S. C. O. C. Pacific
Annual Report. You have a draft.
You, um we are making with the
note that PSF a staff will be
making some final changes to
this report prior to Putin,
15 15th. Okay, I was just one
day out.
Um and any technical,
corrections, corrections and
graphic development prior
tourism with that Mr Carroll
defer to staff and deputy
director to further thank you,
Mr Chairman Leach. Um
Yes, we are. The handout that
you have in front of you is much
more complete than at
subcommittee.
Um Miss Leach and the
subcommittee had made some
recommendations for some
additional information, which,
um,
We went back and researched and
we agree we're going to add
teacher housing. We added a
section on measurement and
verification.
Um as well as
Oh, PSC, the task force
information just kind of what
the task force reviewed over
that.
Fiscal year, 23.
And so, um
Mr Chair and members.
At this year's annual report
focuses on our accomplishments.
And in looking back. We have a
lot to be proud of as a council
in an agency
Um As with past reports, um
This report revolves around the
theme in this case,
accomplishments and then it
provides a space for each
department to reflect on that
from the previous fiscal year.
And so what You have in front of
you is is, um
The hard work that
That this council and the agency
has done over fiscal year 23.
Um
It's always fun to look back and
see what we've accomplished.
Um, in that fiscal year, but it
was also a real general reminder
of the challenges and the hard
work that we have ahead of us.
As Miss Leach said, We will
publish this on the 15th.
Questions or comments between
now and then we will be working
up until the deadline on this,
So we welcome any
Any comments or questions as we
move forward in the next
One week.
And with that, Mr Chair, I stand
for questions, sir.
Thank you.
Committee. Will you be providing
a class?
Quick look through. I know
you'll be working up to the
deadline. But Mr Chairman,
absolutely. We can do that.
Thank you, Mr discussion. All
those in favor all those post
Move on to in your packets.
Tab A is the status report on PS
Mr Chair members, He's not able
to the unlined is not the it's
not working. Thank you. Go ahead
and handle this. Um, as you all
know, we received
Martinez Letter of retirement.
Several weeks ago.
During that period.
Oh, we
Took a look at the
Job description and posted the
vacancy.
Alerted
Okay?
Uh, Subcommittee Actions Search
committee.
Or search? Yeah, begin planning
the calendar.
Tests that have been involved
for committee included the two
subcommittee chairs.
With four
Foreign individuals on that post
the meetings and we can were you
so we put together the search
timeline posted. Initially,
staff posted the
Notice of vacancy on October
19th.
Following that date of the
The small cuts subcommittee made
a few to the vacancy notice and
included. We had the
subcommittee. Uh
And we posted the final notice
on indicated that the deadline
for receipt of applications was
November 30th, which was loud.
The pre screening of
applications by the HR director
has taken place in his note here
that we received 42 applications
applications.
He has
Gone ahead and pre screen those
And put them into four
categories requirements.
Those that meet the
requirements, those that
minimally meet the requirements.
Unfortunately, and those
We are scheduled as a
subcommittee to meet following
this meeting.
To review the
Pre screening together, make
sure that occur with the
categorization, particularly
those that did not meet, too.
Screening of the final
applications and set up
interviews.
Hopefully, uh
Before Christmas sometime and
then bringing
A. Finally I wanted to run that
by you to make sure the process
You will all be involved in that
and
You know, phase hopefully that
we would have someone act on in
final fashion. We're seeing
January 15th of may take all the
time line.
Mr Chair. I do want to add that
Because I moved extended my
date. I will direct her and turn
over my tasks and fill up.
May he make sure that he or she
And one more thing Mr
The status of the office of Mr
Chair members. This is just a
brief update on where we're at
with the status. Uh, officer
Broadband.
The vendor who is going to start
with the statewide education
network. We've issued the P O.
another vendor who's going to
provide the last mile.
There's a few key points here to
talk about PSF A and the office
of Broadband started talking
about a joint powers of
agreement. After we were spoke
with Patrick D. F a
Indicating that we needed a J. P
A. Instead of an MOU.
Um MOU
Prohibit oh by from entering
into any contracts per statute,
So we weren't PSV was still
responsible. We hope that the
MOU would allow the opposite
bride Band to issue um, the pos
for any work that they needed.
And then we thought we'd work on
a, um J P A. But then
Understanding that there is
draft legislation to move the
office of Broadband to move the
staff and the sand over to the
office of Broadband.
We decided not to work on a J P
a move forward that way.
On page 225. You'll see the
draft legislation provided to
this agency by the Office of
Broadband.
Whereas the staff
As well as the broadband.
Page 226 just has a timeline of
The work that we have done, uh,
with the office of Bride bound
prior to them moving in order to
get the statewide education
network up and running.
Additionally, on page 227
There is a letter from
Kim Kruzel, who works for the
Office of Broadband, She wrote
this to Ms Casado asking too.
Move.
The PS based staff over to
officer Broadband so that went
through and didn't work. So now
it's the draft legislation
without regards to this
potential adage. No, Mr Chair.
Um, we're trying to work
through getting some more
information is concerned so that
the draft legislation can you
know one question. Um, this is
Technical, But you said the
draft legislation
Page 225.
Because I'm seeing that as the
timeline. Ah, have a timeline on
226. I wonder if it's not
Okay. It's like a a draft. Thank
you.
Any other questions. Hot topic.
On and
Next information Oversight Task
Force Update.
So, Mr Chair members I have with
me, Mr Matthews, Schimmel, our
fiscal analysts and I like him
too quickly. President, Mr.
Chair members. Thank you. I'm
gonna briefly go over the
past due to update this was the
final meeting of Pisco to on
November 3rd. Um so we started
out
The
Uh, meeting with the PS. COC
update which Mr Bursey Aga
Doctor prey of ornament, and
this leads were nice enough to
do for the council and the
council.
Um, moving on from there. The
notes that they touched on We're
just updates from the October
10th 2023 meeting, just updating
task force on what took place at
the
Previous council meeting.
Next. We moved on to the FAA
update. Um, there were two items
that we discussed topics that we
wanted to address this follow up
responses from her hearing
concerns from the previous task
force meeting. Those are
regarding H B. A C training, as
well as the three year
maintenance agreements. Um
I won't go through all the
bullet points there, but we did,
uh,
Take a task out of this
discussion as additional
research related to the cost of
three year maintenance
agreements as well as
collaboration with L. E S C on
potential legislation on Page
231. It's exhibit A. We did do
an internal analysis of what the
cost of three year maintenance
agreements originally cost on
bids from roughly 2013 to 2015.
And then the table below on page
231 details what the cost would
look like today based on
inflation year over year.
Next PSF a presented their
budget request. Uh, as detailed
in the table below shows, but
our category 203 104 100 items
are for the operating budget for
FY 24 as well as the requests
and what the difference is.
Moving on to page 230. We then
discuss the adequacy standards
presented a brief history.
Of the adequacy standards, the
added adequacy planning guide.
Excuse me and the potential
changes based on internal
evaluation and district
outreach.
Um, Next, we moved on to the
state local match and waivers
presentations. So this was much
larger, collaborative effort
with PSF, a ped lfc and the L E
S. C, uh presented a complete
history and breakdown of the
state Local match Formula
Waiver, Christ and the wave of
criteria currently sentence
statue as well as potential
remedies.
For more equitable foundation.
This was a very significant
discussion, and so the task we
took away for PSF, a staff is
additional evaluation of the
state, local match and waiver
criteria factors.
And other metrics to more
accurately gauge at school
districts. Financial position We
will. We're excited to be
working with L. E S. C and lfc
prior to session and then
altering
Um, Finally, we ended the task
force meeting with House Joint
Memorial seven. This was a
follow up discussion. So the L E
F L. E S C and safe traces were
nice enough to present
Mr Chair just like to say, like
just expressed sincere things to
director.
Yes, yes, and all her staff for
their work, Um, for the task
force, their diligence and the
responsiveness year.
Ah!
That they'll get a little pause
from that. Um, um until, um, may
will be probably the first, um
in 2024 and January, 17th 0 put
him to work quicker, according
to our chair, but on that we
could put um, any input on the
work plan for the 2024 intro.
Can begin. Um,
Around the state local match
that that would not not
expecting that. Um and I think
that was the intention of the
lfc and ourselves.
And then also, I'd like to read
one other person I'd like to
thank here publicly, is my staff
because I think he doesn't
incredible amount of work and
have been top notch with calls
well, so thank you, Um, director
wonderment. I was wondering if I
know State local match. We're
not going to see us. Yes, we are
endorsed legislation.
To address an issue with the way
prohibit micro districts from.
Hopefully it will have a
governor's message.
Or do we? Next is the
maintenance.
Good morning Cherokee and
members of the council.
Item 18 your books or your
notebooks or your computer.
Is the maintenance program
status report as of September
30th of this year currently in
the state of New Mexico, 61% of
New Mexico school districts of
the 91 half current preventive
maintenance plans where our goal
is 70%.
Very dynamic number. It changes
from day to day, week to week
Very quickly matter of fact, the
information as of this morning
is 65% currently have a current
preventive made his plan through
outreach. Um, telephone calls,
emails we Our goal is to
encourage districts to update
that plan annually. 38% do not
And we have performance measures
that we conduct on a routine
basis to help get our goal by
December. 31st is 70% at minimal
films. The use of films is, uh,
the same as last quarter.
61% of New Mexico school
districts used the maintenance
direct module to manage their
general routine work quarters
that happened from day to day
Reactive type work. 67% use the
preventive maintenance work
order piece, which is what we
encourage more of to maintain
equipment systems. Air filter
changes routinely take care of
life safety systems on a
scheduled basis.
Utility direct is definitely an
opportunity for improvement in
the state of New Mexico as it
drives energy efficiencies. It
supports energy management
programs in the state of New
Mexico that's currently at
47.25% use.
We'd like to see at least 70%
and will be driving that hard
2024
Next item on the list is the
facility Maintenance assessment
report, which is a measure of
maintenance performance, our
district taking care of the
assets, are they maintaining the
educational environments? Well,
the answer to that question is
absolutely yes. Um, cycle over
cycle. We're seeing
improvements. We are currently
at a statewide performance
average of above the recommended
70 percentile rating.
At 76% highest number we've seen
ever which is good news. State
charters are also above the
Recommended 70 percentile rating
at 73%.
Our response rate.
And quite simply, that is when
the district receives their
report.
Do they read the report They
take heed and make improvements
and fix the things that are
broken.
Our response rate to the F Mars
this year is currently at 28%,
its highest We've ever seen it.
And I think that's the missing
link, in my opinion if we could
encourage more districts to
respond.
Fix what's broken. I think we'd
be at a higher performance level
in the state.
And we're getting there.
The good news is the highest
rating. This cycle so far is
94.927%. That's outstanding
maintenance performance. These
are very good quality facility
conditions as managed to
maintenance and operations. The
low is 50%. That's a much better
improvement from the previous
cycle. Um
The minor and major deficiency
summary. This was an important
factor for us to track this new
cycle. We're still seeing life
safety issues as being high on
the list districts not meaning
take maintaining their life
safety systems from routine fire
extinguisher inspections either
annual or monthly. The life
safety systems not working
effectively.
We've since collaborated with
palms.
And the good news is with their
collaboration. We're having an
impact.
The deficiencies identified 1st
and 2nd quarter of this year
have all been resolved.
And that is really good news and
moving forward. We're going to
continue that.
Through conversation with the
subcommittee recommendation was
made for us to improve our
tracking methodologies to
determine
What has been impacted.
How many of the deficiencies
have been resolved. And in
January, 2024 will be providing
a little bit more detail to to
that. Thank you for that
recommendation to drive better
communication.
Meaningful maintenance metrics.
This is the report provided we
provide junior Mexico school
districts to tell the story of
their maintenance programs to
their boards and superintendents
routinely Currently 12% of your
Mexico districts use this data
driven report. It's not to say
that they provide their own
reports to their boards. But
what we track is the very
specific report that comes out
of
Films and, um
Moving on last but not least.
New Mexico Facility Managers
certificate program. I thought
we'd put this in here because we
had a recent group of facility
managers that went through the
two year certificate program and
effectively graduated from this
course work coursework was
created many many years ago and
designed to shore up facility
managers across the state of New
Mexico and our schools. Skill
sets.
Yeah. And
We had 17 year Mexico School
district staff
Successfully complete and
graduate this two year cycle Can
you make covering 10, New Mexico
school districts, One B III
School and one state charter
school also graduated. And with
that
Mr Chairman members. I stand for
any questions.
Mr Chair members on October 16th
of this year, the PSF A on
behalf of the PSC OC presented
the 16th annual I'm sorry. The
17th annual Ben Luhan
maintenance achievement awards.
Of which many districts attended
The fall. Conference identified
um, also a very large group of
attendees this cycle, the
highest in previous years. 100
people at 160 People attended
this conference.
Great. Thank you to Mr Stuart
Ingram for being our keynote
speaker this year. He did a
wonderful job. I got a lot of
good feedback. I think that's
important. Also want to say and
thank you for attending the
after meetings. You really had
an impact on the new Mexico
school districts that were in
attendance at the dinner tables,
and we really appreciate your
efforts and what you do.
The ceremony. Thank you.
Welcome.
Good.
We presented 21 New Mexico
District Awards to individual
staff in the state of throughout
the state of New Mexico, three
team awards and the plant
manager of the year this year
was awarded to the Gadsden
Independent School District, Mr
Guillermo Hernandez.
And with that I stand for any
questions. Thank you for the
reporting for awards ceremony as
well. You got it. Thank you,
got it. Thank you. Semiannual
contracts. Mr. Chair members on
page 244. We have our semi
annual contract contracts.
update report, and I'll be very
brief. We just talk about what
we have in the category. 300.
As a budget or encumbrance or
expenditures and our balances.
We also reflect the same thing
in the Category four hundreds
and indicate that the Sims
contract has been paid in full
and films for 50% gushing about
the great consultant country.
You have any. If you'd like to
look at the detail, it's on page
two. If Miss Romero has anything
to add
Um, this might be the time
Mr Chair members. What we did
here in subcommittee is that
they would like to count added
to this council. I was thinking
person.
On, Um
Contracts that are reoccurring.
I think that would be helpful.
