I could start with you, please.
Cindy Montoya, New Mexico School
for the Arts.
Julie Lucero, a Golden Apple
Foundation.
Antonio Ortiz's public education
department.
Lee Anne Gandy, director of
Leadership development for CES.
Dan Ros executive director for
the Coalition of Educational
Leaders at the school
superintendents.
Did it?
Uh, my name is Harry Garcia in
New Mexico City representative
for House District 69. I covered
parts of of one MacKenziebua
Bernard Valencia County. I'm not
a member of this committee, but
I was for years when I first
started. It's a good committee
and it's all about the kids.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
Johnny Benavides public member,
retired educator.
Thank you, and, and actually I
should have had uh Senator
Stewart go because usually it's
the vice chair and not vice
chair, she's just sitting next
to Senator, if you would please.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
State Senator Mimi Stewart,
District 17, and the
International District in East
Gateway area of Albuquerque.
Again, I'm Bill Souls, state
senator.
or
Down in Las Cruces, um, and
Simon, if you'll introduce
yourself and the staff who are
here staffing this committee for
us Simon Suzuki with Legislative
Council Service and Rebecca
Criego.
And Senator Munoz, you are just
in time.
I'm George Minosa. I represent
Senate District 4, Sibola
McKinley and San Juan County.
Thank you.
Very good. Um, we, we got a
A very, I think a very
interesting uh
Agenda today, this committee has
rolling new members on it who
don't necessarily know all the
jargon and have heard all the
things about public school
capital outlay for many years.
So a lot of this is kind of
backing up to some of the
history of
Public school capital outlay in
the state of New Mexico, how we
got where we are, and then some
of how we finance schools and
how those different pieces and
things work with it. Uh, we are
scheduled to take a lunch and
adjourn somewhere around 3 to
3:30, kind of up to the
committee if you'd rather work
through lunch and be done
earlier or if you'd like to take
a lunch, and depending on how we
go, we made, you know, bump some
things up. I know many of
several of you have traveled
long distances. Get here and
want to make sure we
We can get you back home then in
a reasonable time. So we'll just
kind of watch as that goes and
as we get close, see whether we
would just want to push through
lunch if that works and be done
at 1:30 or whether to take a
lunch and then take a break if
that works all right with you,
Simon.
And then, um, yes, Mr. Chair, we
would need to check with um item
3, the presenters from RBC.
Yes, as to whether they're
traveling in or be here on time
and.
And Mr. Chair, they're going to
present remotely, but I can call
them after we see how the time
is going and see if they'll be
available earlier. If not, we
can just follow along with the
schedule and that, that works
fine. So. So Simon, if you
would, uh, we're gonna start
with the history and the legal
framework of the New Mexico
public education system.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
once again, Simon Suzuki, staff
attorney with the Legislative
counsel Service, and as always,
I'll give the disclaimer. Any
opinions expressed in this um
presentation are mine and do not
reflect legislative council or
any other members of its staff.
So, um, the task force has been
focused on very specific
problems so far this interim.
So the purpose of this
presentation is to take a step
back and um
Oh
So the task force can
understand.
Where the public school outlay
system fits within our.
A broader legal context.
So to do that, we're gonna go
way back to the beginning and
for legal purposes, it's
The early days of the United
States and I included this
quote, I think many of you are
educators and would have um
would appreciate it.
Uh, and I'll, I'll read it for,
for those watching on the
webcast, experience hath shown
that even under the best forms,
those entrusted with power have
in time and by slow operation
perverted into tyranny, and it
and it is believed that the most
effectual means of preventing
this would be to illuminate as
far as practicable, the minds of
the people at large and more
especially to give them
knowledge of those facts which
history exhibiteth that
posssessed thereby of experience
of other ages and countries.
They may be enabled to know
ambition under all its shapes
and prompts to exert their
natural powers and defeat its
purposes. So this is an excerpt
from a bill that was introduced
by Thomas Jefferson. Um,
In the Virginia House of
Delegates and it was called the
Bill for the more general
diffusion of knowledge.
Um, so importantly and obviously
the United States Constitution
does not reference education.
Uh, it's
Always been something that was
either privately provided or
very locally provided.
Um,
Oh, excuse me.
So although the founders didn't
include a right to educational
requirements on the states.
To provide education to their
people. Um, early on in the
history, they took a carrot and
stick approach, and that was
through the land grants that
We still use today. So the first
was the land ordinance of 1785,
which started the tradition of
reserving Lot 16 in the
townships for the maintenance of
the public schools.
Um,
At this time it was the um
Congress under the Articles of
Confederation, uh, and they
Uh
Built on that.
Desire, uh, the, the
Coercion isn't the correct word,
but um
Convincing the states to take on
these responsibilities that they
otherwise have the discretion
to. So,
We'll give you land and you'll
use it, but it it has to be used
for these particular purposes.
Um,
And you know, as many of you are
aware, the, the history of New
Mexico, um,
It technically became a
territory of the United States
when the US government occupied
uh the Nuevo Mexico during the
Mexican-American War, uh, and
established a provisional
government.
Um, with the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo and Nuevo Mexico became
the New Mexico territory and was
former um formally became a
territory in 1850 with the
Organic Act and per the
tradition that started with the
early the the um the early land
ordinances, uh sections 16 and
36 in New Mexico were reserved
for the school, so they were not
granted at that time.
Um,
Even um from 1852, 1890, the
development of the education
system was pretty slow. The
Catholic Church was primarily
the
Uh, the, the, the educator for
the state, um, as the railroad
came in, uh,
Protestant families from back
east, moved to New Mexico and
started building schools for
their children, and would
contract with the, the federal
government, the territorial
government, to educate Indian
children as well as Hispanic.
So in 1891, the territorial
legislator passed the first
common school laws.
And it established the common
schools, it created a state
board of education and as um the
Office of Superintendent of
Public Instruction.
And it provided the um
The funding system that's very
similar today that allowed
school districts.
To raise revenue to uh provide
for capital projects.
And it's
With a lot of um nuanced
changes, it's still essentially
the same sort of framework.
Um, and interestingly, I was,
uh, discussing this with Mr. Ros
earlier Senator, um, Mr. Chair.
The, um,
The common school law of 1891
had a provision.
That allowed for um school
districts to temporarily use
revenues from uh certain estate
taxes, bond forfeitures, uh,
other types of licensing fees,
uh, to be collected and then
just the counties would
distribute them to the school
districts.
Uh, to be used for the schools.
Um, right away after the law was
passed, the, the rural school
districts realized that the
school districts that were
either in towns or villages or
encompass towns and villages
were being left out.
Because they didn't have the the
same revenue sources.
So in 1893, the territorial
legislature came up with a
creative solution and require
that a third of those revenue be
um
Appropriated to the county's
general school fund, so they
could equalize uh some of the,
the school funding and, and this
was a time when the schools were
barely getting off the ground,
and that's an image of the
Ratone schoolhouse that is now
at Aloancho de los School
inrina.
Um,
And then this is another
important milestone in 1898,
Congress passed the Ferguson Act
which granted the, the land
grants that were reserved in the
Enabling act or the or the
organic Act.
And this was crucial to
statehood.
Uh, and then finally in 1910,
Congress passed the Enabling Act
which allowed the territory to
become a state.
Uh, the Constitutional
Convention convened in 1911 and
in 1912, the or in in 1911, the
constitution was ratified, and
this was the education clause
that the constitutional
convention included a uniform
system of free public schools
sufficient for the education of
and open to all.
The Children of school age in
the state shall be established
and maintained, and I'll refer
to this as the education clause.
And this was part of a compact,
uh, the, the with the United
States, so the Enabling Act
required that the state
Create this public school
system and also in order to use
the the revenue from the land
grants.
There had to be a public school
system.
And within Article 12 of the
Constitution.
Other provisions relevant to the
education system.
Our chapter. So article 6 or or
section 6 of Article 12 provides
for that uniform system. And as
many of you know, originally,
Um, Section 6 established a
state board of education that
had control, management and
direction of all public schools
under such regulations as may be
provided by law.
The current version of Section 6
establishes PDM PC.
And give the legislature
discretion to determine what PED
and what PC's powers are.
And the the bullet points below
are the statutory citations, uh,
22-2-1, um.
Grants the Secretary of Public
Education, uh,
The power of management and
direction of the schools.
Section 22-5-4 uh provides for
school board powers and duties,
22-5-14 provides for the duties
of the superintendent, and then,
um, more recently, the state has
also provided for charters.
Sections 24, 7 and 12 of Article
12 pertain to the land grants.
We won't, we won't get into too
much detail about those, but if
you wanna look into them, uh,
that's where you find them.
Uh,
Importantly, and or
interestingly, school districts
and school boards are not are
created by law and they're not
established by the Constitution.
Um,
So
Going back the first school
districts were established in
1891, uh, by the territorial
legislature. However, in 1973
and 1980, the Constitution was
amended to provide for
provisions for school board
members to be removed and
provided for um
uh and in the 1980 amendment
allowed for certain high
population school districts to
Have larger school districts,
but there's no constitutional
provision that creates school
boards. So I mean, technically
the legislature could get rid of
school boards, despite the fact
that
Um,
Constitution calls for certain
removal proceedings.
Um, Article 12, section 11
establishes the state
educational institutions and
importantly, these are distinct
from the common schools. So this
the constitutional special
schools, uh, New Mexico School
for the Blind and Visually
Impaired and the New Mexico
School for the Deaf are distinct
from common schools. They um are
different.
Type of public entity, they have
different responsibilities to
their students.
And then these are some
additional
Provisions in Article 12, so
section 5 requires compulsory
attendance.
Section 8 requires the state to
provide teachers training in
both English and Spanish for the
purpose of teaching English to
Spanish speaking students, and
that
Um, comes from again the
Enabling Act and the compact
with the United States.
The United States require that
the public schools be taught in
English.
Article 12, Section 9 prohibits
religious discrimination in the
public schools.
And Article 12 section 10
prohibits the segregation of
Hispanic students.
And mandates perfect equality
with other children in all
public schools and educational
institutions of the state. And
the reason for this provision is
because of the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo, the United
States.
Made assurances to Mexico and to
its soon to be new citizens.
And
Um,
Equality and the full rights of
citizenship, etc. were part of
that.
This, this provision in the
Constitution is in Article 9,
and it does, um, so it's
separate from the the other
education clauses, but this is,
this provides
Uh, restrictions on debt.
So
Um,
But to take away from this is
that a school district can only
be indebted in amount of in that
equals 6% of their assessed
property value.
And
Um,
This substantive provision was
adopted in 1933, uh,
This section's been amended a
few times since.
Uh
The most recent was in
2005 to allow for a lease
purchase agreements. Um, but
Again, when we hear from the
school districts, the task force
has heard from school districts,
Mr. Chair, about their um
difficulties raising revenue,
um, so,
They they can't go into debt
more than 6% of their assessed
property value.
And just going back to the the
main education clause.
Um, these three words, uniform,
free and sufficient are
The, the operable terms.
Uh, and
Depending on
What you think there there's
unfortunately, fortunately,
there's very little legal
precedent on the meaning of
these clauses.
Um, the Supreme Court.
ruled to some degree on what
free means.
But, um, so in strong versus
Russell.
That case was regarding school
district consolidation and
You and then there's a quote if
if the districts are made so
large that schoolchildren are
unable to make the trip to
school and back home each day,
then they would be denied a free
um a free school just as
effectively as no school
existed.
Uh, another case was Norton
Xrell Welch.
Um, and in that case, the school
district was attempting to
charge course fees.
And the Supreme Court said, you
can't charge fees for the
required courses that school
districts can charge a
reasonable fee for uh elective
courses.
The the ZUNI lawsuit with most
of us are familiar with.
Deals with what uniform means.
So the original um
case of
of the genesis of the current
public school capital outlay
system.
Um,
was based on a summary judgment,
um, opinion by Judge Rich at the
time.
And he determined that the
Former capital outlay system was
unconstitutional because the
ability of the school districts
to raise these capital
improvement funds differs among
districts because of the
non-taxable nature of certain
lands within the school
districts, and we know, we, we
know.
Um, you know what happened after
that?
But he
It's a district court, um, it's
not presidential, and he didn't
really define uniform. He didn't
adopt a definition of what
uniformity means.
Recently, in 2020, the ongoing
ZUNI litigation, um, Judge
Dipali did adopt a uniform
definition, and he looked to
Arizona, which has a similar
education clause to ours.
And um this is a quote from his
decision and order. It is not
uni that the
This current capital outlay
system is not uniform as
intended because the funding
scheme being directly tied to
the property wealth of the
school districts allows property
wealthy districts at their
discretion to raise and spend
much more money than property
poor districts to build
facilities to their satisfaction
while paying significantly lower
taxes. And this is currently on
appeal and
The parties will make oral
arguments in November and the
Supreme Court may uh give us a
definition um for uniform.
But there are other
Issues um that the case can be
disposed on, so the court may
not necessarily get to it.
And, and hopefully we'll hear
more about the ZUNY lawsuit next
uh meeting.
Um, by some by counsel from the
parties.
Um, and then another case that
many of you are familiar with,
again, not a precedential case,
but it is uh an order on the
parties.
Um, is the Martinez Yazi case,
uh, where
The definition of sufficient did
come up.
And the court in that case
rejected the plaintiff's
argument to adopt um specific uh
standards establishing what
sufficient was and instead
acknowledge the legislator's
prerogative.
Um,
The legislature makes policy for
the state.
It gets to determine what is
sufficient and adequate and has
passed several education laws
that have established that.
And then just uh again as a
reminder that we're in
You know we're, we're a state
and a union, so there are
Federal laws that we have to be
aware of. Um, I also included
article 2 of the Constitution,
which is the Bill of Rights,
which provides um
Requirements of equal
protection, due process, etc.
the New Mexico Human Rights Act.
Applies to public schools. The
14th Amendment of the United
States Constitution, um, applies
to
Public schools.
Uh, Essa and then other federal
civil rights laws, uh, Title 6,
Title X, IDEA, ADA Section 504.
And
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, the purpose
of this was just to
You know, uh,
Explain to the committee.
Where we're at and if anyone has
questions, I'm happy to answer.
Thank you, very informative, and
I know lots of this stuff, but
it's nice to have it laid out
and some of the, the history of
where it came from and what we
hear some of the comments of,
you know, this particular
lawsuit or that one and why it
was, was filed, um, questions,
comments from committee members.
No one?
Be a sleeper, everybody's like,
hey, we'll get out of here on
time or early. Don't need
anybody to ask questions.
They're poking each other.
Yes, representatives, thank you
for sure. Uh, you mentioned
earlier on the, on your
comments, how
Unfair it was.
For uh communities that have a
bigger community setting than
rural Mexico.
For for funding and so forth,
right?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia, yes, so, um, at, at the
last task force meeting.
The task force heard from
Superintendents from small
school districts Animas,
Melrose.
Maxwell, um, and explained their
issues, raising revenue because
of their low property base.
Um,
And um I included that
information from the late 1890s,
um, in this presentation because
it shows that this is a a
constant problem for the state
that we have a small population.
We have a big geography.
And um,
So from the very, very early
days of of our state we've been
dealing with uh similar
problems.
Um,
Disparities in population lead
to
Disparities and services and
other things.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
you know, the, the, the, the
problem is that we're still in
the same place.
You know, people and, and
smaller communities, you know,
like my district is really
rural. It's on the frontier, and
you know, the population is so
low there and, and the needs are
so great.
The they're just not being met,
you know, you know, we have all
kinds of problems broadband, uh,
internet.
Drinking water, you know, our
kids are suffering out there and
you know, I just made a point of
that because you mentioned
earlier in the 1800s, here we
are in 2024, still facing the
same problem.
You know, maybe not as great as
it was then, but it's still a
problem. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments?
That's rich
There's a lot of interesting
history and nepotisms and other
things throughout the history of
New Mexico and and lawsuits and
other kinds of things and.
And you know, including, you
know, with the ZUNI lawsuit or
not the Zuni, the Yazi Martinez
is shortly after the ruling, the
judge died, and so that now
leaves a new judge to try and
determine what he was thinking
as far as uh what is sufficient
and, and other kinds of things
which
Makes it and the lawyers
continue to get rich.
Again, other questions, comments
from anyone?
If not, thank you, Simon. That
was, was very interesting and
yeah, just in chats with you, I
know you had an interesting time
looking those up and putting it
into a timeline, but it, it
helps lay a nice groundwork for
uh why this committee exists,
um.
So thank you, yo, and this
particular committee that came
about probably right around the
turn of the century, about 2020
or so after the ZUNI lawsuit set
up.
Um, and we had, we used to do
what was called critical capital
outlay in order to fund the
public schools.
But that usually was whatever
money was left over after the
legislature allocated
everything, which as we know the
legislature is pretty good at
allocating whatever we're given
and there wasn't very much.
So
Wealthy districts that were able
to tax themselves to build
schools would do that and go out
for bonds and the property poor
districts were left with crumbs
with from the critical capital
outlay of which there was never
enough. And so this then was the
newer system that
Put it into a formula type of of
issue and so kind of some of the
more modern pieces of things,
and, and that may be some of
what we're gonna get into and
some of the public school
finance and
And priorities and such, but
thank you very much. Appreciate
it. My pleasure, Mr. Chair and
then again just a reminder, um,
our office works for the
legislature. We work for the
committee, so, um, any member
has a request for
More specific information about.
The law about a case, um, uh,
you can let our office know and
we can get that for you.
Thank you, Simon.
Simon transitions coming back up
here, uh, Representative Small,
if you'd like to introduce
yourself.
Thanks so much, Mr. Chair. Uh,
my name is Nathan Small. I'm
privileged to represent House
District 36 down in Donana
County. Uh, where we get to
share, we share a couple of
precincts with the Senator
Pinto, if you would please. Yes.
members of the committee and
Senator Shannon represent
District 3, the Northwest corner
of the same thing.
Wonderful. Did I miss anybody
else who did not, was not here
when we did introductions
before. Do we have a quorum now?
OK.
So while we have a quorum before
other people might run off to
other things, we have two sets
of minutes and an agenda to
approve, so if I can have a
motion, uh, we probably ought to
do them as separate pieces.
So listen to adopt the minutes
for the first.
The meeting from last month, the
May month.
We have a motion to adopt the
may minutes, May 28 minutes.
2, is there any opposition to
adopting those benefits?
Thank you. Try not to bang that
too much when the mics on.
Um, a motion for last month's
minutes, which were June July
1st minutes.
So moved approval.
Moved by uh Pro Tem Mimi
Stewart, seconded by Stan
Rounds. Is there any opposition
to approval of those minutes?
They are approved. Um, and then
do we need to do the agenda for
today then.
So, uh, motion to adopt the
agenda for today.
Almost. The mood, seconded by
Senator Pinto. Is there any
opposition to that?
If
OK, we've taken care of the
formal business part of things.
So next up, we're a little bit
ahead of schedule. Public school
financing issues and priorities,
uh, again, if you would come
down, please, the executive
director of the New Mexico
School Boards Association, been
very engaged and involved with
this since the early 90s when we
served together as leadership in
the New Mexico School Boards
Association and then also Stan
Rounds, uh, longtime educator in
New Mexico in multiple roles and
very involved and engaged with
the
The executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition of
Education Leaders. So gentlemen,
if you would please.
Uh, thank you, Chairman Solz and
members of the task force.
Appreciate the opportunity to be
here this morning. Um, as the
chair mentioned, and I'll give
you a little bit of history on
my background for those of you
that aren't familiar but have a
28 year uh service to state
government.
Uh,
And uh
I served at the state planning
office. I was the last state
planning director in New Mexico
and also director of the local
government division at DFA.
Until my retirement when I
became a school board member,
local school board member, and
And uh after 3 terms.
I, uh
was able to take the job as the
executive director of New Mexico
school boards. I've been there
now uh.
Probably 1617 years, so working
with many of you.
Uh, today I wanted to give you
just a little brief uh
background.
Uh, first of all, on the school
board association, and I'm
wearing my hat as executive
director today. I also uh have
the privilege of serving as
chair of the Public School
capital Outlay Council for the
last several years, and I've
thoroughly enjoyed that, uh.
That uh responsibility.
So first, uh,
Is, are you bringing that up?
I wanted to just provide a
little overview of my
presentation. I'm going to talk
a little bit about New Mexico
School Boards Association or
legislative, uh, advocacy
activities.
Uh, review some of our existing
priorities in terms of capital
outlay.
Uh, identify some issues, uh,
Uh, that we have come up over
the last couple of years, uh,
and, uh, and then take any
questions that uh that you might
have.
If I could just OK, so here's a
Here's the overview.
And uh we'll get into.
The actual mission of NMSBA.
Uh, to assist local school
boards to provide the best
education possible for students
in New Mexico. That's our
overall goal. And we do that,
uh, carrying out several
objectives. The first is to
identify the role of school
board members and provide
training.
Uh, the second is to encourage
efficient and effective
administration of public
schools, so trying to.
Uh, take, uh, and, and share
best practices.
Provide information on a regular
basis to school board members to
help them make their decisions.
And provide the public with an
understanding of the school
board's role in public
education.
Uh, and finally to represent
school boards at the legislature
and in Congress.
Uh, our organization, uh, uh, is
a 501c3 organization. We've been
around since 1958/65 years of
service.
Uh, we have a 100% membership.
All 89 school boards, uh, belong
to the school board association.
We have a staff of 3 full-time
professionals that were located
here in Santa Fe.
Uh, the governance for the
association, we have a statewide
officers, 5 of those, president,
vice presidents, uh.
Uh, Secretary, treasurer, past
president.
And they provide the overall
guidance uh along with our 40
member board of directors.
Uh, we have, uh
Members from each of the 8.
Uh, regions, 3 officers from
each of the regions, we have our
past presidents. We also have
large district representatives,
anyone that has an enrollment of
any larger than 10,000 as an
automatic seat on the, on the
board of directors.
As I mentioned, we're divided
into 8 regions. We have several
committees, uh, including our
legislative nominating policy
and other committees as, as
needed.
The services we provide are, are
at least the general categories,
communication,
writing information.
Uh, also on legislative and
advocacy, and I'll get into more
detail on that one.
Training, that's our major uh
Uh, assignment these days and
that is to provide training to
school board members. Uh, we do
so at our conferences, uh, you
see here conference services, we
have 4 major conferences a year.
We bring in uh uh all of our
board members to uh provide
training and provide
information.
We also provide for uh for a fee
uh policy services to 83 now of
the 89 districts, we help them
keep up their policies as as a
law or regulation changes, we,
we provide them with model
policies to adopt to implement
those uh changes in, in law.
And a whole bunch of other
miscellaneous services and, and
awards.
In the area of uh legislative
advocacy. Of course, we attend
legislative hearings and
committee meetings. You see us,
uh, represented at, at many of
your meetings, uh, not only
during the interim, but during
the session as well. We
coordinate with our New Mexico
education partners which
includes the superintendents,
uh, the two labor unions, PTA
and others, and of course we,
we uh uh coordinate with the New
Mexico Public Education
Department as well on all of our
activities.
We prepare legislative updates
and issue calls to action during
the session, and we represent
boards on various committees and
task forces that the legislature
sets up or that are uh.
established to help provide
input to the legislature and the
executive.
of our advocacy process, we, we,
we're just starting that for the
coming legislative session,
we've issued a call for uh
resolutions, uh, just a couple
of weeks ago where we allowed
the local boards to express
their legislative priorities to
us, those resolutions are
received, uh, then we put uh uh
together a a packet of all of
these proposals and we have a 24
member legislative resolutions
Committee that meets, reviews
those, uh,
And those resolutions and comes
up with recommendations to
present to our full membership
in December at our at our annual
conference every year.
Uh, once adopted these legislate
the legislative program
represents the collective voice
of all of our school boards.
Well, that's how we handle the
process. We're in the middle of
it now for the uh the
20 2025 legislative session.
Want to share with you the
priorities that are currently in
our books, so they may be uh
revised or changed as a result
of resolutions that will receive
uh by the deadline of next, next
month, but these are the
priorities that we have.
Uh, currently
Of course, all of our
legislative program is based on
three guiding principles.
And this these are used to
evaluate and look at legislation
and determine if uh we're going
to support or, or maybe uh
Uh,
Opposed legislation. The first
is local decision making. We
believe that legislation should
always include ability for local
decisions at the local level, we
don't.
I think that one size fits all
in all of these areas, so we do
ask for that flexibility of the
legislature.
Also consistent with the
constitutional history that
you've just heard, we uh our,
our second priority is
sufficient funding, being able
to uh rely on sufficient funding
from the legislature.
And then finally, no unfunded
mandates, uh, many times we get
directives from the legislature
and the executive and at times,
uh, there's no funding or
resources provided for that, so
we always try and maintain uh
that uh that priority.
Uh, in our legislative program,
we believe that school
facilities have a profound
effect on both teacher and
student outcomes.
School facilities affect teacher
recruitment, retention and
commitment.
Facilities also affect student
health, behavior, engagement,
learning and growth and
achievement. So school
facilities set the tone for
success in our schools.
Some of the specific priorities
that we have currently in our
books.
Of course we support continued.
Uh, funding for the uh public
school uh capital outlay Council
and Act.
For systems and standards
projects and preventive
maintenance programs.
We also support continued
funding for broadband, school
safety.
AC and HIV HAVC upgrades.
And renewal renewable energy
programs.
Again, these are already on the
books.
As as our priorities.
A few more, we support the
removal or reduction of local
matching requirements for all
projects, including
School security, pre-K and CTE
projects.
And we also support the removal
of uh of offset penalties on
public school capital outlay
projects, and you are all passed
the legislation in that regard a
couple of years ago. We're very
pleased with that.
Now some of the issues that
we've been hearing about, uh,
Uh, over the last
Oh,
Several months
Uh, include the following.
First of all, all of you know
that we're facing problems with
the cost of construction
escalating.
And particularly in the in the
rural areas, you know, that we
were paying $200 300 dollars
square foot for construction.
Last couple of years, but more
recently we've gone up to 500
$600 900 dollars a square foot.
And that is really uh causing a
problem for
For our school districts.
Uh, as a result of this, the
matching requirements aren't.
Uh, uh, and despite the Senate
Bill 131 which
a couple of years ago reduced.
The matching requirements by 30%
and 50% for some of the
districts. We're still having a
hard time coming up with a local
match due to the uh escalating
uh construction costs.
Uh, we also, uh, are having
problems with the matching
waiver requirements. There was a
Senate Bill 76 did a fix this
past session to help rural
communities, but we're still
having a problem and we're
seeing quite a few uh matching
requirements or matching waivers
coming forward and uh and and
not meeting requirements.
Um,
Another uh issue that we've
heard throughout the last
several months and the last
couple of years is teacher
housing the shortage of teacher
housing and we have uh you have
uh provided funding for teacher
housing for us.
Uh, with, uh, been running a
pilot program through the public
school capital LA uh council,
and we're starting to get that
money out, but again, uh, the
costs for, for those.
Uh, is continue to rise and the
demand from all of the districts
for teacher housing is, is we're
we're starting to hear that.
And then finally, uh, we
appreciate the work that has
been done over the last 2 or 3
years on streamlining the
process at public school capital
Olake uh uh at the public school
facilities Authority and at the
Capital Outlay Council, we wanna
continue to work on that, make
sure that we can remove any of
the uh unnecessary rules or
regulations or procedures to
make
Uh, funds flow smoother and get
the uh project constructed
quicker.
Um
That's uh
is a uh concludes.
My uh portion of the, of the
presentation and, and, and
talking with Mr. Rounds, uh, you
know, this was a good jumping
off point for me and uh as you
know, he's, uh.
has quite a bit of knowledge in
these areas and maybe I can just
keep those.
Uh
Those up there and I know you'll
be talking about some several of
these.
Thank you, John.
There we go Mr. Chairman, I
think that sounds better. It was
kind of echoing there for a
second.
So Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee stand around just to
give you a little history, most
of you know me.
I was public school fin
financially from 87 to 91 also
and similar to Antonio's current
position with the.
With the uh
Public education department, the
difference was they had.
On a constitutional amendment.
It actually took finance out
from under the governor.
And send it to the to the uh
state superintendent of Public
Instruction.
If you look at Simon's
presentation, it shows that
history, cause that's how it
started. It started in that
motif, which said there was an
educational value.
a constitutional component to
look in at education from the
state level.
And then I want to just
piggyback if I could sign on the
rest of what I think the
foundation is set.
The foundation was that there's
a partnership.
Between local contribution,
local effort, and local
definition of what instruction
or what education looks like, as
well as the state constitutional
oversight and interaction
requirement.
She looks at a very nice
history, Simon, thank you for
that, of how things have
progressed.
You see how as a state we've
interplayed who's responsible
for what?
In all of the cases, it is said
first, it, it isn't at the
federal level that is the
primary or core part, although
it's, it has significant play in
in title programs and whatnot
that are instituted, but the
core of what happens is in New
Mexico laden set of decisions.
And and I don't want us to lose
that.
If I could, Mr. Chairman, you
and I talked a little bit a
couple of weeks ago about this.
There's an architecture that I
want you to be aware of and
first of all, I want to agree.
NSBA's issues are the issues
that we bring as superintendents
as a coalition of educational
leaders. There's not a disparity
in our thought.
We're very unified in the
constructs in in general.
We have often as we look at
needs that come from our
constituency, laboring, if you
will, in that, but there's not a
dichotomy between where we are.
I want you to hear that what you
saw in Joe's slides are what we
support and, and know that.
However, I want to give you sort
of a quick course if you will,
on what happens at the school
level because I want to talk
about some districts in New
Mexico.
And the issues they've brought
to me.
As I've traveled around the
state and looked at.
The issue of capital outlay.
capitalizations and the
challenges that they have.
Because just like you, I'm
trying to discover what are the
needs.
What are they really?
And then we can sit and decide
from a policy perspective, what
does that look like? And you as
a legislature, in my opinion,
said policies, you said statute,
right? You, you set the statute
to say, here are the things that
are gonna matter.
That we're going to support from
the state level.
Here then is what should be
supported at the local level and
what this group oversees.
Is that public school capital LA
process.
That you have put in place,
mostly because of the ZUI
lawsuit.
I was
The capital critical capital
outlay czar in 1987. 987 to 91,
Antonio, your position was the
position that went to every
district.
And then came back to the
legislature with a supplemental
request, if you will, for
capital outlay. It might have
come from uh severance tax
bonds.
It might have come from other
State funds like general fund,
but it was always I think Mr.
Chairman, you properly
identified it was sort of a
Necessary afterthought or first
level afterthought, after the
core appropriation was done by
the legislature.
I remember
Mr. Chairman, represent a small,
uh, your predecessor and Max
call that I spent a lot of time
with during that time as we try
to figure out and, and Mr.
Chairman, Senator Munoz, uh, uh
Benny Alta Morano, Senator Alta
Morano was the person I dealt
with there and a lot of our
discussions was about how do you
do that? I'll give you an
example in 1987, my first
session that I spent in that
role.
We have, we had a total amount
of state dollars.
From general fund available of
$30 million.
That was our new money for the
next.
And it was on about a
2 billion, just under $2 billion
total state budget just the size
it for you.
In that, after everything was
settling.
We decided that we needed to
take
$15 million and put into the
public school side of.
Hondo had burned their school
down as an example, and we were,
they was trying to help get that
built back, things like that had
happened.
$15 million in that kind of
scope was pretty limited money
when you talk about it, but it
got into conflict with other
needs, the, the higher education
community has some needs for
higher education facilities. And
in fact, down toward the closing
days, uh, we stripped $10,000
out of that and we were able to
settle eventually at a at a $100
million total appropriation for
public for the critical capital
I funds. And so
A lot of that that went on.
We've improved that, haven't we?
We have a we have a process of
really diligently determining
needs.
And then prior legislatures and
this legislature have been very
dutiful.
And assuring that there's
sufficient funding put into it
and developed a system that I
fully support. I was telling uh
somebody this morning.
I don't believe I think Simon
who is in the discussion you and
I had.
I believe the state of New
Mexico, as I go around the
nation.
And talk to other
State execs like I am.
We should be proud.
Of the system we have in place.
It's quite unique and it's quite
wonderful, and there are several
states that are now asking for
information about our system is
to look at how they might move
their public policy to deal with
educational facility needs in in
their state.
So here's, here's the, here's
the textual part that I want you
to think about. In public
schools.
There are essentially.
4
Sources outside of you, the
legislature.
For capital outlet.
I'm gonna review them. There's
the 99.
Which is called public capital
Improvement Act.
It actually is a subsidized.
Act that incentivizes, if you
will, local districts to pass a
2 mill levy up to a 2 mill levy.
It has a 6 year lifespan.
Potential
And receive a guaranteed amount
income from that.
If they will pass the levy.
It's the only one which, by the
way, and, and what we, what we
do, but it's a non-debt, it's a
pay as you go and it's
subsidized by you, the
legislature every year is you
make a determination about that
match.
And that level of match and
you've you've you've detailed
that and what you've done in
statute. I'm gonna suggest today
that we go back and look at that
and look at increasing some of
those guarantees. Most districts
use that.
Levy for maintenance.
The first tier look, it can be
used for salaries.
You can buy contract services
out of it.
But it's primarily focused at
Maintenance of buildings and,
and in our
Situation that you consider
that's a big player. The second
one is House Bill 33. There's a
capital outlay Act and that
allows the district in
combination with their bonds,
their Ciel mind who uh have
About 10 to 12 mLs worth of
total debt that they can bring
on.
And in their levee system they
have.
But it's a this is a non-debt,
this is a pay as you go levy
also.
You collected, it can be up to 6
years, and you can turn them
back into projects you have in
your district.
OK, and, and
When you go to your voters on
that one.
You tend to talk about some of
the projects. You say here are
the projects we expect to
complete if you'll give us.
The 2 or 3 mL or 5 mLs up to 10
mLs.
You can put into that levee.
And we're gonna over the next 6
years, spend it on that.
The third are bonds.
Well that's where debt starts
coming up.
A bond levy is essentially a
municipal debt or a debt on the
part of the district against
property taxes.
Within the district's
boundaries.
So it pays for it is a levy on
property tax.
The M and proper tax. These
others are also levies on
properties, by the way.
And you have a constitutional
limit, as Simon talked about a
6% uh on that you can't go
beyond on your bonds.
Um, that, that, that is involved
in this.
These are low cost loans.
But if you think about it, when
school districts do their
planning, they'll they'll
they'll tend to go to other
monies other than bonds for
things like technology for
computers and things like that.
I'll call it things in front of
the wall.
The things in or behind the
wall, they tend to go to their
bonds.
Because your ability is
important.
It's like going and buying a
used car and putting it on a
seven-year note.
And then driving at 50,000 miles
a year.
It's gonna, it's gonna be used
up before the debt is exhausted.
Districts had to be very careful
about that.
So then there's the bond.
And bonds, you tend to have to
be very specific with your
voters.
Although it's not in your
bundle, and none of these levees
have the explicit projects, by
the way, in the question.
They are general, but when you
go and sell it to your public,
you get very specific.
We're gonna build this
elementary school we are going
to renovate this high school. We
are going to.
Fill in the list.
No, the 4th source is called
techno.
the 3 that I just mentioned.
Require voter referendum.
A notes do not. The Board of
Education may levy up to 2 mills
on tech notes.
And that's strictly for
technology.
There's a and that's where some
districts have put their efforts
for their technology.
Refitting
Initial purchasing, things like
that.
But those are, those are the
options and that's all of the
options districts have. They
have an option to use general
fund.
But Mr. Ortiz over there and his
folks when they look at, when
they look at budgets are
required to pass through one
gateway, which says that a
district has met all other needs
of the district.
Before they use the general
operational dollars for capital.
And she had to be very cautious,
something that they do in budget
reviews to to get home on that.
Now the reason I mentioned that
is
With all of that going on,
The real policy question is
What belongs where?
And how do you size what, right?
Don't talk a lot about the bonds
and public school.
Capital outlay
on PSF.
Yes, a faith.
Because you qualified projects,
you have districts have gone
through a series of things to
qualify.
And they have presented to the
to the council, here are our
needs and we then have projects
that have been approved by the
council.
Now, as, as uh Mr. Gehan said,
We have an issue of cost
escalation is something that is
new.
To the dynamic.
And you heard this from the
small districts that in fact,
for them, have thwarted in many
cases not only.
Their bond that they have, they
have brought forward but
completely uses up that 6%
capacity.
Mr. Suzuki talked.
And so they're in they're in a
bond.
But when you go to other
districts, they have similar
problems.
Let's go back to what happens.
You go to your voters and you
say, we're going to build this
high school, we're gonna
renovate this elementary school
or what were those projects are?
You go to many districts today
and they out the costs.
Outrun the capacity.
Both on what are just what I
call local district only.
Projects.
But also
Public school projects or the
PSFA projects that they've
applied to.
I'm gonna spend more time there
than on the other.
Because I would recommend that
we look very carefully at our
process of
Funding
And assuring the public that
projects will be completed.
That have been promised.
I believe that when the public
school Kabbalah Council.
And PSFA agreed with a district
that they're going to do a
project to build a school as an
example.
I've got 4 of them when I was in
Las Cruces, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman of the House
Appropriation and Finance
Committee Representative small
uh while I was superintendent of
schools.
And that promissory to the
public was very important.
In our ability to pass bond.
But then more importantly, to
deliver the educational quality
and design that I was
guaranteeing the.
With the help of
Uh, PSFA and then the Cala
Council, we were, we were able
to deliver.
And, and, and make those
projects real.
Today that's no longer the
surety.
And that's the policy question
we've got to do something about.
I've talked to the Albuquerque
Public schools and a number of
other districts around New
Mexico I've tried to probe what
are the real issues here? What,
what's the, what's the real
landscape that we have.
I was shared with a couple of
weeks ago about public schools,
um, that about 50% of their bond
project.
They will be unable to do.
And while they'll come to the
end of that bond cycle, they
will spent every dollar.
And still not being able to do
what they promised they could
do.
And critically, there are a
number of ESCOC.
Projects that they are partnered
with.
With PSFA.
That they have promised
community on that a similar
issue has arisen.
My question is, uh, in that
discussion, they said, wouldn't
it be nice?
If we could make up that gap one
time.
Get us shrewd.
And then move out from there and
do new planning.
If you will, that's true up and,
and, and deliver what we've
promised.
I think in from policy
perspective, I think you as a
legislature need to contemplate.
The PSCOC side of it as a tier
one issue.
And I would endorse.
Assuring the projects that have
been approved and are underway
would be assured.
As fully funded.
And I'll even be more uh
More bold than Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Senator Munoz and
representative Small, that we
Sure that was state dollars
because the, the condition
Of the
Levees that were put in place to
do the job has changed and
districts have done their.
In their communities have done
their promissory, if you will.
In a time that we are in of
Some considerable economic gain
for the state. I think that
might be a place we might, we
might wanna go.
Um, I believe also we need to
come up with a policy for local
districts, but I believe that
that may be through the direct
corporation process.
You saw in Joe's presentation,
we support
Uh removing, uh, the offset as
an example which is in place
currently.
It might make sense this session
to push that out another 5
years.
Uh
But then I think we might want
to have a discussion about.
Projects in the interim that are
new.
And how am I plan and modulate
those, what promises we make to
our voters. That's, that's the
important thing when you go to
your voters and you say, we will
do this.
And you have set your planning
to do it.
And then it's outrun you by
double the cost or almost triple
the cost in some places.
That's very unfortunate.
But it's a reality that I think
is a state from a policy
perspective I think we might
want to think about your
investment into those
conditions.
Make them happen
I think perhaps direct
appropriation with offset
removal is another part of that.
It does raise the issue, Mr.
Chairman, assignment on your
discussion about the ZUNI
lawsuit. There's an equity
question that you might
Cross eventually.
The reason that there is the
offset there was originally the
offset language.
had some districts with more
capacity.
But actually more political
capability to receive the direct
appropriation.
That they needed.
When you're in, um, when you're
in the
Our northeastern part of the
state.
Your number of representatives
and senators is very slim.
In the districts that are there.
And so the ability to build
A direct appropriation is
nominal.
When you get into larger.
More dense areas where you have
more representation.
Especially the way we do capital
outlay for you, the legislature.
We have some individual
opportunity to come in, which
I'm not just debating the right
or wrongness of what I'm talking
about.
The process.
We cross a line where you don't
you have more capacity.
Raise some numbers in that
regard.
And so I think Mr.
Chairman Representative Garcia,
your point early on about, you
know, you have, you have, you
have large metro areas and you
have, you have rural
Areas, this is really on point
with what that issue is.
And so, Mr. Chairman, I, I think
that's something we ought to
contemplate and we would
support, you see, on our issues
here.
A discussion and a process we'd
love to be part of to push that
out for a limited period of
time.
I don't think we can go forever.
We had oil and gas is gonna run
out someday on the, on the back
end.
Um, however, we're in, we're in
a capacity point right now.
Buildings last
We have buildings. I was in a
building this last week.
That it will be 100 years old
next month.
In a school district it's being
used.
That's good use of Hoover built
that building.
Yeah,
this chairmansman also were
talking about the first
schoolhouse up in, up in Raton,
right, in the, in the Maxwell
land grant and uh you know, that
probably would cost us $300,000
to build that little puppy now
and it was probably 29 or 30
bucks when they built it back in
the day. Now,
Even though that's being a
little frivolous about the point
is.
We have very
Different kinds of pressures and
issues on us right now, but when
you build a building, when you
build a schoolhouse.
It is therefore quite a while.
We build the buildings on a 40
year
Kind of viability when you, when
you build them.
And, and so this might be a
really good time. We believe
it's the right time to invest in
relieving this and allowing
communities to thrive and have
in place what they, what they
need to have. We believe that we
need to true up.
As as Joe says there are local
Match requirements.
Again, we, we went back, we made
some changes, uh, several years
back, uh, I think Senator
Stewart, you, you probably
carried that for us, and we
supported retweaking.
What the
State match levels would be. We
significantly reduced and we
moved.
The uh, the local match up in
the state match down.
In the long haul, that probably
makes some sense, but in the
short haul.
We need to recalibrate that and
I think all of us that deal with
this.
I believe we probably missed it
by a bit. That's something that
we should do.
Uh, and that should help us, it
should help us move along.
Um,
So the real issue is.
Who will have the state.
What's, what's the state's
responsibility and contribution
need to look like.
In the broad broad specter of
capital in schools and what is
local.
Right. And, and that's something
that we need to be aware of in
this we believe will be a right
session to have that debate,
that discussion.
And that right true.
Uh, and we stand ready to serve
you and provide information.
Final point I want to make.
Every one of those that we
talked about today.
is based on property taxes. I'm,
I've been around long enough
that we didn't always use
property taxes, even for the 2
mill levy.
I think it was 1987 or 19898, we
went to severance tax bonds with
the same match.
He we didn't tie it in for good,
but it's where we went.
Receive the allocation because
as you heard earlier we had a
real bind in our overall.
Uh, general fund.
We couldn't put that pressure on
it.
But the legislature at the time
felt like the guarantees that
were given.
Match
Guarantee that was given in the
2 mill.
It was important for the state
to live up to that, and they
went to severance tax bonds.
Which isn't
Isn't it, I'll I'll argue, isn't
a property taxation issue.
Sort of is, but it really isn't
in the, in the.
In the bigger scheme of things.
And that's something we might
think about as we move through
time.
As when you look at the year
guarantees.
If you're in general fun now and
we can afford to stay there.
And what is our scheme to
guarantee longevity?
sustainability of what.
We decide, you decide
statutorily is what the state's
policy.
The Chairman, I've rambled
enough, as you heard, the school
boards association, the school
superintendents association, of
which there's 89 of them.
And this the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational Leaders
where there's about 600.
And 1000 members because we have
18 organizations. If you are an
administrator at any level.
In New Mexico.
And you have an organization,
national or state.
You are under the umbrella of
the New Mexico coalition of
Educational Leaders. So,
We, we look forward to using our
strengths.
To have those communications
with those kinds of folks.
Um,
To be offered into this debate
that we're having. Thank you
very much for the chance of
presenting to you, Joe, I guess
I've rambled long enough so I
quit and I'll answer questions.
Thank you both. Uh, lots of
historical background there. uh,
questions from the committee.
About
Or in the background where we
are, how we finance public
schools.
Senator Munoz, thank you. You
know it's.
It, it's very interesting time
we live in, right, because
inflation is kind of run the
price and cost up, right?
And but we have a declining
school.
Right? And everybody wants the
same school that they saw there
for only better, right?
And I don't how we control that
now I'll give you the perfect
example is.
Zi applied for teachers for
$90.09 teachers.
1500 square feet.
$1 million or 1500 square feet.
But roughly $600 or when I ran
into the Zuni governor DMV.
Yesterday or the day before, and
I said, I said, are you moving
into one of those new million
dollar homes and he looked at me
like, what? And like,
9 houses
$1 million I mean.
The council has to get some
control of this.
I some of these.
If you let those contractors do
that.
And you got to set a floor in
the ceiling on on.
On building
Right? Otherwise we keep adding
to little triggers and PS in in
the fun, right?
We added maintenance.
And we added leasing for charter
schools, right? There's a
charter school in Gallup.
And maybe has 200 students, they
pay 105 in rent.
Mhm. Hey, is that really what we
should be paying, right, is how
are we gonna get some control
and tampering down on this
because
Part of our responsibility is to
control inflation too.
OK.
How do we tamper down those?
Those numbers, I mean.
Do we set a floor? Have you guys
discussed on setting the floor?
I mean, you mean the floor in
the ceiling may be completely
different than mascara.
And it is in downtown Albert,
right? Yeah, and, and UNM is
building a nursing center for
$300 and some dollars a square
foot.
Right, and that's probably got
more technical advances.
Then then the school hasn't. How
are we gonna taper down some of
that?
Could you go back to slide 15,
we don't have a printed
presentation. There's something
on the slide 15.
Um,
When when school districts,
right?
To support the removal of offset
penalties on public school at
Valley.
Explain that to me again.
Actually, that's in place right
now. This, this was uh again
our.
For uh previous uh position on
this.
3 years ago, you removed the
offsets.
Tell me what that is.
Explain it to a district.
Uh comes directly to a
legislator for funding for
particular project.
That amount if it was granted
and signed into law and.
It would be.
Reduced
From a capital outlay project
from the public.
It was a penalty.
Or coming directly to the
legislature.
I was chairman of a real
specific. So what the practice
had been under the offset was
exactly what Joe said, and it it
took on this flavor of few where
I was in Las Cruces.
We had a 60% state and a 40%
local.
If I were to, Mr. Chairman, want
to go to represent small
where he wanted to come to me
with an appropriation. So I'd
like to get this into that
school.
I tended to say the legislators
don't do it because
But you will give me directly
will be offset from what we're
gonna receive at the time, Mr.
Chairman, representative Small
for Centennial High School.
be reduced from our map.
And so that's bad money on your
part, invest. For years ago, you
as a legislature removed that.
Uh, for a 5 year period.
Uh, and that's what I was
recommending is that we push
that out from today's or this,
this next session out for 5
years uh as we try to deal with
the inflation cost.
If I could, Mr, let me go back
to to the core question, Senator
Munoz, Mr. Chairman.
Um, yes, we're interested in, in
dealing with what is reasonable.
We reflect on, on some of these
teachers, part of the cost is
you're having to run uh all of
your utilities are having to be
borne by the district.
To take from their end of their
current existence.
To the site.
And so that certainly escalates
the cost. I know the, Mr.
Chairman represented Small when
he built Centennial High School.
Where we built it, we went over
a reservoir.
Roadway.
That had washed out.
18 of a mile of construction
cost me $1.4 million.
But I had to bear that wasn't
even on my property.
You get that.
Access point.
my responsibility, not somebody
else's, and that's, that's the
flavor, I think what happens in
when you go to some of those
costs. Now,
I can't explain $1000 a unit at
1500 square foot.
So that that's overkill.
And so
Part of that is in your design
part, part of it in controlling
the cost.
Ms. Chairman, one of the things
that I'm becoming aware of is
there are fewer and fewer
available.
Contractors and fewer and fewer
available.
Uh, subcontractors in many of
the rural parts of New Mexico.
And we need to figure out how to
inspire that, Mr. Chairman, uh,
and, and have the available
bandwidth, uh, also that's in
this, but putting a floor in a
ceiling.
Uh, Mr. Sherman, we don't have a
problem with, I think
ascertaining what the metrics
are in that maybe a difficult
point we'd have to figure out.
I'll reflect again if you have
to put in 8 miles of sewer and
water line.
Bill 3 houses.
That probably might be scored
differently than if you already
had it existing.
Are you building palaces out of
the houses kind of, you know,
tho those are, those are
certainly the issues, but
setting limitations, getting
that figured out is a good
policy point in our.
In Zuni may be an outlier too,
but, but there's a lot of land
in Zuni right next to schools
and everything else, and they
have teachers that are are
currently just just in through
threw me for a loop when I heard
that. That's just.
I mean
You're not gonna solve the
contractor problem, right?
Getting into the contracting
world is, is almost one of the
hardest things you wanna do and
if you want to go bid against
James and Badbury and Stan, and,
and have some little guy from
Gallup. I mean, they're getting
squeezed out at every corner.
They want all design build.
There's only 5 firms in the
state of New Mexico that do
design builds, and they're gonna
squeeze every other little
contractor out.
All your subs are your subs. It
just depends how busy they are,
where they're lined up at. But
then we go back to some of these
matches and I look at the cash
balances.
And from 2021, I'm just gonna
give you the totals, right?
Each, each one's a little
different.
Cash balances went up from 449
million to 623 million.
Well
How much are they required to
keep in cash balances
operational from year to year.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Munoz.
We used to have a matrix for
that. We don't have a standard
right now in
In that process, I think it's
something worth.
Consideration. We also have to
look at what the levers are in,
in the cash balance.
Um,
And, and at some point we
probably need to get dig deeper
into the concern you have about
the growth of cash balance, just
like the state of New Mexico.
Districts are concerned about
the future.
Guarantees they're giving and
that's part of it.
Part of it is, is you brought
the COVID money in, the ARPA
money to uh districts.
That's modulated how they handle
their operational reserves and
others, there's a whole lot of
factors.
I think what we're both saying,
Mr. Chairman Senators, we need
to become more
Skilled and understanding.
And then what are the metrics
that we think are the guides we
should use?
Began to roll that out. That's
probably good work for us to use
it.
Let me also just mention if I
could.
Senator
Some of these funds are being
set aside for to come up with
these.
These big matches that are
required for local projects.
Uh, the other thing is the
locals are seeing that the state
is setting aside 25.
30% reserve.
In your funds.
So they want to be.
Financially sound as well.
Take care of
Types of problems that stand
here and just mentioned so that,
that leads to that uh those
balances. I'll make one final
point of Mr. Chairman Senator
Bnos, one of the issues that
I've discovered is in staffing.
And
It has lots of different pieces
to it.
But the issue is that when you,
when you budget.
You budget around what your
Need staffing is at the end of
the day, that may not be your
staffing levels you have.
Mr. Chairman, that's, that's
between 85 and 92% of your total
operational budget.
And so it generates quite a bit
of cash in it when you have
unfilled positions or you're
filling the long-term subs.
Long term sub costs can be about
1/3 of the cost of a
Master level teacher, which is
who you're.
Who you're setting your budget
around. It's got lots of pieces
to it. I think that's worth
studying.
Well, I, I think that's
something that we got to
understand, but I'm gonna give
you the example of grands.
Whose operational costs in 2021
were 300 million and had cash
balances of 4.2 million.
Whose operational costs in 2020.
3
40 million in their cash
balances are 12.
3 times the amount they had.
And only $1000 increase.
So they're building cash
balances. There's no other way,
right? They have cash, they're
not doing the programming,
whatever it is that's causing
them to build those cash
balances and then you say, let's
reduce the, the match. Well,
your cash balances are showing
us that you have the money to do
some of this.
Albuquerque, for example, right,
takes their cash balances, they
slide it off and and put it in
an investment fund where we
don't see it.
Well, you got a reserve and a
double reserve, and now you're,
now what are, what are your real
actual cash balances when you
say you need to come to us for a
match.
I mean Zuni is an outlier cause
they only have two stores that.
Generate any GRT and county
treats him like a stepchild and,
and, and so.
You look across the board,
gallops the same way, it's, I'm
gonna use my school districts I
represent 117 million in
operational and $31 million in
cash reserves and you come
across the board and in 2023 and
you get $50 million in cash
reserves, right?
And operational 165, right? So
they did have an increase in
operational with their cash
reserves wanted the same thing
and then.
give us some, give it lower our
match, give us more opportunity,
right?
Take care more things and, and
you come back and say, well, the
state's looking at 25% reserve.
Well, the state's got to bail
everybody out at the end of the
day, right?
If we had a recession, we hit
anything.
I mean, they're coming to us or
our cash reserve is completely
different because
Their cash reserve is getting
built up on state operational
dollars.
There may be some outlying ARPA,
but it should have been used by
now. They haven't used ourburn
in 4 years, I mean, that that's
pretty bad. Mr. Chairman, the 23
cash balance.
I
A year ago, and, and I, I would,
I think it's worth studying
number one. I don't disagree
with you.
I think there's lots of
modulation we need to look at.
The art of money is part of it.
The rest of it is the impact on
staffing.
So during COVID.
When kids were not in schools.
Districts didn't staff up.
Because they were virtual. They
didn't staff up.
That turned into cash.
That's part of the growth is
just that part of it.
Now, kids are back, although
enrollment's down, Mr. Chairman,
I recognize that, Senator.
But it's still the the basic
budget.
To build a programmatic design
that they have as a cost. Most
district budgets I've looked at
have those dollars in that cost.
Because right, in fact, I would
say that people are the
districts are over leveraging.
I tell superintendents that if
you were to build a an
operational budget, you should
not exceed 85% of your total
SCG.
Or personnel, you need to stay
at 85% or below. That's my
experience of 30 years being a
superintendent, being public
school finance chief way back in
the day.
We are averaging over 90% right
now. That's another.
Mid-course correction was
chairman in in our review. I
think we need to raise all those
pieces and come up with a plan
of what's going to be acceptable
and reasonable.
For folks to hold.
Thank you.
I mean there's, I don't have a
problem with them building cash,
right? But then you come back
and you keep taking bites out of
the apple, right? At a higher
rate than we can afford.
at some point in time we're
gonna say we can't pay for it.
$1 million for 1500 square feet.
There's there's a point where we
break the system.
Right, and you have the cash,
and what does that look like?
There's nothing wrong with
building a nice school in
miscall. Nothing wrong with it
those guys deserve everything,
same kid deserves an Albuquerque
grants or whatever and and
that's the cost, that's the
cost. There's a point where
we're gonna have to say, well,
No
There's a floor and here's the
ceiling and new contractors have
to do that.
Because when you control the
market,
You control the price.
And I, I really is as a
contractor, you, you, once you
control that, you control the
whole thing and, and so they're
naming their price and they're
building that they want and they
come back with change orders and
change orders makes it even
higher and they come back to us
at a change or.
There's not unlimited amount of
money cause it someday they say,
well, I really need that school
in Ingle.
Right.
And we don't have any money for
you. If we had a waiver, we
can't give a waiver because if
we give you a waiver, then
nobody, everybody else wants a
waiver, and then we're
We, we gotta figure out some way
to, to start tightening this,
you know, for the, for the
offset, I mean that should
happen cause.
Whether I want the football
field to be used for soccer,
track, or the or the band or
whoever, right? If I decide I
want to give a football field to
my school district, or turf
money for turf.
They shouldn't have an offset
because
SCOC should have built that back
to what they did, but ours is
different and so they shouldn't
have that offset, but, but.
That's a problem that Mr.
Chairman, you, uh, you've got it
nailed down. That's correct.
And, and that's, I think that's
our, that's our point.
What
Suggesting isn't unlimited, by
the way.
We're talking about in the time
where we have
Capability
And we have costs that have
overrun while we're working on a
system that.
Maybe controls that through
time, the, the real policy
question is do we put money into
complete projects we've already.
That's really the
We're leaning on the yes side of
that as a priority.
We also support your question
about cost containment.
If you're if you're $1100 a
square foot.
For a school building.
That's excessive.
We were doing $312 a square
foot.
And now the same buildings
$1100. That's a problem.
We need to find out why. We need
to control it. I wonder, is it
be interesting if the state had
a policy.
All of your cap like, all of it
that we had some, some of those
kinds of restrictions because
Mr. Chairman, Senator, your
point may be well taken if you
control the market, you began to
dictate them.
But um I think that requires you
as a body.
To make some critical decisions
about how you
Move forward.
We're on the consumer side of
this, really, aren't we, for
the, for the kids we're trying
to make it happen together, so
I'm anxious to work, Mr.
Chairman, with whomever um is
appropriate. That's why I'm
happy to serve on this
committee.
We need to sort our way through
this. We have an opportunity to
take care of our kids.
And uh and do some things that
are right while we, we look at
the policy implications.
Like
Also mentioned there was a
preliminary report that was
issued last year during this
period.
At LFC LESC, couple of other
agencies, higher education.
I worked on to try and
the
Increase in production. I'm
wondering if they have met again
recently.
And come up with
Helpful because as you, as you
know.
Uh, everybody's got money now.
So contractors are out there.
Giving the bids that they uh.
They like and if
Like them, then they go on to
the next project.
Which
Out there, so
It would be helpful as as Stan
mentioned, to have some date.
Recommendations or.
These
Yeah, I, I, I don't know how you
control it. It's
That's the big issue, but the
cash amount just so you know,
they brought us a cash bouncer
23D.
24, and they're up from 623 to
656.
So I mean they're still
climbing. I don't, I don't blame
him for holding cash.
Don't come to us and say, hey, I
need an air conditioner. I need
this, when you say, oh well,
whoever here, Zuni, you got.
You got $14 million in cash
balances. So, uh, just the
number for you Senator. Uh, I
looked at the uh direct capital
outlay appropriations from
legislators to schools. This all
goes to the public education
department administration.
This past year it was uh
I think it was about 75 million.
In individual project costs.
the state, of course,
Albuquerque got
Majority of them in terms of
numbers.
That's
70 million that are not.
Being uh uh.
are to be offset.
Good thing for smaller projects.
That we can't fund that public
school capital outlet.
That's a
Mr. Chairman.
When times are good.
Get everything done, you can get
done, right? When times are
turning bad and, and I'm
starting to see that in the
economy now I talked to some
guys in Roswell that had trucks
and they're like, we want to go
to work in Rio Dosa, how do we
get in there?
Good luck.
Sopranos run that town now.
Um,
But there's not, they're
starting to slow and he had 40
trucks sitting in his yard.
weren't moving, right?
So we're starting to see that
slowing of the economy, right?
We're seeing it across the
board.
Um, look what Intel is doing,
look what.
What's happening, right?
And so it, it's triggering back
so as they trigger back, we
better start trigger back, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you both for the uh
presentation.
To pick up a little bit, um, I
wonder if we
What's sort of a range and maybe
uh surrounds, what did you
operate sort of percentage wise
at LCPS.
With the on the cash balance as
a percentage of the budget.
Mr. Chairman, uh, represent a
small.
For that size district, we fell
below what the bond advisors
suggested, which was 12%.
We, we ran 7.5 to 8.5%.
As our cash balance.
And that was on a um.
$200 million budget, Mr.
Chairman, so.
The subwy was our year to year
end balance. One of the things
that pushes that that would be
worthy of study is there's a
whole lot of bills at the
beginning on July 1st you have
to pay upfront.
As an example, your public
school insurance authority
liability insurance is due the
first in July.
Uh, in Las Cruces public
schools, that was a $3.2 million
check.
I had to have that cash on top
of that reserve to pay that
upfront. So it modulates a
little bit and I wanna go too
deep, but you understand, Mr.
Caman representative small,
but that was, that's about what
we ran that, that, that, that's
super helpful. We've gotten, um,
I think.
As well, updated as far as June
30th. Uh, and I wonder, so one,
it's helpful. 2,
in addition to sort of the, the
big capital projects of which
sort of some that's one of the
reasons to say the, you know,
historically reimbursement
timelines with PED have been one
of the other challenges I've
heard cited.
Those seem like it's improving
from what I've heard, um.
And
Uh, appreciate your sort of
openness to studying this. I
wonder if we sort of set.
Uh, a firm ceiling and create
sort of a target because it's
There are the um
You know, uh, particularly as we
consider any other changes that
essentially loosen up the purse
strings.
We should all we should perhaps
really consider statutory sort
of ceilings and and other
limitations. Do you think that's
sort of something to to look
into.
Mr. Chairman, represent a small
short short answer is yes, it
has a lot of nuance to it.
So let me share just a couple of
things of what I know.
The smaller you are as a
district.
A higher percentage of cash
balance you're likely to need,
you don't have the forgiveness,
yeah.
And so we have to be cognizant
of that back under the
Richardson administration we had
for a short period of time.
Caps and then we had a penalty
part that if you went above the
cap, you paid to state or reduce
your SCG by a percentage of what
you were over the cap. It wasn't
all of it. It wasn't one for
one, but it disincentivized
doing that in a drew school
district.
Cash balances back down.
I was in Hobbs, New Mexico at
the time, and I still went above
because of
Specific needs we knew of.
So our system didn't look at
some of the nuanced things in
the rulemaking part of it, uh,
but then we paid the penalty,
but we planned around what that
penalty would be so we could
still accomplish what the end
game.
we're bringing on
Um, a lot of instructional.
Things at the time.
We're we're moving out of
foundation money into
equalization money and things
like that that that are the
kinds of dynamics I think would
be worthy of study if you look
at putting caps, Mr. Chairman,
uh, would be certainly
interested in participating in.
In the discussion across all of
this field of fun. OK, thank you
for that and I appreciate always
that sort of the, the real world
examples. Um.
One of the pieces, going to the
uh the reduction of the local
matching around CTE. That's when
I, I can well imagine really
attractive.
It's in in CTE we just heard and
appreciate Director Clee and Mr.
Liu and others being here. We
just heard it the last LFC
meeting, um, improvements in
outcomes in K-12, many of those
I think related to career
technical education.
So there's no question the place
where we've invested a lot and
are seeing positive returns.
That said,
It's also a place where we can
sort of um
You know, if every single high
school in Las Cruces built their
own state of the art CTE center.
That would be probably an
extraordinary amount of money.
Wouldn't necessarily serve what
is, you know, uh, a population
where we could probably get some
regional efficiencies and this
is not something that they're
planning, but
It is a concern, I think that
would come up.
Where if we sort of take away
all um
Matching requirements without
Guidance, whether it's
legislative by rule or otherwise
to sort of leverage and work
together, that presents a really
It just, it's not as inefficient
of a of a place, as we all know,
and we have some good examples
of communities that are
approaching in a very regional
perspective and Pro Tem just
mentioned Hobbs, so.
Folks are doing good work in
that.
If we again think about
loosening purse strings. We
would need to sort of be, you
know, have a higher level of
confidence that that leveraging
and that collaboration would,
would be part of things. I
could represent a small, I've
seen some recent research and
I'll search it down and get it
to you all. It shows that
student
Performance
At middle and high school.
Advances.
When you and
Heli
PD
And, and that it's good research
that I've seen. I'll try to
write it down for you.
Chairman, so part of what you're
asking is what's the ROI.
As we invest, dollars which may
be shrinking as you move out
into the future. We don't
disparage that thinking. We
think that's the right question.
We might use the chairman some
of the concepts that they use at
CTech in Los in uh in Hobbs and
we used with early college high
school in Las Cruces where the
model built a separate facility.
That serves
A wider population.
And, and what we found was that
the general, the early level.
Tier 1, tier 2 level worked best
when it was consistently at the
home high school.
But then as you raised upward,
more of the cost is honestly for
specializations and then you
build specialty centers that
people are transported into and
we, we think that has a lot of
Reasonableness to it, you know,
where it begins to fall apart a
little bit is when you shrink
the size of district under about
5000.
So something to be cognizant of
that I think is worthy of study.
how do you gin that up in rural
New Mexico, right? What does
that look like?
I don't have the answer today,
but I know there's a lot of
things being tried, you know,
Animas, New Mexico, who you
heard from last meeting here,
starting in early college high
school program in Animals, you
know, and they're collaborating
with Las Cruces.
Early College High School.
Make that work, you know, and so
those are some of the things
would be worthy of studying of
consideration, Mr.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
chair, and as we
You know,
We're, we're, we're sort of in
that, you know, we're on top of
the mesa, we're on top of the
plateau when it comes to sort of
our revenue, although production
is continuing to rise.
Um,
As Chairman Yo said, you know,
because the state really acts as
a guarantor.
And for the entire state across
a wide range of responsibilities
that for most states are
much more locally.
Uh, and regionally and in our
case.
You know, it's more of a state
responsibility.
Um,
The
As we loosen purse strings, we
can't count on sort of really
large new inflows.
We can count on being steady.
More or less, I think in in a
lot of ways, but we can't sort
of
The, the sort of
Big jumps without a whole lot of
Careful.
Side rails, guard rails, is
gonna be very difficult because
that the new inflows are are
gonna be
You know, really serving the
20-30s, 2040s and beyond.
Or, um,
You know, as we move into sort
of as we move into thank you and
only reflection on that is.
Over the last two sessions, you
as a legislature.
I think I've been very wise and
constructing funds for the
excess has gone to.
Help prop the future. The
question last from a policy
standpoint.
Is there a certain amount of
that in this new cycle?
I think it's our question that
should be moved into the support
of this specter in education.
And, and prop it now.
I would argue if that would be
something worthy of some policy
yeah,
but I think we totally agree,
although the, you know, the um
I mean,
Mm
From a recurring perspective,
granted it's primarily through
SCG, you know, 50+% of our, you
know, of our recurring increases
since 19 are are rightly
dedicated.
To the K-12, so the
Yeah, I, I don't disagree.
And it's
But
Yeah, just, just to point it
out, but I appreciate the this
term I point is on monitoring.
Just to be clear,
example. Suppose you took the
next 3 years and you carved out
10% of the excess.
And we put it directed into.
This thesis we're talking about
today.
My sense of things is would be
well.
At that point, not in the
future, but at that point in the
state of New Mexico, and I'm
wondering just out loud, would
that be a reasonable policy on
the part that's, that's
essential.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. uh
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. On
this question, I want to ask Mr.
Chairman, I might be a little
bit out of line, so if I get out
of line, each time, OK,
uh, you know, the conversation
between Senator Munoz and Utan a
little bit ago is about picking
the match off and so forth. You
know, I was in a meeting
yesterday in Gala DFA. I mean,
now what DFA New Mexico Finance
Authority, and there's 22 people
that borrow the most money from
them, and one is the school
districts.
Where we grind a match, big
matches off, and why are these
people borrowing so much money
from uh Mexico Finance
Authority.
If you can answer that.
Mr. Chairman, I'd, I would like
to research that Representative
Garcia, not knowing who the
districts are, but.
As an example, you heard from
the very small schools.
Last time we met.
Where their capacity to bond is
overrun.
the current dynamic.
I've given advice to those
superintendents and those boards
that they go to NMFA as a
As a strategy.
For front loading some of the
costs.
So they have a way of getting
home and I'm not sure that
1 to 1 correspondent to what
you've raised, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Garcia, the
questions the right question.
I don't know enough about the
substance. I will research them
as chairman and, and, and uh uh
I'd love to talk with you and,
and so I can get a list of who
and then I, I can discover what
the issues.
And thank you,
Mr. I might add representative,
uh, at 2:30 and we may change
the time for it, but the finance
authority people will be here
talking about assisting school
districts and charter schools.
So that is one of the topics,
you know, if, if it's
appropriate to say that, but
you're welcome to keep asking
questions along those lines if
you like, but they should be
here this afternoon. Well, thank
you, thank you Mr. Chairman,
cause you know that meeting
yesterday, you know, I didn't
take it to heart. the other
entity is a state entity
borrowing money from the state,
which is wrong.
But anyway, now that the
conversation was on.
About moneys and the school
district is the 2nd biggest
borrower from New Mexican
finance authority, it just came,
you know, just a thought,
another one more just a comment,
Mr. Chairman, on
On the capital loudly, it is
broken. The system is broken,
cause you know, you have an
Albuquerque, you have 35
representatives, 40
representatives and you're in my
district, I got two of them.
Mhm. And you know, I get $200
and you get $120 million so it
did, it's hard to.
Justify what we do, do what they
do. Just a thought. Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee.
I have a couple of questions,
some along the lines of uh what
Senator Munoz, um, week or two
ago we were at Indian Affairs up
in the Gallup Crown Point and
Sheep Springs area, and there
was talk about the Tetridges and
a request.
And again, I'm looking at the
numbers and they're, I think it
was their 2000 square foot homes
but we're about $1000 each.
2000 square foot homes I'd say.
Um,
um.
And
I'm like most of us don't live
in million dollar homes at 2000
square feet.
Why?
I
I guess I can't wrap my head
around why there's not a
developer that I would think if
they're seeing prices like that
would be chomping at the bit to
go and build a 20 unit housing
development, not a school
building, which is Jane's and
some of the other construction
ones.
Are they not out there
interested in building houses?
for
$50,000 each. I mean, it, or
even modular homes, which are
not your old trailer parks that
aren't anywhere near that, and I
recognize bringing in the
infrastructure, but you bring it
in once.
You don't have to bring it in
multiple times.
Thank you, Chairman,
I think that uh
As we carry out this pilot
program at the PSCOC, uh, we
have learned a lot.
One of the, one of them is that
These homes are costing a lot
more out in the rural areas and
we've sort of limited
Participation to the rural
areas.
Uh, because, you know, trying to
do a housing in Albuquerque or
Santa Fe, uh, you know, we could
spend a whole bunch of money
there, but we thought we'd try
here first in the smaller rural
areas, and that's what's causing
it, but we're asking, we're
asking them to look at.
At uh
modular homes, and we've been
successful in most cases, but
they're still costing quite a
bit of money out in those areas,
uh, so we're learning from this
and I, I think that maybe the
square footage that you're
talking about is for duplexes
and things like that, not for
individual.
Uh, units
Um, they actually, um, because
we asked about that and those
were for individual units, I
started thinking about if
districts.
Almost, you know, put housing
some place that's not way out
where you don't have the high
cost and then teachers that have
to travel, give them a $10,000 a
year travel allowance. It takes
a long time to get up to
$1,000,000 at $10,000 a year
travel allowance for those
teachers to drive 30, 40 miles
each way each day, and a whole
lot of teachers I think would be
very interested in doing that.
Um, as opposed to the cost to a
district, but certainly yes,
help inform us.
It just seemed
Outrageous or why there aren't
developers interested in
developing a whole project at
much lower cost.
The chair members, uh, here at
PSFA we do see.
problem.
Keep in mind this is a pilot
program.
And we our data is fairly skewed
because we've only handed out a
few or awarded a few awards.
Where we've seen some modular
homes that are the bare minimums
to where it was maybe $300,000.
For a modular home. Then we see
Zi.
We are currently working on our
teacher housing guidelines, and
there are a few things that
we're working on. In fact, as of
yesterday, uh, my colleagues and
I have met with the governor's
housing advisor.
To work with us on what these
guidelines should look like.
Currently, we are trying to cap
right now when as it pertains to
Zuni, we capped it at $550,000
per unit.
Um, the district will be paying
the additional. And the question
also comes up at what
Point, do we as a state agency
start dictating whether or not
they have to use modular homes,
or do we take their local
autonomy of saying they want
stick built homes, because
that's what they currently have.
So that's gonna be a question
that would need to be addressed
as well. The other thing that we
are also doing is uh we're gonna
be talking to some of the
modular companies to see what
type of, and I really don't like
this word, but a prototypes that
could possibly be offered and
possibly um look to purchase
bulk amounts of these items of
these modular homes, um, to see
if we get better deals. But
again, now we're taking away
local autonom.
me from the school districts and
starting to dictate what and
what they can and cannot build,
but we are working towards
trying to figure out, do we cap
it?
Do we provide prototypes, but
this is a working process and we
see where there are issues based
on the few awards that have gone
out.
Thank you. Yeah, no, I just, as
a homeowner, I'm thinking it's
like, man, at those rates, I'll
move out and go live in an
apartment, you know, and rent
out my house, you know, for, for
what that's costing. It, it just
seems, you know.
Excessive in spite of almost
everything and that there ought
to be developers rather than the
the contractors building homes.
Uh, let me kind of move on
because it was sort of one of
the, the same things.
While the prices for everything
have gone up.
That money stays in New Mexico.
It's going to New Mexico
workers, but the question is, do
we have a preference with
contractors, whether it's for
schools or for teachers.
Or in-state workers as opposed
to bringing in out of state
contractors where the money, uh,
where we leak all of that money
outside of the state, um, and
again, my basic economics is
everything that happens in New
Mexico or money that gets spent
moves through the economy 2.5
times, which builds the local
economy that it isn't a total
cost to the state because the
economy is growing and is
circling around. So let me leave
that question there.
that's kind of nuanced. Let me,
let me kind of go there and let
these.
These fine people, to correct me
if I'm wrong.
In the work I did in Las Cruces,
Mr. Chairman, Representative Smo
you related to.
We did have the in-state
preference as a part of.
Contract with the large.
PC OK.
So we require them to be inside
of that.
So there was preference to local
contractors.
Yes.
No.
I think that is on a project by
project basis.
My understanding, Lisa was then
was when
You received the proposal from
the general contractor.
And they brought it forward for
approval, both PSFA and the
district.
Would apply that kind of
leverage into the country. Am I
right?
Thank you, because a lot of
this, you know, again, the costs
are very high, but the money is
staying in New Mexico, which is
building New Mexico economy,
building New Mexico families,
building uh New Mexico labor,
all of those things. So
I guess I want to caution people
about seeing it totally as a
cost and expense because the
money moves through the economy,
which lifts everything.
Um,
I remember way back when I was
on the school board, there were
always discussions about the
mini Davis Bacon Act, is that
right? Or Bacon David? I can't
remember Little bacon act,
um on prevailing wages, is that
still in place in New Mexico,
um,
That typically is not
contractors building regular
houses, would that be in place
for teachers that are being
built by districts. Is that
still in place and, and please
don't one skew it. I'm a big fan
of that. I think it's an
important part of encouraging
that we are not undercutting the
workers and labor, I, I support
it, but talk about how that
affects costs.
So, so little Davi was bacon.
is a requirement for all public
works projects. So that includes
the work of PSFA.
The question you raised earlier
that I think may be part of the
mitigation that these folks may
want to talk about.
is if you went to a developer.
My sense of things as I
understand the law.
Will Davis Bacon.
would require them to be inside
of the prevailing wages for
that.
As a developer doing normal
development.
That would not be the case.
It has a mitigation, has a cost
increase is not always, but
mostly.
Often the wages being paid by a
subcontractor.
are insufficient to meet the
prevailing wage rates.
Little Davis bacon there's
usually a cost addition.
That that creates.
For the personnel costs to do
the particular.
And, and that's an interesting
nuance and I don't know if you
have any input on that. When
you, when you go to the question
of could you use a developer?
Uh, to my knowledge, we haven't
done that. We've stuck with our
general contractors.
We're doing other on-site work
and are attending this through
that contract.
And the question then maybe it
requires some statutory work.
It's hard, can you make that
break point?
Who do you take? That's why
modular works, cause modular
doesn't require that. They
deliver you the product, you buy
it.
OK. And so, what you paid the
framers and the
Eating in air conditioned to
everybody else.
was already contained in the
price that they sell it to you
just like when you buy a car.
And so that that adds an
interesting question. I'm warm
to the idea of development. I'd
love to find a couple of
developers that would go do that
kind of work, but I, my sense of
things is.
Uh, it would require real
specific modulation of these
kinds of questions.
You get home.
And you know, and I, I actually
think for local contractors to
be able to pick up something
where they then are able to bid
it where they can pay their
workers at prevailing wage is
good for the community, it's
good for those contractors and
certainly good for those workers
when those are available, um,
and so I, I don't know details
about, you know, whether they're
able to do that and for a
particular project, you know,
their workers are getting and
contractors are getting paid at
high
rates than they might normally
be, but again, that money moves
through the entire economy and
tends to be much more local
monies and things so.
Thank you.
know
Just explain that to you. So if
you have 2 $1 bills, right?
And this one has federal money
in dollar bill, right? You have
to comply with Davis Bacon.
prevailing wage.
But this one in the state, if
you go build a school, right?
Or state money
Still follow prevailing wage,
even though Davis Bacon may be
higher, right?
Because Davis Bacons may say,
the guy running the shovel is
gonna get $22 an hour, right?
Prevailing wage as a percentage
over
All of that, right? And so,
You have a state dollar and you
have a federal dollar. Now when
you mix them,
You have to use the federal
prevailing wage, right, which is
Davis Bacon.
I'm just doing a job right now
for the probation office and and
labors are $26 an hour.
That's how that blames that
money.
And then does everybody know the
difference between a modular and
a hud home?
So a hud home is
You can look this up on Genesis
Holmes, like, a hut home is a
home that comes off the
manufacturer's lot.
That is put on a piece of
property that says,
The price of this home was
$225,000. That's what it's gonna
praise it.
On a modular home when you take
a modular home and you place it
on a piece of real property and
put a foundation under it.
The appraisers come in and say
we cannot discriminate whether
this is a site built home.
Or uh a modular home.
And they have to appraise it at
full value compared to if
there's a site home built right
next.
Those are the two big
differences.
When they come out of the
factory, they're
There's a little bit of a price
difference, and there's a little
bit in the timeline building.
Those are, those are two real
big factors that you're, you'd
look at.
Depending if the school wanted
to.
Depends who's doing it. If
you're the developer, you want
mods because they add real
value.
And and if you're
The school district, you want
HUDs.
You want hugs because you don't
need the value.
OK. Other questions from many
members?
Thank you.
I mean, how we doing on time.
We're, we're a little ahead of
the lunch break. Do we want to
take a lunch break? Where are we
with the other two presenters?
OK.
The schedules for 1:30 I can.
Yeah, let's let's plan on doing
that. We'll take an hour, that
works for the committee. We'll
take an hour lunch break, plan
on being back at one and we're
gonna try and move up the the
two presentations to start at
one.
Are they good with that?
We'll uh take a recess until one
o'clock then.
