Kelly Carswell.
Randall Cherry.
Ashley Lee.
Elizabeth Roginsky.
Antonio Ortiz.
Stewart Ingham.
President
John Senna.
here.
Martin Romero.
Joe
We have a quorum confirmed.
Mr. Chair members, there are no
amendments.
Move to roof.
2nd, 2nd.
Hi.
Mr. Chair, if I may, we've got 3
new PSFA employees that we'd
like to introduce briefly if we
could. Yes.
Uh, first one is Mr. Raquel
Silva. She's working in our
contracts administrations group
as a contracts analyst, Mr.
Chris Stewart of the maintenance
division. He's the newest
maintenance special and
Mr. Luis Ortiz, our construction
information management systems
specialist.
say that uh they bring a wealth
of skill set and knowledge that
will benefit not only the
agency, but the public school
districts that we serve.
Um, maybe we could start by
saying no.
Uh, why Mr. Romero isn't here
this morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members. My name is
Larry. I'm the deputy director
of operations at the PSFA
quality assurance and outreach,
uh, Miss Iris Romero is absent
this morning because she has a,
a new grandbaby that she's uh
welcoming to the world. We hope
that she's doing well.
I'm on, on behalf of PSFA
please pass on the, the, our
congratulations. Absolutely.
Thank you.
OK, let's move on, Mr. Chair,
members, good morning. Uh if
you'll turn to page 8 in your
e-books, I'll start with the
financial plan executive
summaries going over the key
points. First, looking at the
awards year to date, the lines
34 3 36, the net change we
present this meeting is $48.2
million dollar decrease.
Uh, so there's a few items that
affected that and we'll go
through each first on the award
schedule for out of cycle
updates were only presenting a
world language changes. They
have a direct physical impact
that we're anticipating. So the
two items shown here are uh one
item.
Gallop, David Skeet is included
on page 26. It's on a consent
item. It's an increase to design
capacity and, and changing
renovation in lieu of new
construction.
And then item 2, Dexter combined
is on page 94. Um, you'll hear
about that more later in the
meeting. The GSF increase is
proposed for 78,000 to 91,000.
So although these projects are
not requesting funding at this
time, we wanted to make sure
that we captured the fiscal
impact based on what the award
language change would uh uh
present.
We do not have any other items
at this meeting that are coming
for funding at this time, so you
won't see any um funny requests,
like formal funding requests.
Next, uh, we have the estimated
award cost estimate adjustments.
So what this is is it looks at
projects working with our um
field team and in preparation
for our June bond sale, which
took over later this meeting.
Uh, we worked with the field and
the regional project managers to
look at all of the projects and
when they think they're going to
be coming for a potential award
as well as if the, the cost was
reflected uh correctly uh
reflected in the financial plan.
So what you see here in this
green table on the bottom of
page 8 is the projects that had
a fun
uh adjustment whether if you
look at Gallup Thore, we've
adjusted, it was a correction.
We previously indicated that it
was going to be 3.6 million, but
based on further discussion
before, so we've updated our
estimate, uh, a few other items
as you'll know, uh, lower
Roswell for Mountain View, uh,
state local match has chain or
the state share has been
increased just based on
adjustments uh with the
district. So we've adjustments
in the estimates, so that's what
you see reflected there as well
as certain items right.
above central Newcom where the
gray box there was previously no
waiver indicated, but now we've
included a waiver just based on
the discussions with the
district. So we want to make
sure that's reflected.
Now, Mr. Chair, members, moving
on to page 9 and I'll actually
ask Miss Delgado to pass out.
There's a a blue handout she'll
be giving you, um, based on
discussions we had in AMS, uh,
the table shown in orange is the
estimated award timing
adjustments. So once we go
through the award schedule, you
see these are all denoted with
little blue arrows indicating
from where they existed in time
to where they currently exist
now, um, based on our updated
estimates, uh, the blue sheet is
just additional information from
the orange sheet and includes
Uh,
what the project type is, the
original award year. We also in
the kind of black border you'll
see in the middle. We have the
original uh anticipated award
year and quarter and then
updated and then we've added
what, how many quarters moving
out the project is going as well
as the month change. So if it's
a 3 quarter change, it's a 9
month, um, kind of push.
We've also on the far right,
you'll see the RPM status
comments, so I appreciate um
working with Mr. Gherkin, his
central coordinators in the
team. I'm getting this
information uh ready for council
so you could have more history
or more information as to why
the projects moved, um, and
we're happy to, to discuss if
need.
I'll now move on to page 10.
These are just the continuation
of the estimated award timing
adjustments. Um, again, with
more detail provided in the
handout. We have a few other
updates to the financial plan as
well. Uh, first on line 2 on the
sources and uses, uh, the SSTB
notes for FI 26 has been updated
from 606.8 million to what our
bond sale for June is actually
going to reflect, which is 396.5
million.
Next to line 9 for capital
improvements SB 9 for FY 25 has
been updated from 45.3 million
to 45.4 million just to match
the actual distributions, uh, as
you're aware, we're entering the
end of the fiscal year, moving
into FY 26 starting July 1st, so
we want to make sure with
certain items that we're leaving
behind in FY 25 that we're
capturing what the true cost
was, um, instead of what the
estimate was at the time.
Line 9 also has an update on FY
26 or the SB 9 distribution. It
was previously estimated at
45.5%, but it is actually uh 50
million for the upcoming fiscal
year and we certified that at a
previous meeting.
Uh, Line 16 emergency reserve
for contingencies for fiscal
year 25 has been reduced from 10
million to zeros we didn't
require to, to tap into that at
this, in this fiscal year.
And finally line 17, uh, school
buses for PED for FY 26 and 27
has been reduced from 29.2
million to 0 million or to 0.
Excuse me, um, the, the, the 0
million, the uh, the change is
based on what the the
legislative language said it was
only appropriated for that that
year. And so we wanted to make
sure it wasn't reflected on the
uncommitted.
Now moving on to page 11, uh,
taking you through the sources
and uses in the financial plan.
You'll see a few items that are
highlighted. These are
reflective of the changes I just
noted on the previous page. Um,
but I'll walk through them
briefly. Again, line two, we've
updated to 396.5, so you'll see
that highlighted for FY 26. Line
9 includes the two adjustments
to SB 9 to match the actuals at
this time, emergency reserve
contingencies has been reduced
to 0, although we do have the um
FY 26 and 7 still included just
in case we need to tap into
that.
Uh, again, the school buses has
been changed from 29.2 to 0.
And then I'd also like to know,
as you'll notice on line one in
FY 27 and line 38 for the
uncommitted balance. You'll see
the negative of 43.3 million.
So based on what our actual June
uh bond sale will be, um, this
will create, this will bring the
uncommitted balance to uh uh uh
a negative of the 43, but if you
look at lines, uh, 2 and 3 for
the art. It's 375.5, you'll see
in FY 26 and then the top for
line two for FY 27. This is our
next uh capacity for bond sales
so we can potentially adjust the
need if we need to tap into more
so. I haven't split at this
time, but I
I will adjust it for the next
meeting to make.
Moving on to page 12, this is
the summary of changes. Uh,
first, the very top denotes for
Des Moines municipal schools, we
awarded 1.4 1 million $419,172
last meeting, this was state
match and the waiver they
requested for teacher housing.
If you move a little bit further
down the list, you'll see
potential council actions. We
don't have any for this meeting
besides the fiscal impacts.
Now, Mr. Chair, members moving
on to page 13 in the award
schedule detail. Um, I won't
touch on all of these, but
again, where we currently exist
right now is uh calendar year
2025, quarter 2, noted with the
red borders, uh, that will be
shifting, uh, starting the next
meeting we'll be moving into
fiscal year 26, calendar year
2025, quarter 4. All of the
projects then that were not
awarded in this quarter or
received an adjustment are
denoted with the blue arrows,
and the arrows link depends on
where the butt
is where it originally was
estimated and then the, the
point of the arrow then shows.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chair,
members,
Uh, questions?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um, not
a question of comment. I just
wanted to thank Matthew for
putting together and staff are
putting together this. I
specifically requested it
because I thought it would be
helpful to see, you know, of
those projects that we're seeing
timeline moves, how much that
move is. Um, I think it gives
the council a good idea of, um,
sort of we're, we're looking for
as far as project readiness,
project status. So I would just
be helpful information for us to
be looking into each project
and, and kind of, OK, we awarded
at this time, but now we're
expecting it to move forward.
with a phase 2.
Mr. Chair, um, Matthew, uh,
agree with Ashley, thanks for
this, um, an additional
question, to what extent are
these changes reflected or not
in line.
36 of the financial plan.
Um, Mr. Chair, Ms. Carswell.
The changes you see on the uh
award schedule detail are
reflected on lines 34, 35, and
36. So, and, and this is a
discussion we've had internally
as well is when we move into FY
26, it'll become a mixture of
actuals and estimates, um, as we
move out for FY 25, you'll see
the actuals we included for the
1 million for pilot teacher
housing, the pre-K, uh, for 56.9
and then the 318.6, what was
actually awarded in this fiscal
year, but it is directly
uh linked and tied to the partly
I asked just because we've, you
know,
We've kind of always had this
billion dollar figure in the
next fiscal year on the
financial plan, and it never
really bears out and usually
it's quite far off like.
You know, we can just look back
at the last two fiscal years to
get a sense of that, you know,
that same figure was there when
we were.
One year ahead of those fiscal
years too. So, um,
I know we've had discussion
about this in both awards and
AMS and the um the project
status report might further
refine this number, so can you
give us a sense of what work is
going on within the agency to
try to get that to a more
accurate number and sort of what
kind of timeline we're looking
at. Absolutely, uh, Mr. Chair,
Ms. Carswell, members, uh, with
the changes, that's absolutely
correct. You will see, go
looking back in time that we
have carried this balance of
Project load that kind of moves
quarter to quarter out a year
but never comes to fruition. So
with the efforts we've
undertaken, uh, agency-wide with
the PSR with our bond
reconciliation, with our project
close out. We're trying to tie
all of this together together to
get to a better system of
understanding our projects and
coming up with almost a formula
based where when certain
projects are in design or at a
certain phase where it's CDDD,
um, what have you, we can have a
better estimate to say that this
project
will come in the next 3 months
to better nail down the projects
that are shown for FY 26. Uh, if
you'd like additional detail,
you can also look at um on the
award schedule starting on page
13.
You will see
Uh, for FY 26 and 27. It shows
the overall of where that 900
and 8 million should be coming
from and that's composed of uh
the 908 is just reflective of
the 904.4 for standards and
systems and then the pre-K, um,
but it is broken down in quarter
and you can see from from
quarter 3 to 44, um, that it's
similar, but once you get to
2026 quarter 2, we have a larger
balance, so the additional work
that we're doing with the team
is just bringing all of this
together together to get better
estimates and, and
better timing, so then the
projects are more spread out and
we're not going to be looking at
the end of the fiscal year again
where we have
A potentially huge amount of
money and hopefully we'd have
enough money in the bond sale
or.
Um, thank you, Matthew, for
that. Um, and so should we start
seeing like shifts in those
numbers, you know, in a couple
of months, by the end of the
year.
You know, what, what sort of
timeline are we looking at?
Mr. Chair members absolutely. I
think um the work we're doing
with field will also bring the
estimates more in line, so I do
believe in I I just had one
question about um
It is the um
The
change in, in um extensions on
time frames, are they inclusive
of
All changes and is there a place
in here that shows if they've
asked for multiple extensions of
time.
Mr. Chair, member, so previously
the uh the award schedule was
estimated from our senior uh
facilities manager. Uh, they
would look into eBuilder, they
would look at the projects and
try to kind of guesstimate when
they think that it was best
coming forward to council, um,
with the, the recent exit and
then changeover in staff were,
were
We're reevaluating that idea to
then look to the districts, the
DPs and our regional project
managers to get the data from
the front line, moving it from
these guesstimates to really
what we're seeing in the field
and on these projects. So the
efforts that the field team has
done with PSR is really helping
the financial plan, and I think
the further that goes out,
we'll, we'll make this where
they're going to be melded
together and gonna be the
projects will, will be
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Matthew. So I
have a
Question on 17, so, and I asked
this at one of the council
meetings is, you know, how the
cost per square foot on schools,
you know, are we tracking this?
Are we, you know, keeping an eye
on that. So I guess, uh, you
know, my concern is, you know,
the terrorists and taking a look
at, you know, the economic
outlook that uh AGC presented
with, you know, Dominic Simmons.
You know, the tars used to say
as an example, still, you know,
55% timber and talking to some
of the, you know, bigger
contractors, you know, these
costs are starting to hit and
they're starting to feel the
impact of that. So I guess my
question is, are you, who are
you working with? Are you
working with AGC to kind of
monitor these costs or what are
you guys doing to make sure that
our, our cost per square foot is
Yes, the only thing that I would
add is that in if you guys maybe
would reach out to Kelly Rokkley
with AGC and you can tell her
that I asked you to, you know,
reach out to her, you know,
cause she has like up to-date
information on this and they're,
you know, putting out, you know,
with that cost looks like, you
know, weekly, biweekly, monthly,
and I think it would really be
good for you guys to take a look
at.
Alright, thank you.
That uh that drives the question
for me. Um, mm.
My experience is that um cost
increases after the bid date.
are, are typically not
accommodated by um our
contracts, um, I was personally
involved when one when we had a
a major cost increase in steel.
And a contractor came to APS
with that.
Increase and it was denied.
And so are you saying that we
are going to, because these are
tariffs that we're going to
acknowledge and, and give
consideration to those cost
increases, or are we going to
stay with the contract and say,
well, that's actually the
country it's very clear that the
contracts expressed concerned
about being able to make, I'm
not saying that we're gonna
honor them if they give us.
I believe we have an obligation
to our contractors to
Broad stroke by the single one
single costume, yeah.
Uh, I'm, I'm just gonna say and
this is coming.
This is really kind of funny for
me to be saying this, um, but
the reality is, if we
accommodate that.
Then we will be inundated with
those cost increases if we get
one, we will need to give.
Oh
And
The fact of the matter is, is
that, um,
This is, this, this would, I, I,
I don't think we could consider
those. I, I think that that
would be uh very problematic.
And, um, the argument has always
come if when prices go down, do
they give us a
Uh, uh, deduct it, it, that
would never happen.
And so I, I, and this is really
kind of in Congress coming from
me being a contractor that I, I
would be making this um big kind
of harsh statement, but the
reality is if we open that door,
we will never get it closed
again, so.
That's my comment
that will be the perspective
moving forward then.
Thank you, um, and this is an
issue that we'll have to bring
forward for, for uh council
discussion, uh, I'm sure that
this is happening amongst other
agencies as well. The impact of
the tariffs will be, will be
felt in I think uh it's, it's a
matter of.
Uh
Understanding those increases in
where they're decision on those,
but I can see if this is gonna
hold up construction or.
Facilities again with a signed
contract,
we will definitely follow up and
present some information um
through the subcommittees for
review and present other
information to the PSU and again
you might talk to some of the
other agencies, funding
agencies. Mr. Chair, just one
quick add to that. Um, I think
it would be helpful when
projects are going to bid now
and those are coming to awards,
um, to the extent they are
overestimates if you
could give us some detail,
including like contingencies.
On a percentage basis that the
contracts are contractors are
including, we've seen some bids
elsewhere where there was like a
specific line item on top of the
contingency or tariffs, um, and
beyond that, if there's like
specific areas of the bed where
you guys are seeing costs go up
a lot, you know, what we saw in
the last round of
Uh, intense volatility was that,
you know, we just saw certain
areas of the bed inflated a lot
and what seems to be happening
was that um, you know, less that
we are being able to adjust
contracts after they'd already
been signed and more that we are
seeing like a very high level of
risk being baked into the bids
on the front end. So helping us
understand how and where that's
happening, um, in a consistent
way so we can also try to be
consistent about how we're
treating it.
Um, in projects and you know,
like.
For instance, like, you know,
not awarding a 20% contingency
one place and 7% somewhere else
or whatever it is, but
Um, I think, I think it'd be
helpful for you guys to report
on that as the words come
forward. Thanks.
Mr. Chair members absolutely
miss Cosmo.
Any further questions on the
report. I appreciate it and we
look forward to additional
information down the line.
We'll move on then to the uh.
Consent agenda, Mr. Tillerson,
would you give us a summary of
those items? Absolutely, Mr.
Chair, members, there are 5
items on consent for your review
and approval, the May 14th, 2025
PSCOC meeting minutes.
The second item is the FY 26
Lise assistance application
announcement awards, the
subcommittee authorized the
release of the FY 26 lease
assistance application
announcement, FY 26 PSCOC
application for lease assistance
for facilities and the
applicable certification forms,
applications will be released in
July July 1 of 2025 and due
August 15th, 2025, with awards
tentatively scheduled for
November PSCOC meeting.
The 3rd item was the
23003, David Skeet Elementary
School for Gallant McKinley
County. This was an award
language change. Council
approved to amend the current
2021, 2022 standards-based award
language to Gel McKinley County
schools for David Skeet
Elementary School, including.
An increase in the design
capacity of 36 students for a
total of 260 students.
Assistance awards too.
Excuse me.
The
