Gandy. I'm the director of.
Hello, I'm Amber Romero, and I
am the director of.
Stand rounds executive director
of the Coalition of Educational
Leaders. Good morning or
afternoon, little baby.
Jack, Jack Field of New Mexico
House District 67.
education department director of
Capital Ole and Transportation.
George Mios, state senators, uh,
Sabola McKinley and.
Good afternoon, State Senator
Mimi Stewart from District 17,
the East Gateway area and
International District in
Albuquerque.
And I'm Bill Souls, state
senator from Las Cruces District
37, and my pleasure to chair
this committee over the last 2
years, and I believe this will
be my last official act of this
committee, uh, today, uh, but,
and thank you all for having a
late start to this. I think that
was to get some of the
presenters here and to make sure
that that was all going to work
appropriately. Uh, we don't have
lots on the schedule, so we're
scheduled to end by somewhere
around 3:30 or so, um, as we
move forward with things, but
with that,
You know, it's uh, Simon, if
you'll take us away and get us
started. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, task force
members, um, and this will be
quick. So I sent an email out a
couple of weeks ago regarding
the uh state Supreme Court's
decision in the Zuni lawsuit. I
know many of you are aware, have
been following um the issue, um,
Essentially, the court found
that the issue had become moot,
uh, do in, um, due to the
legislature's action, um, in
passing amendments to the public
school Capital LA Act after the
2019 um bench trial.
In the case.
Um, so
Most of you know, but for those
who are unaware, a case is moot
when they're, uh, when no actual
controversy exists, and the
court cannot grant actual
relief, and typically the
courts um follow a principle
that they won't decide the
constitutionality of the case.
Um, the constitutionality of a
statute when it's been repealed,
amended, or superseded, etc. Um,
and both parties agreed the
school districts and the state
that the legislature's
amendments to the public school
Capital Outlay Act were
essentially an overhaul of the
system.
Um
So
What, what I would like to do
briefly today is sort of give a
brief recap of the school
district's arguments um
regarding the constitutionality
of the public school Capitality
Act.
And um review the legislative
changes that were made in 2021,
2023 and 24.
Um
So as Miss Benegus explained to
the committee, I mean, she's the
assistant solicitor general, uh,
for the State Department of
Justice, uh, during our
September meeting, that the
central argument in the case was
that the public school capital
system violated the education
clause of the state
constitution.
Um
Which is, uh, and I quote a
uniform a uniform system of free
public schools sufficient for
the education of and open to all
the children of school age in
the state shall be established
and maintained.
Um
So in summary, the, the school
districts argued that the system
that the public capital Act
established was not uniform
because property rich districts,
so um, school districts that had
uh
Uh, a large property tax base.
We're able to build above the
adequacy standards while
property poor districts um
cannot.
Um, and this is despite the the
state pointed out that the
Constitution
I mean article 9, Section 11,
give school districts, uh, the
power to, to bond and to become
indebted to, to build capital
projects. Um, and secondly, the
districts argued that the system
was not sufficient because, and
then the court agreed, the
district court agreed that um
the amount of funding received
Uh
From the state. So a school,
the, the state share of
projects.
Um, was determined by the
adequacy standards rather than
the specific needs of the school
district.
Uh, so there was once again a
bench trial.
There was one in 2016 and one in
2019, and then the district
court in Gallup, it was Judge
Depoli issued the order in 2020.
And agreed with the school
districts and held that the
statute was unconstitutional.
Um, so
In 2021, the uh appellate
process began and that is when
the legislature, uh, with
proactive and, and made the, the
changes that the parties agreed
to overhaul the system.
So
Um, this
To support its argument that the
just their arguments that the
school that the system was
Um, not uniform and
insufficient. The school
districts pointed to the
disparities that
The property tax base is created
between school districts.
Um
For Zuni and Gallup in
particular, they pointed to the
uh
Previous practice of the state
taking credit of up to 75% of
the impact, the federal impact
gave the school districts
received.
Um, they also pointed to some of
the uh non PSCOA Capital
projects that the legislature
approved for school districts,
so the, the pork barrel
spending, um, in the school
districts that were used for um
public school projects.
They also argued that the
adequacy standards do not
consider r conditions and um
The need to expand or build
infrastructure.
And um also different tribal tax
issues. Uh, another
Example, the school districts
pointed to was a reported lack
of funding for teachers,
although that was disputed by
the state, um.
And that
The system did not provide
enough funding for maintenance.
So, um, ultimately on December
2nd, the court disagreed with
the school districts, agreed
with the state that because of
the legislature's changes, um,
the issue was moot. So now what
happens is it, if the school
districts choose to continue
challenging the issue, it'll go
back to the district court and
the district court will have to
review the statute as it is
enacted now, and that's with the
The 2021, 23, and 24 changes.
Um, so just as a reminder, the,
the, the, the bills.
That, um, overhauled the system,
um, HB 6 in 2021, and that was
the bill that removed the 75%
credit for federal impact aid
from the SCG, so the uh state
equalization guarantee the
funding formula for operational
purposes for the school
district.
Um
The
Uh
In total, and this was according
to an LSC analysis.
Um, created about an $83 million
deficit uh in spending that the
legislature made up through an
appropriation.
Um
60% of
That appropriation ultimately
benefited um Gallup and Zuni and
Central Consolidated School
District.
Uh, another bill that was passed
in 2021 was SB 144.
Which allowed the public school
capital LA council to provide
grant assistance for broadband
projects, um, including, uh, to
provide for remote learning,
that was in the, the, the middle
of the pandemic, so we're
learning was a huge concern at
that time.
In, um, 2023, and this is
something for everyone to keep
in mind.
Um, when we hear some of the
legislative proposals later this
afternoon, um,
In 2023, the legislature passed
SB 131, which reduced the local
share or school districts, uh,
Particularly low men school
districts by 1/3.
And, um, reduced the local share
for the pre-K projects by 50%.
Um, so in doing this, this more
than doubled the state's
financial responsibility, uh,
Or the capital outlay projects.
I mean, I
I did not write this down, but I
think for um the highest
priority projects.
Pre SB 131, the state would have
been responsible for about $1
billion
And post SB 131, the state took
on a $2.3 billion dollar.
A responsibility uh for those
capital projects. Um, and
finally, last session, uh, SB
76.
Um
Provided school districts, um,
allowed for school districts to
be eligible for a waiver, uh,
even though their local match
was reduced under SB 131.
Um
So the, the, the legislature,
this committee in particular has
been pretty proactive in
responding to this capital
outlay issue and um
As of today, the statute stands
and uh
Remains in effect. So, with
that, Mr. Chair, uh, that's all
I have for you today. And if
there are any questions, I'll be
happy to answer if I can.
Thank you. Um, and I was just
asking a couple of questions
because about being a lawyer as
to what all the lawyers speak
means with things, but first,
questions from the committee.
If not, I'll ask and, and I
think it was clarified, but this
now goes back to district court.
Is that right?
Yes, if the, so the, the ball is
a Mr. Chair, the ball is
essentially in the school
district's court at this point.
Um, so the, the decision was
based off of a law that no
longer exists.
Um
So the issue was moot. So if
they, the, the school districts
want to continue to challenge
the, the current paradigm.
They have to go back to the
district court and the district
court has to consider uh the law
as it is today with all of these
changes.
Um, so it is up to them. I don't
remember exactly what the
timelines are, uh,
In terms of the procedural
rules, uh, but, um,
Generally, I think there's uh so
Simon, I guess what I'm asking
is
Is the lawsuit done now and they
have to refile a Zuni lawsuit as
almost if it's a new suit based
on current law, or are they able
to continue to challenge it
based on it's been sent back and
we want this judge to rule in
our favor so then we can come
back
uh where's the end of it, I
guess is what I'm yes, so, so,
so no, Mr. Chair, um, it
wouldn't be a new lawsuit, it
would be a continuation of the
existing one. It's uh a remand.
It would be a remand. OK.
So this and are there timelines
for how long they have to to
file.
But they don't think this is
still right or, you know, and if
they don't file,
Is it done? I mean, what's the
timeline forward or is this in
perpetuity? I, I believe that
there are um procedural rules,
uh, Mr. Chair, that I do not
know off the top of my head, but
I will look them up and I will
get that information to you.
Like stand. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So Simon, I'm, I'm
look a little bit confused.
So it is remanded back to
district court.
Didn't you so what were the
issues that were argued by the
local districts.
That
Are set moot by this ruling.
He said there were a couple and
I don't remember what it's more
likely that's what would come
back.
Before the court, right,
because.
The legislature has already
Take the statutory relief.
That's, that's why my, my
question is what are they file
against. So, yes, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, task force members, the, the
entire, so all of the issues
essentially were moot because
they were um
Regarding the statute that no
that no longer exists. So the
previous version of the public
school Capital Outley Act was at
issue in 2016 and 2019, the
legislature has since amended
that statute. Um, so,
It, it's, it's
All of the issues were moot
because they were based on the
former public school Capital LA
Act. It was chairman as an
example, one of the things I
heard you talk about our
teachertridges, the perception
that there isn't sufficient
support for teachers.
In districts. Yeah, yes, Mr.
Chair, that was one of the
school district's arguments.
It was chairman I it.
It's kind of vexing because this
is 30, what in, in, in process
under the under the district
courts overwatch.
Right, I mean, that's, that's
what was happening.
He gets taken to the Supreme for
Review to kind of in that.
It sounds like what Chairman,
that doesn't ever end.
It continues to have standing.
That's what I'm having a hard
time unwinding in my head.
Because in most cases I've
noticed when you get for the
supreme and they make the
ruling.
We're done here.
You have to go back and
re
Argue
New points that weren't covered
under the ruling of the Supreme
Court, is what I thought went
on, so.
I'm, I'm confused about the end
of this.
Sarah Munoz, thank you, and I
think Judge Rich originally
ruled on this, right? Yes,
Senator, Mr. Chair, and then it
was put up for in status or
status conference, where the
case just hangs there, right?
And then any of the plaintiffs
could bring a this up and bring
call it for a status hearing,
right?
And that's what activated this.
Court ruling, correct?
Yeah, so I, I believe that the
original um case resulted in a
settlement, um, between the, the
parties.
And or it was a, an order from
the
court or
And I guess, Mr. Sha, I won't
even answer on it because I'm
Not completely sure about the,
the original.
Um, decision from 1998.
But it was revived, the case was
refiled in 2014 and after the
2014, the, the 2014 refile is
what got us here now, and that
was under Judge Dipali.
But, but under the, it's my
understanding.
Just cause I know, right, that
the case was really sitting
there in the status hearing,
right?
Joe shaking his head, and so the
court, anybody could have
brought it up and not refile the
case, they just ask for a status
conference here, right? And then
if they found things in the
hearing, then that's what they
filed this portion of the
lawsuit on.
I'm looking to joke. You may
want to come up and help us. But
that's my understanding, so if
the Supreme Court kicked it back
to the district court and the
district court doesn't dismiss
the case. So there's the
original case stay in status
conference hearing.
And I at any time and Senator,
that would be up to the court.
um whether or not the court
closes the case, dismisses the
issue, um,
So again, it would go back to
the district court and the
district court would have to
make those decisions with this,
um, these instructions from the
Supreme Court.
But this original case, 35 years
ago, close out.
It's tech it's technically the
The same, the same case, but
the, the issues changed, so.
Like that, again, that would be
up to the the court to decide.
That didn't help me at all. So,
and, and, and Mr. Chair, I would
say that I would characterize
this order from the Supreme
Court is
And, and not, not in a
disparaging way, but it kind of
does kick the can down the road.
It's, it's, it doesn't decide
the
The central issue as to the
constitutionality of the system
that was designed, um, it
This decision really was based
on procedural issues, the, the
fact that the statute had been
amended.
So, you know, the court has to
consider all of this new
information before it could make
uh a ruling on the merits of the
uniformity and sufficiency of
the Capital Outlay Act.
Let me ask you one more question
that goes back to Zuni, right?
Zuni is building 8
teachertridges.
At a cost of $8 million.
Right?
a million dollars for. So how
can the judge say we're short on
teachers when we're expending
that amount of dollars. I mean,
I don't know if they're late or
they got the Taj Mahal on top or
I don't know what they have.
But
$8 million for 8 homes.
I mean, the consumption of
dollars whether it's school
money, which they had 3 billion
in in cash balances in school
districts.
And combined from PSCOC.
I mean, that, that is a really
hard thing for me, and I, I, I
called him and told him I mean
this is.
It's crazy and in the school
district told me, well, well,
that's what we want. It's our
money, we can do whatever we
want, and I called this in
governor like, this is almost
criminal to build a million
dollars 1500 square foot home.
And, and so if a judge hears
that.
In the cases as well.
Well, Zuni
You're getting 8 homes for a
million wanna complain about
teachers and and not enough
access to.
The school money, I mean,
assumption I've heard of them.
And, and Mr. Chair, the, so the
school districts did argue that
um Judge Dealli had adopted that
finding of fact, but the state,
um, disputed it and and
maintained its dispute, uh,
through the appellate process,
um, and, and perhaps the folks
at PSFA or a Mr. Gin would have
information, I believe that
through rule.
Um, the
Uh, public school Cat Lake
Council had been providing
funding for teachers for over 10
years, um, but, um, it's the,
the authority or the council
would have more information
about that.
But not at that that's not at
that level. I mean, that's an
unsustainable level.
I mean if Zuni gets it,
mascara's gonna want it.
And the and the same contractors
and start bidding.
All those school builds are or
builder at risk, whatever you
wanna call them.
The same numbers raise the level
of expenses.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator story.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
So I'm just curious, uh, Simon,
about this remanding uh this
back to Chief Judge Jared K.
Oh fuck it, oh fuck it.
Uh, why, so he is a uh.
Uh pro tempore judge. Why did
they choose him. Um, so, so, um,
Judge Dipali, who issued the
decision order in 2020 has since
retired.
Um, and the Supreme Court does
have a system of appointing pro
tem judges.
Um,
So they're, I think it's like a
rotating.
Yeah.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman,
So does Gallup no longer have a
district court judge then? Is
that what you're saying? It's
only temporary on a rotating
basis. Um, no, they do. I, and I
don't know exactly, um, Mr.
Chair, uh, Madam Protemy, they,
um,
Designated that judge in this
order, but um,
One of the reasons was because
Judge Dipali has retired.
But, but, but the, the, the
judicial district in Gallup does
have district judges, uh,
For both civil and criminal
matters.
Well, Ms. Sherman, I just don't
understand why they did it this
way. I mean, yes, Judge Pauli
retired that office is still
there. There is a new judge
there. I don't understand why
they didn't just remand it back
to that district court.
And, and that's a good question,
Mr. Chair, and I will follow up
with Ms. Venegas and get you
that information. OK. All right.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Other questions. And
again, I think some of our,
my confusion is when does this
end, you know, what, how, how
does it ever end?
Yeah
And I guess it's sort of like
stas, just go on in perpetuity.
And, you know, when, when you,
does it actually end so that we
quit paying lawyers with money
that should be going to kids,
so.
OK.
Thank you, Simon. You're
welcome, Mr. Chair.
Uh, next update from the public
school facilities authority,
statewide adequacy standards,
PSFA operational budget and all
things money in schools.
Mr. Chair members, I'm gonna to
be brief. Um, I'm gonna go ahead
and start with the PSFA
operating budget.
I believe you may have.
It is on just the wrong way.
Yes.
Mr. Chair, you, um, may recall
that based on NMSA 1978, section
2-244G is what gives us the
guidelines as to how PSFA is
operating budget is funded.
And that is based on, um,
The total annual expenditures
from the fund for the core
administrative functions,
pursuant to the section shall
not exceed 5% of the average
annual grant assistance with the
work that we did, um, to
calculate what that looks like.
We actually have
Approximately 14 million that
we're able to request for the
operating budget based on the
grants that have been awarded
over the past 5 years from, um,
2019 to 2023.
And what PSFA has done and as
we've done, as I've done this
over the past few months is we
took a very conservative
approach. In fact, I even feel
like we've maybe been a little
too conservative.
Um, that we are asking for uh a
In addition to our operating
budget, and if you look at your
next slide, this gives you uh
kind of a um summary of what we
are asking.
We're asking for 458,000 in our
uh personnel. Keep in mind the
key point. I'm gonna go back and
forth between this slide and the
next slide.
Keeping in mind that 100,000 of
that ask is actually not an ask.
It is the employee liability
insurance that is imposed by
risk, um, onto the agency, so we
needed to budget for that. So
the rest we are requesting for a
performance-based salary
increases.
Um, over there's some history to
where it's been a little
difficult retaining staff.
Um, based on the current salary
ranges that are provided by the
agency. So, uh, we're kind of
tackling 22 birds, if you will.
We are trying to um create an
incentive by a performance-based
um salary increases, um, setting
down um standards as well as key
performance indicators to
encourage taking the agency to
the next level, which in turn,
um benefits the school
districts. So we're requesting
that.
% increase um in salaries, but
it is a poor performance-based
salary increase.
In addition to that, we are
requesting for two FTEs.
One is an additional, uh,
project regional manager, as
well as one energy manager, um,
right now we have 2 regional
manager, uh, vacancies. So we're
gonna
strive to um get those on board
as you will see later on in the
presentation that, um, there's a
number of new projects that are
coming through, uh, that are
being awarded, and we really
need to get our current regional
managers, um, up to par and
ready to handle the load. Right
now their load is substantial,
and so we're really trying to
find those uh qualified
candidates to be able to um
assist with unburdening that
load and then just learning how
SFA works. So we're asking for
an additional one in fiscal year
26, as well as an energy
manager.
Um, in our 300s, we're
requesting an additional 25,000.
Which in fact will go towards um
we're doing some finance work to
automate how we administer the
funds within the fund.
Um, it just has
Become a little bigger than us
with the amount of money that's
in the fund as well as how many
uh
Awards are being granted, and so
we're wanting to look to
automate that process. Uh, we're
working internally with the uh
Legislative Finance Committee,
legislative Education Study
Committee, as well as the Board
of Finance to, um, do this work.
So it's different contracts such
as that, that we're requesting
the additional 25,000.
And then we're requesting that
our 400 state flat.
And with that, um, Mr. Chair and
members, I stand for any
questions. Thank you. Questions
from the committee, Stan.
Mr. Chairman, I thought we had
given
A percentage of awards.
As how we determine their max
budget for this agency.
Is that still, it's, I mean,
because I, I hear you talking
about Mr. Chairman.
The need for more staff.
More leverage. That's how we
solved that a couple of years
ago when we went to
We expanded the average was over
5 years instead of 3 years
and it was a percent of that
that would then be used for
administrative costs.
And this sounds like you said
you have, did I hear right, Mr.
Chairman, that you have doubled
the capacity.
So you have
$15 million capacity in budget
by that formula. Did I hear that
right?
Yes, that is correct.
Um
The other thing that I wanted to
keep in mind is we still have
vacancies. We were trying to
fill.
So yes, we could have asked for
more FTEs, but we're, I'm taking
an approach where let's try to
fill those, um, FTs first, and
then incentivize by providing 3%
performance based, um, packages
to then
Have them feel like they're, uh,
there is a chance for growth and
really nurture our core team.
Uh, before I start asking for
more and more FTEs and then I
have to um
Report that I have all of this
vacancy savings. I'm just taking
that kind of uh conservative
approach.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.
I just, the reason we went
there, if I remember my history,
I thought I've slept through
something.
Um, was we wanted to have
sufficient staffing capacity.
Be sure on the field side.
That there were sufficiency of
support.
Are the fields.
And so you're going through a, a
trough in staffing where you now
have.
FTE open.
My concern is, Mr. Chairman,
that when you go through the
scope of projects we have, do we
have sufficient staff to
expedite the field.
Project support.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Rounds right now,
if we include the requested uh
regional manager FTTFTE. We have
3 open vacancies.
And so right now, that's what
we're
Our struggle is to fill.
I, I understand. I'm just trying
to look at the capacity thing
cause budget and
Actuals are two different things
in my head, so what, what do
you, what are you setting as
your FTE goal to support the
projects they're likely to be
there. So Mr. Cha, final
question, I won't worry, worry
you out on. I'm sorry. We just
did that so purposely that I'm
surprised that we're not.
At $14 million in the request.
Uh, but this chairman, so
If you're able to fill those
three field positions.
Will they adequately be able to
assure.
That there is no slowdown in
project review.
Interaction or or any, any
interaction they might have.
With the districts, so we have
projects move,
can you repeat that question?
OK,
yeah, I put 3 heads. That's what
I do. So Mr. Chairman, here's,
here's the issue. The reason we
did what we did was because we
wanted to put enough field
people in place who want a
project comes up, it's not
stymied because of the lack of
FTE in your agency.
That was the whole goal of that.
And our and our mathematics of
it based on what we knew about
project review and approval and
support.
is how he got to the percent
number we had.
You're half of that.
So without more information, I'm
worried about.
Projects that will be in the
queue this cycle being
sufficiently supported.
I understand you have 3 FTEO so
my question is, when you fill
the 3.
Will that be sufficient?
For the projects they're
forthcoming.
Mr. Chair, as I mentioned, uh,
as I in my introduction into
this presentation, I felt that
Over the course of a couple of
months that I've been a little
too conservative. Um, as far as
The process is being held up. I,
I don't worry about that. We
have very solid processes in
health.
Uh, well, more FTEs help,
absolutely.
Um, but again, I don't, I have
full confidence in our field
team to get through our own
processes to make sure that
these projects.
It was true and I, I appreciate
that. I just, after being a
sitting superintendent as long
as I was and doing PSFA work.
Inevitably, that's why I
supported the idea of putting
the cap, but also giving the
five-year average.
I don't know of a project that I
got done on time because we
couldn't get through the
staffing issues, the PSFA had.
I'm concerned that we might be
Committing ourselves into that
box, accidentally, I mean, I, I,
I understand why you're doing
what you're doing, I'm just
worried about the outcome on the
back end. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Ros, the other thing that I
had to think about, because I
was posed the questions multiple
times is, yes, we have the
dollars now, but what's gonna
happen when we don't have the
dollars? Are we going to be able
to support, uh,
An excess in staff if we don't
have an access in projects or
don't.
So it was kind of having to
balance it all out.
Mr. Chairman, I just know this.
I'm met with a bunch of oil and
gas people over the weekend.
We're talking about 10 and 12
year windows of high oil and gas
production in this state.
And so the ability of us to have
the capability to fund projects.
I suspect we'll still be fairly
robust for a while.
And so, you know, that I'm shut
up, I'm preaching. I apologize,
madam Director. It's your job,
not mine, so good luck,
appreciate you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Rounds, I, I
appreciate the feedback and uh
fiscal year 27 budget is coming
over just around
questionser Munoz.
ask you this.
shares.
Sorry.
For this year, 5% would.
Equal, approximately.
14.7 million.
14.7, excuse me, 9.9 for the
past five years.
For 5 years. And have you ever
used that to add additional
thing in in your needs. Mr.
Chair, Senator, we've never had
that much, so we've never
requested that much. Um, it's
only been the past year or so
that we've had an abundance in
awarded projects that has
skyrocketed them and spiked that
5% to get us where we're at now.
And um do you remember what it
was?
2 years ago were in line about
777.5 million around that area.
No, but I'm asking for your bar
authority on the 5%. I'm sorry.
You have a 5% bar
where you can borrow money in
I would have to get back to you,
I believe you possibly maybe um
Kelly.
Kelly, that's a 5% of their
total FTE, so 54 million.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator.
Um, yes, the agency does have
essentially 5% additional
authority on top of its budget
to adjust, um, kind of outside
of the legislative cycle, um,
and it was used as recently as I
believe FY 24. It was before
Miss Romero was director though.
And do you remember what they
used it for?
Um, I believe it was for salary
increases that were approved by
the council.
OK.
Did you guys get interviewed by
uh Deloitte for your in the pay
study.
Mr. Charison
Hm, I, I wonder why we missed
this agency and that were
considered an adjunct agency and
we don't go through SO, uh, we
don't advertise through SO, um,
so there's a disconnect.
OK. And then, but you're asking
us for traditional, but you're
only requesting two FTEs if if
you are leaving yourself short
and you were gonna say today, I
want to add FTEs in the 200
level.
What number would that look
like? I'm in my deputy director
field department and see what he
would think would uh fully staff
our field. Well, he's walking up
have you ever
Thought about, you know, if a
school and
Thought about, you know, if a
school in
whatever mascara or Zuni's
building a new one, right?
Have you ever figured out of
adding additional cost to that
contract for
The SCOC to manage that project.
Like, uh, good morning, Mr.
Chair, Senator Munoz, um, we
actually have uh worked on that
with um
Bringing an owner's wraps that
actually represent the school
district outside of the PSFA
staff.
And so for a small district like
Moscaro, um, we have encouraged
the district to hire on uh an
outside.
Owner's representative to kind
of manage the project for them
through the life of the project.
Um, that in tandem with the
regional project manager, um, is
a good system for, for managing
and running that as the two
owners, if you will. And I think
that answered your question, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, and
And the other part of that
question is, you mean you're
only requesting two FTEs, one
for regional project manager. So
I mean if you're talking about
regional project managers, once
you request more than.
Mr. Chair, um conservative, but
I'm sorry, you may have been
conservative in your estimates,
but once you request more than
one.
I mean, it's called small
district like mascara, I mean.
Well, again, those things are
hard to find in any part of the
state, let alone mascara to
watch a.
Um, Mr. Chair, we've had good
success with a couple of um
vendors who provide owners'
representatives, um.
On the uh do a, a few different
avenues, um, as far as regional
project managers, um,
We are considered indirect
oversight. And so it is really
on the behest of the district to
run these projects, and we are
there to oversee them. However,
in smaller districts, we
understand that we need to have
a heavier helping hand and um we
definitely do what we need to,
to support those districts at
that level.
Um, as far as how many regional
project managers we need. That
is a tough balance between um
getting the qualified staff,
quite honestly, and
And just um putting more bodies
on the agency, if you will. If
you had to ask me today, we need
to be building up, um,
The support staff for the
regional project managers, and I
think that's the next step that
um
Mr. Romero and I have talked
about, I think it's a little
premature to do that right now.
Um, I think we have the most
regional project managers on
staff right now that the agency
has ever had, and that's a good
thing, and we are building some
really good qualified staff, um,
at that level. We've, we've been
very fortunate with some of our
recent hires.
And I think building up that
quality is going to help us more
than just building up.
Too, too many people to manage.
That's the 1st, 1st aid agency
too many people.
I'm sorry, I came from a private
industry.
I, I mean, I don't know, I, I
guess be interesting how that
take a deep look cause I
understand you have regional
managers, but then you're saying
that school districts have to
hire regional managers cause
it's their project, right?
Well, um
Mr. Chair, Senator Minos are,
are MOU states that by by
agreeing to this memorandum, you
have somebody on staff.
That knows how to run a project.
If you don't
It says PSFA will help, help
you, and that's what we're
doing. I think we're taking a
little more proactive approach,
quite honestly, because we can't
be out there every day defending
the school district's desires.
We want somebody.
At the local level with local
autonomy to have those decision
making powers. Um, we don't want
the state to be telling them
what to do every step.
But on, on these builder at risk
contracts, right? At the school
districts are agreeing to.
the builder and in that
contract, they could.
Require the air.
Senator,
that's a, that's a great idea.
I, I cautioned doing that
because of the separation of
responsibilities and roles, and
we want that, um,
We want those guard rails, so
that the contractor isn't, it's
the box running the hen house,
right? So we don't want the
contractor hiring somebody to be
owner's rep for the school
district who is just gonna do
with the contractor tells him to
do. So we try to keep it
independent and separated. And
we, but we do infuse funding um
in our estimates for this
outside.
Um
Owner's representative senator.
Yes, sir. And then on the
performance-based compensation.
I've never seen that in any
other evaluation, so I mean you
can, you can give
performance-based increases,
right?
How do you do that? Do you do
that?
Borrowing the money in in your
200s or vacancy savings. Senator
Munoz
with the with the ask, it'll
already automatically be in our
budget and so we can do it
systematically if then at the
end of the fiscal year, there's
um any leftover, then it gets
reverted back into the fund.
And and so.
If the legislature was going to
prove a 3% increase and you guys
wanted a 3% performance, so then
that would be in, and so how and
the performance for 153,000,
Senator, the 153 came from
analyzing, uh, our current staff
minus my salary, what the 3%
looked like.
What we're doing internally is,
uh, as you mentioned, we do
evaluations and we're revamping
our whole evaluation system
where we set certain standards
and certain bars, as well as
KPIs, um, so that they can reach
and it is going to give them
incentive not only just to get
the raises, but also hopefully
tear some of our, our um
departments or growth
opportunities.
And, and have you guys come
across with a base.
FTE increase, right?
Whatever you call them. Have you
ever came across and said, OK,
we're gonna bring you with
vacancy, safe.
From where you are, and then.
This is actually the market,
because this is our problem in
in state government.
We, we hold back on the agencies
in the market sets a rate for
us, and we can't compete with
that open lease.
And so if you
Other agencies have done this.
vacancy saving, increase the
base pay to get to a level, and
then just kind of said, all
right, here's what the increases
are, but here's what the FTE
pay.
Have you ever brought that base
up to where you need to, or Mr.
Chair, Senator Munoz, we are
currently doing that work. In
fact, we already gave about 20
of our employees, uh, a 3% in
order to kind of set a better
standard of compensation within
the agency. We're continuing to
do that work in addition to the
work of the performance space
evaluations. We're also doing
that with the um the assessor
side, because we have open
vacancies, um.
A lot of our applicants want a
minimum amount. So in order to
be able to bring in those
qualified people that we now
have to the rest of our
assessors, so that work is
actually being done.
But you've never come back and
said the assessor in the market
pay.
Or in another agency is that.
85,000 a year, and we're only
paying 65, so we've never
brought them up to that level
and said, OK, now we're gonna
look at it, we've done that
within your agency, Mr. Chair,
Senator Munoz,
not during encourage you to look
at that, right?
going into the session in.
If we need to raise the base to
get to market and then come back
and say, OK, well, here's a
performance based level.
That you can do, but if, if
you're not at market rate,
That employee, you're not gonna
attract him, I suppose, you have
that vacancy savings, but I'd
encourage you to take your
vacancy savings.
Fix that problem.
And then come back and say, OK,
well, if you perform better than
somebody else, so.
I wouldn't recommend
performance-based funding,
right?
I think you need to, cause
that's what that's what Deloitte
is doing for us in this what's
the market rate for
A lawyer in the environment
department and what's a market
rate for a lawyer at the
Attorney general's office and
and setting those bases so we're
not gonna hire a lawyer at
$67,000 a year. No, we can't
compete, so I encourage you. OK,
thank you.
Other questions?
My only question similar to to
what Stan was talking about is
want to make sure that we have
enough people to do the work all
of the time. And, you know, if
there is bar authority, I think
we calculated it's around
3,070,000.
Is that the right number?
370,000 that if you do need to
to get additional people if you
can build the current ones, we
certainly want to slow down
projects.
With the five-year rolling
average on funding right now
where we're on high, there's
more money coming.
You know, and so we shouldn't be
too afraid for at least a few
years till we see a big drop and
then even that drop is going to
be tempered over several years
on the downslope as far as fun
as staffing if need be, so.
Excuse me, I got a little tickle
in my throat. Thank you.
Anything else?
Anything else committee?
Yes, and I was just gonna get
it, please introduce yourself,
Madam Secretary
be here with you all. So, um,
Iris, I know that on PSCOC we've
done a lot of work to try and
improve our processes so that
we're expediting the process. I
know we've been really focused
on
Moving projects forward, getting
things built. And so if you're
feeling is that um it's not the
number of staff that you have.
That would
Move that process forward even
more quickly.
Um, can you describe what you
think would, so again, I know
we've already had an outside
consultant come in and look at
where we can make improvements,
we've modified the application
cycle. We've done many sort of
adjustments to the process. What
else do you think could be done
because, um, I know we could
move.
Faster, I believe.
Um, I think a lot of the cost of
construction and having to kind
of pivot based on uh costs that
come in and it kind of being a
moving target can delay things,
so I just wanted to, to get your
thoughts on what, what do you
think is the area we should be
focusing on, Mr. Chair,
Secretary Padil, I'm gonna go
ahead and defer to uh
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
thank you for the question and I
do think, uh, we have done a lot
in the last 3 years to kind of
move things along quicker and um
just as a for instance.
Um, I talk about this too often,
but it's my go to, um,
3 years ago we had in place that
when you got an initial award,
there was um an educational
specification that needed to
occur.
That work took up 99 months to a
year.
And then that work was taken and
but over here and they said
that's nice. And then the
architect came in and programmed
the space, so you lost a year
and 50 to $75,000 and you
weren't any further along on
your project. We've cut that out
and um projects that used to
take 5 to 6 years are now taking
2 to 3 years. Um.
I can say that projects that are
under construction right now.
Um, we have projects that were
awarded in 23 that are catching
up with those projects already.
Um, and it is through these
approval processes and, and kind
of cutting down those approval
timelines, um, that have made
that happen. And so I think
that's what Ms. Romero has.
challenged us to do is to look
for those similar um
Bureaucratic loopholes, if you
will. Another example is that
the memorandum of understanding,
it used to take almost 5 months
to get signed. It takes 3 days
now.
Um, and so we, we have looked at
just about every process, both
within our um our SEMs, our, our
computer, um, our construction
information management system,
um,
We look at the data in that
program and, and see where the
holes are and we try to fix
those and and make them more
efficient, if you will, as we go
along.
Um, I would say that the
approval timelines for the next.
Um, thing to, to look at and
what I mean by that is that each
design phase, uh, we have
projects that come in and have
to be vetted by staff.
And, um, I would say that we
have a very good staff on board
right now that are doing a, a
pretty excellent job of getting
these.
Approvals out, um, but I think
that's where we're gonna shorten
this time frames up even more
is, um, the, the little, the
little pauses in between the
design milestones, if you will.
Mr. Chair, Secretary Padilha,
there's a lot of
Variables kind of out of our
control, and that is the
turnover on the district.
Um, as mentioned before, a lot
of these smaller school
districts don't have
Um, the staff
Uh, in a facility department to
manage these types of projects.
So we have to kind of um bob and
weave, if you will, and work
with these districts on some of
their
And, and Mr. Chair, secretary,
um, one more item that I think
is been proven um successful in
the last few months is the, the
council has asked.
You know, how do we, how do we
get these projects moving
forward and there's always a
carrot and a stick, right? And
in our MOU it states if there's
no movement on your project, the
council has the option to
rescind that money.
Um
It's never been utilized, but it
is there, um, another thing
that, that the council has asked
is if a, if a district is coming
for new awards, where are they
on their old awards if they have
any, and we've just recently had
a couple of districts, um,
Vocalize that they are going to
reprioritize their projects and
possibly rescind some awards
until they're ready again.
Um, and so we're
I think we're living through
that next, uh, rotation of good.
Uh, movement, if you will. But,
um, Mr. Romero is, is correct.
It's
Um, the, the tough part is the
district side where.
We lose an FTE, we lose that
champion in the district and it
takes that new administration
some time to uh catch up to
where things were and um then
there's, then there's the things
that are just completely out of
our control, like not being able
to get electricity to the site.
Um, that's a huge problem in
these rural areas. And so,
Uh, we, we try what we can. We,
we do the best we can, but I, I
think there is more that we can
do and um Director Romero has
Uh, challenged us to find those.
Um, those, those areas to, to
improve upon.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you both. I wanted to in in my
question recognize the work that
PSFA has done over the last
couple of years to really
expedite the process, there's
big, big improvements like you
just described, um, but I, but
there's more to be done and I,
and I know I'm a broken record
on PSCOC about expediting our
approvals, helping get to
completion of projects is really
important and so I just want to
say it is very rare to have.
Chairman Munoz encouraging you
to add FTE. I would love for him
to tell me that.
Um, so you know, if, if you're
looking at expediting your
approval process, you know, it's
not a bad thing to take
advantage when you have that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary.
Any other comments on this
topic?
If not, I think we've got
another topic on the adequacy
standards. So if you'll just
continue on.
Yes, Mr. Chair. Um,
You should have uh gotten two
handouts, one that says adequacy
standards.
There's uh a, a much less
exciting but most important
document, um, those are the
adequacy standards with the
revisions, um, color coded.
Uh, what we're going to do today
is um just provide a brief
overview on where we are with
all of this.
Um, I want to introduce
Uh, Andrew Martinez and Elise
Ramos, they've been instrumental
in the, the efforts on this.
Um, I also want to thank Iris,
uh, director Romero for giving
us the license to do this
important work. Um, it has been
a couple of years of
Of meetings and analysis, um, to
get to this point.
Um
This is going to be a repeal and
replace of the document because
there are so many changes, um,
that is what the, um, the agency
that oversees this recommended
to us.
Um, and we do have our public
hearing scheduled for this
Thursday. So once that public
hearing is done, we will um
submit to state records and, and
these will be published. Um, I
do want to remind the task force
that we have.
Presented this, um, to this
body, uh, last year and the year
before. Last year, we went a
little bit more thorough over a
lot of the recommended changes
this time around, we're just
gonna touch on kind of the big
ones, if you will. And then
we're gonna talk about kind of
the, the ramifications to um the
weight to New Mexico condition
index.
Um, let me look.
So I'm going to talk about
briefly just the history. We
just heard about, uh, where the
Zuni lawsuit stands, um, these
adequacy standards are in
response to the Zuni lawsuit, as
we all know. Um, I won't read
through all of these dates, but
um,
The first version of the
adequacy standards came out in
2002, I believe.
Uh, the last substantial change
to this document was 2019.
Um, and by substantial, it was
not that much actually, that not
that much changed this, that
time around.
Um, turning to page adequacy
standards.
Uh, just as a reminder, the
adequacy standards are our
measuring stick. It's what PSFA
assessor staff used to evaluate
all existing public school
buildings. Um, we assess every
school against the same set of
minimum requirements, that is
the adequacy standard document
that's in front of you.
Uh, staff collects the data on
each school.
All of the building systems,
age, condition, as well as
educational deficiencies, the
educational deficiencies are
dictated by this adequacy
standard document.
New schools should be designed
to exceed these adequacy
standards, I need to emphasize
this, that the adequacy
standards are a minimum. They
are not what we should be
designing to. A lot of time when
you're, when you're out in the
community, you hear, well, we
designed to adequacy. No, you
didn't.
If you did, then you don't have
a good school because these are
just measuring sticks for us to,
this is the bare minimum of what
a school should need.
Moving on to the next page, um,
labeled adequacy planning guide,
uh,
I love this graphic. It shows,
um, you are the adequacy
standards of the existing
buildings versus the adequacy
planning guide. This is the
larger, more, um, robust
document that is best practices,
uh, for designing a school.
Um
You know, it's based on, on
local as well as national
criteria, and this is the next
document that will be updated,
so, uh, one thing that I meant
to mention at the beginning of
this presentation is after these
standards are published.
Uh, we do intend to um roll out
a new gross square foot
calculator, and then the final
step is going to be updating the
adequacy planning guide. This
could be 6 months to a year of
work, I intend on holding a lot
of public meetings about this,
um, and getting as much.
Um, public
Input as I can from both school
districts as well as design
professionals and engineers. Um,
and so much like we did with the
standards, we'll do the same
thing with the adequacy planning
guide.
And with that, I'm gonna turn it
over to Ms. Ramos to touch on
just a few of the more
Uh, important changes, if you
will, to the adequacy standard
document. members as uh Mr.
Parks stated, um, you have, um,
two documents in front of you.
One is the full draft of the
changes and as you can see
there's uh quite a number of
changes, um, that we have made
based off of comments and uh
conversations with school
districts over the last two
years. I'm going to touch on 4
of the most important and big
changes that we have made in
this document, uh.
The first of which is the
classifications in this section,
we have added the early
childhood classification to mean
schools with only
pre-kindergarten, the former
standards did not have pre uh
kindergarten in any of the
standards, um, and so we have
added that. We have seen in the
last few years that there has
been a trend districts are
moving towards in some areas of
the state that are creating
pre-K specific schools, uh,
pre-K hubs, if you will.
And so we have added this
classic classification for that
purpose. We have also added more
robust definitions for
elementary school to include
pre-kindergarten through 6th
grade, not just kindergarten,
um, middle school, um, high
school in combination schools
are also defined there with the
grade levels.
On the next page, we have um
school security in the
Uh, original documents school
security was embedded in
multiple sections of throughout
the documents we have.
Basically combined all of the
security sections into one
section, so it is easier to uh
find and and read as a specific
section. Um, this does include
that school security features
may be integrated into all
layers of the school and then
provides the standard for sight,
as well as building security. I
do not believe that we made
changes to these sections were
just recombining so that they
are um there's a, a security
section.
On the next page, we have
general classrooms, um, for
these.
Uh, this section, we have
increased the minimum net square
footage of each classroom space.
Significantly, we have also um
gone to a minimum square footage
rather than a net square foot
per student, that way it is um
More easier to calculate and
just a standardized across all
instances we're setting the
minimum for grades 1 through 12
at 800 net square feet. This is
what we've heard throughout our
workshops that we held
throughout the state when we
were holding those that 650 was
what it was set up before, that
was too small to conduct, um, a
normal general size classroom
within.
We also added pre-kindergarten
to the list before it was um
kindergarten at 50 square feet
per student and for the pre-K
and kindergarten, we have
increased the net square footage
to 1000 square feet.
And lastly, uh, and I think most
importantly, we have
Updated the special education
section, um, just like with
security, we have separated this
into a specific section before
it was embedded into, I believe
the
Um, general classroom space, um,
so we have
Made this its own section. We
have also increased the net
square footage of a classroom
previously it specified that
special education classrooms at
a minimum of 450 square feet.
This was the biggest thing we
heard on our workshops that that
is
Um, insanely small for the
special education classes, we've
heard at every single workshop
that the special education
students and programs needed.
equal amount of space as a
general classroom, and that in
most instances in in schools,
they were being assigned general
sized classrooms, um, which was
requiring other things to move
into those classrooms and
creating um in some instances,
um, a lack of sufficient
classroom space.
Um, so that was, um, on the
number 81, um A2 did not change,
it is for those classrooms
serving a high degree of
personal care and assistance,
they shall include a unisex
restroom kitchen and kitchenette
with storage.
But then we did add this space,
um, to include a school shall
provide ancillary space for
therapy programs such as
occupational, physical, speech
and language, no smaller than
600 net square feet each. These
functions may be combined into
one space of scheduling permits
shared use and sufficient
physical and acoustic separation
is provided to ensure privacy.
In the previous document, this
space was combined in
considered part of the student
health, which was just large
enough to have a nurse's room,
so we've separated that to
include um the special education
as ancillary space as
requirements and all. Um and and
as it did say this space can be
shared. We've seen in a small
rural districts, typically
schools need one space and those
um
Services are provided on a
rolling basis as those service
providers travel across that
region, um, but in the larger
schools where they have
full-time ancillary providers
for all of these, they would
need more than one space.
Uh, so those are the, the
biggest changes that we made and
I, and as I stated in Mr. Park
stated, there are minor changes
throughout the documents, but
these are the most important we
feel based off of uh feedback
from school districts. So, Mr.
Chair, this has a, as you can
imagine, a huge implication on
the ranking uh of the schools
because um
Some spaces are gonna all of a
sudden become uh out of
adequacy. So, uh, I'd like, um,
Mr. Martinez to walk us through
some of those implications and.
Um, how we're going to deal with
it.
Mr. Chair members Aie Martinez,
I the facility assessment
database manager for the PSFA,
so my responsibilities include
the determination of the
weighted MCI ranking once a year
for prioritization of funding.
We're going to start with the
little crash course in weighted
MCI for all of us just so we're
all on the same page. Um, the
way that MCI is essentially how
the metrics that we use to rank
these schools to one another.
Um, what we're gonna do is we're
going to look at what the
weighted MCI does is it looks at
the conditions and the age of
your systems in conjunction with
how that space within that
building is being utilized
relevant to those adequacy
standards.
So here we just show on this
slide after this uh waited,
waited condition index and
relevant factors slides
essentially the calculation
itself and then the
Uh, deficiency categories and
associated with weight factors
that are applicable in this
case. So if we go into a
facility and we don't have
enough general classroom square
footage, there's gonna be a
dollar amount generated to
repair that deficiency. Well, we
want to create prioritization to
say that, hey, these schools are
overcrowded, we increase that
numerator of that equation
left-hand portion by this
applied weight factor for that
deficiency. On the next page,
we'll just uh rehash a few of
the things that, uh, Mr. Parks
has already said.
that these these standards have
been defined by the adequacy
standards and the deficiency
exists when an adequacy standard
is not met.
Um, formulas have been generated
based upon the adequacy
standards of themselves. They've
been programmed into this
database that collects all this
information and these
deficiencies are going to be
generated when there is a not,
not enough square footage for
the adequacy standard
requirement.
So simply put, do you have
enough square footage to support
the enrollment at this
particular facility.
Next page we want to just
discuss the factors of the rank
list, um, because there is going
to be fluctuations and there's
only a few options that we can
have these fluctuations, because
the fat is going to operate as a
complex relation database, not
only to the data itself, but in
position relative to the other
schools.
So the, what factors contribute
to these fluctuations if a
hailstorm damages a school
building's roof, it's ranking
will increase because there is a
need for repair.
Conversely, if the district
prepares this damage with or
without the state's help that
ranked position is going to fall
because there is less
deficiencies or less requirement
to repair this particular
facility.
This is the key point in this
case, changes to adequacy
standards or adjustments to
weight factors that influence
rankings will result in a
reorganization of facilities.
That's what's happening in this
case. Moreover, any significant
alteration facility data entered
into the fad or any policy
modification impacting school
buildings can lead to changes in
this rank list.
Either upward or downward.
Additionally, when one's
facility ranking changed, some
other facilities may have their
ranking uh changed as well
because they are going to be in
fluctuation based upon the
current conditions of the school
facilities statewide.
So here's a few of the examples
of some of the changes that uh
we've highlighted in the
document and Ms. Ramos, uh,
talks to. So for elementaries,
middles, and high schools, the
general classroom adequacy
standard calculation would occur
as your number of pre-K and K
students times 15 net square for
that student, plus the number of
1 through 5 times 32, plus the
number of 6 through 8 times 28,
plus the number of 9 to 12 times
25. Sorry, excuse me, times a
growth factor.
You can see highlighted in the
chart on the right, the
significant changes we did to
the metrics themselves. Like,
for example, we, we updated that
32 to a 36, 28 to 33, and those
are to meet those 1,000,800
classroom sizes determined by
PTR from PET. So that's how we
came up to those classroom sizes
based upon the information we
have and the information we
collected. And we can see art
and music is not required in
elementaries and charter
schools, but it used to be the
number
of your 6 through 8 students
times 4 net square foot, 4
middle schools. Now we're going
to keep the same thing, but at
least now we have a minimum for
that uh for that art in music.
If you were to have, we'll just
say uh 20 students at this
facility, the expectation would
be that you would have 200 net
square foot per art in music,
that is not a sufficient amount
of space, so at least needs to
be the size of the minimum
classroom.
As a minimum, you need to
provide those students with some
space for art and media.
Um, same thing with sped, we see
that we changed that 4150 net
square per sped classroom, cause
that's how we look at it. And
the fact is we will count the
number of sped classrooms. Look
at that square footage,
determine if that is enough or
not. Well, in this case, we are
increasing that from 450 to that
800 to to to make sure that
those ed students do receive
large enough classrooms. So the
way we went about analysite uh
and analyzing this is we first,
uh, the primary objective was to
determine
The adequacy stammers within the
fat to evaluate the anticipated
changes by reassessing each one
of the adequacy standard
minimums.
So we took each every possible
adequacy standard change and
modeled it one by one. that
allowed us to determine where
the majority of change was going
to come from.
I'm going to show we have a few
examples of what that analysis
looks at. We look at, there's no
page numbers. I'm sorry. Can I
stop you for just a moment?
We're questioning what is bad?
The facility assessment database
it's thank you I I up here
trying to, I would love to give
everybody a crash course if they
ever have an opportunity, please
reach out. I do it all the time
and it's actually really fun.
So if you guys want to talk
about all day, we can talk bad
all day. It's not trying to
figure out what the acronym was,
so thank you facilities
assessment database.
Ms. Chairman Hall, we're
clarifying on your school types
down there, you have CH. What
does that stand? It's a charter
school.
Cost models. We have different
cost models for different
schools based upon the adequacy
standards. We have elementaries,
middles, highs and charter
schools.
Charter schools don't have to
adhere to as many of the, um,
the, the standards as normal
traditional schools based upon
their programming.
As chairman for districts with
alternative schools.
What model do they fall under?
They're following the charter
school Cosmo.
So within this weighted MCI
ramped position examples, all
this was is we modeled each one
of these changes in the database
compared it to a control and the
determine what schools were
going to move where. And then we
quantitatively analyzed the
magnitude to the state. So in
this case, it's simply we're
control, we're comparing the
control index box.
Uh, the everything, the control
index column from the control,
sorry, excuse me.
And we're doing that for each
one. So we see the only
difference.
Between the control and art in
music happens to occur within
Roy Combo. What that means is
there was a rank position
change, it went from 20 to 19
based upon the new deficiencies.
That's just the fine details of
how the analysis went through.
Let's go to the next page, and I
can summarize what all the
changes look like when you start
to apply all the proposed
adequacy or adopted adequacy
standards. We're comparing the
same two values. We see a huge
change in the EEA index. What
that means is we're going to
have a change.
ranked position.
This final slide summarizes the
entirety of the work, and it
really gives us, I think, the
best picture of where the new
deficiencies are coming from.
So within this last slide
summary of results include all
proposed adequacy changes. So
this is including all of the
marked up, uh, changes within
the, the, the adequacy standards
that you were provided that was
marked up with blue and red.
This is the results of that.
Let's first look at the weighted
MCI comparisons. The weighted
MCI statewide, the average
weighted MCI in the control was
26.10.
We see, we, we are seeing
increases at every single case
that we applied a new adequacy
standard with the biggest
drivers being the SE, which Miss
Ramos spoke to, and the increase
in general classroom square
footage.
So we can see that if we do each
one of those changes, we can see
an increase of an average
weighted MCI of 2 27.05 from
26.10. So the state is
recognizing more space
deficiencies relative to those
new adequacy standards, we can
take that same approach with all
of them, general classroom had
the next significant impact, and
the inclusion of all the
adequacy standards within that
document received is going to
And with a point difference.
From expectation of about 1.32%.
The middle graphic just shows
the positional movement of the
schools. Remember, we're
defining new issues, so schools
are going to get re-ranked.
Between 176 schools moved
between 0 and 10 ranked
positions. And the reason why
it's important for us to
recognize this is because some
of these schools are getting
ready to come forward for an
award. If they fall without
outside of that top 100, they're
not gonna have that opportunity
until the next rank cycle. The
conditions worsen or conditions
of schools in front of them
improve.
The only way they're going to
get back into that opportunity.
So the last uh chart on the
right side of this is
specifically about that top 100.
11 schools are new to the top
100 from schools ranked between
100 and 200, 2 from the 2 to the
300s, 1 from uh 300 plus. So one
school is ranked near the
bottom, rose all the way to the
top based upon new adequacy
standards in this proposed
model.
So what happens to those schools
that get pushed out of that top
100. They just simply fall back
from 100 to 114 and wait for
their opportunity to eat again.
That was really what the
ramifications of this, yes, it
is a largest change to the
adequacy standards in a
significant amount of years and
14 years, I'd say since 2010 was
the largest.
So this was expected. Um,
fortunately, there wasn't as
much movement in the top 100, so
that's a good thing. Um, we're,
we're really close to where we
need to be relative to all that
adequacy standards, new adequacy
standards, and how it changes
the current outlook for some
schools.
That said
That is the implication. Thanks
Andrew yep.
And, and Mr. Chair, I may just
finalize by saying that there's
always movement in the ranking
from year to year, right? So if
As a, as a new school comes
online, it, it drops way down in
the ranking and, and another one
rises up. So we've discussed
this with the council and um
Uh, we've
We, we have a small amount of
concern. It's not a lot, I would
say for the movement that's
occurring. I think it's
important that this work gets
done because uh what we've heard
from the community is, um,
Is is realized in this work that
we've done, and, and it's a
reflection of what our state has
driven us towards. So Mister
Chair will stand for questions.
Thank you. Uh, lots to try and
keep wrapped around here and
figure out what, what all the
different numbers are with
things, but questions from the
committee.
I
Stan, I knew you'd always get to
start. I always have something
to talk about, so Mayfield High
School I see finals working into
the top 100. Thank you for that,
Mr. Chair, I just want to make a
point.
Mayfield High School during the
time I was there as
superintendent. We were doing,
redoing all of our high schools.
Mayfield High School had an
accident in the science lab
where we didn't have sufficient
wash, uh, stations, uh, and we
had an injured child, so we had
to spend money to do that.
We did that with our local bond
money.
But it kicked us out of the top
100, and that is 18 years ago.
It's really good to see them
back in.
Because that's my mistake, Mr.
Chairman, I should have gone to
the council, waited an
additional year, told the told
the insurance authority that
we'll just accept the risk for
another year or two and go that
route because they would have
been in the.
Subsequent cycles within that
time period. But that's to your,
to the point you raised. When
you do certain things to
building. You have a hail storm
and you replace the roof, your
ranking falls off.
Generally, not always, but
generally, because roof usually
a wreck anyway and it.
Those kinds of things happen.
Same thing happens in safety,
and so I'm delighted. It's good
to see Mayfield in there. I hope
that district will move ahead
and get that project done and
get them the revisions of that
high school, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, if I could just
respond to Mr. Rounds. um, thank
you for bringing that up. It's
actually totally off topic, but
something that we try really
diligently to do is to, when a
district comes to us and says,
we want to reroof our school.
We say, well, hang on a second.
You, you're swimming in space.
Um
You're, you don't need a new
roof, you need a new school for
a number of reasons. How can we
work towards that goal of, of
doing the right thing instead of
putting a band-aid on something.
Um, and we've had a fair amount
of success with um navigating
districts into, quite honestly,
a better decision, um, a lot of
time to, to go, go further and
um reduce your square footage,
go from 190,000 square foot
building to a right size
building for this new, this
reality that we're in where
we're losing population, so, uh,
Mr. Chasta, Mr. Rounds, thank
you for that comment.
Other questions.
I have a question and I, I don't
know whether it worries me or uh
is a compliment that I have
similar things to what's seen
often is asking about. Um.
Do you find districts ever
gaming the system, I mean,
almost like, hey, we should fix
the eyewash station, but if we
hold off, then we'll get
somebody else to pay for it, uh,
you you then just a little more
background. A few years ago,
when we
Did require districts to pay for
demolition so that they could do
the things that you talked about
is to get some buildings off the
list which would raise their
totals in other places, but you
find districts that put off
Doing what ought to be.
Routine maintenance in order to
move up on the list so that they
get money and how do we manage
that?
Mr. Chair, that's a great
question and um we, we have all
kinds of names for it in, in the
agency, um.
But I would say the, the, the
short answer is no. And I, the
reason I say that is because we
have a, a really robust
maintenance and operation, uh
department within our agency
that does outreach to all 89
districts.
Um, plus the two specials, um,
And, and how it's done is uh
Andrew's team of assessors will
go out. Part of their assessment
is how is the maintenance team
doing?
And um they come back and report
back to the M&O folks who will
then synthesize that and reach
out to that district and say,
hey, we see that you're not
changing the filters on your, on
your HVAC um as regularly. Can
we help you, uh, with a, with a
preventative maintenance
program. They're actually
required to have a PM plan in
place. If it falls out of um
compliance or uh outdated. Uh
our guys call them up and,
try to get them back within
compliance pretty quickly, so I
would say not really. Um, we
actually see, we, we hear
complaints of the opposite where
we've taken such great care of
our schools that they're not
raising in the rank as much.
And, and unfortunately, that's
um a fallacy as well because
it's all age and condition based
and educational deficiency
based, so letting your roof go
um south doesn't help your
effort very much.
And I don't know if they thank
you and that's really nice to
hear because I regularly tell
people that the leadership in
our schools, the vast majority
are doing great things for kids
and aren't trying to game the
system. They're not trying,
they're trying to make sure
they've got good spaces for kids
all the way through and that
that always is where their heart
is. So that's nice that I can
kind of reinforce that, that,
you know, they're, they're not
playing games with spaces for
kids, but really trying to do.
The right thing all the way
through and also that your staff
are working with them on doing
good maintenance of that, you
know, we've got people who
really are in this for the right
reasons and for the kids and
trying to do right by the
buildings as well. So that's
very nice to hear.
Representative
Oh,
thank you, Representative Tara
Luhan, um, House District 48
here in in Santa Fe. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh, in my
district right now, we have a
school that's that's um.
On the demolition list that's um
EJ Martinez.
And so right now what we did in
our district is we moved to, we
combined two of our elementary
schools together and
So
As we're talking about adequacy
standards, what in the time that
we've we've reduced.
We were told, and my daughter
goes to school there as well,
Mr. Chair. Um,
So how long are the kids going
to be in this joint, um, school,
um.
Before that, that location is
uh.
Built, Mr. Chair, do we, do you
know?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, I, I don't believe that
we have the answer to that. I
think that's a Santa Fe Public
schools initiative and um not,
not a PSFA involvement.
So I guess my question that goes
back to the adequacy of space
and and and how long the the
students and and faculty are
going to be sharing the space,
and I, I mean, it's not for you
to say, but that is what's
happening and and with your
standards in place and our
standards in place, I feel like
they're
They are at or over capacity at
this one school and so that's.
I'm glad we're we're decreasing
the timeline for the for um
getting these things done and,
and just reassessing this, the
standards, uh, I appreciate that
right now that's what our.
Our students and our faculty are
living with here in my own
district. And so I just wanted
to maybe we talk about that
offline, Mr. Chair, my other
question just goes to, um, when
you're looking at uh the page
with the changes of 6.27.30 NMAC
statewide accuracy standards
examples.
And I think, um, Mr. Stan asked
the question too. I was
wondering the CH does stand for
charters, so at this point,
They are not, they don't uh we
don't give them the.
Or they're not subject to the
adequacy standards in our
charter schools, but do you
communicate with them and let
them know what.
You know, we're, um,
These standards are in place,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Ms. Luhan,
the standards for classroom
spaces do not apply to charter
schools. Charter schools are
blanket waved from most of the
space requirements on the
adequacy standards, the general
classroom spaces, what they are,
um,
Measured by
You mentioned, so do you know
who's overseeing their their
standards or their space
standards in this charter
schools or do you, my question
is, do you just communicate with
them to let them know what
you're doing, even though
they're not required.
Um, um, Mr. Chair, Ms. Lujan,
charter schools are required
when they relocate or find a new
charter school to get PSA
approval. When we do that, we
assess the school, we calculate
the WNMCI score to ensure that
that facility uh meets adequacy,
as well as that it is um of good
quality. It is they're not
moving into a subpar facility,
and the general classroom space
is factored into that score. And
we do talk to them. And the
reason that the general
classroom space matters
for charter schools is we make
sure that the number of
students, the enrollment for
that charter school and the cap
will fit into that facility. And
so we do communicate with them
on that when they are moving in,
then throughout time they do get
assessed on the cycle as all
schools in New Mexico are, and
when that happens, they received
the communication from Mr.
Martinez showing that this
school was assessed, and here is
the document showing the
findings.
Thank you, that answers my
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Understood.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
just wanna thank you for the
obvious long and detailed work
you have put in on this. We,
we've been arguing about
adequacy standards for 25 years.
And as you mentioned, you know,
we have dealt with it off and
on, but uh this to me seems like
a really good rewrite. Uh, but I
will just say that it's a
different day when the comments.
is we urge folks to build over
adequacy when for most of the
past 25 years, it's, you will
not be paid for anything over
adequacy, so you build at your
own risk of not getting the
funding from the state, um
having to provide it and of
course the argument was.
You know, well, some districts
can build over adequacy and some
others can't, so that's an
inequality, so that's what we've
been dealing with. So I just
think you've done a really good
job of looking at this
holistically and changing these
old definitions to improve it,
so, uh, good for you, but I
don't think we're still, I don't
think we're saying encouraging
people to build over adequacy.
They need to be encouraged to
build uh.
Uh, the best they can for their
needs, given what they can
contribute and what the state
can contribute, so, um, you
know, we, we never even used to
have teachers available, and we
talked about that for 15 years.
So finally we're there, but, you
know, $8 million for 8, 1500
houses, it's just not uh easy to
uh stomach.
Uh, so, uh, you know, we're in
this period right now with the
construction costs just going
through the roof, uh, cement is
like gold these days. Uh, so I
understand that, but I'm looking
forward to when that sort of
calms down and we're back to
sort of more normalcy. Please
tell me that will happen. I know
you can't. All right. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
But Mr. Chair, uh, if I may,
just, just again to um
Not, not kill a dead horse, but
this graphic right here shows
You, you literally can't build a
school to adequacy if you try to
do that, you're gonna end up
with an, an insufficient school.
So the planning guide which
we're gonna revamp, that is the
sister document to the adequacy
standards is the adequacy
planning guide. And within that,
what I had mentioned was one
component of that is the gross
square foot calculator.
And what that says is, if, if
you put in 300 students, it's
gonna spit out how big an
elementary school should be, how
big a middle school should be,
how big a high school should be.
That is being updated right now
to, to reflect these changes,
but we're by no means saying go
out and build uh the, the
biggest school you possibly can.
Uh, we're just trying to fit.
Um, 21st century learning into,
into the standards and the
planning guide, um, and
That planning guide will kind of
guide architects and and
districts into uh building
sensibly, if you will, not
necessarily to adequacy.
Well, and, and Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate that, but I hope you
appreciate where I'm coming
from, cause I was around when we
had to fix this problem, and we
did fix it. Uh, we fixed it in
1998. Uh, then we revised it. I,
I, I believe that that the
agency we've created, um, the
public school facility authority
is one of our best agencies in
the state, uh, active hands on
at.
every school district, but
I have never heard in my last 25
years with this. Oh, we're
encouraging people to build over
adequacy. You, you've got to
understand that that is not what
we've talked about for the last
20 years, so, uh, I'm telling
you that is a new attitude from
uh from you all. Am I right,
Stan?
Mr. Cha.
Uh, Senator Stewart, I, I
understand and um agree with you
to an extent, yes, ma'am. OK,
good for you. But thank you,
thank you for what you all have
done.
Yeah, thank you. um, my only
concern along those lines is if
we're encouraging people to
build over adequacy, rich
districts, start building great
big things and we're back into
the Zuni lawsuit of the other
districts that can only build 5%
over adequacy with the extra
money we just want to be
careful. We don't want everybody
building minimalistic schools,
but we want to make sure that we
don't start getting crosswise
with equity.
Thank you so much.
In T were only about 15 minutes
behind, so the next thing,
severance tax bonding.
capacity, Ashley Lee.
And we should have that on our
Our tables report on public
school bonding capacity. Ashley,
please.
Yes, Chairman, members of the
task force, Ashley Leach, I'm
the director of the State Board
of Finance. Uh, I also sit on
the task force, uh, on behalf of
DFA Secretary Wayne prompts
apologies for not being able to
meet with you and be here for
the entire task force meeting
today, but I, uh, definitely
wanted to make sure I could come
and give what I told Simon I
think will be a very, very
brief, uh, presentation that may
put you guys ahead of schedule
today, but maybe not. I'm open
for any and all questions you
might have. I get excited.
time somebody wants to talk
about bonding, which is not very
often. So, uh, in front of you,
you have a 3-page um handout.
It's really two pages of
content, but I'm here to give a
very brief update on the
supplemental severance tax
capacity, uh, which reflects the
fiscal year 25 funding that is
estimated to be available for
capital, uh, projects for public
schools, uh, that will funnel
through PSDOC. So, as many of
you know, the state board of
finance oversees the severance
tax bonding program and public
school capital has been and is
funded with the supplemental
severance tax bonding program,
and almost exclusively from the
issuance of supplemental
severance tax notes. Uh, those
are issued when need is
certified by the public school
Capital Capital Outlet Council
for new identified projects,
those are systems, those are
standards, those are teachers,
those are appropriations made by
the legislatures out of the
fund. So anything flowing.
through that public school
capital, um, outlay fund is
coming through this. So when
PSCOC certifies, which is
typically 1 to 2 times a year,
the Board of Finance will issue
supplemental notes to fund that
up to the capacity, which is
estimated by the board annually,
um, we just had our um updated
capacity come out last week with
the LFC revenue hearing.
And we are estimating for fiscal
year 25, 751 million in
capacity. And uh if you look at
the 2nd and last page or the
last page of your presentation,
you're very long packet I have
in front of you. Um, you will
see that uh PSCOC has certified,
they just did this yesterday and
I should also mention I serve on
the PSCOC as the AMS
subcommittee chair as well. So,
uh, uh, PSCOC certified for the
issuance of 144.2 million, which
will be selling.
On December 30th, so just in
another week and a half or so.
Uh, after the, um, or towards
the end of the month, but we are
estimating capacity, uh, on an
average over the next 5 years to
be 100 or $820 million. Um, and
what I've also added on this
slide just for reference is a
historical look back at what
we've had in the past for public
schools. And, uh, if you look at
the chart on that page, you will
see a drastic change beginning
in FY 23 or public school
funding through the fund. Uh,
we're looking at like
said 820 million annually
average over the next 5 years,
whereas we used to be around 140
to maybe 300 million at most
each year. So it's a new day for
public school funding. It's a
new day for PSFA and PSCOC to be
working through, um, inevitably
some issues that come up when we
have more funding than we ever
thought we knew what to do with,
but um we are, uh, you know,
looking at that, we're aware of
it and we have that funding
available. So, uh,
again, I promised a very short
presentation. I've done longer
ones in the past where I go
through some details, but I'm
happy to answer any questions
that you chairman or the members
may have.
Thank you, Ashley. Uh, and you
just comment, it's nice to have
the problem of too much money,
and I hope as a state that we
recognize we're not a poor
state, and we ought to be
building our schools and fixing
all of them that we can while
the money is here, but on the
other side of it, I hope that
the big spike in money isn't
some of what's driving the
million dollar teatridges, uh,
because people see there's money
and they all want to get their
hands on some of it that we
really can do it to, to make
sure that our students
are in good spaces as a wealthy
state ought to have our children
in good spaces, so any
questions, comments?
Me
Senator Swart
Well, Mr. Chairman, I just can't
help myself again. Um, I just
want us to recognize that it was
uh 2017, uh, 2016 where
We had basically stopped funding
the severance tax fund, and we
had to redo.
Uh, what money was going in and
what money was going out. And it
was public schools that took the
hit. Remember that? 12% of our
funding went down.
Uh, uh, there was hardly
anything taken from anyone else,
so that we could grow this fund
back.
Uh, so not only, um, and, and it
was this mechanism.
That got changed 25 years ago to
have a revenue source for the
public schools. Again.
He said they public school, uh
capital O Lake Council and this
task force all were created at
that time. Uh, so we've done a
fantastic job.
With the Zuni lawsuit and
funding schools. $3 billion we
have done in the last 25 years
of state money to public
schools, uh, so, uh, it is
really something to celebrate,
uh, at the same time, uh, to be
cautious that we're not doing a
million dollars per teacher just
but, but really, I mean this
reflects the kind of work that
this committee, that public
school facility authority.
Um, and the council have all
done, so it's something to
celebrate. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
If not, oh yes,
secretary, please, thank you for
your presentation, um, just, um.
Wanna say that obviously we see
all of the projects on PSCOC,
and we have a Senator Stewart
pointed out, really increased
our funding for school
facilities and just want to say
the need around the state is
great and so every project that
we see come in front of us
really is worthy.
Um, and in need of being funded
funded and done quickly for the
betterment of our students and
our school staff, and so again,
just want to um.
Say, as I always do, like we
gotta, we gotta move these
projects we need, need to take
advantage of the revenues that
we have and um we absolutely
have need around the state, um,
and looking at the conditions of
some of the facilities. So thank
you for your work, Ashley.
Thank you Secretary. Any other
questions, comments?
Yes, sir.
Represent chapter.
You know, I just, I, I do wanna
thank everybody in, in this room
that's involved in, in what's
happening in our state today
because
As many of you know and some of
you don't, I was on the school
board 16 years.
I raised two sets of children up
through very small rural schools
and
Years ago, those schools were
just run down in the
The fixtures were falling off
the wall, the paint was peeling
and, and I think that kind of
goes to the attitude, you know,
the self-image of the kids going
to that school. Now we're fixing
things. We have
Nice buildings, we have
well-trained teachers and not to
say the ones before weren't
because there was some
magnificent ones, but I just see
a big investment in our
Educational system, and I think
it's changing the attitude.
Uh, of education in New Mexico
and
And I know that we
We have her back and forth to
how we're gonna fix things and I
think that's gonna be a, a large
part of it, uh.
Just a large
Uh
A factor in our self-image, the
self-image of the kids, the kind
of folks that want to be a
teacher, I really see a change.
Thank you all.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Ashley, and thanks for the
very short presentation because
yes, we did get us back to, uh,
5 minutes ahead of schedule I
can do to help. Thank you all
invite you regularly when we get
behind it, get us back. Thank
you. Thank you.
Yeah
So now update from the public
school Cat Outlay Council, Mr.
Joe, please come on up, Joe.
don't mind real quick, I wanna
just uh commend uh Mr. Parks,
Mr. Ramos, and Mr. Martinez on
the work that they did on the
adequacy standards. I just
wanted to give them a big shout
out and we're just extremely
grateful for the work that
they've done.
The chairman members of the task
force, thank you for allowing us
to present a status report on
the activities of the public
school capital Outlay Council.
Uh
As you know, I have been serving
as chair now for about 4 or 5
years, uh, the council. I served
on the council for 17 years, so
I've seen all the history, the
good times, the bad times, and,
and right now we're, we're all,
I think we're doing very well,
as you can see with we have an
excellent staff,
quality, quality counsel, uh
membership, and again, thank you
for the opportunity to be here.
I'd like to today just go over
uh some of the changes we've
we've had on the PSTOC lately.
And then uh go through a list of
applications that we approved,
uh, yesterday in this very uh.
Uh, room, uh, uh, these are, uh,
activities that took place uh
since our last meeting here.
So these will include those
projects that we funded since
our last report. Uh, also some
information on, on uh projects
that are moving along in terms
of construction.
So
Uh
As you can see on the list of
Uh
Public school capitally members,
we have some new members, of
course, John Senna.
Uh, was recently appointed to
fill uh Guenpara ornaments slot,
although he had been filling in
for her from time to time.
Uh, uh, Secretary Padilla, uh,
has moved over from representing
the governor's office to
representing the publication
department, but she has been
with us, uh, for, for quite a
while as well in that capacity,
uh, Clay Bailey, uh, continues
to represent the construction
industries, uh, division, uh,
Ashley Lee, uh, serves as one of
our uh
The committee chairs, overseeing
the administrative, maintenance
and policies of the uh uh
council.
Uh, Charles Soli serves as
awards committee chair and, and,
uh, along with several other
members, uh, review these
projects before they come to us,
uh, and received recommendations
from uh from the staff.
Stewart Ingram, a member of the
Public Education Commission from
the Albuquerque area serves on
the, on the council as well, and
Shana Kashir.
Uh, is now serving as the
Legislative council Services
representing.
Uh, uh, representative, uh,
replacing Raul Bursaga, who had
been on the council for longer
than I have been.
But uh we also have a new
representative from the
governor's office, Sarah
Mickelson, and she has taken
over the seat that uh Secretary
Padilla uh had as she moved
over, so again, just a little
overview on some of the changes
we've had recently.
Uh, on the council.
Uh, so, um,
As I mentioned yesterday, we,
uh,
Met to approve several projects,
we started the application
process, uh, back in September,
August, September, taking
applications, uh, we had
application hearings in
November.
And uh
Mate awards in December, so as
you can see that process is
moving along very quickly.
And uh it does involve a lot of
work from staff and looking at
these projects, making sure that
they're ready to go and uh
moving them along as quickly as
possible.
On the next page.
Um
You can see the standards-based
applications that we received.
We received 4 of them during
this period.
Uh, silver or a cliff combined
school in the community of Cliff
that uh resides in that
district.
Uh, Bloomfield, looking at uh
replacement and consolidation of
3 elementary schools and 2
elementary schools in a uh
junior high.
Uh, Rio Rancho for renovation
and upgrades at their Lincoln
Middle School, and uh we Rancho
also some additional uh upgrades
at the Rio Rancho High School.
Uh, these projects, again, uh,
we approved these for phase one,
which includes the, the uh
planning and design.
Uh, for the planning, uh,
process, uh, we have
appropriated.
Uh, $8 million in state funds
and 14 million in local funds
that that is the match.
Uh, there are, there is an
additional sheet that I've
attached that has the actual
dollar amounts for each of
these, uh, so please refer to
that sheet. I hope you have that
separately. It's uh looks like
this, yes, and this has the
actual numbers uh from our uh
meeting yesterday.
Uh, the eligibility for these
standard-based awards, we ask
for applications from the top
100 schools, and you can see
their rank there and again, as
we take these projects on, as
you heard uh previously from
staff, other projects move up
and we're able to take care of
those.
Uh, on the next page is what we
call our systems-based
applications, we had several
others uh that applied. These
are the ones that were funded,
uh, that several uh were
determined not to be ready.
We were able to to fund all of
these, these all but 3 of them
are uh face are not faced, we go
from, from planning the design
to construction, these are
smaller type projects, as you
can see Alamogordo roofing, uh,
grants, uh, HVAC and and
lighting, uh, hat, uh, uh, roof
exterior. So these are all
smaller type systems projects,
Unus, Logan, Silver had two
projects.
Clayton and Ruidoso.
As part of the standards-based
projects, uh, we can, you can
see on the top right-hand
corner, we did some, we approved
some demolition projects, and
these are of of funding to
demolish these uh buildings that
are no longer being used and
help those districts uh relieve
them of some uh building
insurance costs that they had
to, they've been having to, to
provide on the systems-based
projects we took applications
from the top 300.
So, uh, these are the, you can
see the rankings on that sheet
as well.
On the next page, we have our
pre-kindergarten facilities
applications and eligibility
here is uh school districts and
schools with pre-kindergarten
uh programs, uh, although we
have two projects here, only one
was funded, the Shining Star
Preschool.
Uh, for an amount of, uh, for
the first phase again planning
and design 250 or uh 1000 in
state funds and about the same
amount in local funds uh for a
new kit cafeteria and kitchen
that they don't have at this
school.
Of the puesta del Sol Elementary
School project uh was uh uh
withdrawn for more study.
The next page are the uh a
report on our pilot teacher
housing applications during this
round.
We had a hatch and Corona.
Oh
Right, for funding these are
again one phase projects.
Uh, uh, Hatch is doing 5, I
believe, and Corona 4.
Uh, my recollection, uh, on
these uh state funding is 123.
23,000, the local match on these
is 435,000.
Uh, so, again, uh, this is the,
these are the projects that were
approved at our meeting
yesterday.
And again, you have a detailed
list.
Uh, on
On this sheet
That includes the plan, the
total estimated amount for the
project, the total amount
estimated for planning in the
month of the amount that was
approved and then out your
funding uh as estimated at this
time. So those numbers will be
Uh, massaged and as we get move
forward, uh, finalized and not
awarded until uh we get bids and
uh uh they're presented to us
for funding.
Some of the next uh
Sheets include some nice
renditions of some projects that
we pro uh proved uh uh prior to
yesterday's meeting.
Uh, and, uh, after we
We met with you last. Here's uh
Gadsden Middle School. It's a
full school replacement.
Uh, and you can see the dollar
amounts there.
Albuquerque Sign Language
Academy. This is a new charter
school.
Uh, facility.
And uh you can see the dollar
amounts there.
Nice, uh, looking, uh,
facility as well. Harrison
Middle School in Albuquerque.
Uh, we hadn't done much in
Albuquerque recently, but the,
uh, what they are starting to
get active again on our uh
funding lists.
Uh, is there any middle school
that was referred to earlier.
Uh, combination high school,
middle school, very, a lot of
money going into that uh uh
school.
Uh, and, uh, again, uh,
Very much needed.
Uh, we have other, uh, projects
on this additional sheets, uh,
that we've funded recently, uh,
Tula Rosa Intermediate School.
Uh, zoo, uh, the, the teacher
housing was separate, and I
should indicate to you that we
set a limit on those at 500,000,
even though they will be
spending their funds on the
difference.
Uh, Portalis High School roof
replacement, and then you can
see on the last page of the
project list, uh, some other
projects that we funded in
Ratton, Hobbs, Alamogordo,
Hobbs, Gallop, and uh the uh
Albuquerque, uh, School for the
Deaf preschool.
That's a very popular project
and saving.
Uh, students
From having to drive to other
schools out of out of the out of
Albuquerque to have their kids
in the school for the deaf.
facilities.
So those are the activities that
we've had over the last
2 or 3 months. We've been very
busy. I, I believe our part of
the project uh process is the
easiest. We get to uh approved
based on recommendations from
staff and a lot of work goes
into these not only from the uh
our staff level, but the locals,
uh, local officials in putting
their applications together,
getting them to us, and now that
they're uh they're funded, uh
again, we're making every effort
to move that process along,
make, make sure.
sure that these projects are
completed quickly and uh going
to the two-phase system several
years ago of uh.
Planning first and then coming
in as soon as they're ready for
construction really helps to
move those projects.
Be happy to try and answer any
of these questions. We have a
full staff here so uh if you
have any particular uh questions
on any of these projects,
please.
Feel free.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members, I do want to make
mention did mention that there's
a lot of work that goes into it,
um, on the PSFA side. What I do
want to um kind of focus on is
the changing process during the
application process. A lot of
times we get applications at the
district is just not ready.
And instead of saying, sorry,
you don't qualify, come back
when you're ready. Staff has
really take taking a different
approach of, OK, this is why
you're not ready.
This is the steps that we can do
to help you get ready.
Uh, we'll refer you to whether
it's your bonding, um, advisor
or your internal finance team,
these are the criteria you need
to meet on the finance side.
This is what the criteria you
need to meet.
Um, in your facilities, and so
they start mentoring way early
on, uh, in order to assist these
districts to be able to even
apply and be ready.
Thank you.
Um, and questions from the
committee and just happy to see
that in general it looks like
construction prices are back
down around $500 a square foot
when everything had been
creeping up to 1000, except why
is Zuni still double the cost
don't make sense to me. I could
see it's higher because of
ruralness and other things, but
doubles hard to understand. The
remoteness has a lot to do with
it, the lack of uh people
wanting to travel that far and.
But that
double the cost. I mean it.
Is the labor enough that it's
gonna double the cost?
Uh, Mr. Chair.
The statewide average that we're
seeing is $500 a foot. That
means projects that are being
built in Albuquerque.
Los Lunas Bale.
They're between, we've seen
between 425 and 5:50 a foot.
Outside of that metropolitan
area and possibly down in Las
Cruces, we're still seeing 60 to
$700 a square foot in, in
outlying areas and yes, in, in
very remote areas, um, such as
Zuni, the, the cost is about 9,
I think this is 940 square foot
um bid cost. So we are still,
we, prices have not come down,
they've plateaued,
unfortunately.
Um
And, but we at least have a good
handle on it, and we've been
able to uh illustrate through
other projects that, yes, these
projects in the middle of
nowhere are going to be
expensive. Um, but when you get
on the I-25 corridor, the price
has come down pretty
substantially.
Thank you. I just feels like if
I wanna get rich, I need to get
my contractor's license. Then
you'd have to drive there, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Munoz,
let me ask you that, but what
did it cost to build the school
in?
You know that number off the top
of your head Mr. Chair, Senator
Munnoz, it was in the 960 square
foot range for Moscaro and Des
Moines.
I, I mean, it's an outlier and.
I mean, Zunia, how many kids are
in that Mr. Chair, Senator
Munoz, it's 580.
In in middle school and high
school, high school combo, yes
sir.
That's 113,000 square foot, very
large footprint.
Um
Mr. Chair Senator Muno, it is,
it is within the parameters.
And this is a builder at risk,
right?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, and you
know it's a construction manager
at risk delivery method, yes,
sir.
and so
I mean, we're gonna have to
really look at, we know that you
can mobilize and not have to
truck it. It's only 30, 40
farther from Des Moines to.
Maybe rat to the concrete and
some of those construction costs
are.
I mean, this is our problem. I
don't mind building nice things,
right?
But
If you ruin it for everybody
else.
And there's not enough money to
build the school at Corona or to
continue this, right?
Bonding capacity is going up.
And, but if you ruin it for
somebody else in the market, and
you set the new base at 962 in
all of r New Mexico. You're not
gonna get those guys going into.
Albuquerque in Las Cruces at 96
at 500 a foot, they're gonna
say, yeah, here's the new base,
right?
If they're getting in rural,
we're gonna get it in.
Urban areas.
And then
817 million that we have bonding
capacity now only builds uh.
About 8 schools.
This is square for. These are
just rough parables.
Instead of 56 million.
50% of the cost in in urban
very.
Harry and Gadsden.
is get in school.
Facility area is about 111,000
zoo.
30, 13 and that's the problem
that we're gonna run into.
You can build twice as many
schools with 800.
14 million bonding capacity, or
you can only build 8.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Mun, if,
if I may, uh, the reason, one of
the reasons we're seeing these
higher prices in the outlier is,
is quite honestly simple supply
and demand. It's because there
is so much work in people's
backyards that they, they don't
wanna go and, and, um, work in,
in, in these rural communities,
so we're actually, that, that is
what's driving that prices.
We're just not getting the same
level of competition out in
Moscaro.
journey as we do and um in
Albuquerque or Los Lunas. So I
would say that the, the distance
actually exacerbates the
problem. And then what we've
been hearing a lot of is the
hauling. It's the hauling of the
debris from the, the demolition.
Um, it's the over excavation,
um, bringing an engineer Phil,
there there are just simple
trucking logistics on some of
this, but I do definitely agree
there are those great uh things
that contractors can do where
they can bring up plants.
In, um, for concrete, but
that's, that's one facet of it,
right? That's, it's
multi-layered for, for sure.
Yeah, but you can't tell me that
change is not bidding on schools
in Albuquerque and Zuni.
Oh, Mr. Chair, they, they
definitely are, and they're
bidding it at $500 a foot, not
at 9060 in town.
Yeah, I mean, that's the problem
with, with builder at risk or
design at risk, right? They're
taking all the risk and if I
build extra capacity.
Um, you know, doubling the cost
per square foot pretty much
takes the, I, I'm just saying
that if you design build,
there's only what, 4 or 5 big
contractors in New Mexico that
build schools.
Maybe 6, right? And if you do
design build on every single one
of them, you now eliminated
everybody out of the market that
wants to do uh schooling.
Left New Mexico.
With the outbuilder risking, so.
Yeah, yeah, I'm a contractor,
but I, I mean, I'll admit some
of this stuff is.
Pretty
Hippy.
Mr Chairman, Senator we're,
we're looking at a silver bullet
somewhere to fix all this. We've
been looking for guidance from
LFC, LESC, and, and our staff
and uh a couple of times we've
gone as far as rejecting uh
asking districts to go back to
rebid, and unfortunately, the
bits came in higher than
originally.
So that's a tough one, a tough
one. I know, and I think we're
gonna have that conversation
with PSC staff. Do we need to
get you an estimator? Do we need
to figure out how to backbuild
some of this, so you, you know,
you know what their margins are,
I mean, a screw in.
In Albuquerque doesn't cost much
difference in the screwing Zuni.
a little, some of this stuff
we're gonna have to figure out
cause at the end of the day, I
mean.
If we want a school in Rio
Rancho that needs to be nice,
right?
And we spent
100 million on this school and
only cost somebody's gonna lose
out at some point.
And that becomes, that's where I
think it really becomes a
problem for me is.
We need to keep this trend of
building good schools and nice
stuff.
But if you consume all the money
on
8 projects when we can have 16
schools, then it becomes in some
of this was inflationary. Some
of it is not. Mr. Chairman
Senator, you, you probably heard
as well in Albuquerque, you
know, they have an annual bond
program. They go out to bid.
And they scheduled their
projects and from what we hear
from them is that they only be.
Uh, going to be able to build
half of the projects they had to
protected because of the
increases, so, uh, they're
looking for ways to.
Get this done too, yeah, and
maybe that's why we should help
save money to help backfill some
of that, so we do get caught up,
right?
Otherwise, we're gonna be
I mean the, the red Rock school
in Gallup, which was like 60 or
70 years old.
It's finally getting replaced,
well, it should have been down
but and the other thing is that
also, you know, the good work
that you all did in reducing the
match required match by uh uh.
The amount that you did 30 and
50%.
With the increase in costs that
still puts it out of reach of
the local match, so we've been
looking at a lot of waivers.
Think that you'll probably be
discussing maybe some easement
on waivers as well, but again
it, it's taking more money out
of the pool.
To, to work with those waivers.
I, I just, there's nothing wrong
with somebody making a profit,
but there's something wrong
with.
I'm making more than a profit
area, that's, that's where my
big issue is, right?
Let's keep enough so we can keep
going and keep going and you
consume it all in 11 or two
projects, and it's bad.
And I like to take this time to
personally thank all of you,
particularly on this committee
that have supported this program
and have
Then the lifeline for it.
Throughout the years and I'm
glad that the Supreme Court
ruled that the way they did, um,
you know, that district court
judge didn't take any of this
into consideration, any of the
hard work that you all have
bought for on the floors on
several occasions for that.
Yeah, well, sometimes judges
don't like the hot potatoes, so
they, they throw the hot potato
to somebody else to decide.
And, and then that gets kicked
back to, so.
I think that's kind of what the
cat.
Thank you. Any other questions,
comments on this topic.
No, thank you very much.
Appreciate the, the input. Uh,
we do have a quorum where we
pass through a quorum, which
means we did establish one at
one point. Uh, and so if there's
a motion to accept the
Minutes of the last meeting, I
would take that at this point.
Thank you,
and approach it, there were 22
minutes, um, 2 sets of 2 sets of
minutes. So would you like?
Uh
adoption of the other set of
minutes too. We have a motion to
adopt both sets of minutes, and
second by Senator Munoz. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
That's approved. I'm afraid to
get this hard with the mic right
there.
Um, and then the other is the
approval of the agenda for
today, which we're most of the
way through
to promotion to approve the
agenda
executive by Senator Munoz. Is
there any opposition to the
agenda that we just went
through, motion to adjourn.
Thank you.
We've done the official business
of the committee.
Um, at this point, we are to the
last thing review of proposed
legislation coming up in the
area of public school.
outlay oversight task force, and
with that,
Cathy
As well, Mark Montoya with LESC
and Stan, I think you're on this
too. You could stay where you
are, you want to go down with
them.
it's a separate, he has a
separate. Oh, yours is a
separate one, OK.
All right, Mr. Chair, um, I am
going to present from this
handout you should have in front
of you.
Um, and essentially this is,
we're just gonna give you,
hopefully a pretty brief
refresh, um, on what you all
gave direction to staff to
execute at your last meeting.
So if you'll turn to slide 2,
and sorry, I'm Kelly Carswell,
um, Capital Outlay with the LFC
join, joined by Mark Montoya,
policy analyst at LESC, um, I'm
gonna present, we'll both be
here for questions and what I'm
presenting does represent the
combined work of LFC, LESC, and
PSFA, this interim under your
direction. So on slide 2, just a
quick reminder of the problems
that you all asked us to.
Take a look at um this interim.
Uh, the first is affordability.
Uh, so as you have discussed
today, um, we've obviously seen
some really, really big cost
increases for public school
construction recently, and that
has made it more difficult for
districts to afford their local
share despite the reductions in
the local match that the
legislature has implemented and
related to that, um, the public
school Capital Outlay Council
has had many more requests for
and has been granted.
ing more waivers, um, which is
another way of saying they have
been exercising their discretion
more in the past to reduce the
local match for districts that
are facing that affordability
problem. Um, and one of the
things that this is kind of a
sign of is that the state local
match formula is maybe not
working as intended and so that
was what we started to look at
this interim.
Um, on slide 3, you can just see
a chart illustrating that
increase in waivers both in the
number granted and in the dollar
amounts, um, which in FY 24 in
particular just outpaced
anything we've seen, uh,
previously at, um, around $150
million in waivers. If you will
turn to slide 4, so at our, at
our last meeting, um, we took
you all through and you had some
really good discussion of a few
options for addressing this.
Uh, the first was to do nothing.
The second was to adjust, uh,
just a few of the formula
factors that go into calculating
the steak, its state and local
match will continuing to study
some of the others. And the
third option was to adjust
waiver eligibility criteria to
extend the temporary local match
reductions, um, implemented by
Senate Bill 131 and to direct
our three agencies to continue,
uh, kind of a deeper evaluation
of potential formula changes.
including, you know, potentially
a complete overhaul of the state
local match formula.
On slide 5, the option that we
recommended and you all selected
was option 3.
And so now I'm just gonna
Give you um a quick illustration
of
Uh, how those changes are
incorporated into the draft
bill, um, that Simon drafted for
you that you have before you.
Um, so on slide 6, we also kind
of with each of the options last
time we met, um, went through
kind of a rationale for each uh
each potential path as well as
some of the downsides. And if
you recall, we kind of talked
about this is the status quo
plus or status quo, but a little
better option.
So why, why we might
do this. Um, it's
In one respect related to why we
might not act now on adjusting
some formula factors, even
though we know some of the
formula factors are not really
reflecting reality, uh, and
essentially the reason for that
is um that it could have
unintended consequences, um, in
terms of potentially shifting
the cost burden on a more
permanent basis, uh, too much to
the state.
Um, and, you know, this, this
formula is actually kind of
complicated too. There's a lot
of different dynamic factors
that intersect and we sort of
felt like we weren't ready to
start tweaking it without a
greater understanding of why in
some cases it's not really
accurately reflecting district's
ability to pay.
Um, on top of that, PS, the
public school Capital Alley
Council has shown willingness to
exercise its discretion, um, and
I think his approach, the waiver
requests pretty carefully and
thoroughly. Um, to, you know,
ensure that it's doing its job
in terms of equity, equitably,
um, deploying the state's
resources around the state and
ensuring that districts are um
putting in a good faith effort
to bring local resources to the
table.
Uh, cleaning up the waiver
criteria combined with the
public school Capital Outlet
Council continuing to exercise
that distraction that
discretion, uh, could also allow
more districts that are putting
in that good faith effort to be
granted waivers, um, yes, the
staff can talk more to this if
you have some additional
questions, uh, but there have
been some districts that have
been kind of stuck.
Uh, with the current, uh, waiver
eligibility criteria.
Um, and then finally extending
SB 131 for another year, um, can
continue to provide that relief
to districts statewide, um,
while we kind of do this deeper
work on the state and local
match formula.
OK, uh, so on slide 7 you can
see the proposed changes to the
waiver criteria in the bill, so
it would get rid of option C
altogether, um, which in effect
is duplicative of option A, and
that would, then it would also
simplify option B, um, so that
there are only two criteria
remaining, and these are for
small districts with less than
800 students. Um, they're kind
of bar for uh what
they should have done at the
local level to raise local funds
would be that they're imposing
at least 7 mLs, um, whereas for
the larger districts, it would
be at least 10 mLs.
Uh, and then finally on slide 8,
the change to SB 131 would be
just to um extend those local
match reductions through fiscal
year 2027. So this essentially
puts them in effect past the
2027 legislative session, so the
next 60 days, which is when you
all could take up if you chose
to do so after we've looked at
it, um, more deeply, uh, kind of
larger changes to the state
local match formula.
And that's all, Mr. Chair.
Mark, do you have anything to
add?
Uh, no, uh, as Kelly said, it
does reflect both of our work. I
think you may have seen
something similar to this during
the November LESC meeting, um,
but no, nothing at Kelly did a
great job.
Thank you. Uh, and Simon nicely
handed me for those of you
looking at this great big thick
document pages 567, and 8 are
where the changes are. And so,
you know, there's a lot of pages
here, lots of them are not
changing and some of the changes
are relatively
Simple, I mean, they're just
date changes, the biggest ones
are the bottom or on page 7 and
8.
Uh, which, which take out the
criteria for some of the other
districts that were onerous or
getting in the way of it, as I
understand. Is that accurate
extension?
Right
and then the amendments began on
7
yeah, the waiver amendments on 7
and 8 and then on 5 and 6 are
the the extension. Any
questions?
Representhan.
Thank you. So on page 6,
Uh, lying, uh, 21, 22, the new
language, the council may adjust
the amount of a school
district's local share otherwise
required if it determines that
the school district has made a
good faith effort to, so.
That's, I believe that's just
cleanup language. Thank you.
Yeah, that, that's not really a
substantive change. It's OK,
cool, that that was my question,
you read it, thank you.
It sounded like I was really
official and knew all of that,
Simon whispered in my ear, it's
just
I can't take credit for, for
being all knowing.
Other questions?
Munoz.
How, how many schools will this
affect, right?
I mean like Cliff doesn't have a
match.
I mean this is really for um Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator Munoz, um,
yeah, so the changes to uh
waiver essentially option 2
under the waiver criteria would
only apply to districts with
fewer than 800 students, um, and
essentially, so for those
districts, they would have to
show that they're imposing at
least 7 mLs um to raise those
local revenues, and it's getting
rid of the additional
requirements that they have, um,
at least.
70% of their student population
on free and reduced lunch, um,
and that they have a local match
greater than 50%, which became
harder for those districts to
meet with the SB 131 direct uh
reductions.
Um, and then, uh, I believe the
free and reduced lunch thing has
also become um more complicated
with uh free school meals.
For districts being able to
prove it.
wait to join us.
You gotta come up here to the
mic cause they'll want to hear
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members,
Mr. Munoz, um, right now under
option 2, only 5 school
districts are eligible under,
uh, for the waiver criteria. If
this change is made 23 could be.
And, and if I might, before you
go on, Senator, this is just
enabling for districts to be
allowed to request a waiver. It
does not guarantee that they are
given a waiver just to allow
them to come forward to request
a waiver, so it's enabling,
correct? OK. Thank you. So let
me ask that question. So if we
do this, right?
How do we know that those school
districts have the money to.
I mean, that'll be in the SCG I
imagine, right, operational
costs, but, but I mean, some may
not have the SCG dollar amount
to cover, you know, if you lose
a a unit after 5 years on one of
these buildings IAC system.
Um
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Munhoz,
to make sure, I'm sorry, do you
want me to answer this question?
OK
we're assuming that's just to
make sure I understand the
question. Um, how do we ensure
that they're gonna operate and
maintain that facility after
it's built, um, part of our
agency, as I mentioned earlier,
is our maintenance and operation
department, whose sole job is to
overlook all 89 plus the two
constitutionals to make sure
they have an active preventative
maintenance plan to make sure
they're using a ticket.
for their work orders. So we, we
go around the state, we, um, our
assessors go around the state to
ensure that the state's
investments are being kept up,
if you will.
And and you look at the school
budget to make sure they have
the operational money to.
And, and Mr. Chair, um, another
uh point that was um whispered
in my ear was very good is we
are right sizing a lot of these
schools. So some of these
districts are going from over
100,000 square feet of space
down to 50,000 square feet, so
there, it's, it's less
maintenance, um.
Needed less operational funding
needed to heat and cool that
much smaller building. And so I
think the, the down, the, the
right sizing paired with the
fact that um PSFA staff does a
good job of checking in with
every district. Those are the,
those are the mechanisms that
PSFA can can muster. I can't
speak to the funding of
Of, um, personnel at a district
I mean with the new building,
the maintenance cost to
increase, but if they're
destroying an old school, then
the main costs are really that
reserve just that's just
something I wanna ask is, you
want nice things, but
At the end of the day.
Thank you. Other questions?
Understood.
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to
say this helps all the
districts, though, because it
continues that 50% or 30% match
or possibly another several
years, so this is a change
that's positive for all of the
districts.
Thank you. Uh, I believe, uh,
we're at a point where as for
the committee endorsement of
this bill.
I moved, we endorse the bill we
endorsed
by Senator Munoz. Is there any
opposition to having an
endorsement from this committee
of this bill.
If not, this is
PSCOC or PSCoda endorsed, um,
now we don't have a sponsor yet,
Mark or is LESC going to be
looking at this in the next 3
days as well. Yes, so John will
be providing you a recap of all
this updates and this will be
our endorsements and this will
be, OK, um, and so what I'm
thinking is we'll kind of leave
it without um a sponsor, and I'm
happy to to sponsor it if that's
all right with the rest of the
LASC when we get over there, but
I don't wanna.
Overstep that if there's
somebody over there itching to,
to carry this particular bill.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman that you might want
to no, no, I think you should
sponsor. We just have a of
endorsement of it. We don't, we,
we can get an LESC also, but as
our chair I nominate you to uh
sponsor the bill. I'm happy to
do so. When it was this big, I
was like, oh God, I don't want
to do that much. But when I see
it's only like a couple of small
changes, I'm good, and we'll,
uh, we'll get it pre-filed then
as well, so hopefully we'll move
this through quickly.
To, uh, education and finance is
probably where it goes.
Yes, finance? OK.
Thank you.
which day will you be?
I don't know, Mark, you, if you
look what day is it on, are we
going to be discussing new
legislation?
I can look real quick.
I think it's Thursday, but let
me double check. Thursday,
Thursday, OK, so we'll, we'll
have it prepared for.
Her endorsement and uh the stuff
for LESC at that point then
also. Thank you.
Uh, then,
Stan, are you the other the
other one if you would please,
sir, Mr. Chairman from here is
OK.
I'm getting old, I have a hard
time wandering down to the
ground and stuff like that. So
as chair when you have the draft
before you, it's dated 12
1674228788.1.
This is a really simple bill and
then it relies on you as a
legislature as you move forward
to decide what to do with this.
But what it, what it does do is
it is a joint resolution that
would
Move the cap.
For millage from 20 mills to 22
mLs. Preserving the 2 mil
increase for purposes of public
schools.
They can be operational or they
can be capital.
The reason this is here and
we've had this is about revision
Simon 3 or 4.
It's gotten simpler, Mr.
Chairman, which I think is
always good.
But it goes back to some of the
things we talked about today is
sufficiency for districts to
have money to put in.
How do you generate that other
than their
The um bonds or those kinds of
things as you look at what those
caps are.
This is a statewide levy.
be collected by the state of New
Mexico, then you would
legislatively have to figure out
now what does that look like? I
believe that the fields of fire
that are good.
Mr. Chairman, you and I have
talked a lot, uh, so Senator
Munoz and I have talked a lot
about.
Providing money that is on
designated for school districts
to do what they need to do.
This would generate
2 mills' worth of that. Would
you get into the matching
capital outlay and having have
insufficiency.
It would give you a fund that
would give you those generative
dollars with without having to
go into your sponge bonds or
into your STDs or into the GOPs
that the district that the
districts are putting forward.
That's just pretty plain and
simple what it is.
It's a tax increase, yes, it's
not a mandatory tax increase is
simply raises.
The uh the cap by 2 more.
and not let me go back here's
history now somebody around the
table have been around that
history, Senator, as an example,
twice and, and there was an
8.925 mL of it that was taken
away and I believe it was 1982
and the Big Mac.
Bill, which took 8.925 mils,
that was a locally generated
tax.
And it reduced the local
capacity to half a mil, that's
it.
It sat on the table for the
longest time and then
Counties in particular.
Because it was available
went there and began to enact,
especially in Class A counties
and others, and ate up in many
cases that.
Well, that village that was
available the 8.425 mLs.
Not, it's not everywhere and
county to county it's different
still.
As I understand it, and so, uh,
Mr. Chairman, that's the, it's
the plain and simple of this,
you'd have to enabling
legislation should this pass the
voters.
The important thing I want you
to hear this targets funds.
2 public schools.
Or myriad of reasons that are
undesignated gives you the
opportunity to make a decision
locally and use it hard to work
fast.
Mr. Sherman probably have an
answer and Simon can help me
with any technical issues since
this is rewrite 3, I think.
Thank you, Stan. Uh, questions
from committee center story.
Well, thank you, Stan, Mr.
Chairman, for reminding me. I, I
even remember who voted against
this bill, uh, the, the time I
did it in the Senate, don't
remember who voted against it in
the house, uh, but I'm pretty
sure I got it out of the house
at the same time that we did the
uh education bill that the
Senate wouldn't even hear.
So, yeah.
I, I believe that the prote has
a very good memory
Yeah, so I mean, I do think it's
a good idea. I think it's hard
to do this at a time when we are
making so much revenue primarily
from it would be our to get this
passed, of course, you know,
when I tried it, the previous
two times we didn't have any oil
and gas money and.
You know, couldn't get it out of
rules, uh, so, uh.
And to that point, I, I would
object to putting language in
that should oil and gas revenues
in New Mexico fall below a
certain number.
Or a certain percentage of of
our state revenue, that this is
a relief valve that enables
itself.
Because that's out there,
sometimes it's just in my oil
and gas folks tell me we've got
a little bigger window than we
might have thought.
But, um, Mr. Chairman, that's
just a thought.
And you said this is really
simple and straightforward, but
I don't understand tax policy
very well at all. Uh.
So the
The 2 extra mills could only be
raised for public schools, is
that right, Mr. Chairman? That's
correct. The, and it is only if
districts choose to do this,
that they could levy the extra
tax. It's not something that
everybody does
this statewide,
but, but the legislature would
make the determination through
other law.
OK
If and when it simply moves the
cap that doesn't, it doesn't
even bring the tax online yet.
You could put caveats in place.
It's a relief valve that in many
ways, isn't it, Mr. Chairman? It
could be for local, but then the
locals would receive the money,
Mr. Chairman, they could use it.
If you were Des Moines, New
Mexico and you couldn't do your
match on the buildings you're
building.
This would be a first resource
you could go to because you've
already done your tax capacity
as far as you can go. This would
give you something you could
bring into to assist FFNE to
assist some of the cost issues
are there, those kinds of
things.
And so, as this is written, it's
not the type thing that some
entity could come and say, hey,
there's now 2 bills more
capacity and they're gonna suck
it up at the public schools are
not doing it. This would be
strictly just for public school
use the two mills would be
strictly for public school use.
The issue is in some counties.
They haven't matched to the 20
mLs you have.
So that capacity, I believe that
was done legislatively too
though when we call the grant of
the counties, the ability to, to
take their levy out of the
remaining 8.425 mLs and apply
all or part of that.
To
They're their budgets.
I think it was referendum in the
process. The other thing that I
always worry about when we do
things like this, and again,
yeah, I'm gonna show very much
my ignorance on how all of this
works, but I always worry about
when we put something like this
in that it allows the
supplementing other places
because now there's these two
mills, so we don't have to put
money in to cover it elsewhere.
What is that a concern or, or
how do we protect against that,
Mr. Chairman, I'm going to show
my trust of the legislature
because that is, that is.
You may have more trust than I
do and Mr. Chairman, I
That's, that's a good point that
the, the clear answer is yes,
they could adjust.
The state equalization guarantee
by an amount that would take
credit for what's generated
here. That could happen, Mr.
Chairman.
Because that's one of my
concerns because we've seen it
happen other times, uh, way back
when we used to have critical
capital outlay for schools and
we put in the lottery in order
to cover it, and we quit funding
it almost the exact amount the
lottery was bringing in.
And so people thought they were
adding to public school funding
when in fact it just got
supplemented.
showing therein is the
democratic process.
OK.
Yeah, and Simon, please clarify
and um and our, our disclaimer
first and foremost uh
Legislative council service
neither supports nor opposes any
bill. Um, so, uh, just, uh, from
a technical standpoint and for
members of the task force who
may be unfamiliar, this
provision in the Constitution
provides, um, the, the state and
municipalities with uh the
discretion to levy up to 20
mills without voter approval.
So, so, so these 2 meals are
available, uh,
Uh, to the state, to the
counties, to the municipalities
without going to the voters
first. Um, this, the, the uh
first section that's stricken.
sets limits on um mills that the
state could levy for certain
purposes, but it's within the 20
mil limit as Mr. Rounds
explained in the 80s, the state.
Sort of gave the village to the
counties and municipalities, so
it doesn't levy, um, uh,
property millage anymore. Um,
and what this would do is this
would provide it so and it, it,
it actually requires a statewide
um mill mill levy of 2 mills, so
it's mandatory. So the state has
to do that, um, but, but the,
the legislature has discretion
as to how it would be expended,
uh.
As provided by law.
We
have the votes. Oh, so and, and
yes, yes, yes, this, um, uh, Mr.
Chair would have to be approved
by the voters. It, it is a
constitutional amendment.
Uh, Mr. Sherman, I don't think
it's correct that we can impose
these village without going to,
we have, we have one provision,
the 0.5 educational technology
that can be imposed by a school
district, but these 2 meals that
we have now, I have to go to the
voters, they can't just be it,
and you'll see that.
You know what's happened now
after the Big Mac tax cut is
that the state gave away their
ability to raise money for
education through giving away
the mills and uh now cities and
counties are are are using them.
Yeah, so, uh, so there's no
ability really for the state to
raise money for education
through property taxes, which is
how every other state races.
me, just not us. And of course
we are, I think, still the
lowest in the country or
property taxes, although we have
this historical knee jerk
reaction to any property taxes
because what happens to New
Mexico and the land grants that
were supposedly given and then
taken away. So, you know, we
have this long complicated
history really hating property
taxes, but.
But
I mean, I, I've tried this
twice, so I'm totally in
support, but I,
I, I'm telling you, I, I don't
think that it's a politically
viable right now
Mr. Chairman, um, part of why I
brought it forward is because
The protem has brought this a
couple of times to the
legislature and it's, it's one
of the ways of bending the pole.
On assuring you have additional
revenues. We are the lowest
taxed property tax state in the
union.
Meetings I go to when you talk
about education, it's not
unusual for them to talk in
terms of hundreds of mills for
education.
They're being generated locally
and whatever and New Mexico is
not structured.
That way. We don't want to be
too regressive in our tax
structure.
As we worry about some of those
kinds of things. 2 mills is $2
and $1000 is suspect.
Not lots of bars.
And, and just one, Mr. Chair,
one thing is that LFC has done
analysis on um Senator
Stewart's, uh, previous, um, uh,
the, the bill she's previously
introduced, and I will send that
analysis to the task force.
After the meeting, I should have
provided it ahead of time, um,
and, uh, but, uh,
At, at, I think as
In 2015, this would have
amounted
It was upwards of $100 million a
year.
But I will send that on the
website.
This is also an oil and gas at
warm taxes, and so it would be
considerably above the $100
million under the current.
Rate of things that are
happening, but eventually
probably settles in the $150
million dollar range. By the
way, yield control would still
apply to this. So yes.
Thank you. Let me ask you, what
happens in, in, in like McKinley
County where you have payment in
lieu of taxes where.
1/3 of the entire county is
non-taxable, right? Right,
truthful.
Mr. Chairman, they would not be,
they would only receive this
mileage on the taxable property.
I, I know that, but, but that's
the problem that we got in that
started this whole thing is
because we had an imbalance,
right and.
We had, and you can only tax 1/3
of one thing and yeah, payment
little taxes.
And that's what causes this old
equity problem because no matter
how we taxed, we couldn't get.
The
in, in your enabling
legislation.
You need to take into
consideration how you maintain
the equities. There are
certainly ways to do that that
we've already ruled on that, by
the way, right, the half mill.
is treated the same.
For all parties involved.
We took off the table all the
other taxes, and so it would
generate this on a statewide,
not a local basis, and I think
that a question.
In McKinley County like.
We there are fine ways of big
taxpayer, the power plant was a
big taxpayer, and they've gone
away, right?
That tax base is shrinking. When
the feds come back and look at
payment in lieu of taxes, right?
Do they add this additional 2 m
on the Fed side?
So Mr. Chairman, my
understanding, and again, I'm
not a tax code expert, but my
understanding of the ins and
outs of that is just like forest
reserve funds and others that
would be exempted from this
taxation.
Cuz it's not a taxable property
on New Mexico tax codes the way
our statutes are currently
written, as I understand it. And
then we'll chart, we'll state
chartered charter schools be
able to access this too.
Mr. Chairman, that would depend
on your enabling legislation
because again, you, you could,
you could make this a per pupil.
You could make this a
formalized, you could, you
could, you could distribute it
in many different manners. You
could put it into chunks, you
could say this much and be
operational without restriction,
this much to be reserved for.
Uh, for Kalila, there's the
neighbor legislation isn't here,
all this is is takes the 20 mLs.
Up to 22 mLs and adds that into
our base. I tried it first look
at could we take what was being
swept by cities and counties and
do an offset that way to get the
uh my my new originals recapture
the 8.425, can't be done, it's
too complex.
We, we couldn't do it through
council, uh, and get it cleaned,
so.
This is the option to kind of
process, but, you know, not tax
lightning, but the taxing issue.
I mean, the counties have the
availability to increase your
rate.
And what happens in our county
is they increase that rate to
make sure.
The counties
That rate goes up almost every
single year and people say,
well, my evaluation didn't go
up, but they're really getting
it on the right side.
And that adjustment on the rate
side is, is done locally by the
county, so I mean.
That's the, that's the other
issue. There's no.
Rent control and there's rent
control on what the school
district can get, but the county
sizes that to make sure.
Their budget is correct, so they
can do what they want to do and.
And do that. And Chairman, that
doesn't change.
It's that these two males are
outside of that because it's
designated only to schools, and
again, you do the enabling
legislation to see how you did
that. The rest of that, that's
that 8.425, right, that they're
using to make sure they make
budget. That doesn't change as a
practice under this.
Under this augmentation at all.
No, but it, it could change the
dollar amount. It changed the
dollar amount but just were to
pass, and they said, OK, we're
gonna change the rate from flat
8 to 8.25 or whatever that that
question for me that's correct,
it would, it would increase
taxes, it would increase taxes
by 2 mills on properties in New
Mexico. That's a fact. That's
what this would do.
If the legislature acted to do
enable legislation they used all
of the cap.
Cause again, this is simply
moving the cap. This does not do
the enabling legislation.
And and that my only concern is
the rate.
meals is not much, right? It's
like.
It's a rate that they can adjust
right and make that work.
And they create, they make sure
they're the winners and and it
could be schools or other
schools. We have a charter
school that it creates winners
and losers and.
We're funding on one side and
not looking at the other side of
what they're getting in in
mills, so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Other, other questions?
Yes, representative I think
we're sharing
so.
This, uh
For clarifying purposes, I guess
this when an interview our
school boards would still have
the ability to raise the.
Mr Chairman, the current options
that local boards have would not
change.
So your ability to bond.
The capacity would still be
there.
Based on that property value,
this would be over and above
that, it's outside of that, what
this does is generate statewide
revenue.
property, but it's outside of
the all the local stuff would
not change of the county stuff
would not change.
Simply add it generates that
revenue into
Um, into an income for the
state. We don't know how it
would be spent because that's
the enabling legislation part.
This is the this is step one.
Do you move it up and I and and
I understand this, Chairman,
this may not be a real popular
thing, but I remember not too
many 2008, 2009.
When we would have beatified
this uh and so I'm future
thinking, you know, how do you,
how do you put the right
Policy structure in place is
really what this is about.
I, I'm hearing that and I'm just
I I would agree with um.
Protem on maybe this isn't the
year to do that, but I think
this is been long coming um.
But I just feel like.
Uh, I think there's there's a
pause for me right now, just to
be quite honest with you and I
would just say that um.
Working with our local, where
are our local governments.
In regards to this, you know,
because this does this does.
He was chair I didn't approach
local governments. I was simply
doing the school solution side
of this. This has been a great
discussion, Mr. Chairman. It may
not be the time for it. I agree
with that. I, I believe that,
that one of the responsibilities
that we have on this committee.
is to raise policy issues.
Then we can look in at and see
what the cause and effects are,
and that's simply what I'm doing
here, I, I, I, I believe it is
may not be the correct year, I
absolutely agree with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I do, I, I
just feel like, yeah, I, I've
seen this before I've been in
discussions about this and how
we resolve this even on the
local levels and some of the
disappointment when we don't get
some of these meals through. I
think that this is just and we
are here to raise the issue, so
thank you for bringing this
forward. I think this.
And it can be very effective in
the future. Thank you.
Thank you, Joe, I know you had a
question or comment School
Boards Association, I suspect.
Mr. Chairman, actually, Mr.
Chairman, this is a state.
Revenue should go to the state
enabling legislation then would
determine how, how it would be
distributed in what lots it
would be distributed and what it
could be distributed before the
language in there says to be
used either operationally or for
the purpose of capital outline,
that's what it says here. So the
enable the United States would
have to do that and.
That'd be up to the legislature,
how do you, how do you want to
do this?
And solve the issues we're
talking about.
Yeah, I guess my feeling is, I
like it, uh.
When you talked about this might
not be the right time. It's
never the right time. The worst
time is when we're in a crisis
and need it, and there's not the
legislation there to do it, so.
So
Center store.
Uh, thank you so uh uh can I, I,
I have some questions for Stan,
so, and I apologize, you may
have said this already. OK.
Where did this come from?
I'm sorry. Where did this come
from?
It came, it came from my brain
to legislative council services.
We started with a question of
8.925 mils, the difference
there, what is the, what is the
attainable slack? Could it be
moved directly to public
schools. I keep that keep rates
level.
Problem is the answer is no.
Because there's very it would,
it would get in, it would
encroach on the counties and and
municipalities. So decide not to
go there. Then we went in and
looked at some other legislation
with language on the fixes we
did.
Uh, in the last couple of years
to deal with uh Martinez Yai.
I was, uh, with 874 with with
the Indian education, all those,
all of that.
mitigated most of that language,
so I said let's just
Keep it as simple as we can.
Raise the policy issues, but it
came out of me.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman and Stan,
I'm, I'm just curious. I, I
don't think this was in the
previous two bills I did, but
the top of page 2. Basically,
when you.
take out lines 1 through 8.
You are taking out what
currently we do.
You know, currently we, we just
have given up.
This idea that this is state
revenue and ceded it to the
cities and counties. Uh, so if
we were to pass this.
Uh
Then I, I, I just, I'm not quite
sure what would happen.
Uh, yeah, we'd have the 2 meals
for public schools, and then
would we have a little bit of
chaos because we wouldn't be
designating certain amounts to
cities and counties, uh, you
know, this, this has 4 meals for
the state, at 10 mLs for
everybody else, we would be
getting rid of that.
That's kind of an old move
chairman, there's always
goodness and boldness,
but Miss Char
the, the issue is this you would
deal with that in enabling
legislation. Now let me tell you
why it's there.
And it's beyond things I talked
to council services about, but
I'll just tell you the why.
Where the playing field we play
on.
It is very hard to move public
policy through constitutional
law.
You have to go to the voters,
you have the lag time doesn't
catch up with the, with the
immediate need.
Doing this, then would open up
for you the legislature.
The doors to determine and
enabling legislation, what does
that look like? And then under
crisis matters.
You as a legislature could meet
even an extraordinary session
and adjust statute meet the
crisis. I'll have to tell you
the 2008.
The 2012 time as a
superintendent was the most
difficult time in my
I'm in education, try to do the
right thing for kids and make
things work for and I just as
soon not do that.
And so getting things so they're
more nimble over in statute, in
my view, is a better.
Mechanism. And I don't know what
the answer, Mr. Chairman, is to
that. I think the legislature
has its wisdom. I don't think, I
think you listen to your
municipalities in your counties.
You're not gonna try to be
hurtful to them, nor am I trying
to be hurtful to them.
Just a matter of taking the
public schools slice and do
something with it.
Yeah, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna drag out that old filmine
and compare them and and see,
see what the differences were,
so anyway, but I like your bold,
good trouble,
uh, that you're at.
Thank you, Mr. Stan you vetted
this with the superintendents
and with your or your leadership
of the superintendents, are they
aware, Mr. Chairman, I haven't
vetted the bill proper, but in
our overall legislative scheme.
Things that we're working on is,
is how do we enable districts
have sufficiency without
requirement.
This fits that
How do you have long term
guaranteed income.
This
Yeah depending on enabling
legislation opens the window for
that, it puts
Maybe 250 million more a year
into the, into the pipeline for
sure and then good years
probably more than that. I don't
know what one mill generates at
this point, I was gonna be my
next question is how much money
is this for a district like Las
Cruces or
Don't know because we don't have
the enabling legislation that
tells you how you're going to
distribute it.
OK. So, you have another
question.
So, so one more question if, if
we don't know what this is and
and I I don't think you should
rate taxes in a crisis and we
don't know what it what it
generates. Do you know what the
20 mils generates right now per
district.
I don't know what the 20 mills
generates, it's gonna depend. I
it's a statewide question, how
much does it generate total?
adding to.
Districts have different
villages, right? They have the
ability of the tummy, the 10
mile levy, and their bonding,
not to exceed tournamentals,
right? I mean that's.
But I, but it's differentiates
around the state.
Because none of it's for
operating, the half mill is all
that is in the operating pool at
this time.
You know what the half mill
number generates, Mr. Cameron.
Since I don't know Mr. Chairman,
with the one, and I'm, I'm
embarrassed cause I I usually
know that so I'd uh the.
I don't know what one mill
generates.
Uh, in
In 2015, it was a little over
$100 million Mr. Chairman, for
one meal.
So that's what I believe how we
analyze the bill, uh, the
protein head.
It's more than that at this time
because they're probably now you
can, I just want to say again
yield control still applies to
this.
So that puts that cap of 5%
growth, notwithstanding what
cities and counties can do on
determining what their mileage
is, but the property value tax
still has yield control in our,
in our law system.
Thank you, Mr.
Any other questions?
Motion to endorse this bill?
Or this resolution?
really want to do that
or do we just discussion
removing this. I want, I want to
aid the discussion and as we do
our policy work as a good year
over year. I really think we
need to get around property
taxation as part of the overall
scheme. We need to look at what
does that do?
And it's a constitutional
matter, that's what this raises
certainly and Simon, I want to
thank you and council services
for dealing with my meandering
and I will send to the task
force this with Senator
Stewart's version of the
analysis that was done um for
her resolution as well as DFA
numbers, uh.
Uh, regarding the, the current
village.
And then we can discuss whether
we want to do it outside of an
endorsement of this committee.
Yes. Yeah.
OK. Thank you.
Um
I think we're down to the end
and public comment.
And we're pretty close to right
on time. I don't know that we've
had any public comment come in.
Clinton, no.
If not, this concludes the work
for this.
Senator
Chairman, I just uh want to
thank you for your 2 years. Uh,
you've done a great job. It's
been a fun committee.
And with our all of our
different changes, uh, I think
I've been on here too long. I
clearly know too much about me,
but I wanna thank you for your
good chairmanship before you
adjourn us
Thank you. I appreciate it. It's
wonderful, you know, this and
the education committee to work
on interim committees that are
pretty nonpartisan, you know,
where everybody is here focused
on doing what's right for kids
in schools, you know, in this,
and certainly buildings and
having nice buildings.
And put and spaces for student
education is what matters most
and, and having all the people
from such varied backgrounds,
this committee is very different
from most interims because we
have so many non-legislator
members it adds very nice
perspective to it all. So thank
you all for making my job easy
and, and Simon, certainly, thank
you. I've enjoyed working with
you on all of this and you
helping keep me straight and
flexibility when we've had to
be. So I appreciate that. Thank
