I was going to.
Read all of this and referred to
handouts I think I'll probably
do part a little bit from the.
Respect the time the fact that
frazzled.
But.
Good morning and thank you for
the opportunity to be here.
It's been awhile since I've been
in front of a group like this
thank the.
Mr Abbey I think Jerry members.
Driving down from farming to
probably in the mid to late
nineties and.
I think in the.
Catherine Smith would probably
be.
Nice project it would be and I'd
be worrying that you suicide
what are you gonna do when we
don't give you half of what
you're asking for so.
This is a little bit different
presents today but I'll be
honest with you.
Out here on a pleasant topic I'm
here because I know that just
directos a real Levin's meeting
there was a.
Presentation regarding.
If you would if you will between
the town of that you would in
the morning are engaged with our
school district.
And that.
I was incorporated by reference
in that dispute.
in a document that was presented
by the town of age with a formal
resolution.
that they had adopted.
resolution twenty twenty two
fourteen.
in the packet that I.
Again you.
Thank.
We see it is.
The second.
Funding in there behind the
letter that's what I was going
to read to you.
is that resolution.
First whereas says the
superintendent did promise the
commute at community meetings
during the decision that the
buildings would not be shut down
but rather be re purposed for
the tap I was that
superintendent.
The work in the district for
some twenty years in the
seventies through the nineties
actually the principal at that
building for five years four
plus years.
Of the I'm not sure that
superintendents can promise
anything really but that that
works.
Anyway we repurposed a whole
bunch of things later on that
resolution it says that that the
district Victor Thomas top of
the second page of that
resolution says the district the
victim the Smarty pants
preschool.
Further in that packet I have
emails from Smarty pants I think
it's on page page page.
Well.
Emails from Smarty pants the.
To some redress to mate thanking
the district for the way they
were treated.
At their plans for the future
and so on the reason I about
buying some things from us on
their way out the door that was
while back but more recently
I've spoken to the woman who is
still the director of she said
that she understood it was in no
way interdictions one happy that
they were other district was
having to do what they can
finally meaning that they were
going to have to tear down the
building that you knew all along
with that was eventually going
to happen.
Was not innovation so basically
the resolution made stuff up but
they use that resolution which
they adopted in June to come
before you guys in October
because they used it.
As well to drum up petitions.
and it was more made up stuff
what's that that you should have
known being an expert in public
school finance she riled up
citizens with fake information
about taxes.
And got a petition signed.
use that petition.
the.
The nefarious reasons frankly
and she thanked me so I have a
letter in the of basically
requesting a retraction I don't
know how you retract a formal
document like a resolution and I
I really don't
but I want to correct the public
record when it's incorrect and
use that document the town of
Edgewood use that document
resolution twenty twenty two
dash fourteen in this public
agencies official record I
resented I take exception to.
I spent twenty five years not
district building my reputation.
I spent forty five years in the
state building my reputation
I've known some of you
collectively on this panel for
over a hundred years if I had Mr
happy and Mr dean Mr Burciaga Mr
rotates seven you have known
that long.
But I'm pretty upset.
And I even have documents in
here we're going back ten years
yes how to me was on the floor
here yet the school board that
we have to close that would
schools due to serious budget
problems and Mr Ortiz probably
remembers some of.
I was retired.
They invited me back to be the
superintendent during those
times.
District one from forty eight
hundred students to.
Public twenty one hundred
students.
They had to close schools that
ward member was the only school
board member opposed to.
Last page in that packet.
Kind of interesting those with
excerpts from a town it would
council meeting.
If the right address them trying
to correct some of this
nonsense.
My kind of thing they didn't
know but she starts talking
about well that that PED support
me all the way they didn't think
they should close the school
nonsense the PED did not support
them I wrote a letter.
Saying that I would take that
anyway they want to try it if
they want to try to send that
she made that up into made up
more stuff about why Mr Charles
amigo currently the board
president didn't vote because he
wasn't knowledgeable yes.
He had to live with their dad
hired me in nineteen seventy
four.
He was transitioning on to the
board that very night that's
true but it was taking the
position from its first cousin
who is the manager state judge.
Who installed him.
At that same meeting later that
evening.
Please tell me that he wasn't
knowledgeable about the issue.
Was that just a convenient loss
of memory I missed out on the I
don't think so.
You decide anyway that I I sent
this packet to Mr our teas
because I felt the truth needed
to reside in an agency that
understands public school
finance it will understand that
miss how to Mayo and expert for
the alleged expert in public
school finance as based off of
lied about me the state would be
in a public document I don't
know how to correct.
Solution is incorrect is in the
record to network now it's in
the record here.
This was the first place that
they used it and they choose to
give me so I came here to try to
correct.
Thank you.
On the right track.
I.
All of those.
West.
Yes that is the most active
That issue will.
Hello.
Misty and I I understand that I
will tell you that the district
is kind of muscle by their
attorneys in this matter I'm not
I'm not representing the
district I'm representing myself
because I feel like the town of
it you would as a cooperated me
into that resolution by
reference I was that
superintendent we did not a
victim.
I don't know even know what
promises made by superintendent
complete as you know it takes
three votes by four they've had
a couple of elections since then
three the board members are
still the same everything I've
written in that document which I
sent to Mr or tease I will stand
by I can prove it I think I did
prove it with the fact that the
two real that I sent to Mr Ortiz
thank you for the good times.
All
of these.
So Mister chair members that
Matthews the previous CFO went
on to work for HSD is the deputy
director iris has stepped in to
help and I'm also supporting
iris we're supporting each other
and we have an advertisement out
for us CFO at this time.
So if you turn to behind have
three eight which is page twelve
in your book you'll see that
we've got an executive summary
for the financial plan and the
upper half of.
On page twelve our actions that
you may take today its the
I think you have a Menteri
school design funding.
Our Gallup McKinley municipal
schools Dave it's Kate a
technical correction to include
teacher housing in the motion.
Representative give you rock
construction funding principle
of.
Construction funding for Water
that's crucis desert hills
construction funding as well as
tourists Tularosa Municipal
schools for design funding.
Then the second half of the page
is changes the reason that we
have these on here is these
changes affect the financial
plan so we've mentioned things
that have moved up a quarter or
down a quarter page are we like
to the on page fifteen when we
look at the awards Senator so Mr
chair members very quickly I'll
just mention the names of the
schools but like the reason for
the change I can also speak to
that.
So go McKinley moved out six
months redesign Crown Point high
school in Gallup moved out a
year because the design members
who Navajo pine also moved out
here and to have two high school
moved out six months I do want
to note that the Gallup McKinley
school district has sixteen
active projects right now.
I'm Alamogordo chef from middle
school moved out here the our
district is considering a new
site for that project central.
Newcome had to move out of here
they're having issues with the
tribal utilities authority
providing the three phase power
for electrical arose will.
Washington moved out one here
and this because the district
wants to complete other projects
prior to this one so it's
district participation.
The money had to move out six
months and they also are having
issues with their dad to call up
and fighting three phase power.
Socorro moved out six months
they're still in design.
Clovis very elementary school
moved out six months of
construction Sierra moved out
one year
Because there were wanting to
pass a bond and so everything
data here for their for that one
it appears he moved out three
months and they want to and
what language change so those
are the projects have had moved
in and out and in fact the
financial plan.
Then if you turn to page
fourteen.
At the actual summary of the
financial plan the projects in
the top half of the page are the
work that you approved last
meeting at about eight point
seven million dollars.
The middle of the page the
projects I just mentioned grants
blue water to a central school
Espanola abba cue rocky view and
nice to see this.
Desert hills those are potential
actions for today's agenda with
eight of thirty two point nine
million dollar change.
And if you look at the bottom
left hand side of the page
you'll see our fund balance
there nine hundred and fifty
seven point three million.
And then the the other chart on
the page on the lower right hand
side is the changes from the
last meeting to this meeting.
with the for the uncommitted
balance and the variances.
Mr chair members of I stand for
any questions if you have any
and the specific
Summary.
At.
The.
Mr chairman members if I
remember.
We do have one that moved
forward but I don't have it on
the on the top of my mind but
there is a one.
I'm.
So Mister chair members the next
portion is on page fifteen.
And what we've done here and I
can take us through it but FY
twenty two has now turned into
actuals so everything on the
left side of FY twenty two was
an actual and we have FY twenty
three twenty four twenty five is
estimates we do have a.
Of the new road to a capacity
estimate of three hundred forty
three million.
for FY twenty four.
And I will take us down to the
new uses.
And less Mr chair you'd like me
to read each one I can on focus
on the new ones or go through
each one.
So Mr chair members one of the
items that is on consent agenda
is the seven point five million
for school buses that would go
to Pat.
This is FY twenty three and then
we have our road twenty six the
inclusion of and the and even
other upgrades to
To our construction budget.
That if you go to FY twenty four
estimates you'll see we have a
sixteen point seven million for
school buses.
We have three hundred thousand
for the cameras on the school
buses that will go to Pat as
well as tribal libraries which
will go directly to Pat.
And then we have the.
Security and CTE for FY twenty
for a total together at a
hundred million.
And then we at the nine thirty
we have are estimated to million
uncommitted balance of ninety
three point seven million.
And then we have the projects
down below with the the various
important because in from FY
twelve to FY twenty five and
Mister chair members I stand for
any questions or any or if you
need any more explicit detail.
The commission I don't want to
get too much time but.
There's there's just so much
going on with the financial plan
and I are.
Okay the council could spend
enough time getting into the
details with the courts of
committees doing a good job.
Doing some of that.
But what should challenge.
The staff to figure in the
boards figure out how they can
bring more information of the
council but.
just general comments
We we need this this report
project schedule this stream we
important and we see not mostly
delays a lot a year and I think
about the board of finance you
know we've got nineteen twenties
that are going to be moving into
twenty four before the start
spending and that would not pass
muster for for the board of
finance and you know these funds
are subject to arbitrage
regulations for the most part
except for that one bond issue
we have.
But.
Thank we did suggested to the
council to and the staff to
think.
Whatever we have a project with
a lot of you mentioned Gallup in
a school districts which have a
lot of outstanding projects we
are being reminded of those time
they're coming in to ask for New
woods and probably pretty
skeptical about finding new ones
until their show for progress so
so that comment.
Temporal bit.
The.
The hundred million children's
fund hear online twenty five
safety what what is that coming
to the council next month Mr
chair members for distribution
it will be coming to the council
after we received the SB nine
calculations we need from Pat
and then we'll bring forward how
it's going to be distributed.
So that should be
Mr chair members of already
initiated those conversations
with Antonio so it might be
June.
What we want do it properly but
we have to have a sense of
urgency but getting safety.
Thirty five million of the
safety money.
Yes state the this is going to
be a real clever to get safety
will need to work or to get to
work and then yes you the Mr
chair Director Abbey when we did
the SB two twelve last year the
the methodology worked really
well we got everything out the
door within two months I think
work will getting the money of
the door I don't I'm not sure
it's worked so well from an
accountability point of view
Wirth that hundred million on
to.
I'm Mr chair members on the
there were some of the
maintenance money to go twenty
four set seventy five okay line
twenty four and we got the money
out the door what is it do we
have a.
Maria what we bought for seventy
five million I don't remember
coming to the council
accountability reports on they
said they're going to do this
what happened.
So Mister chair director Avid we
can bring a summary report of
what they told us they were
going to do with the money and
then on the back and we can that
the validation was going to go
through path so we can we can
work on that maybe put on may or
June to object.
I think it was right to get the
money out quickly but it was
only right if we have
accountability for and having
seen no report to date on that
at all I would we're not where
we should be on that
accountability that we ought to
probably in the plan to get the
million that we should have a
clear idea about reporting the
reporting that asked for was at
the beginning and that the at
the you know we see none of the
last one so.
We probably.
When is the end of the seventy
five million what do we do the
report but what they're going to
use of force.
I'm Mr chair members we can what
they actually used they were
going to come in at the
beginning and so we're going to
use it for this and then we set
COVID money spent and tell us.
What is that supposed to happen.
I'm sorry Mr chair members miss
Ross as we might we might maybe
they had two years to spend.
The.
I think that's okay but again we
didn't get the report at the
beginning only to and then the.
Tribal wars the twenty million
there's a bit of an issue there
is that there are some.
Questions how to how do we get
accountability for that money
gets to Pat but it's.
It's going to the council the
least we have to do some of the
to do nothing there's just to
certify it approved as all that.
Mr chair.
Happy it's almost like SB nine.
We just certify it for them and
that bucket of money gets pulled
out of state for finance into
their own pockets they have
access to so that might be one
where it's not or jobs PED's
job.
How to plan to get kids ability
for the twenty which again is.
The money is we're stewards of
that the legislature delegated
storeship have so we have a
little interest in it even
direct.
Mr chair Mister out the I'm not
sure exactly the methodology we
used to it's gonna be a cider
have to decide Doreen education
divisions so I can get with the
Maximo information and you have
income the council that.
I would think awards would would
keep an eye on that
accountability I was involved in
the preparation of the ticket
was a reasonable approach.
But again we want to make sure
that.
Whether it's LFC earliest the or
path or the council that we can
look back and say to say what
happened to that money so that I
I just I guess the last point
but up to one but.
We've got we're assuming a
billion dollars is going to be
spent on line fourteen forty
one.
The number one and I think
districts are going to be coming
to us faster.
The yet to include the number
that you had a plan for how we
thought that money would be
called on by districts do
to statute and your Wirth that
I'm Jeremy
J. Williams Abby when we get to
the
program section is.
We need to keep an eye on that
I've I've I think we're gonna
find districts much more
interested you know the come out
of they're just coming out of
COVID just get back to.
Public meetings there are
greater awareness of the best of
the money from the spring budget
workshop I'm sure I think we'll
get more request at the same
time the when it comes to doing
the work they're going to be
slower than they thought and
then finally we can here in a
minute that the costs are
soaring we have a hundred
percent cost increase from our
initial estimates.
So tremendous pressures to spend
more money.
The reality is that gonna spend
slower than they thought.
The costs are soaring so just a
lot of things that the board
subcommittee spends a fair
amount of time in the council
needs to really keep focus and
keep thank you sure.
Thank you for agreeing those.
To get support.
We're all the same page on that.
Aware of these.
Developments.
The other questions are called.
I forgot one more thing that's
really important.
We talk we're going to see in a
minute procedures on what drugs
have asked a number time
procedures
Reconciling.
The financial plans to share.
Teachers I think we needed in
writing we got way off and it
turned out the financial plan
kind of held up.
It held up as a it's a proper
conservative way to keep track
of what we what we spent in
late.
Thirty works but it was a wreck
itself properly to sure you
phone up to your hard working
great credit well we need to.
Basically make sure that
reconciliation.
Again the stabbing we're
currently working on that as we
speak.
Carbs are Mr chairman thank you.
Yes.
Fifty.
Chair again members we are now
talking about bond
reconciliation update.
I am asking you if you want me
to go through it line item by
line item for just give you that
and result of the findings good
highlights some items and and
then give us the end result.
We need to get a good picture
right.
So the executive summary well we
for fact
Page twenty nine discretion.
Twenty nine is a.
detail of all the bonds.
From SSTV fourteen just do to.
There were numerous thousand
transactions that or consultant
reconciled.
And what if we for to call.
So is at the at the bottom is
twenty three point four million
is the net result of the funder
draws so we incurred the expense
but we never need down from the
board of finance.
Keep in mind sixteen point four
million of that is from current
draws we had not requesting draw
from one of finance since
January.
because we do want to muddy the
waters whether reconciliation
what's happening so that draw
has now been submitted so are
the ultimate result was a seven
million dollar hundred draw
which will reduce the fund
balance by seven million.
Also if you can refer to and
this is on the consent agenda
the second page thirty.
The second spreadsheet.
These are bonds that could not
be reconciled.
Share currently what we do is we
assign an identifier and
Schardin a code for the first
three digits reflect the bond.
Prior to two thousand fourteen
that wasn't done so there was no
way of tracking which project or
a code went to which bond so our
consultant was not able to
reconcile so we requested and
which is on the consent that we
revert the remaining funds.
nine four excuse me call of duty
eight point three million one
two three four five funds
because it could not be
reconciled so with that request
when we report those funds they
are no longer available and they
were swiped and we don't have
access to them anymore so we're
just happy to report that the
reconciliation is done we have
in our next Gen item are.
Procedures to help ensure that
this doesn't happen again so I
with all of that I stand for any
questions.
Mr chair I just wanted to then
iris and yes it may seem working
so diligently on this and
working for friends and finding
us to meet the consent inviting
us to sit down dividing us to
help with the procedure
Development the the the
wonderful job we pushed for good
summaries and they delivered and
I just I really want to
recognize we in this meeting
their efforts on this to be a
really great result in error to
position to move forward sure
that we're reconciling and that
that we know where everything's
going thank you.
Thank you and and let me just
thank you also for your
assistance and help in providing
guidance and advice in this
matter.
Okay Mister chair again members
let's talk about those drop
procedures.
Fifty.
I can go through what those
procedures are or you can kind
of get them and ask any
questions that you may have just
a few of the would.
Highlighted changes that you're
making from.
Read this procedure or maybe
visual steps that you're taking
to make sure we get to that
share.
Mr chair members what we
realized when we were doing Ross
was there is a certain report
that was being pulled from share
it was really welcome this the
you know some you had another
meeting should you thank.
There was a share report that
was drawn that was an AP report
accounts payable report this
report was not capturing all
activity that goes through share
such as operating transfers such
as auditing entries so we which
we identified that we.
Now pulling a report that does
capture the whole story and that
is the G. O. journal lines so
what we're doing is we are
pulling both reports making sure
see where the differences are
and what needs to be included in
the bond dropped.
So with that being said what we
do is
We cut off all payments the
shared by the twenty third to
ensure that we capture all of
those.
Expenditures.
So that we can reconcile both
the expenditures and revenues if
any differences are discovered.
We do our research we identified
and then we
I identified by the differences
materialized after the jobs
report is also stating the
network files for future access
and retrieval.
We are also ensuring that we are
doing these drives by the tenth
of each month for the deadline
of fourteenth finance.
that's pretty much where the
issue was now what we do at the
end is now we reconcile.
On page thirty three or seven
after the draw was completed a
reconciliation will be performed
after each month.
Very limited basis a technical
correction to a payment could be
made that made the effect that
might affect expenditures so
this is what we'll be doing to
ensure that everything
reconciles matches.
That extension professionals.
Questions or comments.
For
the procedures.
This is information.
What the what's good.
Well that's the.
Thank you for your work in all
of this.
During the.
The.
Recruiting of the financial
director.
Everybody else for filling in
this way.
This Madam to the consent
agenda.
There are several items on your.
Its previous meetings.
I want reconciliation.
All these assistance awards but
for charters which three
increases in one
reduction.
Correction on Gallup the to the
project.
restarting every two Espanola
project.
We certification of this.
The new projects that the lack.
Work and time.
There's two scenarios in here.
And then assume that.
Having attended either of the
subcommittee meetings of where
those present to.
Mr chair yes post.
US scenarios were presented and
the committee chose the one with
the meetings on Wednesdays.
That would be a little more
difficult for me but will.
we'll go from there.
If there's.
The.
changes we make
I'll see if we can do that for.
Range plans for to see that.
Okay so those are the the items
on the consent agenda.
Unless there's any.
The information that you want on
any of these will I would
entertain a motion to approve
the.
The second.
The motion in the second.
The items on the consent agenda
all those in favor please
indicate by saying aye.
Was supposed.
Motion was approved.
We do have some folks from the
Espanola area here and on the
Abbey to project and on the way
from Gallup and.
Graduations are moving that we
started that project.
We go to the awards cycle.
We have a basis receive this
information.
Mr chair.
Informational item to inform you
of the pre applications we
response the last sorry.
Station.
I'm sorry we had.
Change on the agenda to allow
for item seven eight.
House Bill to school.
Appropriation.
If you could if we could go to
that we.
Mr chair members item seven
eight is on page one forty two
in your.
And we received a request from
PED regarding need to approve
the seventy five million dollars
for house bill two your twenty
twenty three for school bus
replacement the staff
recommendation is approval of
this request from Pat and you'll
see the other key point
indicated that it's the twenty
twenty through the twenty twenty
legislation and house bill two
contains provision for school
bus replacement the amount of
seventy much five million
appropriated from the PSC C.
capital outlay fund administered
by Pat.
Seven point five.
The questions on that if we
could
Thirties what is the process no
to this it
working so just to projects that
fall in line received to open up
that basis for.
This is how that works.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is actually
deficiency request so these are
for buses that were already
purchased the opera was one of
the school districts they were
purchased the committee they do
supply chain issues there was a
mix up with the reversion date
from the original bill the
regional funding to prop so we
paid a school district school
district for rate but we were
unable to drive down the front
to the state board of finance
due to the fact that the the
language in the bill had expired
so with this was we requested
division see also to page this
is what this is in addition to
basically for right out of the
funds from for finance or not to
read anymore.
So it's not for any additional
possible personality purchased I
see so the new money for buses
that was appropriated.
Specification.
That will that's in addition to
this correct that'll that'll be
a for application of you have
six of the.
Well Mister chair members of the
committee so what if it's based
on a report on the replacement
cycle based on the we do our.
Obsolescence what's gonna happen
in July we do will send out an
award letters to each one of
those districts notify them of
the buses that need replacement
based on a twelve year please.
Thank you for that information.
Any other questions.
The H. what was this so this is
one of our motions.
What.
Of course if you need to.
Sure please indicate by saying
that.
This post.
This is a.
Thank you for.
Of.
That.
We'll go back to.
The point I.
Richard this is an informational
items to the pre applications we
received this to January PS the
OC.
As you can see on your executive
summary we received the
following standards based
applications there's one per
penny also for cooperating
school for elementary which is
currently ranked number three
the middle school currently
ranked number thirty two and the
high school ranks number eleven
Mexico combined currently ranks
number seventeen central C. of
my middle school currently
ranked number twenty four
Hagerman combined right one
hundred and dexter elementary
ranked twenty thirteen and
middle school ranked eighty one
we also have another application
for the pilot teacher housing
programs for weight.
as you know the application
cycle is open all year long so
we're receiving these awards as
the districts become ready to
submit those applications and
awards will be made throughout
the year we will be scheduling
site visits for these schools
that we haven't visited thus far
in the upcoming months.
As you know as well the
legislative session passed
Senate bill one thirty one which
will go into effect July first
of this year which will affect
the state local match percentage
that the districts in the state
will the calculation of how much
each side will pay we're going
to most likely hold off on most
of these actual words until
August so that those districts
can get that.
Reduction in the local shared.
If you look on page number
seventy one there is saying
spreadsheet showing all of been
preoccupations we received thus
far.
Some of these were submitted
last year and we're we were
unable to make awards at that
time due to district funding so
we've left them on the list so
that we can address them this
year hopefully all of those in
blue are requesting a waiver of
the local natural local
introduction.
one thing to know is the.
Estimated cost on this entire
spreadsheet were contributed by
the district in there for they
haven't been fully vetted and
aligned with potential scope
from us so these are just place
holders in the middle of this
you'll see current state local
match calculations and how the
projects would be calculated
with the current local shares
and then on the far right you
see the local match production
scenario that the one thirty one
will.
derive that in total we use
these numbers we would see a
difference of forty three
million.
Removed from the local match to
the state each.
Following this document or all
of the others from each district
making the request for their pre
application and last week on
page
Eighty two.
We're showing a document that
we've been working on throughout
session we've developed at this
document for each in every
district just so what you need
district would be eligible for
which schools would be eligible
for standards with schools would
be eligible for systems and what
specific systems.
You are getting ready to send
these out this week's to all the
districts as a way to outreach
to them and inform them of what
they could apply for and how to
apply as well as announcing the
legislative update
Passed in that work with signed
by the governor so with that
said we are expecting is Mr
Abbey spoke to a large increase
in interest in applications and
as we move forward throughout
the year I will be presenting a
report alongside this
information of.
Districts that have expressed
some interest whether they've
applied yet or not.
How much we expect to spend
going forward so that we can
start planning ahead and with
that I stand for questions.
Questions.
The interest has started already
in.
We'll continue to to also get.
To everyone involved in getting
those.
That legislation passed
that would is going to.
enable us to free up some of
this money and put it to work
for students.
I want to make sure the all the
state charter schools are
getting that same notification
at and I was wondering how the
how it works for charter schools
within districts do they have
their at their districts well or
how does that work Mr Chairman
Abby districts charter charter
schools must go through their
districts other district must
apply for them and be willing to
financially supports that
request the state charters can
apply on their own behalf
and it's a fairly complicated
due to several districts service
Senator to schools or the thing
privately owned facilities which
we cannot support funding for as
well as in the past there's been
a lot of the.
Inability to fund the local
share due to the high local
match as well as the office that
individual charter schools
where.
Account for.
Mr chair.
Mr chair so I'm happy to see
that there's increased interest
now what the legislation being
passed and
hopefully we will see more
funding going out to to really
provide these important projects
more quickly
I wanted to ask my dad about
yes they and their plans around
supporting this increased
interest and submitting
applications and if you all have
thought about how you money to
make adjustments to make sure
that you're able to support the
additional applications and
hopefully processing the money
going out more click quickly to
schools and and the more capital
projects that will be hopefully
funding.
Mr chair idea we've done a
number of things and I'll start
with finance with a financier
yeah we've increased the
staffing
in the past there were two
people processing the PO's of
the payments of for the
architects and the contractors
in the district we've increase
that for we are also working on
an online application for such
state systems and
we already have one for
standards that correct.
Thank.
So working on online
applications and what what was
what was wrong is done if you
look at the.
When she's on this page.
Go to the districts each in
every district on the that's
eligible and telling them
exactly what they can apply for
so they don't have to we sent
out an announcement about SB one
thirty one and I House Bill five
oh five to all the districts and
started getting calls will what
we do and how can we do it but
this is customized to each in
every district so that will help
them that we've also paid an
additional staff member to
support miss Ross doing this on.
And we are leaning heavily on
the gentleman behind you Mr
gonna to help us with
builder of using making things
process.
Eliminating manual processes and
doing it that way as well as
bring the regional managers in
to educate them to let him know
exactly what every step and
every process is so that our
team is ready.
Districts have new information
so that we're ready to move and
we've been very excited for
awhile when L. E. S. C. NMSC
first started with Senate bill
one thirty one back in July and
we were at the task force
districts were involved and they
were listening and they've been
with us and he sent out the
announcement when governor
signed on April fourth.
And why we got responses right
away so
Checking in Ms Perea.
We were ready we might have
missed something but.
That's where we're at at this.
Mr chair my take I'm really
happy to hear that and again I
know the intent of the council
was that we would make all of
the processes simpler but also
make sure that we address that
match fees so that we can fund
more projects
and so it's I'm really happy to
hear that you all have been very
proactive in making sure that we
are ready on our end to get the
money out and to support
thank you for doing that.
Mr Chairman is putting in.
But also like to comment there
that it's been working with
several individuals of council
members to the plan for the the
work slowed down the line so
just that we put that on for
subcommittees.
Have those discussions
separately to go through this
subcommittee so that we.
involved in those decisions and
recommendations and additional
preparation when the.
Thank you Mr chair and just you
know for us council mental
members as well we want to get
funding out to we what we want
to be supportive in helping make
sure that we're funding these
projects great thank you in the
in the governor for.
To get chance stations with.
We're moving on to.
Understand the sheeter page
seventy one why isn't dexter of
their.
Just trying to be clear about
timing.
Mr chairman members at the time
of subcommittee when this
document was created.
Texters letter that they
submitted didn't have an
estimated cost so I would have
to have a dollar amount to add
to the spreadsheet.
Is that the only one.
Resubmitted their life one of
the questions that came up.
For some of the cool talk to
schools the state of current
rules of data a look at this
reference the point is we only
have forty take care of that
became an issue in talking about
one of the school so.
What is this what the question
prepared what wants to eighty
one twenty day at least eighty
what can PS FAA get up for
current data which I think is
critical at this time to have
the most current data when we
look at try to right size the
schools.
Mister chair Mister this data is
currently available what twenty
it hasn't been certified yet.
What is the what what date one
twenty four less.
the state shares that it
believes around they were
secretary second went to the
that we're.
But
I think I would suggest awards
need to see what twenty for the.
You know they need to have a
full snapshot of this year's a
almost four they were positioned
Act on some of these projects so
twenty P. SFA I guess I don't
even have been certified I
wonder if it's possible to get
the preliminary data.
So just that that's something
that I think needs to be worked
on part of.
Alright acting was funding
schools and.
Why because we know enrollment
has declined sharply in some
districts are projecting
recovery which is speculative
than just need going forward
every step of the way to get an
update and see if that
recovery is materializing with
up to four weeks you know in
order to right size schools so.
Of the one comment I in and kind
of related to that.
You know again with the
enrollment decline we need to
really think about.
Districts and how they relate to
their surrounding districts and
how they're dealing with
consolidation which may never
happen but like worry what's
housing are they working with
miss kero we don't have to
answer that today but that's in
the county of six hundred.
I'm gonna build housing for
people and it just kind of six
hundred we will make sure the
districts were talking to each
other do we do with housing from
a secure.
Yeah so.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay Google to item be I think
the the withdrawal.
Yes Mr chair members yes.
Right.
But I have some comments on that
okay go ahead.
That is still on the agenda.
Point talked about it for a long
time this came up six months ago
the district expressed concern
and it I think what we learned
is important.
For for what we learned all we
know.
Pre.
Okay this fully funded for all
three and four year olds.
But yet we have districts coming
in and saying we we don't have
seats for them.
What with the blue crucis was
they did not have a good handle
on.
The need by school of many seats
they needed they came in that
they have turns out they have a.
They said that eight thousand
kids but a cohort is only
fifteen and so they don't have
data that makes sense they
didn't have data that I counted
accurately for how many turns up
seventy five percent of four
year olds are already in pre K.
in Los crucis on a thirty three
yearolds and so on the one hand
we really want to get cracking
on making sure every three and
four year old they're funded to
get services operating budgets
is our seats a problem or not.
And what's my point I guess.
The master plans are not
generally their master plans had
a year to go but master plan
wasn't helpful in trying to
answer this question about how
many seats they needed and then
finally found out that ECECD has
a lot of money for planning
grants which you'd expect so I I
think the point I'm trying to
make is we all want to make sure
every kid wants to services that
are funded or getting them.
But districts don't have a very
good handle on what the needs
are in a particular coordinating
the needs in the school
districts versus whose and had
started who's in high quality
child care which is kind of
council service the kids so I
just.
I wonder if would revert to the
future point to have of.
The CDC data come in and talk
about their efforts or at least
have that maybe haven't come to
awards just there's a lot of
coordination that needs to
happen in the there's gonna be
frustration that we're taking
the money out the door would
kids want services if the seats
are probably but we don't know
whether suits are problem to
discuss this with this Perea
Warniment and I I wondered if.
Again could ECECD do more or
should we be allowing school
districts to update their master
plans out of cycle for early
childhood only you know could
should Los crucis come in and.
You know you're you're for their
master plan expires so just
those are there's a lot of
desire to get the money out the
door we're not that great a
position of a lot of work to be
done so I was glad.
The agenda but glad we talked
about a lot of awards and it
stayed on here because
We're gonna frustrated
frustrations about this we get a
better handle it thank you Mr Mr
chair just because yes please
Mr chair and director Abbey I
know that the early childhood
department has spoken to you and
your team about their community
planning coalitions and that's
the intent of these local
coalitions to do planning
very locally based on all of
their early childhood system
including a three of four year
olds pre K.
that's why funding those
coalitions are so important so
the idea is that they have an
ongoing process to identify
community needs need and to
figure out you know how they per
purser pursue funding either
through community based provider
or through the public schools.
You know I really think that
that process will allow us to
identify the true need within
each community community and
hopefully make sure that they
move forward with seeking
funding.
But I agree I think it would be
great to have them come in for
the council I know they've been
in front of the task force and
have made presentations to them
about
there funding but you know we
need to make sure that we're
finding the capital
infrastructure along with the
actual seats in classrooms.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes.
This.
Okay.
One two items six cycle wards AT
work Representative rock Gillen
the two.
This.
Thank you Mr chair so they
our committee did recommend for
the council that we would
improve
to into the current standards
based awards calculated schools
rocky view in red rock
elementary school to include the
construction phase funding for
replacement facility total I.
Thousand one hundred eighty one
gross swept for four hundred and
twenty students grades pre K.
through five for state match of.
There's six point nine million
which is about eighty percent of
the corresponding local action
nine point two million.
Not sure of twenty first.
Mr chair members eight I just
want to comment that this
project was originally started
back in twenty eighteen and back
then the funding request was
much lower because things were
different on
Back in twenty eighteen we
expect to the construction I
need to be about twenty four
point six million and then that
in twenty twenty the cost went
up to about twenty nine point
nine million and the prices in
front of you today is an actual
construction did have a
contractor
with that said Mr chair members
of mine and I stand for any
questions that you might have.
Questions.
This one Mr chair I do have a
quick question so what can you
on the tribute this large
increase to is it just the cost
of materials and labor or and is
this consistent with what we're
seeing in other projects around
the state.
Chairman's video
it is what we are seeing around
the state we're seeing a general
increase and in cost for square
foot
at the construction level this
is actually.
A little lower than the next one
the next one we'll see down the
road in in requests but a lot of
things that tribute to it
including
At the the foundation system
that that they utilizing Gallup
the utilities in the area
but more than anything it's the
escalation in material and labor
costs right now.
The Kurdistan on this particular
project there was only one did
Mr chair that's correct.
Mr chair that's that's what
we're seeing around the state
also right now is
less than favorable number of
bids coming in.
to just.
In this the.
Look at ten fourteen.
To help us.
Let's see new construction
elementary schools.
Chris this projects not on.
But it's going to be off the
charts.
Off the charts but and.
What is the point of trying to
make it okay perfect to have.
They were so we talked about new
projects cost this is.
We are we are behind the curve
on those cost estimates or that
probe with the curve.
With these cutting increases to
you know who who generated those
numbers to have.
Where is the yes.
Eight seventy one.
Total estimated project cost
here with such dramatic changes
and I think you know it you
talked about grants news
grants is going to come with
that's the just the original
estimate was like less than half
of the current cost so so we you
know we know that there but
dramatic changes are we our
current estimates were they
coming from the kitchen.
Mr chair members to respond to
that the current estimates in
the first column I from the
school districts so what Mr
almost is going to do is when we
do this site visits we will dial
in the cost per square foot or
so right now is our guesses.
Coming from the districts.
Mr Evers these.
Koster.
I predict this will drastically
increase.
This is what we're we have to.
Mr chair the state budget by
project when we start digging
into it one of these mistrust
arts digging in and the detail
informs us on the call we
associate with that absolutely
it's it's by
by more modern pricing.
It
was wondering about the number
of contractors are bidding
with more contractors originally
and then the most of dropped
out.
For the design firms doing
anything to.
Communication I I that's just
really not competitive when you
only have one bit of and I just
wonder what we can do to.
Encourage.
As a patient that that's
terrible Mr Chairman string and
that's it.
That's a great COVID I can't
speak to what the design
professionals are doing but what
our agency is doing as we do a
lot of outreach to the design
professional community and the
general contractors
we all collectively generate
interest in our funded projects
we haven't seen that yet but I
think we'll see I think we'll
see more interest as we move
forward I'm on this one in
particular I can't remember
exactly there might have been
three landholders as general
contractors and one decided to
turn and.
I was.
Situation is a little.
Mr chair yes.
So to add to questions actually
first question do we require
more than one bid for projects.
Mr Chairman stay at.
We would like to see more than
one one bit Madam unfortunately
if you only get one that you.
You have to make a decision as a
a district do you accept that
better to you prepare the
project hope there's more
interest unfortunately what
could happen is you agree that
it gets zero bids and so you're
in worse position than you were
before unfortunately for the
budget could come in higher than
where they come in higher.
So Mr chair second question.
This issue of have of just not
having enough really big
contractors and.
In the state and if that's the
case have we ever have there
ever been projects awarded where
you have.
A team of contractors that have
specific components of jobs and
have we ever looked at that I
don't know how that would work
you have to still have a main
contractor but just wondering I
mean in the state where we maybe
have limited sort of options you
know what other options might
there be and then of course it
depends on the scale of the
project and the complexity of
the.
Mister chair Mister here that's
a good question I would say that
we have a good amount of.
very good general contractors
ranging from large to medium and
small I think the bigger issue
right now honestly is the
subcontractor community
and the labor availability
that's what's kind of stretching
everybody a little thin right
now.
The question.
Thank you for the question great
question and so I would ask.
The legislature's appropriated
money to beef up.
First training but at the
specific city about I know we
try to do that second set some
initiatives.
And so question is or is there
anything workforce solutions can
do and is there any other
regulatory barriers that also
might be playing to play in this
debate could you come of the but
both issues you know it what
that spend a half a billion a
year.
And if we're only get one better
for you sometimes you only get
one fifty four five million
dollar project and it's like
it's in regards to our two game
body up there but this is a big
project thirty six million so I
just think.
We are being given more thought
to barriers of regulatory
authority to think of anything
and training.
That it's it's a subculture to
brief problem with workforce
problem.
Mr chair director as you
indicated the the work flow.
Almost not work shoots projects
the wall over the last one is
Facebook Intel Amazon and it's
taken all the resources and the
the other states are busy to a
question times get more
incentive financially to get the
workers out there how we work
and working with community
colleges are doing everything we
can to bring the workforce in
solution back into us right a
lot of it the glamour we without
because I do want the stuff in
hands on people you know we
start losing and are trying to
get back young people to get
involved in trade schools try to
get back out there the big
issues when you have these jobs
like out in rural area this call
you'll need cost of location all
of your employees out there
please put when you still got
all this other stuff in the
metro and they're just there's
more than you get on the we see
that all the time we were in a
license through as quickly as
possible and you know the
numbers of more prevention much
but I'm telling use it till for
example they've taken every
journey when you can find on the
lexical side right I mean
subcontractors are struggling to
get over there you've got to
have somebody that's license and
qualified to do this work right
immediate safety and safety
issues a lot of us just trying
to build the forces that get
people back interested into the
hands on actually getting out
there in the third and that's
been a challenge.
Mr Chairman.
I just want to say very quick
and report about the critical
nature of career technical
education in high school.
At telling correct Mr chair
elaborate on that hi increase
the T. is huge and I think the
opportunity scholarship also
allows for students post high
school to build upon those
specific areas as well and so
hopefully we will see an
increased interest in that area.
provide more opportunities for
our kids.
just contacted I mean or worked
with agency and ABC those are
two places I was thinking that
we could maybe
Broadcast that.
I need to know that is a they
have a their own mechanisms and
stop.
Connections and I was thinking
they might be what was
projecting so Mr Chairman string
them absolutely we we do
outreach to both ABC and ABC as
well as a
we hold quarterly partnering
meetings with general
contractors and architects where
we discussed openly new any
concerns they want to bring to
the table but it's also an
opportunity for us to remind
them that we're going to have
these projects coming out and
how important they are to the
state in our communities
it is C. as in those meetings
and I work really closely with
ATC on other items
And you are correct they have a
very robust workforce training
development type of program as
well.
They are ramping up as as I
understand.
Yes we will.
Okay we've had some good
discussion here but I do think
we need to move along it is that
we do have a motion on the
floor.
Committee and.
Sure.
So.
There's further discussion.
Follow the favor of approving
the motion please indicate by
saying aye I.
Those opposed.
Wish to pass along to this was
elementary school.
One of the for the.
Motion.
Thank you Mr chair report about
this very.
Discussion about Water
elementary school
That we're on.
Thank you.
Yeah right session on desert
hills as well around something
that director Avid spoke about
earlier in terms of the need for
ongoing regular data in terms of
enrollment so for you the the F.
one twenty data that's up to
date
shared by the council as well as
the the staff is yes that they
we look at the trend data in
terms of Los crucis enrollment
so I just want to mention that
because I think that heavy
consideration we actually asked
for some information from school
district about this
because they're asked was an
increase based on
the potential increase in
student enrollment to the two
seven hundred and eighty three
do this.
so I think it's on page one
hundred you'll see that tax
in Roman trans
In.
Thank maybe the case but
Not sure I see a current
enrollment the projected
enrollment
so we don't want to stop.
again we don't want to
Any potential construction
knowing that we're seeing some
delays as we've seen already
this morning but we were sort of
concerned about this and before
I actually make the motion I
think maybe we hear from
director could see as that
anything from.
Senator.
Mr chair.
director okay I want to make the
district is here today as
requested to talk about their
plan for redistricting and the
students that they plan to
expect to come into this
desert hills elementary school
so director one moment thank you
for the opportunity to speak but
I I defer to the district in
this.
What.
Hey Mr chairman folks might want
to look at page one hundred
which is really key to this
issue.
Yeah this morning Mr chair I'm
going regions and director of
construction and I have a claim
Martinez who works with the I.
IP she's been working on our
enrollment projections since
we've been doing club yeah we're
looking at three redistricting
or trying to bring a lot of the
students from the cemex that
down towards desert hills and
that's what we have a projected
enrollment and I'll defer to
Colleen because I know she came
up with some additional data
that you presented to you this
morning.
Mr chair members of the council
we did give out a hand out this
morning and it's does show
illustrate the desert hills at
attendance some we are as part
of a greater effort in
redistricting for the district
it all started with Columbia as
part of the process and we
started looking at some of the
high growth areas across the
district and noticed that there
was an opportunity with the
Columbia elementary replacement
as part of that desert hills no
not
highlands.
MontaVista in Colombia there was
there's going to be some changes
made but it's all predicated
wants Colombia gets done because
we've got school operation to be
able to do the shuffle that is
also led to attended some
changes that are going to happen
at the middle school and high
school level to help the kids
were they really need to be
because it's all part of that
Jack the report schools
initiative within the district
so
one of the things that's really
interesting that this summer we
do have two large at apartment
complexes that are getting ready
to open with India at desert
hills attendance on so we do
have families that are re
releasing these apartments so we
do have new families moving into
this attendance on so we do know
we are going to have a change in
enrollment we do also know with
the birth rates that you know
not only nationally but across
the state they have been on the
decline with the most recent
data from final statistics you
know Dona ana county was one of
the actual few counties that
actually did see a minor
increase over the past couple
years
located on the southeast mesa
you know we do see families
moving into this area we also
have a lot of in fill
development happening here in in
fill housing construction while
the enrollment projections
initially projected were based
on that Columbia report we've
been working with the district
continuously on making
updating those projections
because we're trying to prepare
for that middle school and high
school changes because that's
really critical to get back
right and so as you can see on
the upper part of that map we do
have this area that is part of
cinema it's got about a hundred
thirty six kids in it that we
know of that will be moving in
two years and that will also all
right but the timing of the
construction with
Desert hills as well as part of
that Columbia re adjustment that
will now be incorporated into
the desert hills attended some
so we do have that those kids
going to be there as part of
that and then if you take that
into consideration with the new
apartment complexes and that
other housing that is actually
already under construction we do
know we have those kids and
those families are going to be
moving into that area.
So with that Mr chair members of
the committee I stand for any
additional questions.
The information.
This is one additioal.
Yes yes but as Mexico that
would.
Representative David's
This.
Page one hundred.
How.
How does this information
related to those numbers that
we're seeing there can be.
Okay.
Okay so on on this map here we
do have an updated
enrollment projection for the
school in twenty at five twenty
six we're looking at seven
thirty eight that by twenty
twenty nine were already at
seven hundred seventy four
students so we are.
Getting very close at that point
to the seventy three that was
projected it's taking just a
little bit extra time because as
we all know you know the schools
during the COVID we did have
that decrease in twenty twenty
one and then in twenty twenty
two well schools did reopen
there was a lot of concern by
parents of sending their kids
back to school and it has taken
a little bit of time when I I
work with a lot of districts
across the state in various
districts that recovery is
happening at different right.
Because you know parents do have
a lot of different options.
Part of the legislation at the
pandemic recovery.
So we're looking at seven thirty
eight twenty five twenty six one
is on change does happen because
we will.
Eighty eight capture Senator
plus it just with the some
change.
And that is taking into account
that some of those kids are
already transfer to other
schools because we already know
what those ones in the in the
queue.
And not disturbing them because
one of the things that within
the district if they have
transfer we'll be able to keep
that transfer happening
everybody thank.
We want to keep want to keep the
peace that.
And we've been ongoing geo
coding stated that the district
for the past three years to keep
tabs on.
Questions or comments.
This is very helpful.
So hopefully fifteen.
Mr Paul does to the director yes
that.
Our system does utilize.
But we need to.
but then there are school
districts.
The last utilization study.
We're within their ninety to
ninety five per.
So good mission.
Federation.
The word subcommittee for the
council to approve it right
standards based in fourteen
offices public schools but does
it also mentions school
including.
The first part one hundred and
thirty five state increases
designee will it for total of
seven hundred fifty students
grades pre K. five with an
increase of about eleven
thousand three hundred and four
spreadsheet.
Allow us more footage.
Just over eighty nine thousand.
Second party.
Education and social issues.
Totals eighteen four million
putting state match eleven point
eight local Max of six point
six.
With thirty six percent
Thank you Mr alright.
if you have a couple things to
say one is noting that.
The increase in the elementary
pre K. so to take that into
consideration when you're
looking at pre K. as a district
since we have a discussion about
that earlier
yeah at.
The second is that we would
still like to keep our eye on
the data in terms of income.
Thank you for that we should.
The committee discussion.
Not all those in favor please
indicate by saying I
suppose.
Motion passed.
Thank you on behalf of us public
schools we think the whole
country thank you survey and
we're looking forward to getting
this project started and
completed all also I'd like to
take person mount I've worked
with Abby for the last eighteen
years three years would be is
the fate of fifteen years with
the district that I realize this
is your last
meeting and I I want to thank
you on behalf of us because of
public schools for everything
you have done to contribute to
all of our projects and we sat
down and and we wish you well in
your retirement.
Thank you.
In this last week.
If they have a special.
At.
Okay let's move on to.
I don't see.
Water elementary.
Mr chair.
Cements with.
Extended discussion about this
in the words of.
I would like to draw attention
on page one.
The points that.
This is a pretty.
General contractor cost per
square foot but seven hundred
and seventy three dollars this
is shock troops mark.
Pretty high amount I do want to
really recognize the district
and what they've done.
Get as many visits as possible
to really look at
in their letter to director yes
on one page one twenty two.
The quest for the advertising
expenses so.
This piece of paper thousand
independent and Cibola all of
those states
so they've done their due
diligence in terms of trying to
reach as broad an audience I
think it's possible in our those
are pieces fitting the W. C. as
the department tell us more
about the process but
there's a whole host of.
Earnings to why this is such a
high cost so.
I'll make the motion to turn it
over to.
It's hard to talk more about it
but we do recommend for the
council to
and then the current standards
based award grants Cibola County
schools water elements to the
stores and so I think this.
Thank
include the construction phase
funding for replacement facility
totaling twenty two thousand
nine hundred fifty nine goes
where few words twenty two
states.
Its pre K. through six for state
match of fifteen thousand six
hundred twenty three fifty one
dollars corresponding local
match of.
Well over five million dollars
or twenty five percent match
Noting that this is small
Romans students specifically
rural community I think we are
this is the.
We're we're very mindful of
footprints the state buildings
new buildings.
But
Elaborate.
Thank you chair members thank
you and I to turn it over to Mr
parked.
Mr chair members.
Director Perea Warniment did a
great job
Summarizing everything all all
elaborate a little bit on this
high construction costs a lot
of things attributed to the
increases
The the water supply of how to
in this area does not have the
capacity to support the fire
professor production system so
that figures of fire booster
pump and tank and
Also the the existing sewer
system that was in place was not
gonna handle the new school
capacity so that triggered a new
on site septic leach field
system again this has a very
robust patients system it's
remote even by grants standards
so again many things contributed
to the this higher cost and in
this case this was sticker shock
we we hadn't seen one quite this
high yet but
the design team in the district
have done their due diligence to
make sure we're not overbuilding
which is why we support this
this
recommendation.
Comments questions.
Was another single bitter.
Mr Chairman string in there were
two bidders on this project.
The.
And and they were close to each
other so that's a good that was
a project.
Was there the other questions
all those in favor of the motion
please indicate by saying aye hi
the post.
Just as.
Thank you.
Want to I do.
Touro set aside.
Thank you Mr chair
the the recommendation but we do
recommend this but wanted to
hear from the district that's
the here
just a so to clarify a couple of
questions for us
I think it's point of committee
we decided to.
Your education component
Of looking at it in terms of
joint facility for our middle
schools or high school but we
have to get a concern I think in
terms of okay for all of the
districts across the state.
So I think we have a few
questions for the district or
not what committee does
recommends for the council to
approve and amend the current
standards based working towards
some of those
for the Tularosa middle school
to include design phase funding
for the placement of their
existing facility.
so that they're able to
construct a new school for
design room and two hundred
forty students grades K. eight.
So this lives and six great sex
in that section your.
It will also include a shared
clear to educate.
Facility dining collaboration
with disabilities high school.
Well we're footage sixty one
thousand square feet increases
the state match up two point
seven million or seven seventy
one percent and local match of a
little over one million or
twenty nine percent for the
design phase.
For up to a total of three point
nine million.
Compensation of the device
design phase work the district.
And then return to the PS CYFD
for out of cycle construction
please thank.
Mr chair members before we turn
it over to the district just
real quick if you'll turn to
page.
One twenty seven.
There's a there's a nice graphic
showing what's the Polish in the
middle school comes online.
And it's it's roughly forty
three thousand square feet of
permanent this.
With another five thousand feet
of portable and so one of the
concerns or discussion topics at
the last was that we're we're
building this.
Potentially building this new
sixty one thousand square foot
facility what are we taking
offline how much but it's are we
adding or subtracting to the
district
and so I would say well we're
we're adding sixty one thousand
to the districts total area
we're demolishing
Forty to fifty thousand square
feet potentially and twenty
thousand square feet of that new
sixty one thousand square foot
Is shared space between the
middle and high school so the
the up the middle school portion
of it is around a forty thousand
square foot facility with two
ten thousand square foot shared
spaces.
I don't know if.
That's because you just want to
add anything otherwise we'll
turn it over to the school
district Mr chair I have nothing
to add.
In this year's.
I brought my assistant
superintendent judgment okay
with me because she's our CD
expert.
So thank you wrap this
appreciate welcome.
I don't know where to start.
I guess we'll start question
that education there's questions
there.
What was the.
Permission to rest.
so my questions related to after
the moves how what about the
other schools that are pretty
close to this one.
I'm looking for a church that.
No mention or intermediate
school because they're all
within half a mile up a little
over a little more than that
once someone set it down high
schools on the other side of
town and what we're trying to
move the middle school you're
the high school.
so we can share teachers and to
create more opportunities for
students and up our middle
school is it's.
It's disgusting to say the
devices like about.
So.
Thank you.
Twenty five of.
This.
What.
So
you're gonna have three schools
with this is.
A yes Sir.
K. five elementary.
I was looking for more
information what they're all the
about excess capacity in the
other schools.
That brings a good point what
the.
There's a couple things going on
to the rules are right now and
one of them being up I'm moving
my sixth grade of middle school
because I believe it should be
at the middle school that we can
use our service writers for a
you know.
Managers on our middle school's
teams or anything else that I
just listed sweaters belong near
the elementary kids they're
they're getting up there really
should be there up right now
excuse me.
Roses bar region nine so we
We use region nine for special
ed services but we I have a new
year of two hundred special ed
students in Tularosa so we're
trying to create our own special
ed department because it's a
it's better for kids we don't
have to go out and
you know making appointments for
IEPs and and as years services
it's hard to schedule so would
like to use in those classrooms.
At the intermediates go we'll
move our sense great teachers
for a special ed Pressler
Services or.
That kind of stuff so and our
our.
If you'll notice on our I think
the are intermediate school has
had a serious foundation issues
and they can then spend millions
of dollars trying to raise a
force the teachers could
literally passed notes classroom
to classroom.
but but anyway so they fixed all
this but still there's that
there's cracks down the hallways
and the.
doors on open the certain places
because the foundation is come
up or receive it either way.
and it is a gorgeous school I
will say it's my second year
Tularosa in it is a beautiful
campus that's done a great job
of maintaining our campuses but
a.
We're gonna have to have the
issues of that so I'm afraid
that intermediate school in the
near future is going to have to
have some major renovations or
come down and we're gonna end up
having to build on to the
elementary school because the
foundation issues that are
continuing with the intermediate
school.
So I was asking questions about
what's the capacity of the
elementary and high school after
bring this on we were able to
get that.
Yeah.
Right I can answer some of that
we've actually added Apache but
not that language teachers and
so we don't even have a
classroom at our intermediate
school for Apache language
revenue share classrooms with
the with our budget language
teachers elementary and so that
at the intermediate school the
into classrooms would actually
have room for that also but a I
would say our elementary schools
at capacity right now our pre K.
to third grade second grade
third grade.
Second and then our fourth fifth
six greater intermediate school
so we're.
I build a new school and move
and our middle school to the
high school pathways that
creates opportunities for CTE
program which I will break down
all day long I think we're we're
doing a great job the the I
think we're well above most
people in the state so maybe
excluded ops.
Is there a role returning here
like last what we saw from us
because.
One thirty five.
We have somewhere right now
around nine hundred fifty.
Students somewhere in that area
we've through a hundred and
forty students this year.
Okay.
The elementary so wonderful for
that one that's good.
Chart.
One thirty three.
Sorry is relevant.
So one for element fleet.
Right here.
So what what's the capacity for
the elementary school.
Mr chair at.
Mr Abbey that we have to get
those two schools.
It I.
The right off the top of the
page to schools the intermediate
and elementary school however
with the additional uses of
needing for the at this patch
Education.
That is settling down the
schools are ninety percent one
is ninety eight percent utilized
twenty thank you percent less
right the moment so they are on
the very high end up being
utilized
we are in the process of already
re evaluate what's what.
He is I.
Because we are all structural
issues and some of the other
things going on at that time
looking at what the options are
for taking care of that
facility.
For me it's on page one thirty
six three eleven.
The capacity with two hundred
kids that.
This project was really hard to
kind of sort through the data
because of the report.
My questions with the
subcommittee meeting were to try
to.
Make a clear way to look at the
whole.
District which again it's not on
one campus but it's very close
to that pretty.
So I don't think we played there
yet but I I don't want to hold
this project which so I I just
think.
You know what it would look at
the enrollment trends.
What was the I can see we're
growing footprint.
I I think we I think we need to
kind of hammer that issues of
dealing with it in a way it
surprised if you're not in a
declining enrollment situation
which many your neighbors are so
that's a good thing in.
Senate twice what's the thirteen
thousand fourteen foot print
Representative thirteen.
What what percentage program
director Avid is about.
Twenty thousand square feet of
shared space between the
cafeteria what percent increases
that the total to total
footprint.
I don't know that there was a
there was one of the questions
so I just again I I know a lot
of work is going into this and
I'm impressed that you're you're
getting rid of a lot of space
which are growing footprint and
and we need to have this
conversation in every aspect of
our business including higher
education you know we're down
twenty percent
so.
thank you Mr chairman for chest
COVID thank you and I think that
it's incumbent upon staff in the
district to.
To finalize these numbers and
make sure we know.
What we're what we're doing and
how it's.
Of the the enrollment in the
house to make sure.
but I firmly believe that excuse
me with our with our reservation
and ours the way our CD programs
are going
Mescalero reservation is
literally Tularosa school
district ever missed R. O. as
their own school with some
students some literate also
school at the way our CTE
programs going we are seeing a
lot of kids want to come down
the back to to the rules of
along with the home airforce
base we get the impact aid money
for that also went up we're
doing some your ms McCoy here
and this the other agency mature
Act to miss my toys
we're growing to eight
imbalances in our CD you know
the conversation was a while ago
about trades we're working on
all that were.
we've developed eleven of the
sixteen career clusters in this
last year and out of those
actually twelve clusters and out
of that we've developed I'm
twenty six pathways for our
students to earn certifications
and career technical Education
one of which is our computer
science students to find the
At.
We have a call center the call
center the technical call center
for the state so our students
then that and earn wages while
they're doing that as well as
computer repair depot for the
community we've also opened up
internships with the terror
county electric wishes to
address that.
Base and telecommunications I
have also have
I developed an automotive
program with casa Chevrolet well
actually it on all of the
automotive dealerships in
Alamogordo so we are teaching
that on campus they've already
been.
Till they have a job anytime
they want one
working on diagnosing and
electrical age back on vehicles.
We started a Woods program at
the middle school with the and
the that is growing like crazy
and trades is use our acts up or
at the high school or if there
are welding and stuff it is so
small they have to push their
welders outside too well and our
act done a real good job of
getting Perkins funding that
they have all the nice equipment
but we don't have the space
literally to to have the welding
classes we made up our
automotive we're needing a left
we have as the kids get would
work with the costs of labor
right now we're looking at a
commercial kitchen for our press
star program that we have
started they'll start competing
and
Looking at innovative ways to
change the way we deliver our
content meshing you know
symbiotic courses together that
makes sense so that kids have an
experience from business
development to creation of their
product and how they're going to
manage that when they get out so
from start to finish and we've I
worked really hard in this last
year to start that development
product process and kids are
excited we've been able to hire
them utilizing funds and stuff
to pay them while they're and
gaining these work based
learning opportunities and we
would like to continue with that
helping our community partners
who are willing to.
By that work based learning for
our students but necessarily
don't have the funding to pay
them for that experience where
we can we're soliciting funds
that so that we can help
facilitate that because if you
put money in his hands they'll
do the work so we're working
really hard to try to beef up
what are our community has
identified as.
Workforce needs four of terror
County it literally if you call
the help line for your computer.
Up whatever it is you're going
to get it to the rules of high
school students on the phone.
At the they'll be.
Help you fix your cell phone or
your computer which is a service
that right now it's really big
forces making fifteen dollars an
hour students and the past all
their courses manages
certificate to.
Sideboards first semester we
were able to four hundred and
sixty five.
Precision exam certificates of
these are.
Career centered certificates
that kids have mastered
the.
What they need to learn and have
that as part of their portfolio
as they go out to look for jobs
well it sounds very exciting so.
Of all of your work
Many districts are striving to
get where you're at.
It's a great accomplishment.
Was this get back to the project
and in
the.
Or call was for the questions we
should do what we.
Act on this all those in favor
of approving the the
subcommittee recommendation
please indicate by saying aye.
All those opposed.
Thank you very very much making
the trip up here we appreciate
that.
We have a couple of other items
The business if we do get to
those quickly I I know we still
have up to the district here
discuss a project
Could we.
Mr to.
Mr chair we can do that the next
time I believe it's seventy.
Which is the five percent local
match reset reduction for
exemplary maintenance and with
that said I'd like to turn it
over to Mr Johnson and we will
be mindful of the the time
that's that for the meeting
welcome to good morning Mr chair
members
thanks Larry maintenance
operations support manager with
the BSFA agency which did you
want to go over the motion or do
you want me to going directly
into discussion about the.
Exemplary maintenance criteria
Mr chair right had a line that
preventive action.
Mr chair members of the last
name is committee we presented
the criteria for example remains
in the state of New Mexico I
think one of the questions we're
asked to follow up with on was.
Why was it enacted when was it
enacted in two thousand eight
the
It was adopted by the council as
a form of.
We're safe proactive funding for
New Mexico districts that we're
doing exemplary maintenance
proving that they were taking
care of the educational
environment proving that there
is good stewards of financial
capital money for doing that
there are good stewards of
maintenance programs in the
state of New Mexico they would
be eligible for a five percent
reduction in local match on
their projects that they will
apply for we provide a little
bit of history beyond the
criteria and just to keep it
brief.
We haven't had a measure of
maintenance performance since
the F. more came along thousand
left.
Even when the F. Moore was
implemented as a measure of
maintenance perform we didn't
have any New Mexico districts
report performing to the high
level which was deemed
exemplary.
It wasn't until our recent five
year completion cycle the third
cycle of the F. more that we
recognized to New Mexico
districts that are performing in
the outstanding range in your E.
books there's a.
Three
excerpt from our milestones for
the F. more five year cycle that
we just completed you'll see the
chair New Mexico districts that
were performing in the
outstanding category to compare
an aspect over time over that
five year period the produce
very high performance ratings
they updated their.
Their power users of the state
legislative finance tools and
resources.
Of important note is the
districts that are performing in
the good criteria these
districts are on the cusp.
Some of these districts ended
the cycle eighty nine percent
eighty eight percent.
And as we look back at the data
that would mean only two or
three work orders that would
take them over to the ninety
percentile range so what I'm
saying is more and more
districts are performing to
higher and higher levels and I
think I'm confident I'm
confident that during this next
cycle we're gonna have more
districts in that range that
will be eligible for the five
percent reduction in local match
that are meeting the criteria
that we've created.
With that Mr chair members I
stand for any questions right.
The the motion yes Mr chair so
the innocent Committee listen is
up approval to adopt exemplary
maintenance program Frank for
the twenty twenty three capital
outlay awards cycle The school
district meeting this criterion
may be eligible for up to five
percent of five percent
reduction in its local tax on
capital outlay and innocent
Committee review the criteria we
learned about the history I know
for me it was new and I think
it's very heartening to see
districts moving towards that
simple reason that as the memory
status excuse me and utilizing
this is Anna's hopefully at that
you know incentive for those
school districts to continue the
good work on the maintenance
with the nose of critical
offered long term spending needs
of the district on.
Very good thank you.
Questions.
So what is mainly I mean how who
will decide may is going to
happen or not happen but have
opposed.
I Mr chair Mr Abbey I believe
that the criteria would be
awarded or you give that to us
to determine what their of
reduction would be because of
the state of up to a five
percent reduction local match
and it during previous council
meetings in twenty eighteen we
presented a tiered criteria for
example ninety to ninety two
they would get.
I got the criteria exactly but
it was ninety nine to nineteen
ninety four and it would be two
years that the higher performers
would get the.
Reduction local much I'm Mr
chair director Abbey.
If you so choose you could
change your shall be eligible
for up to.
That's okay.
I I guess.
Are you proposing a formula and
if you are why isn't in here are
you proposing that be on a case
by case basis at such time as a
district presents with the
request for funding in there
over ninety percent which is.
Mr chair members.
We're proposing is this this
criteria and if they may meet
this criteria that's listed on
page one forty three then there
could be considered for the five
percent reduction.
Thank you Terry are you saying
it might be tourism.
Mr chair Mr I mean we can bring
that criteria with us.
What you think this is going to
cost.
Mr chair Mr Abbey we have not
wanting those during the cycle
right now we have to districts
that would be eligible however
they have not come to the
council for request for
standards or systems based
funding what available kirke was
what's up occur kia.
Mr chair members Albuquerque
does not meet the.
There are Albuquerque's good so
how far away they.
Mr chair driving all courteous
in the state those service for
that it got okay Farmington
Farmington as a lot of project
force what's important to them.
I mean it has eighty nine eighty
nine.
Farmington probably has they
have a hundred million dollars.
The question.
Members for new projects these
are.
They're coming in for
construction of course we've
authorized to move forward on
about a hundred.
So what they do does it have to
be brand new projects or
construction awards that we've
already authorized Mr chair Mr
Abbey would be brand new
projects for Farmington with the
the ones they've already that
are on deck would be able to no
no.
What why five percent went up
one percent.
Mr chair Mr Abbey I don't have
the answer to that all I know is
that the director it was to get
that set it.
School districts that want to
come to funding in two thousand
eight.
Legislation.
Especially.
Yeah I'm I'm sorry it's it's
just Mr chair there is a on to
the G. five percent came out of
the statute and and that it
might twenty seven point
inspection says may into some
strange and then it's up to the
five percent.
Yes my comment I think we talked
about it for a long time.
Either we up to four with the
rest of the.
The staff to be removed but I
think it's a try I think the the
incentive this is great and.
This is great I mean.
We want what everybody qualify
for that of my cost us some
money but it would save us money
in the long run with the less
deterioration of facilities and.
In order.
It's just part of COVID.
You're on the verge of.
Working on a fast increase.
Projects which we are
incentivizing greatly.
I'm concerned about.
You don't want to start one of
these you know takeaway very
readily
I would be more comfortable
would you consider small remote.
Miss Leetch the subcommittee
like one or two percent to it's
called a pilot and see what
happens since I think it's up to
five percent I think maybe I
would.
I would propose director Avid if
you'd be able to have it stop
and look at the end presents at
the next meeting on the tiered
structure they had identified
before I think that could be
something that would maybe give
us some ability to pump the
brakes at some point in time or
revisit it one thing that we
also ask for a little items
today is some semi annual or
annual reporting on on this with
numbers attached to it so that
we can evaluated at that time
because I I hear the concern and
I think it's appropriate I don't
know why.
Would want to.
Take action of a lower number
two day or maybe we pre visit
tiered structure or visit
revisit it as a revise patriot
the next meeting allowing the
staff trying to kind of look at
how that might affect
the awards.
Because it says up to five maybe
we can control that and that
could be a big number or four
percent of precedents program.
Considerable cost for this it
was cap to me there's a raise
and you could do that.
Incentive we wanted some of us
this rather waste incentivized
to.
Don't accept applications.
Okay if somebody is.
By the way.
Representative por are they
eligible to apply for New.
Yes.
So I think that's something we
also talked about if you're poor
you don't get to apply for
project.
Concerned at the time where
we've given over thirty percent
plus percent cost reduction for
projects to start a new program
without having a clear idea of
what we're heading into a sort
of a thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Your concerts all one common
goal is real quick on I I got
sick from my personal experience
being involved in this and the
costs we are incurring.
But for maintenance that it is
an incredible cost and and also
a.
we're looking at a real.
We're gonna have a problem and a
lot of schools that is going to
be almost insurmountable and and
it is directly from the lack of
maintenance and so I just hi I
applaud this disincentive I
agree with you and the state you
know and and and but I just the
thing I know how much money we
have lost even in new schools
with noon new equipment that we
didn't maintained at it and it
has cost.
On a lot of.
Further discussion.
Mr chair I would just mention
that we can certainly work with
staff to look at that tiered
criteria a little bit more and
maybe do some projections on
funding I agree I I I hear the
point it could be a large number
so
And I think we could revisit
this in the next six months to a
year probably prior to receiving
any additional.
Projects that would you know
from asked her to come Kerry and
and see if we need to scale up.
Good.
That's a good approach.
So all those in favor of
approving the motion please in
the state.
It was a post go.
Thank you.
That's we want to.
The
Chairman of the creation of the
program.
This
is.
No this yes sorry I was with the
motion get so at the in this
application is for approval to
contract with a measurement and
verification vendor to perform
measurement and verification
technology and software services
for selected school districts
chairman three years in the
total cost is seven hundred
thirty five thousand seven
hundred and forty dollars and
I'll head over to staff but I
would mention that the
contractor would be mountain
secretary Energy and it's for I
believe I school districts with
a total of about the.
Misleads Mr chair members this.
This program.
Started up back in twenty
fourteen with the house measure
sixty one.
that requested key agencies so
to work on
Public energy efficiency and
water conservation and so now
fast forward a little bit we are
bringing we are bringing this
back to you we did have a
measurement verification manager
on staff at PS that they at one
point but unfortunately she left
a few years ago and the the
vision and mission kind of
I don't know if you want to
speak on that but I kind of lost
lost its way we've sense kind of
regrouped and adopted this new
approach and that's what we're
bringing to you today so what
this does is measure written
verification systems collect
transmit and store information
on the energy and water use it's
real time data it's not from
bills it's from the actual use
on the buildings
yes the Fe has.
Installed meters in other
equipment on forty two school
statewide these are new schools
that were yes you'll see funded
so there are forty they're a
little more than forty two
schools now with this monitor
equipment.
Installed however there's no
data platform associated with
that right now and so what what
we've done is we've engaged with
as misli madam madam secretary
Energy to provide this
technology and software services
and what we're proposing today
is that we we do this as a pilot
program for three years with it
as misleading mentioned it's
actually I school districts but
I'll explain that a little bit
more so the for pilot districts
would be Farmington Gallup
hospitalists luminous and the
reason we selected these
districts as because they have
several facilities what this
with these components installed
several of these districts have
a an energy and management
manager that could oversee this
program.
but as part of our exploration
with mountain factor
they actually install this their
their final component on to the
system of Santa Domingo
elementary school and it's it's
allowed us to see what the
system would look like
and if I could there's there's
an anecdotal story.
On page one fifty two where.
Currently Santo Domingo schools
it as it says is serving as kind
of our test subject in September
of last year the water utility
over spike in usage and the
water utility was blaming the
district trying to charge them
for it will.
the software actually proved
that it wasn't on the districts
side that it was on the it was
on the water utility side that
the that the water usage was was
losing from so they were
actually able to prove that they
work.
Spending that water and that it
was from the water utility side
In my past life I have seen this
and in action at a district
where there was a spike in water
usage at an elementary school
and we were able to identify it
quickly and shut it down before
we lost hundreds of thousands of
gallons of water so it has real
it has real world applications
to it on top of the fact that it
will allow these districts to.
Monitor their energy usage and
and adjust accordingly.
so back to.
Page one forty nine
Reading through here real quick.
So as I mentioned
This Bender would have to
install a final piece of
hardware on to the system in
order for their software to talk
to the facilities and
so the vendor would have to do
that and then they would provide
access to the data subscription
cost per per side per district
the staff is recommending that
we fund this for three years
and the PSCS in the school
districts of party done the
majority of this work needed to
complete the effort so this is
the final little component that
needs to go on and the
subscription service and start
this pilot program.
some of the original goals of
this program are to improve
school comfort reduce the
operation and maintenance costs
and protect our investments
better identify facilities for
improvement.
quantify the effects of
maintenance which is something
that misli to that we will bring
back to this body.
should this pass and it's a
learning tool for the students
so you can actually plug in a
monitor and show this
information to the school
students at that facility
where where the use in your
building is going eventually two
it does have a photovoltaic
component as well so it will
read how much energy is being
stored by the photovoltaic on a
facility as well.
And with that I'll stand for
questions.
It.
What questions.
thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation that we cover
this in a mess but
So yes the paste all meters and
other equipment that.
Rep which will have to.
Installer component.
This is for three years at the
end of three years debate take
that other components back is
that usable by another.
I poor company area.
They could to happen I'm just
curious how this would play out
after three years Mr chair Mr
Burciaga I I believe that this
is proprietary it's something
that they've developed that the
mountain vector has developed
however it's it's one piece of
equipment
What the cost of.
Roughly ten thousand dollars
But that's for three devices so.
you take that up it's about
three grand a device but I don't
know that they would actually
take it off after those three
years and actually the district
could choose after that three
years to continue on that
subscription at that time.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Representative yeah I was gonna
ask so with the subscription is
not affected going to find
somebody that's going to be
monitoring or is you said that
each district for several of the
district's at energy energy
individuals are monitoring I
just was is there somebody
within the subscription that's
kind of monitor the whole the
whole project so we can get
information that.
Mr Chairman string and thank you
for that question absolutely.
There will be staff from the
vendor that will be involved in
maintaining the software
maintaining oversight of it and
I know just from my experience
with this
with my experience at another
district that if we ask for a
report they will help us
generate those reports and some
of that oversight.
Yes we and PS that they will be
able to see what the district's
sees so that that's that's also
very nice it's it's very similar
to our maintenance program in
that respect yeah that's just
been my experience right we have
similar on the that if you it's
great having information but if
you don't have anybody looking
at it it doesn't profit anybody
so we just need to have somebody
monitoring it constantly Sir.
Mr chair members if we could
just to feed into rights
presentation three districts
that are listed on this list
function this samples oral films
the utility direct model to the
your perfect level they're ready
for next level utilities and
what that is and each one of
these guys have a dedicated and.
Yes this.
Comments.
Mentioned so one and that's the
list it looks to me like this is
sort of something that was maybe
that wasn't really a revised and
so I think the pilot program
seemed really appropriate for us
to have the data haven't
reported out and actually we did
request for porting out that
discusses a specific benefits to
using this equipment to really
of value we this investment and
whether it's worth it moving
forward that's I think the pilot
program approach seemed
appropriate in that regard to
see if this equipment in this
monitoring is going to be useful
for the districts
So that I would just mention
that as well that that was
discussed in the.
Thank you for those.
Good question.
I think what it is just that was
this was almost a phone dongle
we spent how much by the forty
two.
No Mr Chairman strategy.
The the comments and the
equipment were folded into the
act trying to salvage.
Which may put.
That's what's happening and what
happened with a couple sellable
system in this I'm confused well
as I think it's a I think the
misspoke.
What did you say districts did
something.
Mr chair Mr Abbey I just
reported that Farmington pubs in
Los Lunas they're all power
users of the current films to
resources tell us how come so
they did something but they're
not on this project.
Thank you Mr chairman striving
they are on this list Liz Lewis
looking at page one fifty three
of two to eight page one forty
nine so this is the one.
Los Alamos was in the right
members that what's the
relation.
Between the four schools on page
one forty.
In the schools are one fifty
three.
They are the district.
What.
Mr chair director Avid page one
forty nine as director one
images said.
A lot of forty nine has
Remington as well as one fifty
three.
Caliphates on both pages as well
does this have to know we didn't
have we don't have time to sit
anywhere Mr chair I mean right.
Okay so the.
This this is thirteen schools
what what about the other twenty
nine what happens to those
that's what they do with the the
ones that are going to be in the
budget chair Mr Abbey we would
like to bring all of them online
but.
We would like to be.
Conscious of funding and use a
pilot program to see if it works
first last question.
Can we just could districts use
this on their own.
Previously presumably districts
could use it what you're trying
to do is get from the server for
PSSA to have a capability to
provide oversight of what
districts this product I just
called dogle presumably some
districts used to detect.
Mr chair Mr Abbey there I know
of one district in particular
that has this on every brand
every new school that.
It is the the future of.
Right thank you to use.
So that was funded by us.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair stepped out
for a second you for the
questions.
We have a motion Permian mass
all those in favor.
I just and I I I.
I was both the.
Okay.
With the requirements for.
Okay so now informational
section eight.
First I was twenty propose
moving out of the.
Mr chair members of the school
district is here we heard this
item at awards the district was
coming forward to we start the
project and we tabled at awards
but I just like to if you look
at one fifty six we have a
little bit of history some of
you might remember Mr team
diversity of and and share Abbey
director Avid that back in
twenty eleven the district was
awarded a planning phase for the
largely on the back to school
with the state local match sixty
four percent and thirty six
percent and a lot of things
occurred from then until now
in twenty eleven they got a
general contractor in twenty
thirteen the PS C. O. C. approve
the D. design package
in may twenty thirteen the
school board rejected the
general could contractor
selection and then the school
board at that time was
considering because
consolidation in some areas and
voted not to proceed with the
project the counsel table the
motion for out of cycle
construction funding back in
twenty thirteen.
And then in November twenty
sixteen.
The PSUC approved a motion to
recess in the four of them to
maintain their their spot in the
rankings of the funding went
back within their spot.
And then there was some issues
with PED and there.
The board was suspended.
And then.
We go speed back up to date the
work that Mr parts of my staff
had been doing as well as other
people agency November we toured
a lot of the elementary school
to review the medication needed.
And then twenty.
Twenty twenty two and early in
twenty twenty.
Went to the board of education
to talk about the projects that
were in the previously funded
which would have been advocate
and providing and at that time
we do understand that there were
six schools and the top forty in
Espanola but I advice was you
might want to look at the older
projects first that were
previously funded and had moved
that time.
so in April.
And in March of twenty twenty of
this year the school board went
ahead and voted to re enact the
awards for outcomes for the
lightning.
And then we brought it to the
subcommittee and we talked about
the many projects that were the
top forty that need funding and
we table and we the subcommittee
invited the district to come and
talk about the.
The size of a lot of the it has
fifty students and the size of
the existing building as well as
available state space down the
street at of the.
Mr chair with that brief history
several questions are invited
District act act at your
discretion.
I believe that you know those
two projects that were brought
forward today one of in the
thank you level we've acted on
this was a little different so
we felt well from what I
understand of the word's a
committee that they needed some.
Some additional information from
the district to let us know what
type of priority this poll why
it's
Well it's not being possibly
considered for
Movie into the coverage will
increase.
Several miles down the road.
I know that over the years I
fought for local decision making
on this and this related to the
while there are some local
decisions to be made there's
also some practical decisions
made in terms of finding.
And the trying to put this list
together I should say that I I
left the district school board
in two thousand seven so this is
happened after that and but I I
still feel that this is a our
students that are attending
that's.
Need to be provided for taking
care of so with that in this
welcome to the two.
Thank you Mr chair numbers thank
you for this year well.
As per your question if you need
to be yeah could you who are
superintendent Martinez.
This is District that.
Chief operations officer on the
weather is really good with this
we're trying to get this
reinstated
I will this position is that
you're still looking at this
we're going for suggestions with
Mr parson this is yes was
looking at those awards and so
it was very alarming the fact is
the work is outstanding sitting
there since two thousand eleven
so that has been one of the
bulls with that discussion or
whether they would like to try
to consolidate those just for
for she just.
That project so that.
What they asked for with the
project this school is right we
have mobile access to the
packaging provided practical
first second ring fast the
second third grade class
situated passable they do not
for teachers.
They have the pricing for this
fall
but looking at the numbers we do
have my district yours well
looking at the numbers of this
equipment to fall spending the
other school this pattern other
schools as well that school is
they have to do a students as
they have been able to maintain
that for a long time they were.
You know working on recruitment
they have a kindergarten classes
have fifteen students they'll
also be change project that
would pre K. students that will
be increases so we can't been
trying to recruit students from
As well but we don't believe
that that'll happen you know
leave they workers two years ago
working with them NFA to try to
get some awards of the
conversion that they've been
able to recruit students that
way but the community really
fast together they out for every
board meeting different local
but we really just want to make
sure that we can rectify this is
work that was the intent of the
previous four to improve the
wall Act and the limited to
still believe that they should
do that handing a motion that as
well so we've tracked that.
Anticipate really about how we
can work on those projects for
the the H. fact the doors
windows and so more of us
systems basically.
Representative Rehm all of that
so not a complete renovation we
do hello Act there's a new focus
to that because when that World
first issue that's preventing
we need to do and now they have
fifty students.
But we would really like to just
move forward with this project
you are working.
That would.
I guess good storage.
And buildings across the state
so.
Excuse me Mr chair this yeah.
as you know all of the award was
issued it was four hundred forty
five students we're down to
fifty eight students right now
and we've had discussions with
the
Community and there's a lot of
resistance.
And basically the resistance is
my grandfather went to school
here he's very in the back you
will close the school if you fix
a school dot com.
We understand that
Want to find a facility for
students but the state ability
and reality here comes to play
up it cost quite a bit of money
to maintain the facility it's an
old facility built back in
nineteen fifty.
so we're concerned also but the
board did go forward and voted
to move forward with the award
so we're stuck with that
decision right now so how do we
move forward from this state.
It's a difficult thing.
There have been
Of estimates
to do what it cost.
To improve the situation your
identified we the chair.
Again we have not.
As of yet I think the the next
stage of the working with the
SFA on the design and looking at
the foot print to see if we
could reduce that footprint to.
Copulate a better price for this
project here based on the role
that.
Right.
Mr chair.
S. cost the the cost that was of
the subcommittee was based on.
four of us read all of.
Director Avid.
Look at a smaller smaller
renovation project and so that
that is what we have not been
that we have is the we can.
And now to a smaller amount of
issues we absolutely that is
just a matter what.
A lot of the.
Mr chair if I may the original
award back in two thousand
eleven would increase because.
if you did that we open this a
morning would not be for you.
This.
Is the system.
Traveling the only the building
is there.
As I recall the the original
project was ready to be awarded
the construction bid and that's
when the war change their mind
on the project so there was some
very to the level final plans
and specifications developed
already so I don't know if any
of that can be salvaged if that
works but I think it is
important that.
That we maybe go back to
right size the renovation and
then maybe come back
consideration that.
And you know depending on the
size of it I know that
It would be the time to come
back with those reduced
That to requirements and that
kind of thing but again I think
it's important that we that we
try and.
Just the conditions that those
students are having to put up
with that this.
Just one quick question
Is there you know renovating
some schools is appropriate and
renovating other schools is not
appropriate depending on the
actual condition of the
structure itself and I'm just
wondering is this
thank you a quick overview of
the business structure.
Founded up to provide to to.
Justify renovation to.
Castellano I would say that I
would say that it is
The the condition as.
There is a stop.
Hello there.
Mr chair the question.
What is the distance between the
two schools.
Communities Mr chair in this
video it's four point three
miles from the largest tool
called.
Mr chairman what do we know that
the enrollment from the Covid
hospital.
The hundred fifty enrollment.
Capacities look four hundred Mr
chair.
Yeah us too it.
So at seven aces and pass it to
the.
For the library cafeteria that
was designed so that we can add
classrooms on before.
Now
you have other district other
schools that are even smaller
going to what what are the
enrollments and some of the
smaller element yes we have
about fifty students at Dixon at
one of the things to point out
about this in the last year they
did receive the distinguished
worked and were recognized in
New Orleans at the SM happens
this year they also receive
award for their yes to work on
for there to be increasing test
scores so we are trying to model
that we do know that benefit all
schools it is the exact.
And have those.
What's pre K. and kindergarten
so they're at sixty so similar.
At about ninety six students.
Yes.
This is about the statement the
president.
Thank you Mr chairman.
There are other schools in the
district which are really in bad
shape that are big like I think
so this seventy two percent FC I
to my is ninety percent it's not
I don't think in your plans
right now.
Yes so actors.
Packed with kids and a we were
R. the board wanted to do was
before the storm warning
actually part of the need
thousand and I think that kind
of.
A big challenge with this
project is this like well we
lived in a world of fifteen
years ago we decided to do
something that no no we can
afford to do some of the state
can help us do some so gonna go
back to our fifteen year old
plans just because they were
good one.
I'm.
That's kind of a problem when
you have a school like to my
which probably has three or four
hundred kids.
Well one forty okay bigger
anyway.
So I'm just concerned about the
prioritization and and I also
but by the same token I think
it's still worth looking at is
there a way how about a key
through to school Sixt a quarter
of the kids are in K. looking at
the sheets so what okay to
school the you know a downsizing
option for the smallest kids
addiction to is a special case
because of.
School buses in the canyon of
the snow and ice and Wunderman
their reasons Dixon this.
Well the way.
The dangerous road time so their
their differences with the thank
you Mr.
But I do think that the the.
Place to go with this at this
point would be to go back and
try and downsize that project
come back to work with staff and
see see if that makes more
sense.
To the subcommittee at that
point it also to the full
council I I do recognize that
it's not easy for school boards
to make priority decisions but I
think that the community was
promised this sometime ago they
haven't forgotten as I recall
the the bond issue local bond
issue at that time was was
included them and they still
feel that
the the.
The are deserving of of some
facilities for their kids in
their community.
So I recognize that and
hopefully if we coach it in
those terms maybe we can come
back and make a better decision
Mexico.
Thank you for being here and
also for staying the whole
meeting.
To move that up on the agenda I
think you learn quite a bit in
terms of of what we're facing
here.
Superintendents were change.
All.
With that but you being funded
you what thank you like at the.
Okay.
That and think again thank you
for being here we have several
other items on the
informational.
so.
Fifteen minutes so that you
great break it up.
And Mr chair members the next
items on page one fifty eight
Tennessee twenty twenty three
legislation legislative update
and I'm.
Pretty sure that many of you are
already familiar with this I
just touch on Senate bill one
thirty one which reduces local
share and funds the CTE reduces
local shares the state local
match we have House Bill five oh
five for the sixty five million
for CTP and.
That sixty five and we are money
the thirty five million for
school security and five million
for pre K. and then Mr chair
those to help to of house
memorial I want for.
school ventilation and air
conditioning.
And the other is to say that the
issue is the state local match
Mr chair that brief overview I
would stand for any questions
that you might have.
for these to create the.
Morial's the.
Are you going to be needing to
appoint someone to serve on
those committees have.
Mr chair will lead on those Mr
chair members that were you have
Mr chair members for the study
will be installation and air
conditioning it's collaboration
with.
L. E. S. C. and LESC and the
report twenty twenty four so we
would be collaborating with
chair.
Director Warniment as well as
to.
Is there any mention of PS
you'll see.
as well as Mexico school board
association and the New Mexico
location of educational leaders
the study will be reported to L.
E. S. C. and LFC in twenty
twenty five you you may remember
that we are working right now
we're currently on this
objective and this will expand
the membership in a creative
path forward and perhaps Mister
chair and
chair we age we can present a
plant in mass as a way forward.
Well the only issues taking will
you be sending out appointment
letters request so.
If you are interested well we
will be serving on there as.
And I'm just be a school board
association so might be
appropriate for someone else
streetwalkers.
Mr chair the other is our our FY
twenty two I didn't have which
we had to this is a page one
sixty one we had to deficiencies
Two material witnesses and one
was about the timing of our
drives and the other was about
our project close out.
Mr chair members should I
elaborate leisure sample
questions.
I think we need to know.
generally what will on a finding
you'll have some corrective
action that you proposed.
Yes Mr chair thank you so.
One of the repeated findings is
our project close out we didn't
complete them last year and more
this year and we had a hundred
fifty seven projects to close
out of at the when I ended so
you'll see we've got a current
status report and of those
hundred fifty seven twenty nine
are closed down or nineteen
percent
Eighteen of those projects are
reconciled and ready to be
closed we're working with the
district back and forth on the
reconciliation we need a
signature from the districts.
Eighty six of those hundred
fifty seven projects are
currently being audited and
twenty four of the projects of
the seven hundred fifty seven
are pending district
transformation.
So one of the things that we
we've decided to do.
Is right a letter to the
districts who are non responsive
and say if we don't hear
something in thirty days we're
going to go ahead and close out
the project with the data that
we have.
This can get cost closed out
additionally I know irises
listed here as a co presenter so
one of the other things that
we're doing is we've got a staff
member taking the lead as well
as cross training the other for
people that are in the finance
department as well as a
recommendation from a mess is
regular reporting to to you all
on the status of our project
close out.
with that Mr chairman members a
stand for any questions you
might have.
Is that page one sixty two you
hope to have the rest of the one
hundred fifty seven projects
close by two thirty
Mr chair director every that is
are intact.
If you look at the previous
pages in the percentages of how
far along we are thank you.
You to do that by that time
because then.
The next round of active
projects staff.
Thank you and I would give them
thirty days after the fifteen
days.
We are also
encouraging Mr chair we think
that direction.
This is.
She chair members arrested
staffing pop dates are process
improvement updates in our
projects that support would you
like me to go to those.
There's.
Those questions but we also have
some new staff that you want to
introduce Mr chair members yes
thank you so much it's related
to page thirty seven with our
piece of the staffing update we
did our CFO went on to a
different job our human resource
managers went to Los Alamos and
then regional project manager we
lost him to Netflix as well as
our CPO went to the department
of safety and public safety and
in she went on to a higher
paying job as well so we did
find we had a jam at internal
staff members have a huge cruise
if you don't mind standing up
who has the qualifications and
background to take on the
position to help us with
contract administration as well
as being or CPO.
And I don't know if you'd like
to say a few words I'm just
excited for.
Projects.
Thank you.
Mr chair members that's.
The settlement that.
I think David has another
question.
Keep in mind this is not the
actual.
That would be.
That.
Anyone else.
I would entertain a motion to
adjourn.
During.
Yes.
Please indicate by saying aye
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Chair.
I'm sorry I did want to say I
know that you all have
acknowledgments Romero's work on
the I reconciliation but I to
recognize which is definitely
appreciated.
Thank you.
That would.
I have a date.
We're.
Following the issue again.
Watch this.
The.
Thank.
