EFA or we're talking about the
funding formula and the work
that's being done on it. So
please give us an update. I know
that's one of the main things
we're working on this summer.
Good afternoon, uh, Chairman,
members.
So, just a brief update, um,
number one, it was a task force
directive to um do some analysis
on how we can assist the
districts in a short term.
Um, as well as
How we can
In the future, um, help the
districts be able to obtain
capital funding, as we know that
Uh, there needs to be work on
the funding formula, we feel
that there might be some short
term changes to the funding
formula that could possibly be
addressed in this session, um,
but that's also gonna take
additional work. Right now we're
working on the waiver criteria.
And working with LESC and LFC on
eliminating a couple of items uh
within that uh criteria, and I'm
gonna go ahead and defer that to
Miss Ramos so she can speak more
towards that.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members, um,
I have a on the screen the uh
presentation that I gave last
month.
And we thought we could just
quickly review it.
For you to refresh your memory.
Um, so as I spoke last month,
um, we were talking about the
local.
State match uh calculation and
the issues that we're seeing
with that uh with many
districts, many districts cannot
afford their local match with
the current uh for current and
potential projects due to the
bonding capacity in available
funds.
And although SB 131 did decrease
the local match, it is not
enough for some of these
districts, particularly those in
small rural districts to afford
their projects, um, as we spoke
about several small districts
this morning, uh, many of these
schools are aging out, have many
deficiencies and need to be
replaced and or uh updated in
terms of systems that they
cannot afford their local match.
And so just a very basic and
simple explanation is if the
replacement school costs.
$30 million.
And the local matches 10, but
the district can only bond out
for 2 million, they can't afford
their local match, and that's
when the local match reduction
comes into play, AKA a waiver.
Um, however, for district to get
a local match, they need to meet
particular statute requirements.
There are 3 options within
statutes. Uh, the first of which
is primarily for all districts,
and it's that the district um
has insufficient bonding
capacity over the next 4 years
to fund said project, the mill
levy must be equal to or greater
than 10, and the second option
is really where we're seeing the
biggest issues for small
districts. It's for those
districts with a mem count less
than 8.
100, uh, the, uh, of free and
reduced lunch is greater than
70%. The state share is less
than 50%, meaning that the
district should be responsible
for more than half of the
funding in the middlelevy is
equal to or greater than 7.
The third option, we have not
seen, honestly, and um that
might be something else to
consider. It's for growing
districts with a growth rate of
2.5% or more and in the facility
master plan, it indicates that
due to growth they need a new
school.
Um, last month, actually, let me
back up one slide. These are all
of the standards-based awards
that PSCOC made last year. There
were 11 in total, all of those
highlighted in blue, need a
local match reduction to fund
their local share.
Um, so we're seeing more than
half of the districts come
forward needing that local match
reduction, and if you look at
them, it's Maxwell Springer
Dexter Penasco, Bernallio
Hagerman and Hondo, for the most
part, those are all very small,
very rural districts.
I'm gonna scoot forward, um, due
to time and you've already seen
this past the case studies.
And um just review ESFA's
recommendation for a short term
fix while we determine a better
long-term solutions, um, are
suggestion is to remove
The items from that option 2 for
small districts.
Um, for, um, these, the free and
reduced lunch equal to or
greater than 70%, but we're
hearing from districts is that
the families aren't submitting
that form for the federal
program because the state funds
free lunch now.
Um, so it's difficult for the
districts to get over that 70%
and it's not within the
district's control.
Secondly, the state share is
less than 50%, um, we're seeing
districts that even if their
local share is 5%, 10%, they
can't afford that. So the 50%
doesn't really play into their
ability to fund a project, um,
really what matters is that
there are a small district who
can't support the full funding
of their um larger projects.
And the mill levy of 10 is too
much for those districts, so.
They can attain a meal levy of
7, if those other two items are
removed.
And then it's not shown here,
but at the end of the tail end
of our discussion last month, we
did suggest or discuss the
option of getting rid of option
3 for growth districts because
we're just not seeing that and
the mill levy for that is 10,
which is the same as option one,
so it's redundant.
Um, and that's a quick recap of
what we
Reviewed last month.
Mr. Chair and members will stand
for question. Thank you. Any
questions from the committee. Do
you have any, do you have
recommendations for us yet or
still working on specific
recommendations.
Or did I miss that part? Mr.
Chair, members, our
recommendations was exactly
this, and so that's what EESC
and LFC are currently working on
in um LCS to potentially draft
legislation towards this
particular item.
And, and Mr. Chair, we are also
meeting um collaboratively to
discuss the longer term plan of
uh addressing the state local
match formula, um, but that's a,
a heavier lift and we want to do
our due diligence to ensure that
we're are um making solid
recommendations for that effort.
OK, um, is the building being
drafted? Do we have somebody
sponsoring it at this point? I
mean, our actual words being
written.
By someone that'll be coming
forward to one of our meetings
because I don't think we meet
well in the the the fall, do we?
We have September and November,
not a December or January, so
we're gonna need actual
legislation if we're going to do
this as a.
OK, so we do have a file open on
it. It sounds like and starting
to work on actual words on
paper, so we'll have something
to vote on for committee
endorsement.
OK.
Um, center souls, um, members,
yes, as Iris, you know, already
kind of explained a little bit
and I don't want to repeat what
she said, but yes, as director
of the task force, we have been
meeting, uh, we are looking at
some of the more immediate
things we can do this session,
uh looking at possible options
for the longer term if those
kind of go hand in hand, that'd
be perfect, but I think we're
really being methodical and
we're also using the Bieber
report as kind of a guide to
make sure we're kind of, you
know, dotting all our I's and
crossing all our t's at this
point. OK, very good.
OK, so yeah, you said to me the
waiver and then a longer term
modifications to the funding
formula.
OK.
The questions from committee
members.
So
Mr Ortiz,
uh.
Mr. Romero, I just had a quick
question on, on the group you're
working in, have you guys done
an analysis to with these
changes, how many districts
would qualify for a waiver?
And if so, if we could share
that with us and then um also
just a quick comment, so the
free and reduced ones were uh
department, our our student
nutrition bureau still working
with districts to make sure we
get those uh free reduced
applications we have to.
Um, if we don't collect those,
then basically the, the state
share of the universal meals
would go up, but that is
something I, I know we're
working with and I think.
We're still getting pretty much
like 90 to 92%.
Uh, submission of those forms so
just just for FFYI.
Uh
Mr. Chair and members, we do
have that information, that
analysis on uh which districts
this would affect, uh, we didn't
know we would be talking today,
so we didn't bring it with us,
but we can share that.
Any other questions?
Thank you for the quick update
on that always nice when we set
up task forces that they
actually are working and getting
the work done, cause sometimes
you can set them up and people
forget about them and nothing
ever comes of it, so I
appreciate the work that you do
every day.
Thank you.
OK, I think we have got the
connection for the next
presentation.
From the
RBC Capital Markets, LLC and how
school districts secure capital.
So we have Eric Harrigan and
Kayle
Weimer, I will butcher your
name. I am so sorry.
Please help us on how to
pronounce that.
Uh, you're quite close. It's
Weimerskirs, OK.
Please go ahead.
All right, so unfortunately,
Eric Harrigan was unable to be
here. He just had a scheduling
conflict that, you know, ended
up extending past 1:30. So, uh,
in front of you, I just have a
very brief presentation kind of
going over the uh capital
sources that are available to
school districts and also a
couple slides addressing some
questions we've seen come up as
we've worked with PSFA. So
without further ado, I will
begin to share my screen.
OK.
So really when we think of
capital sources for school
districts, we can really put
them into two different groups.
The first would be the issuance
of debt, which could be the
issuance of general obligation
bonds or education technology
notes or districts could look at
levying a capital mill levy,
such as Senate Bill 9 or SB 9 or
House Bill 33 or HB 33. Um, all
of these, uh, sources of capital
derive their revenues from
property taxes, and some may or
may not require voter.
approval. So, first looking at
the issuance of debt
specifically at general
obligation bonds, you know, geo
bonds do require voter approval
to issue. You know, once a
district receives that voter
approval, that voter approval is
good for 4 years. So if a
district goes out to voters in
November of 2025, they will then
have that authorization until
November of 2029. State statute
allows for uh the max term of a
geo bond to be 2.
years
Uh, additionally, to the tax
rate for general obligation
bonds are set annually, and
they're set at whatever rate is
needed to cover the principal
and interest payments on the
outstanding bonds. So,
generally, theoretically, you
know, the more geo bonds you
have outstanding, the more
principal and interest
requirements are outstanding,
and therefore the higher uh tax
rate is needed to cover those
principal and interest payments.
Uh, the use of funds are general
capital improvements.
And the legal borrowing limit is
6% of the district's assessed
valuation. Now looking over at
education technology notes, they
are similar to geo bonds, but
with some few uh distinct
differences, you know, for one,
ETNs do not require voter
approval. They only need an
approval from the governing
board from the school board, uh,
districts can seek voter
approval if they would like to.
For example, Santa Fe Public
Schools does go out to their
voters for ETN authorization,
you know, should
District receive uh voter
authorization to issue ETNs like
GO bonds that authorization also
lasts for 4 years. Uh, the
maximum term of an ETN borrowing
is only 5 years. Uh, this is to
be in line with the useful life
of a lot of technology, such as
laptops, computers, stuff of
that sort. Of course, the use of
proceeds are education our
education technology needs, and
additionally, like general
obligation bonds, that tax rate
for the ETN is.
annually and it set out whatever
is needed to cover the
outstanding principal and
interest payments. As for the
legal borrowing capacity, ETNs
are also subject to that 6% cap,
and uh they you essentially
combine them together to meet
that 6% too. So we look at both
geo and ETN for uh bonding
capacity.
Moving on to mill levies, uh,
first we have Senate Bill 9.
This is a much more common mill
levy across uh school districts
in New Mexico. You know, this
does require voter approval and
that approval lasts for 6 years,
uh, SB 9 is an exact 2 mill
levy, $2 for every $1000 of your
assessed valuation, the
traditional use of SB 9 funds
have been capital improvements,
um, but as long as it's
disclosed on the ballot
question, SB 9 funds can also be
used for
Education technology needs.
As for HB 33, it's very similar
to SB 9, the primary difference
though is that the HB 33 rate
can essentially be any rate as
long as the district's total tax
rate does not exceed 15 mL. So,
for example, let's say that
there's a school district that
has a $10 geo bond rate and a 2
mill levy an SB 92 mil levy rate
in place for a total of 12 mLs.
Well, that would only leave $3
left for HB 33 until that
district.
would hit that $15 limit.
Oh.
So here we just have an example
of how all of these tax rates,
you know, look together in the
same table. So here you can see
again an operational mill levy
for, uh, sorry, 50 cents. You
also have your 2 mill levy for
$2 and then you have your HB 33
rate, you know, the debt service
rate is a combination of both
geo bonds and education
technology notes, and that's
what essentially gives us the
total residential and
non-residential uh tax rate for
a school district. Uh,
A very key difference though
between both uh geo bonds and
ETN rates versus mill levy rates
is that mill levy rates are
subject to yield control. So if
the districts assessed valuation
if it's tax base grows faster
than the rate of inflation. That
mill levy may be yield
controlled down. For example,
here, you can see on this 2 mill
levy right here for the tax year
of 2023, you know, this district
levied 2 mills.
But only 1.991 is actually on
the tax rolls, um, you know,
this is essentially so that the
district can continue to collect
the same amount uh from that SB9
rate because their tax rate is,
or sorry, their tax base is
getting bigger, they can levy a
smaller tax rate to still get
the same amount of collections.
Counterly, let's say that a
district's assessed value
declines faster than the rate of
inflation. That mill levy.
Then be yield controlled it
upwards, but that mill levy
cannot exceed what was approved
by voters. So again, looking at
HP 33 here, there is some yield
control you can see between the
residential and the
non-residential rate. Now,
again, let's say that, you know,
a districts uh assessed value
declined faster than the rate of
inflation. You may see that mill
levy go back up to 1.4, but it
will never exceed 1.4 because
that is the amount that was
approved by.
Um, you know, we really wanted
to bring this up because, you
know, the mill levy rates that
were approved by voters and that
the district wants may slightly
differ from what is actually on
the tax rolls due to this yield
control. And in this example,
you can see that, you know, this
district approved a total tax
rate of $10.09 but due to that
yield control, you know, on the
tax rolls, they only have a tax
rate of $9.
90 cents.
Essentially, we get our final
tax rates, uh, from, uh, sorry,
from the Department of Finance
Administration will go over one
of those tax certificates there,
but essentially tax rates are
submitted to each county uh by
September 1st, and then each
county commission approves those
tax rates, um, and their first
meeting in September.
So I will blow this up to be a
bit bigger so you can see it
better, but here's an example of
Bernalio County's uh tax
certificate for tax year 2023.
Uh, this is essentially where we
get our tax rates from as these
are finalized, right? So you can
determine what school district
you're in by looking at the
public school district that's
listed here. So in this example
we have Albuquerque Public
schools, and if you scroll down
to the to the total school
district amounts here, you can
see both the residential and
non-residential tax rates. So
for tax year 2023, you know, uh,
APS is residential tax rate is
$10.
And 59 cents.
You know, continuing on, here we
just have a timeline of how we
set tax rates. So essentially
preliminary uh data about each
district's assessed value starts
to come out in July, starts to
come out in July, um, then in
August we begin uh the tax rate
setting process with PED, uh,
essentially PED has to submit,
you know, their their first
round of tax rates to uh DFA by
August 15th, you know, from
there.
Tax rates are then submitted to
each county September 1st. Each
county then approves those tax
rates at their first meeting in
September. After that, you know,
those tax rates are then
officially enacted starting on
November 1st.
Now, the tricky thing about tax
rate setting though, is that
essentially, again, we set tax
rates in August for the next
year, but school districts due
to changes in election law can
only go out to voters for a
regular uh regular November
election on odd numbered years,
um, you know, should a district
decide to go ahead uh and pursue
a special election. They can do
this, but they would have to pay
for that
All mail-in ballot. Essentially
that cost of that ballot would
be borne by the school district,
um, you know, depending on how
many registered voters there are
in that county. We estimate
that, you know, the cost of that
postage could be from a $150 all
the way up to $3 per registered
voter. You know, this is
something we have to be very
cognizant about for tax rate
setting just because when we set
tax rates with PED in August, we
don't necessarily have that
geobond authorization yet.
To levy a tax rate on. Um, we
won't have that until November.
Kind of switching gears here.
Here we have the dis uh an
example of legal bonding
capacity. So per state statute,
a school districts in New Mexico
can bond up to 6% of their
assessed value. So in this
example, if there is a school
district that has $1 billion of
assessed value, they have a $1
billion tax base, 6% of that
would be $60 million. So this
school district could issue up
to $660 million. Now let's say
That they have $300 outstanding.
Well, that would mean that
they're only 50% bonded to
capacity and could issue an
additional $300. Um, you know,
this bonding capacity does get
refreshed every year as
districts, you know, assess
values, update every year too.
You know, another critical, um,
thing to point out too is that
often with school districts,
even though they could legally
issue more money, you know,
practically.
They, they wouldn't necessarily
because of that tax rate impact
and also depending on their
needs, right?
And then lastly, here are just
some things to consider for uh
issuers, you know, one of those
would be is the spending of bond
proceeds. So once a geo bond
deal closes, districts have to
commit at least 5% of those bond
proceeds within the 1st 6
months. Um, after that,
districts have to spend at least
85% of those bond proceeds
within the 1st 3 years and then
100% of bond proceeds must be
spent within the 1st 5 years.
Uh, should a district not spend
down their bond proceeds within
that 5 years, they may be
subject to an arbitrage rebate,
and what in that case likely
have to hire an arbitrage rebate
consultant, and they may be
forced to actually pay back the
interest returns on those bond
proceeds uh to the IRS.
You know, that, that really does
conclude the things that we were
wanting to go over with your
board, um, you know, I, I know
we went through a lot of
information and quite fast too.
You know, I'm happy to revisit
any topic and go more into it in
depth or uh kind of go over that
slide again if you need.
And I also stand if there's any
questions too.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
We're sitting here kind of
figuring out uh what our tax
rates and and those percents at
the bottom like on the page
about Albuquerque, that is the
rate, right?
So the percentage.
Yeah, so again, due to that art
era that yield control, right?
There is a little bit of a
difference between the
residential and the
non-residential tax rates, but
essentially the residential tax
rates for APS for tax year 2023
was $10.59.
And then the non-resident
residential tax rate was $11.32.
OK. Um, I remember, you know,
when I was on the school board,
we would often talk about
Re-upping the taxes so that it
doesn't actually raise a
person's taxes. It's just
reauthorizing the tax that's
already there, that it's not a
tax increase, it's just
reauthorizing what was there as
a way of selling it to the
public that this is not an
increase, it's just a
continuation. And is that still
an accurate way of describing
how this works as bonds get paid
down and you're just um
authorizing up the capacity to
then pay down over the next
several years.
Essentially, yes, um, you know,
his advisors, you know, we, we
generally set the tax rate at
whatever tax rate the district
desires, but like APS for
example, they are in a bond
cycling program. Essentially
with that bond cycling program,
you know, we issue new debt as
previous debt matures, so that
overall debt levy requirement,
those principal and interest
payments stay level and in
return, you know, the tax rate
stays level too.
How does changes in the bond
ratings with Moody's or others,
um, affect.
This whole process of, does that
cause rates to go up and down,
uh, I, I was remember we had
discussions about it's a good
time to borrow money because the
rates are really low right now.
Yeah, you know, I'd say for one,
a majority of school districts
in the state of New Mexico issue
with the New Mexico Finance
Authority, um, essentially
through a private placement.
Um, you know, the NMFA buys up a
lot of uh debt across the whole
state of New Mexico. And the New
Mexico Finance Authority does
not require a bond rating. So a
lot of school districts in New
Mexico actually don't have an
outstanding rating, but APS for
example, they do go out for bond
rating, you know, APS's bond
rating has been stable, I
believe, for the last 3 or 4
years, you know, a worse bond
rating of course means slightly
higher interest rates, you know,
a bond ratings kind of like your
credit score and
way, you know, the better credit
score you get, the better
mortgage rate you get, the lower
credit score, the riskier you
are viewed as a borrower and
therefore you have to pay a
little bit of a uh premium on
that interest to borrow, right?
Thank you. Um, let me see if
there are questions from other
board members or committee
members.
Themnos
Um, let me ask you something in,
in, in the Kirtland scenario.
And you bonded those school
districts, right? the alarm's
gonna go off at 12 a.m.
Um,
He bonded those school districts
and I think it's Kurtlins.
Consolidated, right, and the
power plant closed.
And so they lost their mail
levy.
On that power plant.
How's the bond company gonna
come back and say,
And we sold you these bonds
based upon this valuation and
this happening in this school
district.
And now you're not him. How's
that default?
Mechanism gonna work.
Hm
Sure. So, um, you know, for me,
I'm not personally uh familiar
with Kirtland Consolidated
School District,
but with this.
Kind of general obligation
bonds. Again, general obligation
bonds have the right to be
levied at any tax rate that is
needed to pay that principal and
interest. So if there is a
school district where they're
tax base deflated, then yes,
they may potentially have to
raise that tax rate in order to
be able to cover those principal
and interest payments.
Um, you know, as municipal
advisors, we do handle a lot of
tax bases that have uh a lot of
volatility in them, you know, to
name a few, there's Carlsbad
schools, uh, and jail schools
with all the oil and gas tax
base, Kre Schools has a, a large
um copper tax base within it too
that also heavily fluctuates.
You know, part of our job as
advisors is to anticipate those
fluctuations and make sure that,
you know, we're kind of ahead of
the curve so that, you know,
districts can
Confidently issue bonds without
needing a tax rate increase.
We, we come at it with a very
conservative approach.
Yeah, it's just interesting to
me how you're gonna handle these
situations, right?
When, when, and I, I'm just,
these are not numbers that I
know or anything.
When all of a sudden that that
portion of the mill that was
guaranteed to pay the bonds now
doesn't exist, right?
And they can't go above the 12,
the 10% cap, right?
Uh, so for, uh, legal bonding
capacity or the, the mill rate
for 15 mLs for 15 mL and they
can't go above that, right?
They cannot approve a tax rate
that is above 15 mLs. Um, you
know, and nowhere recent or no
time recently, I have heard
though of some school district
having to levy a tax rate of
upwards of 22 mLs because they
have their tax pay fall out
below them or they structured a
balloon payment, you know, at
the end of their bond, and they
needed that tax rate to cover
that payment. Essentially
general obligation bonds are
backed by that district with the
ability to.
Levy whatever tax rate is needed
uh to cover those payments.
OK, and then, and then to go to
your slide 8, right?
Just so I understand this,
assessed value is a total
assessed value of the county.
So it would be for that specific
school district, um, you know,
counties have an assessed value,
cities have an assessed value.
Utilities do too. Um, it
essentially an assessed value is
determined by what tax district
that, that school district
resides in.
So the, the assessed value for
Albuquerque public schools is
going to be different than the
assessed value for a city of
Albuquerque or Bernalio County
per se.
But if you go to uh I use Las
Vegas, right?
They have 2 school districts
within one city, right?
In the value in each school
district is then used to bond
that.
Differences.
Yeah, and uh both West Las Vegas
and Las Vegas City School
Districts, um, you know, they
have different assessed values
because they have different
boundaries.
And then, uh huh.
It's and it's the property
within their boundaries stand is
whispering in my ear, right?
Only within that school
district's boundary.
Yes, so within a school
district's boundaries, you know,
we can break down the assessed
valuation from uh for one
residential values such as your
houses, you know, your homes,
non-residential values which
could be your local businesses,
and then underneath
non-residential, we also have
centrally assessed values. Uh,
these are values that are
essentially more based on
services and utilities. It's
things like um uh P&M uh gas
companies, uh,
railways, stuff of that sort,
but a mix of those is what
creates a district's assessed
valuation.
And, and then when you come back
in a district says you want to
sell.
Uh, a bond for 6% of our
assessed value just from your
numbers at 60 million, right?
How do you tell, how do you rate
those school districts with
their bore.
Or does Moody's come back and
say
I mean here's our past
performance in history and bond
payments.
How do, how do they get you.
How do they get rated a little
bit there is the, the question
how does issuing more bonds
impact, uh, a bond rating? No,
no, how did they get established
a bond rating, right? Like if
there were a AA or AAA bond
rating, who establishes that
that very first just say in a
brand new school district with
uh matches your slide 8.
How did they get assessed a bond
rating.
In that
Yeah, absolutely. So, um
After the OA crash, you know,
Moody's has gradually, um, you
know, kind of made their metrics
more and more secret, but again,
his advisors, we do advise
multiple districts on these bond
ratings. The things that we see
that Moody's does look out for
is for one, kind of the local
economy, right? It is that
assessed value, is your assessed
value growing or is it
declining? And what are some of
the signals in your local
economy, you know, are there new
businesses coming in? Are there
any news headline
signs that show any big
industries coming in, uh,
additionally, Moody's also looks
at the enrollment rates of a
school district too, you know,
is, is enrollment growing or is
it shrinking and what are the
projections around that too, you
know, Moody's also, um, they
make a lot of their decisions
based off of the audited
financials, you know, they'll
take a look at a districts um.
Statement of operations and kind
of looking at the cash inflows
and outflows, and what are the
sources of that cash too. So for
a bond rating, you know, even
though we're just talking about
the bonds, you know, Moody's and
S&P and Fitch and all of the
rating companies do approach it
as kind of a more holistic and
big picture uh view.
a secretive meaning to determine
what your bond rating is and and
then just your financial status
in the market, right?
Uh, can you say that again,
please? The secretive media is
how they determine your bond
rating and then it's the
financial status in your market,
right, that determines that.
Yeah, so they, they, Moody's has
a range of ratios that they use
to calculate um that really
decides, you know, if a district
lands in an A1 rating or an A2
rating. Um, it, it's those
ratios that they kind of keep
under lock and key, but again,
we advise multiple districts
through that bond rating process
and have kind of developed an
idea of things that they look
for.
And then let me ask you this.
And you may not, you may or may
not know this. What's our
highest bond rating in the
state, and what's our lowest
bond rating in the school.
So I know I can tell you the
lowest.
The lowest I've seen is BAA1,
um, you know, that, that's kind
of on the cusp of being a junk
bond, you know, anything below
that if we saw a district come
forward with that rating, we
would recommend for them to go
out to the private markets, um.
You know, for the highest
I'm trying to think if I know of
any AA threes. I know that the
state of New Mexico is rated
AA2, which is, is pretty good.
And, and tell me what um
E E W is in a bore. I've never
even heard of that.
Other than it's junk.
Like a BAA1, um, it's just a
lower bond rating, essentially
it's it it it's like a letter
grade, it's kind of like a C.
Um, again, the districts that do
have a bond rating that is
around there. Uh, we do
recommend them generally to go
for a private placement just
because it may not be worth
going out to investors with a
credit rating like that, you
know, districts and issuers do
have access to bond insurance
too, um, and that's something
that we always look into too if
a district is considering to go
forward with a public market
sale.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, it'd be
interesting to see.
What school districts and what
their bond ratings are, right,
she said there's one that's a B
double E W
What school districts and what
their bond ratings are, right,
she said there's one that's a B
double E1 I think that would
sing to us what's going on in
the school district, what their
value is, right?
And the one in San Juan is
I mean
Central Consolidated is one
we're gonna have to watch,
right? Yeah.
And again, a lot of school
districts in the state of New
Mexico do not have an
outstanding bond rating or an
active bond rating, um, like I
said, a lot of them, uh, issued
through private placements with
the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
The story. Are you, are you
thinnert.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I was just
wanting to um
See uh this example in some
smaller district or, you know,
what in Uno suggested central
consolidated to see the
difference, see what it looks
like from an area.
Uh
It's quite different than
Albuquerque.
I don't know if you have that.
Um, are you asking for, uh, like
central schools is bond rating
or their tax base versus APSs.
Um, I just wanted to see the way
you've laid it out, the tax
certificate example, um, but it
looks like I could like go to
the uh DSA state website and see
that.
Yeah, um, give me one minute and
I'll try to pull up that tax
certificate.
Mhm.
And we'll try to do central
schools as the example here.
By the way, while you're looking
that up, I want to compliment
you on your answers are very
concise and kind of right to the
point. We really appreciate
that.
Oh, I appreciate that. It's one
of the best compliments I've
ever been given.
All right.
He information tax certificates
for San Juan County.
Um
Got a couple of people are
looking it up.
OK. Yeah, I'm, I'm trying to get
it up on my screen too so we can
uh screen share and and continue
here.
All right. You want a job, we'll
hire you.
Well, it's a good thing my boss
wasn't able to show up, huh?
We don't take all right.
So I was able to find, um, you
know, San Juan County's uh tax
certificate here, right? So, you
know, first we want to look at
the school district. And you
know, before we talked a little
bit about like the different
boundaries for the assessed
value. These are those
boundaries, the different tax
districts, right? So we'll keep
scrolling down, let's take a
look for central school
district. So here we are for
Central Consolidated School
District. I can see that they
reside in tax district.
22
and 22 out.
So when we scroll down a little
bit more here, we can see here
that they levy both on SB 9 mil
rate and then they also have a
geo bond mill rate, and then
their operational mill rate for
a total of $9.30. So central
Consolidated School Districts
levels a total tax rate of
$9.30.
So it's quite similar to the
larger school district.
And I see that.
I'm sorry, they're not leveling
uh they didn't pass the HB 33.
Yes.
So it looks like they would only
have, you know, Senate Bill 9
that SB 9 and then they have a
$6.80 geo bond tax rate, and
then along with that operational
tax rate of just, you know, 50
cents, it comes out to a total
of $9.30.
Thank, thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
My pleasure. Thank you, uhm.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Can we stay on this slide?
So the issue is such a
consolidated is the loss of the
PNM power.
Right, that's, that's the issue
we're talking.
Sure, and correct me if I'm
wrong, the current bond rate.
is with that property value in
play.
When they lose it, it will fall
off the books.
But the debt in the bond.
There remains to be paid will
still be there.
Um, I am I out of league to
assume that rate could double?
It could potentially, depending
on the fluctuations within the
district's tax base. You know,
I'll say that we've worked with
Central for a few years now. We
are aware of the fluctuations in
their tax base, um, you know,
and that is, that is something
that we prepare for, um, and I
want to say too that even with
PNM leaving, um, I, I think
their tax base actually
increased this past year still.
So, you know, that is a huge
factor, but that isn't all that,
you know, that tax base is made
up of. Like I said, we have kind
of the local economy, um,
outside of the energy and then
also the residential values too.
Yeah, so Mr. T, let me make my
point. Let me go back to your
slide 8 that we've been talking
that everybody knows who's
talking about.
So if you have an assessed
valuation of 1 million bucks.
And you have a constitutional
debt limit of 60 million.
Um,
Let's assume that you take that
available depth capacity.
And, and a district were to go
ahead and go into that debt.
They would structure a bond,
correct me if I'm wrong.
They would generally usually be
between 12 and the 20 year
limit.
Pay it off. It's like buying a
car. Do you do it for 5 years or
7, and the same.
But then once you do it, you
have the doubt.
Now let's assume that your
employer now cuts your salary by
30%.
You still have the debt.
You have to pay at the monthly
payment you made. The same thing
is true here and that's the
issue in San Juan County. If you
close up the power plant
completely.
Remove its value from the tax
tax logs.
It has a sizable impact on the
total.
land valuation.
But the debt
is still there. That's, that's
the issue I'm trying to raise.
Am I wrong?
No, that the debt will still be
there. Um, again, we do
represent central schools and
we're aware of the, the
fluctuations in their tax base,
you know, as a follow up, I'm
happy to do kind of an assessed
evaluation analysis uh on
central schools for you, cause
we, we've uh weighed the impact
of that closure before, um,
definitely happy to do that for
you. That'd be great.
Mr. Chairman, my final point,
the last time the state did
this, it was either questa with
the moleorine, or it was animus
with the Kennicott copper
spelter.
OK, I remember animals cause I
was public school financial back
in that day.
So they went out and did a bond.
That had a debt to build new
buildings.
Everything looked like it was
fine and done, but after the
bond was passed and the building
was built.
Which means you've already
incurred the debt. They closed
the smelter.
It was gonna triple.
T.
The, the property taxation on
the properties there because
while they, they bond debt.
was, was near the 6%.
The debt was there. That's the
two heads of the snake.
The debt still has the monthly
payments so that the yearly
payment that has to be made,
actually actually buying.
OK, and so that, that was the
issue that created we came.
I was public school, we came to
you, the legislature.
And said that that was onerous
on the community.
They had, they proceeded in good
faith and the and the state of
New Mexico defeas those bonds.
So they could reduce the debt
down to what those property
owners expected under the
current levy and had them pay
off that diminished amount.
It was defused off the bond.
Those are the kinds of issues
that come into play.
San Juan and I appreciate, you
know, these, these guys were my
bond advisors in.
To the districts I serve,
they're very, very good at their
task, as you said, Mr. Chairman,
clear, concise, and, and able,
and understanding, but those are
the issues that are in this
cause you have tremendous impact
on property. That's, that's the
issue.
Thank you. Yeah, and if I can
add to that too, you know,
before we talked a little bit
about bond cycling and that's
what APS does, um, you know,
with districts that do have
fluctuating tax bases, we help
them through that bond cycling
program. So for example, like,
let's say that a district has
$60 million of authorization to
issue, right? Instead of locking
that district in into $60
million of debt over the next 20
years, and maybe be better to
kind of cut up that off.
ization You know, maybe we only
issue $150 each year, so that we
can kind of get updated
information on what that tax
base does, right? Um,
additionally, too, in extreme
cases, we have restructured debt
to essentially push it out to
avoid a tax rate increase. Uh,
for example, Lovington schools
back in 2021. They have a very
uh oil and gas heavy tax base
that part of their assessed
value had a little bit of a
crash and so instead of
Letting that tax rate, you know,
uh, rise, we essentially
structured the debt to push it
out. And since then, you know,
we've had some recovery in the
oil and gas tax base and now
Lovington will never have to see
that tax rate increase. So there
there are some tools that are
built that we can utilize to try
to avoid that tax rate increase,
even if the assessed value
begins to drop.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee.
Uh, thank you. This has been
very informative on, you know,
how those mechanisms work and
with some real life examples
that are currently on our minds,
and so I very much appreciate
your, your expertise and, and
working with districts to manage
all of this because often school
board members are not
knowledgeable in these areas and
rely very much on expertise of
firms like yours. Thank you.
No, absolutely. And again, thank
you for your time and thank you
for also reaching out to us, um,
you know, if you have any
follow-up questions, please do
not hesitate to reach out to
myself or any of my colleagues,
you know, I'm, I'm happy to give
a presentation like this again
or a shade of it again if needed
And um again, I'll be back with
that Central Schools uh assessed
value impact. I'll, I'll give it
over to Simon who can hopefully
get it over to you. Great. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Thank you and have a
great rest of your meeting.
Thank you. Our last presentation
in Mexico Finance Authority, uh,
assisting school districts and
charter schools, so, uh, Mr.
Pierce, and right, Ryan Decker,
if you all with
Please begin whenever you're
ready. All right. Thank you for
being here.
Thank you.
Chairman souls and task force
members, can you all hear me OK?
Yes. OK.
Um, I'm Ryan Decker. I'm the
policy and capital strategists
at the New Mexico Finance
Authority, and I'm joined here
by Chip Pierce, our chief
financial strategist.
Um, we're really excited to be
here today and present to you
how NMFA is working to lower
funding costs for public school
facility projects throughout the
state.
Uh, I'm gonna start with just a
brief overview of who the New
Mexico Finance Authority is for
those of you who are less
familiar with us, uh, starting
on page two of your handouts. So
we were created just over 30
years ago by the legislature in
1992. We are a public entity and
a government instrumentality.
MFA is governed by an 11 member
board are current board members
are all listed there on the left
hand side of your page.
Two of them were confirmed this
year. Remember Konstantinides,
the senior vice president for
finance and administration at
UNM and also the new secretary
designate for the energy,
minerals and natural Resources
Department, um, our board is
currently fully, fully staffed
and very active. They meet on a
monthly basis and we also have 5
subcommittees that meet on a
monthly basis.
And the NMFA board is
responsible for approving our
program rules and policies that
provide the governance framework
for the various funding programs
that we operate our board also
also oversees our operations and
approves our annual budget.
If you turn to the next page,
uh, 3, this gives you an
overview of our program
activity, uh, we are currently
statutory authorized to operate
25 different programs, funding
programs throughout the state.
Um, uh, on the left hand side
you can see those that are
currently active and have
funding available and on the far
right hand side, you can see
those policy partners we work
with, um, for example, for our
economic development programs,
we work closely with the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department for the childcare
revolving loan fund that we
administered, uh, we worked with
ECECD, um, we also have a
handful of other programs that
we operate, not through statute,
but uh when such.
Partner agencies reach reach out
to us to administer, for
example, the CES grant program
during the pandemic and also the
childcare supply building grant
uh program that we operated with
ECECD.
Um, so this is just, uh,
hopefully a helpful overview in
the snapshot of the breadth of
what we do. Um, I would like to
call your attention to the two
programs that are most relevant
for public school facilities.
The first one that was created
in the same year that NMFA was
created in 1992, the public
project revolving fund, um, and
also most recently in 2022, the
charter school facility
revolving fund was created by
the legislature specifically for
um charter school facility
Projects which can be financed
either through the PPF or
through um this new fund that
was created um a couple of years
ago.
Um,
I'm gonna hand it over to Chip
now. He's gonna start covering
um PPRF for you on, on uh slide
4 and then um I'll come back and
cover the charter. Yes, you'll
take us home. Um, yeah, uh, my
name is Chip Perce. I'm the
chief financial strategist for
the NMFA just uh a bit of
background on me. I, uh, was the
financial advisor to the the
NMFA from 1993 until I retired
in 2019.
And then uh unretired when uh
the uh opportunity availed
itself to become the chief
financial strategist, uh, in
October of 22. So I've been with
the PPRF for
Uh, most of my adult life at
this point, um.
It's been, yeah, it's been one
of the most uh sort of
pleasurable professional
experiences I've had.
The PPRF is we we call it the
flagship program of the NMFA.
And we make loans to a variety
of of uh school districts, uh,
cities, counties, uh, tribal
governments, um,
Public universities, so
basically the gamut of anybody
that uh is in need of that, uh.
Projects, the NMFA uh is able to
make loans to them.
The question of of uh bond
ratings was uh came up in the
last presentation, uh, NMFA is,
is
One of the, if not the highest
rated, uh, public entities in
the state were AAA with S&P, and
we're AA1 with Moody's, um.
And that's been a, a process
that's evolved over time as the
program, um, you know, one of
the things that Moody, well,
both rating agencies look for
that we get rated by uh his
diversity of program. We've now
got over 1000 loans within the
pool, uh, and again, it runs the
gamut of credits from GO to GRT
to the net system revenue, you
name it, it's in the program and
so that's one of the things that
boosts our ratings is the fact
that we've got a very diverse.
And,
um,
And we're able to pass our the
the interest rates associated
with those highest.
Ratings to our underlying
communities.
We
Provide a cap so the community
comes to us, they get approval
for a loan. We fix that rate for
90 days. Um, so they've got some
certainty as, as far as what uh
what their interest rate's gonna
be, we absorb most of the cost
of issuance.
Um,
And if, uh, if they have their
own cost of issuance, those they
may pay, but for the NMFA's
issuance costs, underwriting
fees, bond council.
Uh, those fees we pick up on our
own.
Um, one thing that I think the
NMFA, the PPRF program does that
is.
Of real benefit to a lot of our
customers is that
Um, you know, many of our, our
borrowers don't go to the bond
market very often. They may only
go once every 5 or 10 years and
like anything that you don't do
very frequently, you may not.
Be really good at it. We, we're
in the market of quarterly,
maybe uh 33 or 4 times a year.
We've got, uh, you know, the,
the background in developing the
disclosure documents, you know,
negotiating with the
underwriting firms as far as the
rates, and we do this all the
time and it's beneficial to our
underlying borrowers to have to
benefit from that expertise, so.
You know, something that I think
pooled loan programs.
Really do bring that benefit of
frequent, as a frequent issuer,
it's a Byzantine world. I mean,
issuing bonds is a weird kind of
confusing world if you don't do
it a lot, but if you come
through a program like the DPRF,
you get the benefit of, of
having um somebody that that
does it frequently, um.
We, uh, we do provide
disadvantage rates based on uh
the median household income. So
depending on where the community
stands, uh, relative to the MHI,
they can either get um
2% loans or 0% loans up to
$500,000
or 10% of the, of, of their loan
and so I'll I'll get into some
of the details of that in a few
moments.
On page 5, we just talk a bit
about the, the uh structure of
the
Um, of the PPRF when we started
the program, our, our first
issue was in 1995, um, and we
were
Making something out of whole
cloth, we had, you know, the
program did not exist and so
what we did have was the pledge
of the government on grocery
seats tax.
And so around that we sort of
Worked a lot with Moody's, um.
Well, you know, cause they, they
wanna, when they're coming to
rate a program, they want to
know, well, who's in it, we
don't know who's in it because
we haven't taken any loan
applications yet, but we did
have the GGRT and so we did
commit to Moody's that we would
give them an opportunity to uh
take a look at our borrowers.
Provide an assessment of their
rating, um, and then with that
loan, those loan repayments plus
the GGRT restructured a program
that I think initially we were
rated, maybe A1, A2, and now
we've subsequently moved up to
to uh 881 and with S&P, as I've
mentioned, we're, we are AAA.
So the GGRT comes in monthly.
It's pledged to our bondholders
along with all the loan
repayments from uh from our
borrowers, uh, and then.
At the end of the year that GGRT
plus the excess revenues that we
haven't used for debt service
flows into sport and lean and
then it flushes out and then
that's the cash that we can make
loans throughout the year. So we
start, typically we'll start the
fiscal year with
0, 60 to $80 million that we can
then make loans. We don't have
to issue bonds in order to make
loans. We can make the loans and
then reimburse ourselves
subsequently with, with Bond,
uh, with the bond issue, um.
Right now we've got a senior
lien and a subordinate lien.
They're both rated AAA by S&P.
They're both rated AA1 by
Moody's. We're, well, we'll talk
in a few minutes about a new
lien that we are uh well into
the development phase of or uh.
Among other types of credits,
charter schools.
Um,
The, the program's structured,
it's fairly clean we issue fixed
rate debt, we don't, we don't do
variable rate, we don't do
derivatives. Uh, typically we
give, uh, our bonds are issued
with a 10 year call provision,
borrowers get that same, uh,
that same call option.
Um,
You know, I think the, the, the
fact that we've never had a, a
default, a delinquency in the
program as a credit to the lone
staff at the PPRF at the NMFA
who do a really good job of, of
assessing credits and um you
know, it's over a 30-year
history not to have any defaults
as I think, um, quite an
accomplishment.
Um,
We, uh, yeah,
we said we take a variety of
different types of pledge types,
we've, you know, we lend to, as
you see, 33 counties, 14
municipalities, etc. etc. We, we
basically belong to everybody.
On page 6,
I'll get a bit into the weeds
here, but um if you look at the
top line of this graph, it gives
you a sense of, of how the
program is structured. We
Right now, the, the GGRT for
fiscal 24, actually this uh is a
little bit dated. This was based
on last fiscal year, the fiscal
24 uh GGRT was 38 million.
Um, we have loan repayments from
our borrowers of about 150
million.
And against that we have debt
service at the senior lien of
136 million, which means you go
to the the 3rd row there, we
have 50, almost $55 million of
cash flowing into the
subordinate lien, then we have
subordinate lien borrowers
paying us back money, uh, at
55.7 million.
And again, with that all goes to
pay debt service at the
subordinate lien of about 51.6
million. OK, so that's the world
right now. What we are working
on is a junior lean program.
Where that flow through.
That right now just goes back to
the uh.
The PPRF funding is available to
make loans right away. We're
gonna pledge that to a new lien,
a junior lien.
And so that's, we estimate that
that's going to be $500 to $600
million a year flowing through
and then we'll we'll make loans
at the junior lien level, those
borrowers will pay into the
junior lean.
And, you know, we've got
You know, where we started the
PPRF um
Bonding program in in '94 with 9
million from the GGRT. We're now
looking at a uh a program that's
gonna start out with 500 to 60
million as initial cash flow.
Um,
So that the the capacity, you
know, conservatively is probably
300 million. I it's, it's gonna
be north of that. We've had
initial conversations with um
with Moody's and S&P indications
are that, you know, it's not
gonna be the same rating as the
senior and subordinate lien, but
it's gonna be.
Um,
Very solid investment grade
ratings. So investment grade.
Uh,
Starts the BAA3 or
and then it works its way up to
AAA, so that we're gonna be in
the upper tier of the um of
those investment grade ratings,
and we've already, we've adopted
a
A, uh, you turn to page 7.
Um,
I'll just
Move along, you know, the, um,
yeah, in the 224 legislative
session House Bill 207, it
eliminated the discretion uh for
the public school capital outlay
Committee to
Provide lease assistance to
charter schools. I think the,
was it a May and now it's a
shell. So if, if there is an
appropriation.
Charter schools will get uh
their appropriation.
Um, we, it did include a number
of charter school facility
projects in the PPRF
legislation, legislative list.
Uh, which we need in order for
to be able to make a loan, we
have to have a um approval from
the legislature.
Um, as I mentioned, the, the
junior lane were well on the way
toward sort of uh completing
that we did the board approved
an indenture for the junior lean
in 2024.
Um,
So we are ready, ready to move
forward and we're just in the
process now of developing the
the application process and sort
of the credit uh lending review
process for the uh charter
school and all the, all the
folks that will be coming to the
to the junior lean.
Um,
Right, and also doing some
education. Oh, sorry about that.
Thanks.
Um,
So the PPRF has been an active,
on page 8, an active lender to
school districts in New Mexico
over the past 10 years, uh, it's
been north of $660 million. It's
been to every county in the
state with the exception of
Bernollio County, the two school
districts in Berlio County have
not come through the PBRF, but,
uh, really the bulk of the
school districts have. So, um,
you see that
I mean, we, we've averaged.
Uh, over the last 5 years, you
know, somewhere in the 60 $70
million dollar a year of
lending, so.
And these community, the, the
school districts that come to
the NMFA get
The benefit of our AAAA1 rating.
So the concern about underlying
ratings of school districts.
For, for most of these credits,
it, you know, we, we assess the
credit based on
Our credit standards we're not,
we're we're not assigning a
rating to them. If you, if
you've got a general obligation
pledge, and you come to the BPRF
you are, you know, likely to get
approved, so, um, you know,
that's one of the things again
with the pool loan program, uh,
the, the underlying communities
don't need to go get a rating.
Um, they avoid that whole
process if they want to get a
rating, they're certainly
welcome to do that.
But uh
On page
9, I've got a summary of the uh
uh the lending to the school
districts and as you see here
over the past 5 years, we've
averaged 83.2 million um
And then we've also made uh 24
million of disadvantage that is
0 to 2% interest rate loans, uh.
Averaging about 33 million a
year.
Um, so before I turn it back
over to Ryan. Any questions?
There's a lot of
Stuff that I've unloaded on you
here.
Then,
Chairman, thank you. I think it
might assist.
Um, if you could be descriptive,
can I pick on the countyu
County.
Uh, you've got $12.5 million
worth of loans from 19 to 20.
2019 or 2015 or 2024. Mhm.
So there he is there are only 4
districts, right.
Yeah, and um what, what kind of
loans do they ask for?
Well, uh, I'll tell you, so, uh,
in 2015 and 2016 to took him
carry both years had $1.5
million loan.
Uh, and then they had another,
they had a $300 loan, I believe
that's 21.
Um,
And then 1.5 million this past
year, um.
Uh, San Juan, San Juan, I'm
sorry if I mispronouncing that,
but they had a $530,000 loan.
In
2
And then, uh,
And then a $400,000 loan, uh,
three years later.
Um,
Logan Municipal School District
had a $1000 loan and I'm
guessing I can't see cause it's
off the screen, but the 2019.
A 1.2 million in uh uh 2021.
And then lastly, house, uh
municipal School District had a
$400,000 loan in 200.
And another 400,000 this past
year.
That's
Indicative of Stan, what were
those loans for or what, what
kinds of things are the school
districts taking out a $500,000
loan for, um, you know, small
construction projects by and
large.
Yeah, uh, improvements to a
playground or uh, you know,
classroom improvements, HVAC,
um.
This basic infrastructure.
Mr. Chairman.
When they pledge.
The payment because they're in
because they are qualifying.
Governmental entity, they don't
have to go through a credit
check, so to speak, but instead,
I'm assuming they pledge.
Off of an income source. Do you
have any idea?
Is it also
It's probably not all bonds
because it'd be no reason
because yeah, Mr.
Chairman, um, the generally
these are general obligation
pledges, so they go out and they
get the voter approval, and then
they come through the NMFA
rather than
Issuing on their own. So Mr.
Chairman,
This is, we had a presentation
about you go out to the private
market.
Or to NMFA what this is the
local district bond.
That
Thr
previous presentation.
Wasn't
salable
Through that bond market.
NFA has been the bearer of those
bonds instead.
And that's what the loan is, am
I correct?
Mr. Chairman, yeah, these are,
these are, uh, it, it's a
different avenue as opposed to.
I say a local government or a
school district going to the
voters, getting an authorization
and then.
Going through the bond issuance
process, which again, I have
said this is, you know, can be a
complicated process.
Alternatively, they go to the
voters, get approval.
Submit an application to the
PPRF, um.
It's important that they, and I
think in general, most school
districts are on our approved
list of of applicants that you
have to go before the
legislature, uh, but they submit
the application to the to the
NMFA.
We do our own internal credit
analysis, but
The general application, I mean,
the, the
Um,
I can't remember the last time I
looked at it, I think the, the
uh frequency of general
obligation default in America is
like 0.001%. I mean just it's
non.
Relevant. I mean, it's a, so,
you know, we feel very
comfortable that the, the, the
credits we get, particularly the
ones with GO GO backing are um
perfectly suitable for the for
the PPRF program. Thank you. And
so let me just go there cause we
were talking about how the
structures itself.
So this is in these funds are
inside of the 6%.
Limitation
This is instead of buying a bond
from a
Of the private side or someplace
else, they go and sell it to, or
they, they, they borrowed from
NMFA. Correct.
And then they pay it off, so the
limit, this isn't on top of what
you have in.
Statute
This is within that.
It's another option they have.
If you're in a house, New
Mexico.
You probably are gonna have a
hard time leveraging your bonds
on the bond market.
Right. So you either buy it for
a private which has a lower,
which has a higher percentage
rate you're gonna have to pay.
Or you can go to NMFA, which has
a very reasonable percent of
interest rate on it.
And borrow from you. Am I on
page?
Correct, yeah. Thank you Mr.
Chairman, that's the, the right
now the um just to give you an
idea of the
Uh, current.
Rate for the PPRF um.
It's a funny, the interest rate,
the yield curve is very odd.
It's very flat in the first
several years, but it's 270.
2.7% in the first
A year and it stays right around
there for about.
9 years and then it
slowly ratchets up to the point
of 20 years, it's uh
We're just north of 4%.
And so Mr. Chairman,
For those the source of the
From the district is.
An approved referendum on a
bond.
Issue they have.
And you're the point of
purchase.
You know, is that enough? That's
correct. OK, Mr. Chairman, uh,
when if
If it's below a $10,000 loan,
um, we can fund that.
From
are available cash.
You know, it basically a date
that they pick, and it's gonna
have the rates that, you know,
that we, our rates adjust
weekly, but um they're AAA
rates, so, yeah, and then
We are basically the bondholder.
Uh, we then will subsequently
Take all of the cash flows from
those loans that we've made and
sell bonds into the market.
That reimburses, but
You know, the school district
has no
They don't have any obligation
for uh um you know, disclosure
requirements that they would
have if they were issuing on
their own and all the stuff
that's associated with issuing
debt.
I just wanted to kind of make it
simple because of our
discussions we have been I, I
thank you for being patient. I
just wanted to, wanted to walk
through that cause it's
It's confusing.
In the big picture that we're
trying to contemplate and what
are the district's capacity?
So essentially you're the shop
to go to if you have $10,000 or
less.
Because your rates are gonna be
less costly to a district.
And probably the open market is.
Even with the structure you just
talked about.
And then I'm not doing bond
defement or
um
refunding or anything like that
in.
Our discussion here the 2.4% is
a really good rate today.
Out on the bond market.
Probably.
60 50% cheaper, 40% cheaper than
Miss Sherman,
I just make sure it's actually
2.7-ish 9 years, but um the
there's, you know, the, as you
go down in rating from.
AAA A A 1 to say A1.
A minus, uh, that.
Mm
It's a date to go too far out of
land, but you're probably
looking at a uh 30 to 50 basis
point differential, um.
And, and if I might add, that
we, we make loans of more than
$1000 but in order to avoid the
risk of interest rate
fluctuation, the folks who come
to us with a $100 million loan
or greater, um, we call those
simultaneous loans and so we
will fund those loans at the
same time that we issue a bond
issue. We did a large loan, um,
last year for the Albuquerque
Buro County Water Utility
Authority, about $120 million.
Um,
We, we sold their loan.
At the same time, we sold the
overall bond issue just because
we don't want to be in a
situation where we're committed
to a, a 3% rate and then market
goes up to 5%, we're going to
take a big hit on that, so the
bigger ones we were willing to
take the, the rate risk on
smaller loans but the bigger
loans we walk, walk into the
bond market hand in hand. And
Mr. Chair, let me do clean up on
just one other thing because
there are other funding we
talked about was the Cinel 9
houses 33 in tech.
No
In your knowledge, because those
are all the technos a
referendum, right.
So
You districts.
A refused.
MFA and NFA as
A source
Using mill levies rather than
bond.
Authorizations to pay off.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, we have
done, we have made, and I wish I
had that information. I do not,
but we have, we've made several
ed tech note loans, um, see them
quite frequently.
Chairman, just my final point.
Those I described as pay as you
go funds.
But you only get one year slice
when you need 6 years' worth of
money.
You can go in my face.
Borrow a larger amount.
And then as you, that's a
guaranteed Mercedes you receive
that on your mail levy, you pay
back the loan.
In a 5 year period and
everybody's square, you got the
infusion of
Money, you needed to make the
investment.
Technology, or
Small
Capital projects, those kinds of
things. Thank you. Mhm.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
really confused now.
On, on PG on the last column on
the right is that in millions?
Uh,
Uh, Page the last column,
that's, that's actual dollars,
so it's millions of dollars 663
million on the top like the
question I'm asking Mr. chair is
like Saboa County has a 21 $21
million loan, almost $22 million
loan.
Mhm. Yeah, over 10 years. So
this is 2015 I
I asked you earlier, um.
You know, they have a like, they
have a reserve of 12 million.
Why are they borrowing money on
top of that? Do you have any
idea for that? Or do you guys
take a look into that when you
didn't borrow this money.
Um, I unfortunately, I'm not, I
can't answer that. Which, which
county was that? The Sebola? Um,
I can absolutely look into that
then, and they, you see they
have like a fun balance of $12
million. I'm sure it's about,
you know, there's like there's
another couple of other school
districts that have a big fund
balance, and yet they're uh
I'm gonna use uh uh McKinley
County, uh, there for 25 75
million, and they have a reserve
of 50 million in the bank, I
think.
Don't call me that number, but
My question to you is,
Why do you guys keep on letting
borrow money if they have the
money? That's
Does that make any sense? Uh,
yeah, Mr. Chairman, um,
I, I can't speak to the
specifics. I guess my, my own
personal feeling on, on, uh,
The financing of long-term
capital just on a basis of sort
of generational equity, it makes
more sense to pay that over
time.
As opposed to do a pay as you
go.
With current assets just because
if I live in the district,
Um, and use, you know, use cash
to pay a $10,000 for a new
school.
Somebody moves in the district
the next year.
Doesn't bear any of the cost
that even though they may be
benefiting from that asset. So
that, I mean, and that's just a
philosophical position I take
about, you know, that that.
From a generational equity
perspective, paying for long
term assets with a long term
financing is just more fair as
far as the the fund balances
these guys are carrying. I, I.
I, I can't answer that.
But I can, I can look into it.
Who was the, the other district,
the
Besides Ebola.
Uh, I think McKinley County. I
mean, I, I'm not pointing
fingers at anybody, you know,
cause that's one part of my
district.
And you know, I'm just asking a
question of why are they
borrowing if they have it.
I know it comes down to chair is
like when you go buy a car.
And the 0% interest, well you
don't get no down payment on it.
You just pay with their money,
as I understand that part too,
but you know, to have a fun
balance in, in your uh in your
bank.
And then you're borrowing money
now they're in for $21 million
not.
That's just a question.
I, I understand, I understand,
and I, I will.
Uh, see what, uh, some of the
lone folks, uh, if, if that, if
that, I don't know if that
enters into their um
calculations, but I'll
definitely find out.
And one more question, are, are
you, uh, you're not done with
your presentation yet, are you?
Ryan's going to be talking more
I need to ask you some questions
on, on
Uh, private industries that
cannot borrow money from uh.
Finance Authority. Are you gonna
get into that a little bit later
on?
We're gonna ask that question
now?
Yeah, and, and representative, I
think what you're asking about
is something it would be more
for the public or the finance
authority oversight committee as
far as their lending to private
entities as opposed to public
ones. This really was focused on
uh how school districts are
utilizing their services.
I think it was for no reason I
asked that because on page 4
states uh
Uh, private
You know, who you let money
borrow to he don't.
And on top of the, the first
page is his uh um.
They the local
And rial, you know, I was just
wondering if it, if it's on the
deal, we can always ask that
question to somebody else.
Thank you for sure.
Thank you. Any other questions?
If not, if you would please, uh,
Inform us and educate us about
how this works for the charter
school side of things.
I did
Here we go.
Um, uh, that we've worked with
over 60 school districts
throughout the state on over 400
projects. So the charter school
universe uh here in the state,
um, one thing, um, uh, that's
important to understand is
actually is quite small.
Um, so they're just over 100
charter schools throughout the
state, um, but what I wanna
highlight for you is what we've
been working on in terms of um
facility uh funding or uh
facility financing capacity
under both PPRF and um the new
charter school revolving loan
fund, um, program that was
created a couple of years ago
for those uh uh facilities,
projects, um, and some of the
things we've been looking at
around those um funding needs.
Um, so.
Just to start on page 10, some
basics which I'm not going to
cover in detail because I'm sure
you all know all of these, but
uh charter schools are public
schools, they're publicly
funded, um, they're overseen by
publicly elected authorizers.
They operate according to
charter school contracts.
Um, and they are often seeking
to offer alternative educational
models, uh, including
specialized pedagogy, focusing
on art, local culture and
language, uh, modalities such as
project-based learning or
Montessori, um, or specialized
uh blended learning or college
preparatory curriculum.
Um, here in New Mexico, charter
schools have existed for over 20
years. They're currently just
over 100 of them, um, roughly
70% of charter schools here in
the state by count are located
in urban communities,
specifically in areas of
Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and Las
Cruces, and the other 30% are um
rally located uh charter
schools.
Um, and over 50 of them are now,
um, included on the PPRF
legislative authorization list.
So, um, last year, um, we, uh,
the public charter schools of
New Mexico, um, went out to
their membership uh throughout
the state of charter schools,
um, with our legislative
authorization request form and
this year during the session as
um Chip mentioned there were a
number of charter schools that
were added to that list. That
means that all those schools are
authorized by the legislature to
apply to the PPRF.
Or um uh facility funding.
On slide 11, uh, what I wanted
to go into here was just to
cover um some of the facility
funding, um, needs that we
uncovered, um, one in part, uh
working with public charter
schools of New Mexico, um, they
did a survey with charter
schools throughout the state. It
was a really short survey but
got 37 responses, um, from
schools around the types of um
facility projects that um they
uh they needed uh funding.
4, a couple of the takeaways, so
one, note that a lot of charter
schools in the state are small
schools. The average size of
respondents was 380 students,
um, charter schools are heavily
dependent on public funding, um,
for their facility needs to
cover their facility needs. Uh,
some of them are successful in
raising private philanthropic
capital uh to help um supplement
their public funding sources,
but by and large they do rely on
public funding sources.
Or facilities projects, and 90%
of those that responded um
indicated that their current
facility needs some kind of
improvement, expansion, or
specialized space. Um, and that
could be something as simple as
a gym.
Um, or a library, um, not to
mention something more
specialized like a, like a lot,
a science lab.
Um,
In terms of the types of
projects, um, uh, we, we see
short term projects anywhere
from, um, you know, within 1
year to 5 years for renovations
and tenant improvements. Um,
there's also demand for um
funding to acquire um new
facilities to expand space, um,
and then there's also, um,
longer term financing needs 5+
years out to 20 years for larger
expansion or additional
facility uh projects.
And respondents, um, just
highlighted um some of the
challenges that they're facing,
um, uh, they are uh lacking
options in terms of um
affordable financing, so, um,
charter schools uh do not have
an easy time getting traditional
bank loans, um, there are
oftentimes working with
alternative lenders like uh
community development financial
institutions, um, that
specialize in financing charter
school uh facility projects.
Um, overall, uh, charter schools
indicated that just overall uh
strained finances and strained
budgets, um, impede their
ability to advance facility
projects, um, there's a lack of
um built educational facilities,
particularly in rural
communities, for um uh schools
to, to seek to occupy.
Um,
And they have insufficient cash,
um, cash balances to fund down
payments, um, for acquiring new
facilities.
Uh, the next slide, uh,
highlights some of them, um.
Kind of broader policy
challenges, um, that the charter
schools uh face um from a credit
perspective, so I'm sure you all
are familiar that um charter
schools as as public schools,
um cannot um take on debt, um,
so they, whenever they do take
on a facility project, a longer
term facility project, and
finance that it's through a
lease purchase, um, agreement.
Um, and their primary source of
repayment for their lease
payments um under lease purchase
agreements or lease assistance
payments. Um, those are awarded
by the public school capital
Outlay Council. That's an annual
grant process, um, an annual
funding process administered by
the PSCOC, um, every year, the
PSCOC also determines, um, on a,
on at its discretion, um, the
per pupil
that um determines the dollar
amount of that uh grant award.
That then charter schools
receive um to offset the cost of
their lease payments on their
facilities. Um,
And we know that um historically
those lease payments, um, that
they receive, there's a
shortfall um between what they
get from PSCOC and what their
actual lease costs are, um, in
the fiscal year 2023, um,
according to PSFA, uh, publicly
funded lease assistance payments
covered just 70% of total lease
costs, um, for charter schools,
um, in, in covering their
facility, uh, leases. Um, so
that.
That shortfall is already um an
issue for them in terms of being
able to afford um adequate
facilities. Um, the last 3
bullets there are just um kind
of credit considerations, if you
think about if you're a lender
trying to underwrite um
financing for a facility
project, so, um, our, um our
collateral is effectively an
educational facility, um, which
if there is a default situation
we would own a
A school building, um, and, um,
in terms of being able to manage
that or liquidate that or sell
that, that's um uh potentially
more challenging than other um
other types of facilities that
we could uh potentially um be
looking to to to sell off and
liquidate, um, charter school
contracts, so, um, uh.
The contract under which they
can operate and exist, um, those
can be suspended or revoked by
their authorizer, um, and those
contracts themselves um have a
maximum term of 5 years, so, um,
if a charter school comes to us
with a longer term project, and
we're looking to finance that
we're looking to finance an
entity that technically is not
able, not potentially not
operating, um, but we're looking
to finance something that has a
longer life.
Um, so there's a mismatch there.
Um, charter schools can also
lose that lease assistance
payment that I talked about
earlier if they fail to meet
standards for educational
occupancy or e-occupancy is
determined by PSFA, um, and, um,
related to that is the fact that
charter schools do not receive
funding um to help maintain
their facilities, and so that
poses a risk for continuing to
meet occupancy requirements and
as a lender,
Um, if we lend to a charter
school or finance a lease
purchase agreement for a charter
school and they they lose their
occupancy, they could lose the
revenue stream that they're
using to pay our lease payments.
Um, so, um, for a host of
reasons, they are a more
challenging credit, um, and
lease purchase agreements are
more challenging to finance.
That's one reason that we've
been working on uh the junior
lean that Chip described. This
is one of a number of types of
credits that we would be able to
offer historically PPRF has
always been able uh charter
schools have always been
qualified entities under the
PPRF, but because of these types
of risks.
We have not been able to do many
projects historically, PPRF has
done 2, over the, over the
history of the program.
And so we're excited about the
junior lien because it will
expand our capacity, not just
for charter schools, but other
types of alternative credits,
um, where we have seen that
there is um funding uh need or
demand here, um, in New Mexico,
so, on, on slide 13, um, this is
an excerpt from the public
school capital Lake Council
meeting materials, and this just
shows the trend of that
discretionary rate um per mem
rate.
That PSCOC um sets. So lease
assistance payment is either the
lower of an actual lease amount
that a charter school is paying,
or this discretionary rate times
the number of students, um, uh,
and they're pretty specific
about that number, um, times the
number of students, and you can
see that um this is the the
history of the rate, um, how it
was set in the orange line, and
that rate um has significantly
lagged um inflation.
In terms of um increases year
over year, um.
And just to highlight in fiscal
year 2024, PSCOC just approved
lease assistance awards totaling
for um just over 100 schools,
charter schools throughout the
state, 22 million.
So that would be the total
amount of eligible lease
assistance awards um that are
going to go to all charter
schools in the states to cover,
um.
This assistance or lease
payments.
Um,
And the last slide here, uh,
Highlight some of the things
that we look at when um
underwriting on financing lease
purchase agreements, um, and
from a school and project
perspective, so some of the um
and what we're developing in
terms of project applications
that are specific for charter
school projects. We'll be asking
for information um that like a
business plan, for example, that
can help us assess, um, not just
enrollment.
And, and, and current and
projected enrollment by the
schools um capacity to attract
um that student population
because the number of students
is directly tied to how much
public funding um they get, um,
we assess the strength of the
school's administration,
staffing board, um, and we look
at their educational uh quality,
um, and how competitive they are
for um uh attracting students
and being able to retain their
students.
And from a facility perspective,
we'll look at um the project
readiness, um, the extent to
which they've planned
effectively and budgeted um to
cover the project, including
cost overruns and maintenance,
um, and just the extent to which
they've identified a site, um,
uh, put a uh uh identified a
site and negotiated terms of a
lease and acquired or or made
any progress towards permitting
um that would be necessary.
Um, on the structuring side,
lease purchase agreements and
financing them are, um, is
relatively complex, um, and
LPAs, um, must be approved by
the public education department
and the school facility itself,
um, must be, um, uh, signed off
on by PSFA, um.
LPAs have annual terms, um, so
technically as part of the terms
of the lease, um, the lease um
can can be canceled um after one
year. Um, and that's related to
this, um, um, kind of constraint
on uh a public school being able
to uh obligate itself beyond um
the current fiscal year.
Um, and then the lease
assistance payments, the source
of repayment on the financing,
um, are granted on an annual
basis and we have no visibility
on what those lease payments
will look like beyond the
current fiscal year.
Um, so a couple of things that
um uh we will be um continuing
to work um to potentially
implement, um, uh, Chip
mentioned in the past, um,
legislative session that shift
from made a shell on the fact
that Liase assistance payments
if the legislature authorizes
them, shall be made on to
charter schools, other things
that that that could um improve
the, the credit quality um for
charter schools would be um
setting a minimum.
uh, rate that discretionary rate
that PSCOC sets also um looking
to introduce an intercept on
those lease assistance payments,
so they come directly um to
NMFA. We do that on a lot of um
the PPRF uh loans, oftentimes we
intercept GRT payments, um, uh,
that improves credit credit
quality, um, significantly.
Um,
Yeah, and last but not least,
one thing um we've noticed is
that um charter schools that
have a positive relationship
with their local district, um,
those schools tend to have um uh
be incorporated into that school
district's access to um a
facility funding through GO
through the various HB
9 SB 33 funding sources, um, but
a lot of charter schools seem to
not have positive relationships.
With their school district,
public school districts, and so,
um, have not been um
incorporated into those um kind
of accessing those funding
sources.
Um, in terms of impact that we
see and why we're working on
this, um, you know, in part when
we received the charter school
revolving loan fund that's been
um appropriated $100 million
from the legislature in 2022,
um, we, we took that as a sign
that the legislature wanted us
to look at um charter schools
alongside how we um support um
public school buildings
throughout the state, um, and so
we've worked both at our looking
at our PPRF capacity and how
We could make that available and
we're looking at how we can uh
use that then $10,000 to um
support that that subsector of
of public schools in the state.
Um, with that, I, I stand for
questions.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
Munoz. Let me ask you something.
You mentioned in your
presentation.
Yeah
When you go look at the charter
schools, right, or, or these
other schools.
We're not looking to see if they
commit that money to to bond
company, right? Let me, I'm
trying to understand that. So
they sold the RBC and went out
and got a bond and sold that
bond. When they come back to
NMFA to these loans, right? Are
they committing the same bond
money to you that they committed
to them. Um, yeah, Mr. Chairman,
the.
Yeah, basically, uh.
Yeah, the pledge that uh they
would make in the public markets
if they're to issue the debt on
their own, based on their own
rating that that pledge is gonna
be.
The same as we accept in our
loan agreement with that with
that district. Are they doing
that in tandem? Are they
pledging the same dollar cause
you said that you weren't
looking at their audited
numbers, right? They are only
giving you what their total
amount.
Receivables were and they
weren't, they could pledge both.
They can pledge it the both the
same, but could they pledge the
same dollar
guarantee Mr. Chairman, uh, no,
the, the
They, they can, uh, a district
can certainly go out and issue
their own.
Yeah, let's say we have a
$500,000 of debt service on that
self-issued loan, then they come
to us or another loan.
Uh, that is another $500,000.
They now have $1000 of debt
service, 500,000 of it goes to
bondholders, 500,000 of it comes
to the NMFA, so they, they still
have to operate within.
The limitations of the of the
the state.
A limitations.
And I want to make sure I, I, if
I gave you the sense that we
don't look at the audit that I
don't as much as the look at the
audit, but the oaks at the end
of the day doing the the credit
analysis absolutely that's when
you said you didn't look at the
audited that through that red
flag up in my head, but you
actually are looking at him, but
yeah, no, no, they're they're in
fact our loan um management
policies have an entire section
on what they have to, you know,
the, the, the currency of their
audit, the information.
Yeah, the audit is, is one of
the fundamental pieces of
analysis that the uh loan
officers look at.
in
And answer me this question, why
aren't we making every school
district come to you?
I mean if you're, you're bonding
at 2.74%, right?
With a
With the flat for 10, I'm just
gonna say 10 years, it's 20 year
bond, right? and then it.
At some point they're gonna hit
that 4% if it's whether it's a
10 or 15, right? Yeah, I mean,
you've cut your principal
amount.
At a larger rate at the 2.74.
And you have in the 1st 10
years, then you have if you went
to the open bond market, which
is probably around 4 or 5 right
now, right? Yeah, almost double
of what that is. Yeah, Mr.
Chair, I think a lot of the, a
lot of the school districts will
uh get uh issue through there's
a state of bond guarantee
program, where I think it's an
intercept program that they get
an underlying rating at that
point of A3. So,
Yeah, that's fairly close to
what our rate is. I think a lot
of districts, um,
want to
Uh, it, it for a number of
reasons that that maybe that
they feel like the timing isn't
working for him if it's a larger
loan, you know, they have to fit
in with our bond issue and maybe
that doesn't work for them, um.
I think there are
Just issues of
Uh,
controlling the funds with the
NMFA, the, the funds, um, are
held at the NMFA and
requisitioned by the by the
school districts, um, and so we
keep track of arbitrage earnings
and all that. Some districts
don't, don't aren't comfortable
with that, they want the
proceeds at closing. So there,
there are reasons that that uh
districts might want to go out
on their own, um, and it's
certainly a a personal choice.
But I'm sitting here as a
financial guy, right, and
saying, should I borrow money at
4% and you're gonna give me $220
million for a $200 million bond
today, and I'm gonna start
paying 4 or 5%, right? That's
pretty much a marketing a AA or
AAA.
Or should I pay the state agent
she's smiling at me. Should I
pay the state agency 2.7%, but
I, I may not need the 10 million
today, and I can make draws on
that note, right?
And as I make those draws,
Then my total
That interest payments are only
on that
that drawn, correct?
Um, you're holding the money,
you have it, they got a same $20
million loan, but they're only
drawing 5 million out a quarter,
right?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, they, um,
once they have, uh, made, once
we have a loan agreement for an
amount of principal, you know,
50, 10 million, whatever it is,
then they have an obligation to
Uh, there's a death service
schedule based on that full loan
amount, and they will be paying
on that loan amount even if
they're
Requisitioning very slowly. They
do get the interest earnings on
any funds that are being held at
the NMFA obviously, but um,
yeah, their, their obligation is
for the full amount that they uh
signed in the loan agreement.
And I, I want to just add that
uh.
We work with RBC and all the
other financial advisors in the
state extensively and so we have
a very um
Positive relationship with them
and they, they bring, as we saw,
$6660 million of loans over the
past 10 years, so
most of those come through the
uh local municipal advisors or
you know other firms that do
municipal advising in the state,
um, and I think we have a, a, a
positive relationship with him
and at the end of the day, it is
um
It's up to each district to
determine whether the benefits.
They
Uh, offset any of the meeting.
Advantages that people perceive.
And then my next question goes
to the charter school loans,
right? And there, there's been a
couple that have went defunct,
right?
and
If they're leasing the building.
Right.
And they're pledging money to
you guys.
For improvement
And all of a sudden the charter
school goes away.
I think there's one or two that
have there may be more, but I
don't know.
Then where do you come to get
that payment?
I was asking her.
Yeah, I mean, that's what,
that's what we're working on is
how to, how to underwrite and.
Manage potential situations like
that, um.
You know, ultimately the goal is
that we're not underwriting a
school where we think there's a
high likelihood that they're
gonna be defaulting.
Um,
Yeah, I mean, I'll give you the
perfect example is charter
school in my district, who wants
baseball and a football field,
and they have 200 students and,
and I, I just don't see the
viability of all that athletic.
Stuff in a charter school with
only 200 students.
Right, and they're trying to
raise money every way they can.
Oh
If they go to you guys and say,
hey, we want school
improvements, right? And then
swap that money once it's there
and
And build a a soccer field or or
base, whatever it is, right?
And then the fun and on a leased
property then.
I mean, you're left holding the
bag.
Mr. Chair, I think, I think
that's a really good example
because I think that's actually
a very common example of the
type of project or applicant
that we could see.
The reality is a lot of charter
schools are on the smaller side,
and by virtue of that, their
budgets are constrained both for
their core activities,
educational activities, not to
mention facilities expansion.
Um, so constrained, a
constrained facility.
Budget is something we are
having to look at how we can
make projects work in with that.
Constraint, um.
When I talked about some of the
things that we look at, um,
project feasibility is something
if and if an applicant comes to
us and there's a project that
the scope is out of reach for
what a school can afford,
realistically, it is unlikely
that that would pass
underwriting.
Um,
And I think I didn't really
mention it, but the other thing,
um that is common throughout the
country in charter school
ecosystems is a um need also for
technical assistance in the
planning phase for these types
of projects.
You know, charter school leaders
and founders are typically um
educators, um, they're not
facility people and, you know,
hopefully they have on their
governing board and a member
with some facility expertise or
they are able to hire someone if
they want to.
You know, pursue a a significant
Facility upgrade or expansion,
um, but the reality is, as you
all know, it takes a lot to um
to successfully do a project
like that and and charter
schools aren't equipped as
organizations to manage those.
And so, I think some of the
things you're pointing to are
also just project readiness, um,
and something that we're
familiar with often in seeing in
with all of our programs and
applicants that come to us with
Needs, you know, for funding for
Ideas and and things that they
would like, but.
It may not be a match for what
they could afford.
I, I just caution that's
I, I just caution that
the charter school owns some
type of asset, right? It's not a
lease.
Those and
Things that I look at and say at
any point in time the lease
could be terminated.
I
Owned the asset, but
I don't know, that's a slippery
slope.
I don't, I mean, there's good
ones, there's bad ones I can
tell you, the ones in Gallup.
Middle college ones my sons went
to both and
And there was war internally
with the school district on
funding and and everything else
and
How they're gonna get it and
then another one the state
chartered and
It's just that is something I,
that I don't think can happen.
I would just caution how you
lend that money cause in the
day, but it's interesting to me
that
We are requiring school
districts to come to you guys to
bond, right?
There may be.
RBC hit me in my truck when I'm
done with this, but take them
out of the market, but I mean,
At 2.7% and using state money.
Especially when we talk to the
WNW.
BBC, the lowest bond rating in
what school districts are in
there, right?
And why we aren't running those
through them because if they
default, it comes back to us no
matter what.
To pay the debt.
be interesting to to look at
creating that bonding fund.
And, and even though you sell
them on the open market at the
end, they still have an
opportunity to buy those.
to look at the short term
front-end costs.
Savings to school district may
be pretty significant.
are doing the underwriting.
And the cost
Interest rates for the first
there's a way to lock those, you
can.
We had $200 million in bonds
sold throughout the state and
we're cutting our percentage by
Like from 5 to 2.7.
I mean those are big numbers.
Those are big numbers to school
districts that go there to their
classrooms or their bottom
lines, right?
If we can save them money, we
should look at that as any way
and.
Let me start thinking about
that. It'd be interesting to run
a scenario like. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
I do just want this German Mr.
Chairman, don't you have a
Don't, don't you have a cap?
Authorization by the legislature
for the amount you can
Land in any given year.
Or not.
Um, I'm not aware of a cat, the,
the limitation is the, the um
authorized list of.
Of borrowers, but.
Um,
There you go.
So, thank you. I was, I was
confused. I thought that some of
the funds had legislative
authorization as a prerequisite
to funding.
Um, I, I think I might be wrong,
so.
Um, well, Mr. Cherry, um, to
apply to PPRF, you do have to be
legislatively authorized, but
There's no cap related to that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Munoz's.
Idea of pushing
Public school
Uh, bonds through you as a first
source is doable without any
additional statutory.
Um, yeah, I guess.
Uh, I
My only hesitation there is that
uh.
I think
I think the local school
districts should have.
The option to, you know, cause
like I said, there, there may be
issues that uh we, we're unaware
of in terms of um yeah, the
structuring or the access to
funds or.
Um, at this point, I mean,
really, the interest rate
differential between.
If they are going through the
state with the AA 3, I think
it's a GRT.
Uh, no, it's a, it's, it's a
state intercept.
Through, yeah, um, you know, the
differential there is between a
double A1, AAA that we have or
AA3 uh with the state guarantee.
You know, I'd be surprised if
it's more than 10 or 15 basis
points. And so for some folks
that the fact that they can have
their own funds.
Control their own timing.
And that sort of thing. I just,
you know, I don't want to sort
of impose some sort of
You know, paternalistic sort of
expectation kind of thing. Thank
you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
If not, thank you very much. I
am very informative and very
hopeful, um.
It's nice to know that there's
some lenders out there that feel
like the good guys that are
doing low interest rate rate
loans for the good of the state
of New Mexico and just moving
that money around through New
Mexico to do more good. Thank
you. I appreciate all that you
guys do.
Uh, we do not have anybody that
has signed up for public comment
and so that was the last thing
for this meeting, our next
Meeting uh is scheduled for the
25th of September, uh, same bad
time, same bad place, I think.
OK, and I'll plan on covering
the adequacy standards at that
meeting as well as probably it
would be time to have an update
of what projects are currently
in process and things. So. Yeah.
Any
Update on the funding formula.
So thank you all for attending
and we are
