Good afternoon, everybody and
thank you for waiting. I believe
we now have the live webcast on.
We're starting late because
traffic apparently is very
backed up on lava hot a hill and
heard that there was an accident
public with the construction and
things aren't moving, so we'll
have other members come in, as
they're able to manage and get
here.
But for those who are here,
thank you for pushing through
the traffic and the problems and
all and being here and we'll get
the others will just do some
quick introductions of the
people who are here. So this
tortoise Antonio, if you would
please
Good afternoon, everybody. My
name is Antonio Ortiz. I'm with
the Public Education department.
and I am the designee for
Secretary Romero. Good
afternoon, everyone. Ashley
Leach. I'm with the State Board
of Finance here as a designated
for secretary with Good
afternoon, Dr Karen Sanchez,
carry a go Superintendent, Cuba
Independent School district,
retiring June 30th. And so my
last meeting very excited to be
with you.
Good morning, everybody
representative Jack Chatfield,
New Mexico House district 67 up
in the northeast corner of the
state.
Kovacs, Curry Harding place at
McGill and Union counties.
Uh,
Just almost Texas, almost
Colorado and almost Oklahoma
riding right in the corner.
Good to be here today.
Thank you represented for being
here and way over on the far
side. Mr. Good afternoon. I'm
representative Animals. Castano
I serve house district 70.
Just like glad to be here, and
hopefully we have a good meeting
there. Mr Chairman. Thank you.
And I'm Bill sold state senator
from Las Cruces and very honored
that I get to chair this and
been very involved with capital
outlay issues for a long time
Way back. When we first started
the facilities thing I was
principal at the time and very
involved in setting up
Oh,
What the standards were and the
whole process for things way
back. Yeah. What that would have
been about 2000 or so when we
were first doing that when we
shifted from having critical
capital outlay, money put
towards schools, Um, and we have
a new Legislative council
service lead with us today. So
Simon if you'll introduce
yourself and the others with
council service, please. Simon
Suzuki I'm a staff attorney with
Legislative Council service. I
am new lead step on this
committee.
And I look forward to working
with all of you and the
facilities authority as well.
Thank you. As we get started
just a couple of things again.
We're gonna have other people
coming in. But because of the
special session, there's 10 of
the leave been called for July.
The next meeting is moved to
July. 1st instead of I think it
had been scheduled for like the
19 50th. So if you could set
your calendars early off of
things, some things have
shifted, so please make sure and
check that as we're moving
forward, and that will be some
of what we talked about a little
bit later into the
The meeting today. Um, with
that, uh, let's move. We have an
update from the public school
Facilities Authority. And so if
you would please, Mr Romero.
Good afternoon chairman Souls
members of the committee.
I want to first introduce myself
officially, my name is Iris
Romero. I'm the new executive
director for the Public School
Facilities Authority. As you
recall, Miss Casillas has
retired, and so I will be taking
on that role. And I'm sure you
know my colleagues here, but I'm
gonna reintroduce Deputy
Director Ryan Parks and programs
manager Elise Ramos and the
three of us will be presenting
to you today.
So what we want to talk about if
you want to go to slide one on
the agenda. We heard what you
are wanting to hear. And so
we're going to be talking about
specifically fiscal 24 new
awarded projects as well as
completed projects. Um, during
fiscal year, 24
Where we are on our workload.
Um our current process progress
in our projects.
And Mr Parks is going to talk
about construction cost trends
and also give some highlights on
a current projects.
And finally we want to talk with
you to discuss potential
legislation, modifications and
potential new legislation.
So with that, I'll go ahead and
start on. Slide two and give you
again Just a quick overview of
the organization between, UM,
the Public School Capital Outlay
Oversight Task Force, who
oversees the work of our public
school Capital Outlay council.
Who then in turn, manages the
allocation of the public School
Capital Outlay Fund.
And then Psf A is considered
staff to the PSC or C as well as
yourselves. Um, when needed,
where we manage and distribute
the funding and we partner with
the school districts. We are the
boots on the ground. We not only
work with the district's during
the construction projects, but
also we take a proactive
approach and we reach out to
Our school districts who maybe
needs some assistance in
learning how to qualify to come
to request for funding as well
as maybe guiding them towards
having their bond sale. Um, and
sometimes that takes a year to
two years before they even come
to us for funding, So we're
boots on the ground.
Quick overview of the programs
that we currently administer and
that it was the standards
program, which is the school
replacement renovations and
additions. We also have our
systems program, which is
replacements and upgrades, such
as H Back systems, roofing and
like We also have the pre K
Uh, which
Considers renovations and
additions for the pre K program
and teacher housing with which
is fairly a newer program that
offers housing for rural and
tribals areas who don't have
access all readily available
housing, um to rent or to
purchase for teachers.
We also can't forget our charter
schools where they can apply for
at least reimbursement
assistance. And finally, the
facilities Master planning
assistance. So these are our
main programs that are
administered.
On Page four. We're happy to
announce that there were 31 new
projects awarded in fiscal year
24.
Uh, they were six standards
based 22 systems.
To teacher housing, and one pre
k Keep in mind. We have one
more, UM, Capital Outlay Council
meeting in June and there will
be potential awards allocated
then and those stand currently
at five standards for systems,
one pre K and one teacher
housing
We are also very excited to, um
announced on slide five.
Um are eight completed projects.
One of those is Hatch, which is
a pre K project. We have four
standards projects that were
completed this fiscal year to
include Hobbs, Gallup,
Alamogordo and Roswell.
And then I three systems
projects, two of them coming out
of farming tonight and one out
of Los Lunas.
And here is our total of our
current active projects. We have
a total of 553 projects.
And that makes up 58 standards.
79 systems.
10, pre K.
Five teacher housing
36 facilities. Master Plan one
emergency.
Five M and V or measurement and
verification projects. 85 B TCP
projects coming out of the
ground, but our broadband
division
And then there are the
legislative initiatives that
were allocated during fiscal
year 23 and 24, which was house
Bill 505 and Senate Bill 212,
which included allocations to
each of the school districts
that included items such as
security, CT, e and other
maintenance for, um, their
public schools.
And with that, I'm going to turn
it over to Deputy Director Ryan
Parks, and he's going to talk
about construction trends.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members.
It's great to be back at task
Force.
Um, I wanted to land on this
very cool page. Um All of these
pictures are groundbreakings
Page seven. All of these are
groundbreakings. There's one
ribbon cutting in there.
But these are all
groundbreakings that we have
just recently gone, too. So
there's a lot of new
construction projects shovels in
the ground.
Um, and you'll see some of these
images throughout the
presentation. I just think it's
pretty cool to see all the kids
and the and the teachers and
staff celebrating their ribbon
cuttings for their new schools.
Um, as Mr Romero mentioned
I want to talk a little bit
about what we've seen with
construction.
Since the last time we spoke
And, um
If you are? Yep. You're on Page
eight.
Um
That orange and yellow trend bar
that you see you can see those
giant stalagmites towards the
end. Um, so everything to the
left is kind of rolling along
business as usual, and then we
saw those large spikes last year
and places like Gallup will
Saleh most Mascaro Des Moines.
Um, And at the time we were very
hopeful that as we saw projects
bid closer to the interstates
are closer to larger
metropolitan areas that we would
not see numbers in the $1000 per
square foot range.
Um And so I'd like to
Tell that story along with
providing some information on
some
School projects so
As the bullets, state
construction costs.
Continue to stay fairly high,
and, uh
While we while we've heard that
inflation is subsiding and
material costs are
Um, plateau ng their plateau
owing at a much higher level
than they were pre pandemic And
so we're not seeing any savings
when it comes to material.
Um and labor continues to be a
thorn in New Mexico side. We
just simply do not have enough
labor force here for the amount
of demand on construction that
we have.
Um as mentioned costs for
projects in rural areas in
Mexico have seen some of the
highest cost increases will
projects closer to metropolitan
and interstate corridors have
come in lower
And will cost the recently shown
signs of leveling out. They
still remain significantly
higher than pre pandemic.
Um, we continue to struggle with
shortages of labor.
Here in New Mexico. As I
mentioned and this paired with
the continued demand for
construction services here.
Uh,
I I think we're going to see
construction pricing. Stay up
for the foreseeable future. If
you move on to page nine.
I just wanted to share a few of
the many projects that we have
under design right now.
Um, this is just a highlight.
Not
An exhaustive list if you will,
but we do have a project that
just bid and Carrizo Carrizo
combined school.
Uh, New 44,000 square foot
facility, plus a renovation to
their career technical
education.
Building.
This will be a reduction in
square footage as we've seen in
the other.
K 12 schools that we've
Um, been designing and building.
Uh, some of these districts are
in over 100,000 square feet of,
um, school and with the
population, we're trying our
hardest to right size those
schools so that their more
economically feasible to operate
and maintain without taking away
from the educational delivery
quality for the students.
Um, the next project on Page 10
is in Berlin.
It's Dennis Travis Elementary
School. This is a new 46,000
square foot school and
renovation of the existing Jim.
This will serve the pre K
through six.
Um and we do expect construction
to start this fall.
I should have mentioned on
Carrizo. So we expect that work
to start this summer as I
mentioned it just bid recently
and I believe we're waiting on
the decision to be made from the
selection committee.
You turn your page, Turn your
booklet to page 11.
Um, very excited to talk about
the Zuni Middle height
combination school in Zen into
Mexico.
This is a new 97,000 square foot
facility serving 581 students
grades seven through 12.
We do anticipate this one to
start construction this fall as
well.
They actually broke ground. They
had a groundbreaking ceremony
last
Wednesday.
Um they are breaking ground on
some of the play fields and some
of the other parking areas that
are going to be disrupted by
this construction of the new
facility.
But the main portion of the
construction will, um
Will start likely this fall.
And then if you turn to page 12,
these are projects currently
under construction. Some of
these I brought
We We brought and presented last
year when they were in design De
Moines combined school broke
ground this year.
Ah New 45,000 Square foot
facility for 96 students pre K
through 12th grade.
Um, we do expect this to be
completed October of 25.
And the total project cost is
coming in at just over 51
million. That's a construction
cost per square foot of $943, a
foot
If you turn to page 13
This is Mascaro combined school.
another pre k through 12 school
up in the Northeast started
about the same time that Des
Moines dead.
Yeah. Also serving pre K through
12. We expect this to be
completed in August of 2025.
With the total project cost of
just under $46 million, and the
construction cost per square
foot on this came in at 852.
On the next pages, Um, School
for Gallup McKinley schools, Um
Catchy high school in to Hatch
in New Mexico.
Just a little under 58,000
square feet serving 300 students
grades nine through 12.
We do anticipate this one.
Being complete in September of
2026. This is a rather large
Project with a lot of
Interesting construction. And so
this one will take a little bit
longer to get wrapped up.
Total project cost for this came
in just over 63 million
construction cost per square
foot of $913.
And now I'll turn you to page
15 and we'll go down to Las
Cruces and Columbia Elementary
School.
Um
This is an 87,000 square foot
facility for 752 students,
grades pre K through five.
We anticipate this one.
To complete to be complete.
Excuse me next summer Summer of
25.
Total project cost of just over
53 million with the construction
cost of square construction
costs. Square footage of $509 on
the next page page 16 in Los
Lunas. We have Peralta
Elementary school.
47,000 square foot facility for
350 students. Pre K through six.
We had anticipate this one to
complete be complete next summer
as well.
And the total cost on this is
coming in just over 28 million
with the construction cost of
496.
Dollars per foot, so you'll see
Mr Chair and members that, um,
as illustrated by Las Cruces in
Los Lunas, and we've had a
couple other projects along the
I 25 corridor in Socorro.
And, um
One other that I'm I'm
forgetting at the moment that
have come in.
Not at pre pandemic levels, but
we're not looking at 900 to
$1000 a square foot and so
I think we're, um
We're relieved that what we
thought was going to happen is
happening that things closer to
metro areas are
Um, are coming in at a lower
cost.
And, um, I think a lot of it has
to do with the travel and per
diem and getting crews out to
these remote locations has
driven the cost up in the rural
areas, whereas some of these are
in in these folks backyard and
it's
It's a it's a little bit more
manageable for those companies.
And was that I'm going to turn
it over to Miss Ramos Mr Chair
members before Miss Ramos, Um,
makes your presentation I just
wanted to kind of lead into the
reason for the next president,
Part of the presentation is
Capital Outlay Council and psf A
wants to take a little bit more
proactive approach.
And requesting assistance from
the task force again, as I
mentioned before, were the boots
on the ground, and we are
They're sharing the frustration,
um with the school districts
when they are coming and
requesting assistance from us,
but they don't qualify. Whether
that is the fact that they can't
bond to the capacity that is
required.
Or maybe they just can't afford
their local match. Especially
what these cost increases and so
what you're going to see today
is just a handful of some of the
Um
Gaps and problems that were the
districts are facing, and we
thought we'd kind of take
Small bites at some of these
issues, and so with that being
said, I'm gonna hand it over to
Miss Ramos to detail
Mr Ramos? Yes, please. And I for
me, one of the key things I
think for all interim
committees is that we come out
of here with a package of
proposed legislation that will
alleviate and fix problems and
make it better for kids in our
In our statement in their
schools so very much appreciate
kind of that proactive. Look at
what do we need to fix and how
can we appropriately fix it?
Thanks. Chair and members. Thank
you for that. Um, these
suggestions are just that to
help the state and helps the the
school districts. Uh,
In New Mexico achieve some
better facilities.
The first on your list is the
state and local match. As you
know, we've been working on this
for a few years, and SB 131 made
a temporary attempt to reduce
the local match. Um, but that is
a temporary fix. Um, that
reduced the local match by one
third for most districts and
half for the micro districts.
The phase two formula has been
fully phased in the phase. One
formula is now out of the
equation. But despite uh, that
occurring and the SPU 131
reduction, many districts cannot
afford their local match for
particularly the standards based
projects for school school
replacements.
Based on their bonding capacity
and how much they can afford for
these large projects.
Um many of these districts have
very high local matches, and so
there's no way they can afford a
very small percentage, even
though that the formulas
indicates that they should be
higher paying higher percentage.
Um, and so we would suggest
relooking at that formula during
this temporary
Phase of the SP 131.
And resolving that formula
issue.
Potentially to be based off of
the bonding capacity for each of
those districts.
Secondly, we have the local
match reduction, which is
another way of saying waivers.
As we know these districts that
cannot afford their local match
can apply for the PSC OC to
consider waiving and reducing
the local match to a number that
those districts can afford.
Those districts, much must meet
statue requirements in order to
qualify for those waivers.
Um, However, those statute
requirements are difficult for
some districts, particularly the
small districts to meet those
qualifications.
And with the higher matches, it
puts a lot of these districts at
a disadvantage.
The, um
So we would suggest looking at
that statue requirements for the
waiver, potentially amending the
statute for, um, the second
option of the three options for
that local match reduction.
Specifically the free and
reduced lunch in the state
requires our state share
requirements limiting or
adjusting those would help these
smaller districts become
eligible for those local match
reductions.
Um, and without these local
mattress actions we have several
districts just waiting to become
eligible in any way so that they
could afford their standards
based project.
Thirdly, we have
Appropriations and the
inappropriate use of the public
School Capital Outlay Fund.
In the last few years. We've
seen a few. Not a lot, but a
few, uh, earmarks that took from
the public school out Capital
Outlay fund. Um, this pasture
there was one for Memorial
middle school. In the past,
There was another one for
grants, and there are many other
appropriations that occur.
Every year. Um, however, some of
these can bypass the public
school capital outlay, county
councils and PSF phase processes
for awarding projects.
And, um
The process is there for a
reason. Um, so we would like to
look at that and potentially
amend the language to act to
prevent earmarks that are
inappropriate uses of the fund.
Um, Fourthly, we have offsets.
Um, so last year s P 131 negated
offsets previously offsets, um,
were gained by districts as they
Received legislative
appropriations for anything that
amount would accumulate over
time and become an offset of the
total amount of appropriations
the district had received.
And then when and if the
district came to the public
School Capital Outlay Council
for a potential award that
offset was added to the local
match. So this prevented several
districts from being able to
afford their local match that
was potentially already high and
then add an added percentage. On
top of that.
So that's been fully negated.
However, we suggest that we look
at, um, the language in the
bill.
Um, there is no language in the
statute to prevent the districts
from using legislative
appropriations to fund the local
match.
And that would result in
additional funding from the
state.
As well as, um
The offsets were created to, um,
kind of be an equalizer and so
That system is now gone.
And lastly, we have
Some, uh, facility needs for pre
K
As you heard the There is a move
to move pre K from half day to
full day.
In doing so school districts
will need additional classroom
space to fit those full day
programs. Um, and so we would
like to start preparing
For that, so that there is not a
rush.
To construct and, um alleviate
those classroom needs.
Um and we also
Um
Just need to get prepared for
that.
Um, And with that.
Mr Chair and members.
We stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it. And I have several. You
brought up some good things that
I have some questions about
already. But first let me go to
numbers that represent
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Charles. Uh,
Mr. I guess. I comment slash
question on the local match on
the offset, you know, as
legislators
There's nothing
That we enjoy more than being
able to help our local school
districts have 13 of them, and
they're important to me. And,
uh, a lot of the power to help
them come through with funding.
If you do that funding through
some of your
Personal discretionary funds.
It's not gonna be a lot.
If you do it through running a
bill.
Then everybody in the entire
legislature has to agree to that
bill.
So it's probably a pretty good
deal, right?
Uh, so these are awesome. That's
what they do is strip us of the
power that the voters give us
when they elect us.
Ah, secondly
Uh, you cannot use state funds
to match state funds.
I'm I'm six years in the
Legislature, but I've got about
20 years or grant, uh behind me.
You can't match state was state
You can match date with federal
you can match state with
private.
But you can't match state with
state.
Uh huh.
Maybe there's some kind of a
special deal for the local
matching schools. But I can tell
you in every other industry and
every other part of the state
government.
It takes federal to match state
that takes private to match
state.
So I don't think there's a
problem there.
And, uh, I would not be in favor
of bringing back the offsets. I
always thought they were just a
Regulatory way of getting around
pretty darn good system that
exists and your comments on
that.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield. I don't believe what
we're suggesting As far as the
direct legislative
Of the fund. It's I know there
is a capital bill for those
direct legislative
appropriations while we're
talking about as far as the
appropriations coming out of
this particular fund because
there's a process um, that was
Dictated in statute on how to
fund schools as far as the
offsets.
We want to do a study and work
with our partners such as Lfc L.
E S c. To make sure we're still
in line with the Zuni lawsuit. I
believe the offsets were part
of, um, that litigation in order
so that we are now more
equitable.
Um, so again. We want to work
with partners to do that
research and do that study to
make sure that we're still in
line and that the lawsuit is not
going to be affected.
Forward by us eliminating that
offsets.
Um, definitely indefinitely. So,
Mr Chair the the doing away with
the offsets is what brought you
in line with the Zuni lawsuit.
Uh, before whenever there's
federal government paid money.
To the various Indian nations
because of the they did not
have, uh, private land.
So so they
Somebody help me with the name
of the money that
Somebody help me with the name
of the money the
impact when they pay the impact
aid to make up for the fact that
they didn't have taxable land.
Well, then it was an offset was
run. And so it took away the any
benefit that they received their
when other school districts do
have taxable land, so they they
got not only the funding
formula, but they were able to
Leverage taxes. So what brought
you in line with the Zuni
lawsuit was the offsets and, uh
so bringing them back is not
gonna more align you with the
Zuni lawsuit. It probably will
take you
Hmm. Put you more out of line
with the Zuni lawsuit, and I
understand it pretty darn well
like, say, it's not my first
rodeo.
I did. I would probably
Pretty steadfastly opposed. Not
that
I make that much difference, but
the bringing back of the
offsets. I always thought they
were not good thing from the
very beginning, and I was glad
to see him go. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you Other questions.
Nope. Okay, um, Couple of things
And you, You brought up some
some very interesting ones. When
you talked about
This is particularly smaller
districts can't afford.
The their share. How do we just
ERM in what someone can afford
in that if the local community
doesn't pass the bond, they
don't have the money. They can't
afford it. But that really is.
the local community could have
afforded it. They just chose not
to.
Who or how would we determined
that?
Mr Chair and members for these
standards based projects.
We're seeing school projects up
to 30 40 50 plus million dollars
if a district can only bonds to
2 million. If passed, they
cannot afford a 94% of their
local match. They couldn't even
afford 20%. And And so that is
what we're speaking to that the
local match cannot be supported.
If the bond passes and full
Mr Chair majority of the
districts that were in
conversations with her and just
that boat. They're not in the
boat of not having passed a bond
election. In fact, last last
election cycle, I believe only
one district that went out for a
bond didn't pass their bonds. So
We saw a huge growth in support
of local bond elections. But as
Miss Ramos points out, it's a
drop in the bucket to what the
facility costs and when their
matches 94% without the
One third reduction. And even
with the one third reduction,
it's It's not enough, um, money
in the in the bond coffer for
them to afford it.
Thank you, And I appreciate that
because I know that that's the
problem with some of them. I
know we've we've had a couple
where the local community hasn't
and then you know, they've
Played poverty and, you know,
please come help us and I'm
like, Yeah, it's a little harder
to justify, um, for those
districts, Um
Is there a mechanism? I've
always been concerned when? At
the state level we set what the
capacity. The bonding capacity
is.
And does that need to be
readjusted and set it a
different level where we're
saying, you know, they want to
raise the money for locally
They're not allowed to raise the
money locally, is that part of
what we're looking at? As far as
fixing this issue, or
I'm not a financial wizard type.
Or is that a bigger
Bigger lift than any of us feel
like we can carry.
Mr Chair. I think that's bigger
than us here. I, um I can't
speak for how they would
increase the capacities. But I
can't say that, um well, two
stories, so one district
Bonded to Max capacity, and then
they had a very big taxpayer
leave. And now all of a sudden
they're over bonded.
And so we want to make sure that
we're not
Stretching people too thin, too,
and maxing out their credit
card.
Um so I can't speak to how they
could raise those capacities.
But I could never see where
A rural school district would
have the bonding capacity of $60
million to build a new pre k
through 12 combo school.
Um, but one
One Good story is Penasco last
year they did. They failed their
bond election the first time
around by 13 votes, and that
district went back out, and, um,
successfully passed the bond and
Um
They're They're in the motions
for a new project out there, so
they're one of the success
stories right now.
Okay, well, and we have great
people who sit on that to really
make some of the decisions If
the district is really doing
everything they can,
particularly were a wealthy
state. Right now. We've got lots
of money. And if that's the
case, and they're doing their
part of it, I think it's
incumbent upon us as a state.
To to meet them with what they
need, because their kids deserve
it, You know, And your doesn't
matter that they're rural kids
that they need a new school. We
ought to be building them a new
school if they're doing
everything they can do locally
Uh And so, uh, and again, I know
many of the people who sit on
that make those tough decisions
about whether
Whether this really is a
hardship case that we need to
come up with the rest of the
money. Certainly the state has
enough money to do that, and I
think we ought to be ought to be
doing that.
The second one. You talked about
earmarks? I haven't heard about
this. And as I read through some
of the pieces on this about your
marks
How did that public school
capital outlay? Money gets spent
on other things? Who approved
it? Who allowed that? Were that
come from? And how do we get
control of it? Because that does
not seem like what this money at
all should have been spent on
and you know, where were the
checks or what do we need to fix
to put those in place?
Mr Chairman members. I couldn't
tell you. I do know that these
are sponsored by certain
legislators, and I don't know
how it gets picked out of the
fund. Um, we need to do or I
need to do a little more
research as to what happened
from the beginning. We get it
in, uh from I believe it's lfc
who lets us know that these are
coming out of the fund.
And
For now, I know for the memorial
middle school. We don't even
administer it. It just comes out
of the fund. And the dollars
will be, um the sold the bonds
will be sold and then p e D will
then administer those dollars,
So it's something that is an
anomaly, and we just noticed
that it's coming out of the
fund, and it's bypassing the
process.
So we need we will do our due
diligence to come up with a plan
and figure out how it's getting
through.
Thank you because, yeah, it's
very concerning that if somebody
has found a loophole of how to
get some other things, you know?
Is it getting written into the
language in the House? Bill two
to fund it through this, But
that means somebody is writing
that language in there and doing
it.
Um, because I least my
understanding those don't come
anywhere close to what the
The intent of
The public school capital
outlay. Monies would be so it'd
be interesting to find out who
where How is is doing that.
Uh, Mr Chair. I was just being
reminded there were there were
two earmarks that were raised a
flag for PSF a staff and that
was the memorial middle school.
Um, And then there was the
appropriation for the school
safety summit.
Um And I think our concern is
that the fund is for capital
improvement.
Um and it's being
It's It's getting your marks for
other reasons. Mr Chair
Safety Summit or not Capital
right? That's an operational
type of monies for it, so
Yeah.
Well, let me get through my and
we'll come back to you and, you
know, certainly jump in on any
of those pieces. Um
On the offsets your I share some
of representative Chet Fields.
concerns in the past.
And lots of the offense. Offsets
came when Albuquerque which has
lots of legislators would fund
things through.
Direct appropriation to go
around them needing to go out
and do it through the capital
process and bonding type of
things. Um
There were a number of those
that
Sat on the books for years and
years and made it difficult for
the district.
That had some of the historical
offsets to ever make their local
and it was two or three
superintendents and boards ago
that put him into that position,
So I think lots of what we did
was try and kind of wipe the
slate clean.
My concern.
Then and now is
How do we put in legislation to
make sure that we don't start
that process again of districts
through direct appropriation or
legislation helping their
districts through either their
regular capital money that we
all get to to spend?
Because that destabilizes the
whole
Formula that we use for funding
public schools.
Um And so I want to make sure
we've got appropriate guardrails
in place that we don't start
going back to legislators want
to help their schools so they're
going to give their capital
money.
But that then means you know
we're not getting it through the
other The appropriate processes
So certainly as we're looking at
legislation is, how do we get
appropriate guardrails without
stifling the ability to fund
schools? So any comments anyone?
Do I have that right? I mean, do
under my understanding the
problem, Mr Chair members? Yes.
Yes, you do, and we look forward
to partnering with the partners
of lfc LSC and making sure that
Gardaworld guardrails are put in
place and that we're doing, um,
our school districts, Justice.
Thank you, Um
I think those were kind of the
questions that kind of jumped
out at me as we're going through
it and certainly, like I said,
is as we move through the
process.
Looking for what do we need to
fix in legislation so that the
process works better for
districts and most importantly,
the kids are getting the
building spaces that they need.
Represent Castano. Thank you, Mr
Chair, So I guess you guys are
talking about Memorial Middle
school in Las Vegas. I assume
right. So that was Capital
Alley. That was funny to
Memorial school. And is that
for I thought that school was
closed.
That it's probably no, no, I'm
understanding what's going on. I
like to talk a little bit
offline on that with you guys.
I like to find out a little more
about that. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, senator. Souls.
Um
I would just start by saying
when we asked. How does this
happen? Is new Mexico politics?
I mean, no, we're not committee
and we maybe shouldn't say this,
but that's the truth. I grew up
here born and raised here and
You know, I have seen the
legislative process over the
years and part of what we learn
even as communities of how do we
impact the system to be able to
get what we need for our
communities, and that is by
legislation right voting people
in putting pressure on them,
etcetera, etcetera. So, um, I
just wanted to say that's the
reality of what what does go on.
And so I am also as a community
member as a superintendent and
educator.
Do believe, too, that we
shouldn't take the rights of the
representatives and senators
right to still be able to
contribute. Some of the monies
to their communities is that's
part of what I think communities
see, and I also believe that
there should be some kind of an
equitable process to be able to
get the monies and, um, be able
to access them, right. Uh, For
instance, in Cuba we had like we
were. We were looking at
different kinds of things, and
it took us six years. In some
cases, they get something, even
a health clinic.
We were hearing like all this
money all this money. To be
honest, we hear this on the
committee all this money and
then we go back and we talk to
people that work in the system
and they're like there's not a
lot of money, and I'm just like
I just sat on a committee and
they told us there's a lot of
money and then I come back and
talk to you guys who work in the
system who tell us that's not a
reality. So I think you know I
would recommend to the committee
as well to maybe have like an
offline or a closed session with
your psf, a people and others
that is open about what is the
realities of what's going on.
And how do you do that, like in
a closed session, Not
To be able to stay away from and
not to be able to.
To have this, Um
Not be public, but maybe some of
the conversations that don't go
on within the interim committee
or the committee aren't being
said, because people are afraid
to say things. I know why I am.
I mean, I've had a couple of
slaps on my hand and emails that
I've gotten back after I've sat
on this committee and said
things and I'm like, okay,
you're mad because why? Because
I questioned something because
this is how I understand it, but
I can only operate as a school
superintendent.
How I understand it. And again,
We're in a small little village
that doesn't have a lot of
political power. We've had to do
a lot of things by hiring our
own people to come in and try to
help us which we normally would
not do. Um
What is it when you help people
to come and help you to the
political contractors, lobbyists
and be enabled to piecemeal
together? Although our kids are
what I think they were 89, But
now they're 88. I think Wagon
mound is like flip flopped at
risk in the state of New Mexico
were growing district. There's
nowhere to live in that
community unless you live in the
local 550. I feel like the
community as a whole relies on
the school district.
Because that we have 1000 people
in our community on a daily
basis if everybody's there in
terms of that, so just going
back to some of these
legislative things, I think
they're they're key, and I know
these guys do the work on a
daily basis, But I would say we
can't negate the concerns and
issues that those of us
practicing in the field have. Um
and I think it's not good to
shut us up.
And, um, you know, and I think
it's also
Um, really important that there
be a process right? And how do
you do that may be aligned with
senators and representatives
that still need to be able to
help and support and honor and
bring back money to their
community, where there's still a
process that's being handled of
how you can get different
schools. Last thing I'll say
about this is you know I am all
about about my, um
Counterpart school districts of
getting 30 $60 million schools.
Sometimes you go and look at
this and you're thinking Oh, my
God, this beautiful school. How
did you get and you go to
another little school and
everything in the school
district is crumbling, and
you've got a maintenance. You
know, Money's that that helps
you like, like, patch it and fix
it to certain things. But your
kids aren't getting near what
other school districts are and
that if you take a look at not
only the Zuni Law School
lawsuit, Yossi Martinez
Um, and those of us that have
grown up in New Mexico and in
different areas in the rural
part of New Mexico and our
parents, etcetera. It's not
equal so I would just continue.
You know, I I do support the
work that they do, and I do
think they're hardworking. But I
also think they don't understand
the realities as committee and
the workers of what we have to
do on a day to day basis to try
to get things back to the
schools that are
Are important and good for kids.
So I think you Mr Chair.
Thank you. And I absolutely
agree. And you know, we
When I always say that we have
lots of money. That doesn't mean
it's getting allocated.
It means it's there you know
with you is a very different
thing as to how much is actually
available, and I think part of
the whole point of this
committee and when it was first
set up, this process is to try
and ensure that there's equity
because in the past
Um, buildings were built totally
on the local property taxes and
this them set up some of a
formula mechanism so that the
haves don't get more in the have
nots have less is to try and and
level that, to some extent now
getting the proportions right.
That's always the tricky part.
Thank you.
Mr Chair. I just wanted to
mention that we were not for or
against the offsets. We're just
bringing it to your attention
that this is a potential for
Something to happen in the
future. And so we think it would
be beneficial to just visit it
now.
Before before it rears its head.
Thank you. I appreciate that as
well as kind of the forward
thinking of get ahead on the
early childhood centers and you
know and how that's going to
work and get those things
started now rather than wait
until there's a problem or a
crisis and and try and do it
when there's not ample time to
get it, right. Yes, sir. And Mr
Chair. I meant to mention one of
the reasons I brought, Um Dennis
Chavez is one of my examples
Under the design phase. This
should be under construction
right now. But they stopped when
This understanding of full day
pre K came out.
They stopped and went back to
the drawing board and had to add
a pre K classroom to their
design before it went out to
construction. We're not going to
have that luxury on all 89
districts around the state, so
we want to be able to get out in
front of it a little bit. Yes,
thank you. And proactive is
always a good thing. So thank
you very much. Appreciate your
Your presentation. Um
Proposed work plan and meetings
schedule.
Thank you all.
You should. People have been in
your your booklet, the proposed
work schedule.
Everybody have a copy of that.
You all are just Mr You're
welcome to hang around.
See what we're working on and
stuff because lots of it
obviously very directly affects.
Your office and what what you're
doing, But thank you so much, Mr
Do every day I'm making sure
So Simon Welcome, and Simon is
the new lead from Council
service for this committee.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair
members of the committee, so
just more time assignments.
Suzuki, staff attorney with
Legislative Council service.
Um
And as, uh, you all know the
task force. Um
Per statute is required.
Um to, uh, engagement, certain
activities during the interim,
and I'll just sort of go through
each of them. Um
For the committee. So the task
force shell monitor the overall
progress of bringing all public
schools up to statewide adequacy
standards developed pursuant to
the public School Capital Allah
Act monitored the progress and
effectiveness of programs
administered pursuant to the act
and the Public School Capital
Improvements Act.
Monitor the existing permanent
revenue streams to ensure that
they remain adequate long term
funding sources for public
school capital outlay projects
Oversee the work of the public
School Outlay Council and the
public School Facilities
Authority as they perform their
functions pursuant to the
Public School Capital Outlay
Act, particularly as they
implement the statewide based
process for making Grant awards
appointed Advisory Committee to
study the feasibility of
implementing a long range
planning process that will
facilitate the interaction
between charter schools and
school districts on issues
relating to facility needs. And
finally, before the beginning of
each regular session.
Of the Legislature. Report
Results of the task force
analyses and oversight and any
recommendations to the governor
and the Legislature.
So, additionally and as per
tradition and previous interims,
the task force will also, um add
additional related items to
their interim agenda. Um
So the version that you all have
now has received an update on
the Zuni lawsuit. Um
So most recently and, uh, the
district court in McKinley
County
Um uh,
Issued a an order that, um
declared that the public School
Capital Outlay Act in the public
Schools Capital Improvements Act
were unconstitutional that the
state has appealed that ruling.
Um they appealed to the Court of
Appeals in the Court of Appeals
certified to the Supreme Court.
So it is currently the issue is
currently under review.
Mhm, um of the Supreme Court.
The initial briefing has been
completed or arguments have not
been scheduled.
Um
But perhaps sometime this year,
we'll have a decision from the
Supreme Court on that matter.
Additionally, two bills were
passed this session that relate
to the work of the task Force
House Bill 207 and Senate Bill
76.
Um, Additionally, there's an
item to review the impact of
inflation as Mr Parks discussed
and it continues to be something
that the task force needs to
keep an eye on, Um
To another item is to receive an
update on bonding and tax
issues.
Ah!
To review federal funding
options and other matters that
the task force decides are
relevant and necessary of its
attention.
Mhm.
Mr Chair. That's that's all I
have for you.
Thank you, Simon. Um, comments
questions. Additions did
Thank God to be on.
Pinto, Mr. Chair members of the
committee.
One of the things after going
through a couple of my schools
and thank you for your work
you're doing for joining us, but
we did the food, the food
bringing nutritious food to the
schools. One of my mid schools
does not have a cooktop, stove
and refrigerator.
So how do we make sure that our
schools are
Um, because I think the reason
we kind of put that off to make
sure that our schools were
adequately equipped and staff to
bring that forward. Um so that
were, um
Giving them that time.
The other, so I don't know if
inventory has to be taken or do
we do a study or if there's
gonna be a shortfall? Does it
fall under this particular
funny? I don't know that's
fairly new area and whether that
would fall under a systems.
Because it's an appropriation of
districts need to
Because it's a date their
kitchen facilities and things
because it's a fairly new
school. It just got renovated a
couple of years ago, and then
now the high schools for
renovation.
But with the high school to into
Hachi
The ingress coming into the
school comes off the highway and
right below there coming up with
the Busses leave during the
wintertime.
The water pools there.
And then Isis is created. So
when you get up to your either
trying to speed up so you can
get up there or you'll end up
sliding back down.
Um, So how can we allow for the
Collaboration with department
transportation, or who, who's,
uh
When we have these new schools
under construction, because I
think we only cover what's
within our
Parameters. But on the
reservations some of those roads
to some of the schools are owned
by somebody else being a or, um,
and then it the it doesn't get
upgraded.
Didn't school and that's and I
think some specific ones about
specific issues would be more
through the public school
facilities authority for them to
look in as to whether there
needs to be more dirt work done
there to deal with the pulling,
and the ice. Um
I think many schools are going
to be looking at some of the
upgraded needs for the
cafeteria.
Rebuilds to, you know, as we've
gotten away from having on site
kitchens, and now it's required
again. And when I see you kind
of nodding with that fall under
The system's request if they
need funding for doing that, you
know
Um, I'm suited because when our
programs come in to the schools,
too, so I have, like a bike club
or something. And they decided,
okay, we're gonna do this
program. They don't have
anywhere to store their bikes.
And even with the snowplows they
district site to give him four
wheelers with these little
things to clear the drive the
parking lot
They have nowhere to park them.
So is that fall under this or do
we do address it through capital
outlay, Right. Mhm? Um, thank
you, mr Chair. And, um my name
is Gwen Potato Tournament and
the director for the Legislative
Education Study Committee. Thank
you, Simon. Um, yeah, I'll talk
a little bit about this in terms
of, um what
But we think the funding can be
used for but also what might be
some, um, potential
considerations for you all for
the task force and then also the
greater Legislature for the next
session. I was just chatting
with Mark Montoya was one of the
analysts L. E S C in terms of
how this interfaces with the
universal meals Bill, um and or
Future construction and whether
or not we actually have to look
at the, um way we build schools
so that they take into
consideration what we're asking
for from the Universal meal's.
That's right Plans for a new
school is adequate pigeons to
meet the universal school meals.
Exactly Mr Chair, exactly in
terms of that need to be in
legislation or is that more just
kind of in rule as they're
working with districts on
Construction plans. Okay? Yep.
Mr Chairman, mostly enrolling in
the work of the CSF, a staff
themselves and what they
consider, um the, um forgetting
the term right now, but adequacy
standards. Thank you, Mr
Chairman for the kitchens and
what is needed at each school
site. I think it still begs the
question in terms of
retrofitting some of the schools
and the dollar amount that's
needed for the schools. As
you're saying.
And this sort of gets to one of
the
Proposals that the PSF was just
talking about in terms of
inappropriate uses of capital
outlay funds, and I think
there's some nuance and
definitely some consideration.
Um, certainly from us at L. A P.
L. E s c And I think also our
partners at LFC staff in terms
of flushing out some of those
proposals a little bit, um,
like, um, hearing
Definitely from you all around
the offsets. I think that's
certainly something we would
bring to your as well and, um
what you're considering but also
What might be appropriate or not
appropriate because I think it's
there's some gray area in there
in terms of capital outlay and
one good example here is some
preparations that you have made
in terms of career technical
education.
Using capital outlay dollars to
build and provide fixed assets
or infrastructure around career
technical education, and that's
similar to this.
One of the other things that I
saw was the computer rooms are
so to speak, called a computer
room.
But the classroom retrofitted
for technology.
And we have roofs leaking and
the the wiring still not
You know adequate enough So I'm
like, How do we make sure that's
addressed? Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you and Gwen. I think one
of the things is it needs to be
durable, good type of thing. I
mean, it's gotta be things that
have a long shelf life.
So to speak. Like
As senator was saying.
A commercial cooktop. Yeah,
isn't something that gets
consumed over the course of a
year that is there for 10 to 20
years.
Okay. Thank you. Other
Questions, comments from
committee members.
Um And I've I'm sorry. Yes, Yes,
Mr. Chair. I would just mention
if you want a presentation on
bonding. I'd be happy to do
that. But I'd recommend a
morning meeting or we'd all fall
asleep. I'm so glad that there
are some people like you enjoy
that sort of stuff. But, yes, I
find it my numbing sometimes
Other comments. I would just
like the presentation and where
they indicated these several
areas of potential.
Legislation that we work those
in to really kind of flesh out
what that would look like, Uh,
possibly have you all working
with council service on what a
bill might look like so that we
can kind of do some of the
debate before it gets to
committees come January and
debated within here, so we think
we've got it pretty well where
it ought to be, and so really
start looking at what the actual
language would look like, not
just kind of broadly. We need to
fix this area.
And particularly as we get
further down in the list of
things, so maybe looking at the
the August September meetings
starting those and then in our
November meeting, actually look
at taking a committee vote to
endorse that legislation.
And Mr Chair. Do you believe
that falls under item J of the
work plan, Or would you like to
add?
Um
More specific item regarding PSF
a suggestions
Um Or maybe just expand, you
know of specific committee
endorsed legislation.
Yeah, I think that that actually
gives us some specific things
that we're working on. We're
trying to fix We're trying to
get done in the legislative
session and getting ahead of it.
The
And potentially
Look at the funding and how much
we may need.
Two.
To do some of these to help the
small districts. How much money
do we need to put in that pot so
that
And the earlier we get that that
we start lobbying and working
with the Finance committee to
make sure that that's in their
budgets rather than wait until
January to say, Oh, can you add
50 million into the budget to
help the small districts that
can't meet there?
Their match.
Um, so the earlier we can get
actual money so that that then
gets translated out to the
Finance Committee to go into
their budgets.
For for these and
I look at that. That's kind of
like a semi recurring cost that
you know you may not need it
every year, but you need to re
rebuild the fund if we spend it
all out so that there's always
some to meet those critical
needs for districts that can't
But it's not like we're gonna
need 50 of making up numbers.
But statisticians, that's me.
You make sure stuff up all the
time. But
The but you know, however much
that we need to keep refilling
that that bucket so that we meet
the needs of those districts. So
I'm I see you in dotting so I'm
kind of challenges come up with
a number that we ought to put
out there. Um and
Don't do it on the cheap. We've
done education on the cheap for
too long without what we really
need to make things work
properly. Let somebody else
negotiated down if they have to.
Wonderful. Thank you.
Anything else Committee.
If not, I do appreciate
everybody was able to make it
here today with the various
challenges from transportation
and of other things that
