So if I can begin with folks to
my left.
Senator,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm a
state senator Ron Griggs. I'm
from Alamogordo. I represent
Senate District 34 covers the
south half of Oarroll County and
pretty much the west half of
Eddie County, excited to be up
here with y'all. This is, it's
getting close to the end for me,
so it's good to get to see you
guys every so often, even you
representative Chandler.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Sher.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. State
Representative Larry Scott.
District 62, which is uh
Hobson Central Lake County.
The heart of the
Oil and gas.
Industry in southeastern Mexico.
Very pleased to be here.
Thank
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Antoine Cedo Lopez. I represent
District 16 in Albuquerque,
which is the um
The Southeast and the northeast
heights around central area of
the university CNM area. Um, I'm
delighted to be here.
Thank you. Moving to our right
side represented the Chandler.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, everyone, happy to
be here, Representative
Christine Chandler from Los
Alamos, House District 43.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, colleagues. It's good
to be with you this morning and
I'm representative Susan
Herrera, and I represent the
northern part of New Mexico. I
have most of Ri Riba, Sandoval
Santa Fe and Taos.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Mr Vice
Chair members of the committee,
members of the audience, and
Christina Ortez. I represent
House District 42 in Taos, most
of Taos County where it was so
cold that I almost put on my
heat, but I'm gonna wait until
November 1st.
His name
Next we have our actually
someone just walked in. Good
morning. You can introduce
yourself, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members and representatives
Cynthia Brego represent District
17 in Berlio County, which is
the closest area to Cottonwood
Mall.
Great, Vice Chairman, uh, thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman, of
course, to the committee
members, good morning to the
people that are online that are
paying attention. Thank you very
much for uh your attention and
attendance and then of course to
our staff. Thank you very much
for the ongoing work that you're
doing.
Uh, before I go ahead and I
introduce myself, uh, it's
really interesting to go and
see. We're going to talk about
revenue volatility,
stabilization and
diversification. So, uh, Mr.
Jarrett really sounds like you
encompassed uh all of these
issues in order for us to
continue to make wise decisions
on behalf of the people in New
Mexico.
New Mexico State Senator Pete
Campos representing all the
parts of 7 counties in
northeastern New Mexico, uh
representing Senate District 8,
and again, it's a pleasure to be
here in Santa Fe with all of
you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Uh, as we get other folks
settled in, I will introduce
myself. I'm Derek Lente. I come
from Sandia Pueblo, New Mexico.
I represent the sixty-fifth
district in the House of
Representatives, and that
includes parts of Rio Riba
County, San Juan County and
Sandoval County, and it's an
honor to, to chair this
committee for this interim
session, uh, looking forward to
the discussions today as we get
closer to our next year's 60-day
legislative session. There are a
number of issues that are at the
forefront of wanting to
prudent decisions as we look to
the future in regards to tax
policy, tax issues, tax changes,
and as it moves forward, uh,
just trying to make sure that we
are all involved in those
discussions and in those
deliberations. So thank you
again for joining us this
morning. And before we begin, I
want to go back to uh a
gentleman that just walked in,
Senator Pope, if you would
please introduce yourself.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Vice
Chairman Senator Harold Pope Jr.
District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque, Burn Leo County.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and as a
reminder to folks, if you walked
into the back door, there is
some breakfast items, some
apples, oranges, some yogurt,
uh, in the room next to us that
was provided by the New Mexico
Museum Foundation. Thank you to
Lauren Abbey for providing those
to us. We really appreciate it,
uh, and then.
As we settle in further, uh, if
we can have our first presenter
come up to the desk, please.
First we have on our agenda
revenue volatility study, which
is presented by by Ishmael Izzy
Torres, who is our chief
economist for the legislative
Finance Committee.
Uh, Mr. Torres, whenever you are
ready.
The floor is yours, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and good
morning. Good morning members.
Um, hopefully you have two
handouts in front of you, one
that looks like this, money
matters with the subtitle, state
revenue volatility and fiscal
stability, and also an addendum
I brought this morning that
looks like this chart here will
be swapping back and forth
through them, so, um, keep them
close by.
And I always find it to be a
little bit helpful to start with
context when we go into these
reports and the context here is,
um, this kind of study, this
revenue volatility study, is a
recommended best practice from
folks like Pugh, who you'll hear
from in a little bit, but also
the Volcker Alliance and other
sort of national fiscal think
tanks that recommend this kind
of study happen regularly for
the benefit of you all in your
policymaking and, and really the
the thinking behind it is if
you're not
Studying your revenue volatility
if you're not thinking about it
on a regular basis, then you
won't know how to address it or
how severe or significant that
the challenge might be.
So, uh, you know, the, the first
time we did this study actually
was 5 years ago, uh, in early
2019, and my predecessor Donnie
Glaci is the former chief
economist of the Legislative
Finance Committee, was the first
one to do this kind of study and
what she found at the time was
actually that New Mexico was
experiencing the most volatile
re most volatility in its
revenues in decades. And what
I've found, not to bury the lead
here, is that in the last 5
years since that study, our
revenues have actually grown.
Even more volatile. So the only
time in New Mexico's history
that our revenues have been more
volatile than in the last 5
years were the 5 years before
that. So, last 5 years, the most
volatile in history, the next
most volatile five-year period
in our history was the 5 years
before that. So in the last 10
years, the state has experienced
the most revenue volatility in
its history, and I'll get into
that more here in a second. And
of course,
Highlight, I think it's
important to highlight in in the
context of this report, the
importance of revenue
volatility. Of course, you all
understand it as the revenue
stability Committee, but as
economists, this keeps us up at
night because it challenges our
ability to do our job and
estimate the amount of revenues
the state has available to it
and and for you all to
appropriate, but maybe most
importantly, revenue volatility
challenges the ability of the
state to continue to provide
essential services to New
Mexicans. So if you have a
highly revenue, highly volatile
revenues and
You depend on services that the
state provides, those services
can be pulled back at any time
because of that volatility. So
that's really the main purpose
of addressing revenue
volatility um for the state.
So, I wanna start off by um
drawing your attention to the
chart at the bottom of page one
here.
And this is the revenue change
your annual revenue change going
back to the early 1980s. And
what I'm really looking for when
I'm looking at these charts is
peak to trough. So even though
it may look
Uh, kind of crazy in the 20
years from the 80s to the early
2000s, I really want to point
out that you actually don't, the
state didn't experience much
revenue decline over a 20 year
period. That's really
incredible. So even though it
kind of looks volatile, we're
talking about 5, maybe 10%
revenue change in a given year.
So peak to trough.
But over that 20 year period, we
really rarely experience maybe
once, um, a revenue decline. So
incredible revenue stability
over that 20 year period, and in
the 20 years since we had the
dotcom bust, which you can see
in the early 2000s.
Quickly followed by the Great
Recession in 2008, that really
severe decline in revenues
there, followed by the oil and
gas price crash in 2015 to 2017,
followed by the boom in oil and
gas in southeast New Mexico in
the years following, again
followed by a bust in the
pandemic years, and then the
boom following that from the
federal stimulus policies and
high inflation. So you can see
how that volatility has grown
from 5 to 10% in the 80s to
early 2000s now.
We're talking about 1520, 25%
swings in revenue change year to
year. So you can see how that
volatility has grown
significantly. And really, um,
the, the metric of this study, a
primary metric of this study is
the volatility score, which is a
mathematical representation of
how much you can reasonably
expect revenues to change in any
given year and, and I think um
Pew may speak to this shortly,
but um I'll I'll say just the
revenue volatility score. What I
mean is the standard deviation
of revenue.
change in any given year. Again,
in layman's terms, that's how
much you could expect a revenue
to change on average in any
given year.
So if I mention a 10% of
volatility score of 10, that
means that you can expect
revenues to go up or down by 10%
every year. And you'll see
that's about what New Mexico has
as a whole in the table at the
top of page one here.
5 years ago in 2017, New Mexico
was the fifth most volatile
state in the country. We have
improved since then to the 6th
most volatile state in the
country, but yet despite that
improvement in our ranking, you
can see that our overall revenue
volatility has actually
increased from 8 to almost 12.
So that means now in the last 5
years, our revenues, you can
expect them to go up or down by
12% in any given year, which is
really tremendous. And obviously
that points out that the nation
as a whole, states in the
nation.
As a whole have grown even more
volatile than New Mexico has
over that time period. Again,
because of the pandemic, federal
stimulus policies, inflation,
and other various factors. But
of course, we are still highly
volatile compared to other
states. If you see that our um
our volatility compared to the
media, not quite, but almost 2
times as volatile as the median
state. So New Mexico, a very
volatile um state when it comes
to revenues.
Um, if you turn to page 2 here,
I, I want to point out how
Our our rankings have improved
here.
And that's really because of the
great work that you all have
done in the past 5 years to
stabilize revenues.
After the first study, the first
revenue volatility study in
2019, you all enacted um some of
these.
Uh, what I call stabilizing
measures that I, I, I'm sure
that you all remember the
Cap, they sort of take these
windfall oil and gas revenues
above a five-year average and
distribute them to the Early
Childhood Trust fund that was
2019. Also around that time,
tapping um any revenues above a
five-year average. So again,
windfall oil and gas revenues,
sending them to the tax
stabilization reserve that's a a
reserve fund in the general
fund, also called the Larry
Lariaga um reserve fund. So
those two
Insulating measures, those two
stabilizing measures alone, we
estimate in this report reduced
revenue volatility by 37% in the
last five years. So, really
tremendous um uh improvements in
our revenue volatility and you
can see the impact that these
insulating and stabilizing
measures have had on the general
fund in the chart at the top of
the page. The blue represents
where our revenue volatility
currently stands, and the red or
the orange there represents
where we would have been had
those stabilizing measures never
taken effect. So almost 10
10% uh expected, you know,
revenue volatility in the
general fund in each year, we
would have been about double
that without those stabilizing
measures. And when you focus
specifically on oil and gas
revenues, you can see 30% uh
volatility score of 30, that's
still very significant
volatility we have today, but it
would have been more than double
that had we not taken those
stabilizing measures into, into
effect. So that's great news for
New Mexico and and our analysis
shows that we expect New Mexico
would actually have been the 3rd
most volatile state in the
country behind Alaska and North
Dakota.
Of course, two other highly um
energy dependent states had we
not taken those insulating
measures. So, again, a good
improvement in our rankings
there.
Another thing not reflected in
this study that is good news is
the oil and gas caps that were
implemented in 2023. So moving
forward, oil and gas revenues
above a certain level will also
go to the severance tax
permanent fund to be saved,
invested and, and spin off
revenues to the general fund for
future use. That doesn't take
effect until this year, so it's
not shown in these measures, but
our estimates using the
consensus revenue estimates
going forward. We expect that
that will reduce our volatility
by 55% in the coming year. So
another
Um, good thing coming on the
horizon.
So, uh, it's unfortunately not
all, you know, uh, good news
over the last 5 years. We also
have had some changes that have
increased revenue volatility by
a little bit here. Um,
especially in the reductions in
stable forms of tax revenue. So,
of course,
If you reduce some of the most
stable forms of tax revenue
personal income tax, and gross
receipts tax, which uh we have
done in the state in the last 5
years, about $1 billion in
reductions in those two revenue
sources that will necessarily
increase the proportion of the
budget, the proportion of
revenues that come from more
volatile sources. So you can see
in the chart in the middle of
the page here, sales tax or
gross receipts tax and the
personal income tax are our most
stable forms of revenue in the
general fund, but still quite
volatile
Uh, 10%, about a 10% expected
change on any given year in both
of those revenues compared to
the national average, our
grocery seats tax is more
volatile. That's because of its
dependence on the oil and gas
industry, which is a more
volatile industry than others.
Personal income tax is actually
less volatile. That's because of
our dependence or, or I guess I
should say lack of dependence on
higher income earners.
Elsewhere around the country,
higher income earners make a
larger proportion of the
population and that actually
increases revenue volatility. We
have less of those earners, so
our revenue volatility and the
personal income tax is actually
lower than the national average.
But you can actually see that
our corporate income tax is more
than 3 times as volatile as the
national average corporate
income tax. And that's because
of our industry makeup again, is
much more highly concentrated in
the oil and gas sector, which is
a much more volatile industry
comparatively to other um
industries.
And interestingly enough, our
direct energy revenues because
of those stabilizing measures
that we have taken are actually
less volatile than the rest of
the country again, for those
reasons that I just mentioned.
But as reductions have taken
effect in the grocery receipts
tax and the personal income tax,
but also earmarks away from the
general fund of other stable
forms of revenue has also
increased our revenue
volatility. So I'm thinking of
the motor vehicle excise tax is
a very stable form of tax
revenue, the uh health insurance
premium tax is another very
stable form of revenue.
Those have been earmarked out of
the general fund for other uses,
also contributing to revenue
volatility in the last 5 years.
But on the whole, um, we
estimate that these changes have
increased volatility by about
5%, so still on net, um, large
improvements in revenue
stability in the last 5 years.
So, that's sort of where where
we've been in the last 5 years
and, and what you all have done
to address those forms of
revenue volatility and so
Looking forward, what other
opportunities for improvement
are there. If you look at the
chart at the bottom of page two
here you can see revenue
volatility over time for many of
our revenue sources that we've
identified for you all here at
the bottom of the chart, gross
receipts and personal income
taxes, as I've already
mentioned, some of our most
stable forms of revenue.
Interestingly enough, we see our
direct energy revenues also
growing more stable, of course,
higher numbers reflect the
volatility score means higher
volatility, so lower numbers
means more stable revenue. Our
direct energy revenues are
growing more stable due to
To those stabilizing measures
that you all have implemented.
But in the last 5 years, we have
seen really skyrocketing
volatility from the corporate
income tax and from the state
treasurer's office in investment
earnings, and I'll get into that
here more in a second. So if you
turn to page 3.
You can see those two revenue
sources plotted at the graph at
the top.
And I think it's probably
helpful to give a little more
context here. The state
treasurer's office, their
primary mission is to invest the
general fund, the, the fast
moving parts of the general
fund. That's basically our
checking account as revenues
come in and expenditures go out.
In the meantime, they're
managing and investing those
revenues primarily through
short-term investments, so
that's uh overnight investments,
3 month Treasury bills, or 3 up
to 3 year I believe Treasury
bonds. And so as those balances
are
Invested, they can become highly
volatile because their
evaluation is highly dependent
on things like interest rates
and also market value. So we
have this component of our
general fund that is counted as
a revenue, the investment
earnings are counted as a
revenue, but those investment
earnings are just as volatile as
what you'd expect for market
investments. So this is a highly
volatile part of our, of our
revenue makeup and you can see
the blue line here shows that
our investment earnings can go
from negative to extremely
positive in any given year with
little notice.
in the early, uh, sort of the
dip there in the early 2020s, we
had interest rates climbing very
rapidly, which devalued the
state treasures um asset
holdings. So that's where we saw
it be a drag, a negative to the
general fund. And then in the
subsequent years, our balances
have exploded. We're at about
$100 billion in investments
managed by the state treasurer's
office and as interest rates
have risen now, and, and
earnings on those with that
interest rate and on those large
balances we're seeing large
influxes from that revenue.
So we can expect a significant
amount of volatility to continue
in that source, especially as
balances are drawn down as
spending grows, but also as
interest rates come back down.
The corporate income tax, as I
mentioned, tends to grow and
decline with the oil and gas
industry, but also has a high
degree of volatility due to film
tax credits, which are paid out
of that revenue source. So those
are highly irregular, uh large
production which we might expect
to file for a credit in one
year, made.
Delay by a month and it show up
in the next year, and that can
can can can also contribute to a
significant amount of volatility
in the corporate income tax. So
you may be thinking these are
very small revenues in our
overall makeup. Why are we, why
am I so concerned about this?
Well, when you think about the
revenue estimates, how much
we're estimating revenues to
grow, we're at about 3% right
now.
And these two revenues alone
make up 7% of the revenues and
they can really swing up or
down, become negative, with very
little notice in any given year.
So, for me as a state economist,
I come before you all and say
3%. I'm very worried in the back
of my mind that
7% can disappear overnight and
we could be in a negative
position. And that's what sort
of keeps me up at night, if you
ever think I'm, I'm a
pessimistic person, it's because
I'm worrying about this kind of
stuff every day.
But in addition to this
corporate income tax and state
treasury's office earnings. We
also have other sources of
volatility. The gross receipts
tax is highly dependent on the
oil and gas industry, about 13
now. That's about $1 billion
depending on that industry. If
we have another bust, we could
see that.
$1 billion dry up very quickly.
We also have an increasing
dependence in the personal
income tax on the oil and gas
industry. We have an oil and gas
proceeds withholding tax,
similar to a wage withholding.
So if you're earning royalties
on oil and gas payments, the
state can withhold those tax
payments for you, um, sort of
payments in advance of your
income tax um due at the end of
the year. And we're seeing that
portion of the personal income
tax grow pretty tremendously.
We're now expecting about 25% of
the personal income tax coming
from the oil and gas industry as
well, about another
$1 billion. So you can see how
even though we have insulating
and stabilizing measures from
direct oil and gas revenues in
the general fund. There are
these indirect impacts.
From an oil bust or boom that
could see $1 billion or more
disappear very quickly.
In addition to that 7%. So these
are the things that we're
constantly thinking about. And
another thing I want to add here
is reversions have been an
increasing source of revenue
volatility.
As appropriations have grown
quite quickly over the last
several years. Agencies are, of
course, ramping up their
spending but may have difficulty
spending at all quickly enough.
So we're seeing those uh uh
reversions which count as a
revenue back to the general
fund, so unspent funds
appropriated to agencies, Spike,
we're seeing a significant
amount of volatility coming from
that source as well, and I think
get into that a little bit um
shortly. But again, just to
reiterate, opportunities for
improvement, including the
corporate income tax, the
State treasurer's office
earnings to the general fund,
reversions, and then of course
the oil and gas portions of the
gross receipts tax and personal
income tax. So still a lot of
room for improvement here.
And so what are some of the
strategies that can be employed
to improve the revenue stability
of these sources. Um, if you
look at the chart at the bottom
of page 3 here, of course, what
we have found to be the most
stabilizing.
Tool in the tool kit is the use
of the permanent funds. You can
see in 2023 here we would have
had a massive decline in
revenues had all of those
revenues been going to the
general fund, but instead,
because they're going to the
permanent fund, they're invested
and through the power of
compound interest grown over
time and then distributed in a
stable 5-year average of 5% of a
5-year average and we actually
saw revenues from these sources
grow over the last two years
despite declining revenues from
oil and gas. So this is the
primary, this is the best way, I
should say, to stabilize these
revenues.
But there are a lot of other
ways that have worked
successfully. If you turn to
page 4.
Some other tools in the tool kit
include identifying revenues
above a trend that helps.
Um, maintain, you know, growth
in a revenue source, but any
windfalls, any irregular
windfalls above that source
could be identified and pulled
out for one-time use. There are
also these decision trees that
you all have used with great
effect on the left here, the
growth fund, this new fund that
was created in the last year,
now receives excess revenues
above 8%, so when they are
unspent revenues in the checking
account, it spills over anything
above 8% of spending spills over
into other funds that used to
spill into
The tax stabilization reserve,
now that's spilling into the
growth fund, that's so that
those sort of excess revenues
can be identified and spent by
you all as a one time rather
than recurring, um, but the tax
stabilization reserve, as you
see in the bottom, still does
receive revenues as well from
oil and gas related revenues and
from investment earnings on its
balances. However, if
Reserve balances are above 25%,
those revenues instead carry on
towards the Early childhood
trust fund. So, because our
reserves have been high in
recent years, all of that money
has continued on to the Early
Childhood Trust fund.
So, um,
Let's see, make sure I'm not
missing anything here. Just,
just to highlight some of the
other states uh tools that they
use, Louisiana requires
non-recurring revenues to be
spent on retiring bonds, making
payments against unfunded
liabilities in the retirement
system, capital outlay projects.
So these are some of the ways
that you can help identify these
volatile revenues, anything
above certain trends or caps,
that's another tool that you all
have used, uh, a specific cap,
um, to help identify one-time
revenues and then transfer those
for one time use rather than
including them in sort of the.
occurring pot.
Of course, another tool is on
page 5.
That's just exercising fiscal
restraint. That's not
necessarily any sort of fancy,
um, stabilizing tools, but just
maintaining recurring spending
below your, uh, sort of stress
test scenario. So, your
economists, when we do these
revenue estimates and of course
we're very worried about this
volatility. We'll stress the the
level of volatility, especially
to the downside, of course, an
interest in maintaining those
public services for New
Mexicans. So we conduct these
stress tests as you can see in
the graph on the right here, and
One way to stay ahead of the
curve or to um protect against
volatility is to maintain your
recurring spending below these
stress test levels. So if I
could ask you now to shift to
this addendum that was passed
out this morning.
Um, we used to conduct a stress
test and just show how far
revenues could decline. Since
then, we've been asked and uh to
tie that more closely with
expenditures.
And that's what we've done here
since the, since this study,
we've done this extra analysis
which shows how far our revenues
could decline and, and matching
that up with our expenditures.
And you can see a couple of
things on this chart here. The
blue bars represent recurring
spending over the last several
years and of course that's
grown, but also the gray bars
which represent non-recurring
spending, which has also been
spent out of this big pot of
money, which has grown even more
so over the last several years,
to a significant degree. I think
we used to be below $500 million
in.
recurring spending a year, maybe
5 years ago. That's grown to
almost 3 billion. So, almost a
third of our spending every year
is now in the non-recurring
category, and that is actually
really good news when it comes
to how we compare these stress
tests to the spending scenarios.
So you can see in the red dash
line, which is our most severe
stress test scenario. That's how
far revenues could fall given an
oil bust.
That
The revenues never cut into that
recurring spending.
So this is flat spending.
And, and the point here is that
if you grow recurring spending
above that amount, you could
have to pull back, you could
have to cut agency budgets, pull
back on some of those services
if this scenario were to come to
fruition. But if you maintain
below that amount, and instead
it's no it's spent, the
difference is spent on
non-recurring. That's pretty
easy to do. You can use some of
your reserves to cover at least
one year of those non-recurring
appropriations that you have
already made. And when you come
into the next session, you could
simply pull back on some of
those non-recurring approach.
And because they're
non-recurring, that won't affect
any critical services that are
are currently offered to New
Mexicans. So maintaining a
recurring spending below uh uh a
stress test is another tool in
your tool kit.
Um, if moving back to the brief
now.
Uh, of course, maintaining
adequate reserves to cover these
stress test scenarios is another
tool in the tool kit, but I
really want to move on to page 6
here, which was uh one of the
more interesting uh findings
from this analysis, we are able
to painstakingly go back in the
revenue history all the way to
the start of the LFC and look at
our revenue volatility and our
appropriation volatility over
time.
And again, even prior to the
80s, I really want to point out
the really incredible revenue
stability that the state was
experiencing, and tremendous
revenue growth over that time
period.
And I think as this relates to
your all work, um,
Of course, if you remember in
the early 80s was when the Big
Mac tax reforms took effect. The
leading up to this, the state
was experiencing significant
revenue growth, significant
revenue stability, and that
really gave, I think the
legislature the confidence to
tackle huge tax reform. Of
course, in the subsequent year,
we did see some revenue
declines and also increased
revenue volatility because at
the time the state traded away
stable forms of revenue like the
property tax, or less stable
forms of revenue like.
Severance taxes.
So we did see revenue volatility
in the years following that
large tax reform, increase in
volatility, and then, of course,
The story that you all are very
familiar with of the last 20
years, which is even more
volatility. I do want to point
out that only 6 times in this
history did we see
appropriations, recurring
appropriations get cut. And out
of those 6 times, 5 have been in
the last two decades.
And of those 5 or of of the
total 63 have been in the last
10 years. So that's just
highlighting the tremendous
challenge that you all have
faced in your time serving in
this legislature, more
challenging than what I have
found to be any other time in
the state's history.
If you turn to page 7, you can
see the state's rankings if
you're interested compared with
other states and how far we may
have to go uh to improve our
rankings, um, and then a map you
can see on page 8, which uh may
do a better job illustrating our
our rankings there.
Um, and with that, Mr. Chair, I
think I'm ready to take any
questions if there are any.
Thank you, Izzy for the
presentation. Let's go to
questions. First on our list we
have Senator Munoz. Good
morning. Good morning. How are
you guys? Good to be here.
Morning, I, I don't notice any
gray hair on you from sleepless
nights worrying about this.
Senator, is your mic on? Uh, it
is. OK, sorry, let me try
pulling it closer that work.
Yeah, I don't see any gray hair
from me worry about that.
You mentioned $3 billion in
volatility.
Correct.
Oil and gas is the the
withholdings for the tax, uh, $1
billion in tax credits that
we've given away.
And I forget what the other
billion was.
Mr. Chair, I would
Mr. Chan, Mr. Chair, I would say
that uh
We've done, you all have done $1
billion in in tax expenditures
which have increased volatility,
but I, I still think that the
main sources of volatility is
probably maybe around 2 billion,
maybe 2.5 billion.
Uh, as, as we've seen in our
stress tests. And and in the
legislature is gonna have to
figure out how to take that
volatility out.
Because we've set ourselves up
to be an investment-based state.
And take our our non-reoccurring
money and invest it and make it
reoccurring money. And so as we
head down that path, right, with
capital, that's a big one that
we're on the plan for not having
to ever bond capital ever again
that we can pay cash for capital
outlay.
And so
One of the things that are gonna
take the, the 2 billion.
In volatility.
Out of it. I mean, we're gonna
have to increase taxes at some
point because we've given $1
billion away in taxes.
The other 1 billion volunteers
volatility in the oil and gas
taxes combined.
I mean, have we looked at tax
scenarios that says, OK, we need
to start.
I'm gonna say the food tax. I'm
not gonna say I want to do it,
but the two food taxes $230
million or was a couple of years
ago. I don't know what it is
today, right?
How do we take the rest of the
volatility out of, out of our
general fund budget. That's a
path we need to ahead and I
don't know if you thought about
that when your sleepless at
night or not.
Mr. Chair, um, that obviously
was not listed as one of my
tools in my toolkitt, but it,
it, it's certainly an option.
You, the food tax.
was the most stable part of the
gross receipts tax, so there are
um
Certain tax increases that could
improve stability. I didn't
study them here. I, it's not
something I've been thinking
about a lot lately, given the
the revenue surplus, but it's
certainly something we can think
about. Well, we gotta be ahead
of the curve, right? That's what
we're planning is the head of
the curve of oil volatility ever
hits.
Yeah.
Anything ever happens in the
economy, we're stable enough to
survive for a couple of years at
the same level we're at before
we start making those cuts. And
that's like being here from
2009 on watching the volatility
in the market and so we've set
that up since 202,020, well,
Senator Smith started that in
2019 with early childhood and
we've continued that process to,
to survive downturns in the
economy.
But that's something I think
they.
You should look at in this
committee should probably be
looking at.
The amount of reversions.
Through state agencies.
At the LFC hearing we're talking
about there's 3 billion in
non-reoccurring money that's
sitting in agencies that's
that's out there.
And there's 1 billion that
hasn't come back, that should
have came back.
And that's another $1 billion
that we could be looking at in
reversion because agencies are
overfilled and can't can't get
what they have spent. I use the
quarts, for example, that
They have $70 million of unspent
money.
Uh, in non-recurring money that
hasn't been spent and they're
taking.
Reoccurring money or hiring
staff, and they're using it for
PTO paid time off.
And painted at a higher level, I
mean, that's the problem we're
gonna run into with agencies.
spending money or not spending
money and then spending
reoccurring money for a
non-reoccurring expense and how
do we get control of that?
Mr. Chair, from a revenue
perspective,
Um,
I think there are a lot of these
tools would work. So I think
what you could do is uh set
reversions at, you know, what we
would expect a typical reversion
to be is about 1% of an agency
budget. So we could say set
reversions at 1% of the
recurring spending, and anything
above that amount, to your
point, could go to a permanent
fund could go to the growth fund
for appropriation of new
one-time spending, but trying to
take some of those unspent,
especially the one times, but
also the recurring and identify
them for one time use.
Especially when they're above
the norm, and, and we know that
we can't count on them in the
future. I, I think that's one
option, but there are many
options you could take.
I figure out all the options
first.
What are the returns of the
state treasurer? I mean, you
said the state treasurer returns
are pretty low. How much is over
there roughly? 3 billion or
something like that?
Mr. Chair, actually, I think
right now the state treasurer's
earnings are, are quite high
because interest rates are high.
Um, about $10 billion invested
at the state treasurer's office
for the benefit of the, the
general fund, that's in the
state general fund investment
pool, they have other
investments on top of that, but
that's what I'm referencing
here. And, and so should we move
that over? Can we move that 10
billion so that that we as a
legislature can control where a
general fund money is coming
from I we moved to the SIC or we
create another agency. I mean,
10 billion in
Investments of the treasurer
office. Those are overnight
investments, right? They're,
they're not tied to anything
where we can't get to it in
short term, correct?
Mr. Chair, up to 3-year Treasury
bonds, but yes, they're they're
highly liquid so that um they're
available to you all. I, I don't
think it would make sense to
move it to the state investment
council because the State
Investment council primary does
longer term investments and that
those funds need to remain
liquid. Um, I think, uh, a big
portion of them, I think our
study, I, I didn't include it
here, but about 1/3 is in
unspent capital appropriations,
so
Money that should hopefully be
moving out within 3 years, say,
um, about a third, maybe from
agency budgets, and then maybe
about another 3 in reserves. So,
um,
I think it, it's appropriate to
keep that at the state
treasurer's office. However,
again, from the revenue
perspective, you could um
Identify a cap or a certain
amount coming from the state
treasurer's office each year
into the general fund again,
identifying the excess for
either investment at the state
investment council, to your
point, or for other one-time
spending, um, as well. I, I
mean, that's pretty much how we
funded roads. We spent that
money for.
Rhodes when he did $700 million
road package, right? We swept
the overnight cash that was on
top of that and put it $700
million road package together,
right?
But if, if we did the, if we
leave the money in bonding it.
I think it's shirty bonds or
whatever we had there.
Is that really our best
investment, or I mean, should we
expand SIC's investment and say,
all right, we maybe only getting
3% on the on a bond debt.
Whatever.
And should we, should we move it
to the SIC and say, can you get
us 5%?
They'll say they get a 7.75 but
nobody's ever hit that target,
maybe this year or a couple
years later, but I mean.
2% on $3 billion is.
$200 million right?
I think
Roughly somewhere in there.
And and so how do we get that
bigger return? I mean, that's
something I think you guys need
to look at too.
Is, is that really the best
place?
For our general fund money and
are we really getting the best
return?
On her money. I like, I like
your comment about the
legislature exercising
restraint.
But then we also have.
6 billion in capital.
Sitting out there, right?
And we have 3 billion of
non-reoccurring money in
agencies that's unspent.
And in
Or should we or should we take
some of that money back?
It hasn't been spent, like we
know, there's tons of examples
out there.
20 million for behavioral health
that was never spent.
Number goes up and up and
I mean, if, if we're gonna pull
back from
What the executive has not
spent.
What does that look like in
order to to reduce our
volatility.
And not raise taxes.
Mr. Chair, I think, um,
It might not reduce volatility,
but to your point, getting a
better handle on
How much future versions would
be, would be a good start, and
then from there we could, uh, I
guess identify.
Those above trend reversions for
for alternate uses, uh, you
know, by statute.
These unspent appropriations
have to be reverted. So the
timing of the reversion impacts
volatility significantly, um.
But
Encouraging agencies in your
role as an oversight body to
spend the money is
Also a good place to start. I, I
kind of like it when they don't
spend it.
There's a second bite at the
apple, but I mean.
I, I, I want you guys to look at
Mr. Chair. I'm sorry.
That, OK, we take $1 billion and
we reduce $1 billion of
volatility, so we're not coming
back looking at raising taxes.
How do we, how do we take that 1
billion, whether it's wherever
it's laying.
Capital and, and reduce the, the
2 billion volatility that you're
taking.
And not saying we need a tax
increase, so cause.
This, I mean,
New Mexico is is on the track. I
think the chairman carried the
bill for capital and carried the
bill for higher ed, right, to
create that fund.
And we've set everybody up with
a fund.
And so we're reducing volatility
throughout, but how do we really
get to the, to the general fund
cost of vulnerability is the
biggest number cause it's 2
billion.
And we have billions of sitting
there that aren't span.
How do we take
2 billion in in the volatility.
In the general fund.
I mean, that's our safest bet.
Familiar
gonna be getting gray hair
thinking about this over the
next.
90 to 120 days before we get to
the session. I mean that that's
a goal I think we should aim at,
right, or shoot for, we should
get it accomplished.
is ending that volatility, so
we're not coming back and
saying, we got to raise
corporate income tax, or we've
got to raise personal income
tax.
We gotta look at the food tax or
or whatever it is.
I think in the big picture
scenario in the tax committee is
how do, how do we not raise
taxes, but how do we take this
money?
And then
Make that volatility go away.
Oh
You may want to go buy Walgreens
and get some just for men.
And I put something heavy on
your shoulders, but I mean,
really, I mean, you're young
men, you're
20 something I'm assuming maybe
hitting your 30s.
Um,
And and and you just got a big
pay raise and you're paying more
taxes, right?
And you want to buy a house and
how do we take that tax burden
off you so that you invest more
in New Mexico, right? You buy a
house.
Buy whatever you want to buy
with your income and you're not
taxed on it, so I mean.
If you're the one that's gonna
end up paying the tax because
the older we get, the less tax
we have to pay.
So,
Think about that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I think that's a
really interesting topic is how
we get to the in the volatility
out of the general fund system.
With the money we currently have
on.
Thank you.
Good point. Thank you, Senator,
for
Posing those questions, let's go
to our next question coming from
Senator Cedo Lopez. I think
about.
Thinking about um I'm impressed
with how much we've reduced
volatility, um, because, um,
I mean that, that experience, I
know that experience of, of
going up and down and seeing
programs cut. It's just
horrendous. Um
I, um,
I'm the opposite. I don't like
it when agencies are not
spending their money cause it
means that our policies and our,
our desires for the state are
not being accomplished. And so,
um, and I've heard stories like
just
This weekend I was hearing
stories from nonprofits who were
saying that um they're talking
about the growth fund and how
difficult it was to get money
out of that. Um.
Some nonprofits were talking
about RFPs, you know, nonprofits
that are, um,
Used to getting state money, um,
but then having little blips and
and how that affects their
bottom line. Um, and then
somebody was really complaining
bitterly about the anti-donation
clause.
And I was like, well, wait a
minute, if you're providing
service there should not be a
problem. Um, so my question is,
how can we better ensure that
agencies spend the money that we
allocate to them.
For the purposes that we do
that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
senator. That is, that is, I
think.
The goal that at LFC we're
always trying to make sure that
the appropriations you all make.
Reach their intended purpose.
Language obviously is an
important one. Making sure that
the language is tight and, and,
um,
Doesn't necessarily allow for
redirection of funds, that's an
important component. Again,
making sure that when these
agencies are before you all.
Questioning those and, and for
us, providing you all with the
information you need to validate
that it's happening, um,
agencies also sometimes have an
ability as Senator Munoz was
mentioning, to use unspent funds
in another category and spend
them somewhere else, making sure
that the language is tight so
that that can't happen, but when
it does happen that you all are
are pushing on the agencies to
to use it for its intended
purpose. Um,
Uh, of, of course,
there are a lot of carrots and
sticks available to you all to
encourage agencies to do that,
um, that I think you're probably
well familiar with, but, um, as,
as the legislature, I would say
those are your primary.
Avenues.
Thank you. And you said
something um
And I just wanted to understand
it better. You were talking
about excise funds that were
directed.
And I'm not sure I caught, does
that help volatility or not?
I mean, does it assist us with
addressing volatility or not?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator Lopez,
thank you for giving me the
chance to clarify.
When the revenue that is
earmarked out of the general
fund is a stable revenue that
Negatively impacts. It's maybe
an unintended.
Consequence of moving those
funds. Um,
As I mentioned, motor vehicle
excise tax, um, as, as I'm, I
Guessing maybe where you're
you're thinking about this,
liquor is also a very stable
form of tax revenue in the
general fund. So taking it out
of the general fund and
earmarking it for a specific
fund would increase the
volatility of the general fund,
maybe an unintended sort of
Negative consequence of that
action, but, uh, you know, just,
just important to be aware and,
and weigh the
The benefits exactly the reason
you're exactly right where I'm
going, because if we're spending
that money on behavioral health,
which actually worries me that
raises raises another question
you said about the.
The unspent money in in
behavioral health. Um, that's a
concern. Um.
No, I think it was um the
senator, I'm sorry, the senator
raised that concern about
because all of the, all of the
providers are telling us there's
not enough, and there aren't
enough beds, there aren't enough
facilities there, so the, the
narrative we're hearing is not
enough, not enough. Um, why
aren't they spending it?
And then would it help the
general fund to raise taxes
significantly so it could move
the needle so that we would have
enough and then those funds
would not be needed from the
general fund. So I'm trying to
explore this issue of volatility
because if you take away an
obligation from the, the general
fund.
And have directed funds.
And the reason I think that's so
important is because behavioral
health seems to be historically
one of the places that cuts come
first.
And that's not really good for
the state to have people on
treatment plans, have beds, and
then all of a sudden not. That's
horrific. So I'm, I'm wondering
what you think about that and,
and does, you know, does that
enter into the calculation of
volatility.
Um, Mr. Chan.
C Lopez, uh, that's a really
great question that I think we
would, it probably is in the
detail, we probably have to put
the pen to the paper on exactly
how much to see if your um
reduction in recurring expenses
is greater than the increase in
volatility from your recurring
revenue sources. So I think it
depends on the details, but to
your first point, um, you could,
if you increase the tax revenue
such that the earmark
Uh,
Still leaves
Say the same amount of revenue
in the general fund, then you
would have no impact to revenue
stability. So there is, there
are ways to craft.
These um trade-offs so that you,
you can hopefully avoid the, the
cost of increased revenue
volatility. That's certainly an
option as well. And finally, I
have asked several times and
maybe I'm just don't know who to
ask. How much we spend on
behavioral health now.
And nobody's been able to tell
me.
A definitive answer because, and
maybe with the consolidation of
the two agencies, it'll be
easier. But what I'm told is
it's spread, you know, through
CYFD, all these different
agencies, and it's not really a
set that's what I was told that
it's not easily separated out by
whether it's going into
addiction treatment or other
behavioral health issues, and so
that I haven't been able to
figure out how much we're
spending from the general fund.
On addiction treatment. And I
think that figure would be
useful in understanding whether
um my perception of moving the
needle.
By raising significant funds
that could go into building
facilities and go into the
recurring expenses. Um, I toured
the veterans, um, integration
center recently, and they, they
love, they're happy, grateful
for the capital to to create
their new facility, which is
fantastic.
Unfortunately, they can't
implement their vision because
they don't have the recurring
funds necessary, um, to, to
provide the holistic services
that they want for for the
veterans. They're they're just
providing housing and of course
veterans who are avoiding
homelessness.
Really have a lot of other needs
as well, and a lot of them, not
all, but a lot of them related
to addiction services.
And so,
If we could find out how much
we're spending now, where it's
spent, that would really be
helpful in understanding this
tax, um, and the other thing.
You know, just finally,
volatility.
has affected behavioral health
more than any other service that
is provided. So shouldn't it be
a goal to try to stabilize that
as well, so we could look at
volatility, you know, uh,
reducing the volatility.
In that important service that
the state provides, which I
honestly believe we're at the
bottom of so many lists because
of addiction that unless we move
the needle, we're not there.
We're not gonna move it
elsewhere.
Uh, Mr. Chan, um, Senator Ceddy
Lopez.
Uh, I, I'm, I'm not the expert
on health spending. I, I can
work on that for you, go back to
LFC and work with our health
analysts to try to work on a
number for you, um, and then to
your point about revenues or or
I guess maybe you're referencing
expenditure stability rather
than revenue stability. Right, I
guess that's, that's right,
they're right, absolutely, and,
and, and so, um, I, I, I, I
could dig into that. I'm not
familiar as well.
My, my gut tells me your sense
is gonna be spot on about it.
And uh I think that comes down
to the appropriation process,
making sure that as you all
prioritize certain investments
that you're prioritizing
stability for those services.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I really
appreciate the answers and the
presentation was really well
done. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
on to our next question,
Representative Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
story is
Your presentation.
To be mostly about oil and gas.
Uh, if, if we take the petroleum
industry out of the New Mexico
economy.
Then all of the volatility is a
consequence of
Not
Economic development within the
state, but rather
External factors, COVID, for
example.
Investment Recovery Act.
etc. is that
Pretty much accurate.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, yeah, I, I think, I think,
yes, if you're, if you're, yeah,
since
the, the boom at following the
bus were, especially in the last
3 years, primarily.
Global or national phenomena
that that are affecting the
state and and that's primarily
because of those insulating
measures that you all have put
into place, otherwise, I think
we would be having.
Most volatility coming from the
energy sector, but because of
those starting in 2019, now, now
the new sources of large
volatility are are external
factors.
And given
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Torre has
given
The fundamental changes in
technology that if
Opened up
Reservoirs
Traditionally considered to be.
Nonconomic.
I think most people's opinion
is, is the petroleum industry is
no longer
Exploration and production,
it's.
More akin to farming.
That is, if you can predict the
price of your product.
And the operating expenses to
acquire that product.
There's enough spread.
You're gonna
But a lot of projects together,
is that?
been taken into account.
In Y's projection.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Scott.
Yes, I, I think we are
absolutely seeing the maturity
of the basin, uh, as much
More stable pace of drilling.
Um,
In uh improvements in efficiency
are still increasing volumes per
well, for example, um, so we are
still seeing some volatility in
volumes, but you're right that
most of our volatility from that
sector on a year to year basis
is now coming from prices, much
more so than than production
volumes.
Um,
I think there's sort of the
overall volatility, the
long-term volatility question
that that remains for, for these
revenue sources which is
How long do we maintain these
production levels?
Um, and what variation do we
have in those production levels
over the long term, but in the,
in the short term and medium
term, I think absolutely prices
are the main source of
volatility for these revenues.
OK, Miss, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Torres, you had it exactly what
I was leading up to here.
And that I think we could
consider
New Mexico to be a $5 billion a
year oil and gas company with no
operations.
Now,
Private sector oil and gas
companies.
Routinely
Use a tool.
To reduce the volatility of
their revenue streams.
My question to you is,
What is that tool?
Has it been considered for use?
And if not
Why not?
Mr. Care Representative Scott, I
assume you're uh referring to
hedging, price hedging, uh, we
have looked into it.
The
Uh, trade-off, the large trade
off that.
From our perspective, made it
uneconomic for the state, was
the large premiums that we'd be
paying to broker services who
would be um facilitating or uh
providing the hedging services
to the state would be
significant and uh maybe a free
or maybe even uh uh
earning potential hedging
strategy or the stabilizing
measures that you all have taken
into account. So,
The price fluctuations are not
expected to hit the general
fund, and instead we can capture
100% of that price volatility
and convert it into a stable
form of revenue, which through
the permanent funds, through
investment earnings, um,
And, and in our cost benefit
calculation that was better than
uh the, the premiums lost to
hedging, say, on the upside,
when we hedge and we lose maybe
some of the value on the upside,
uh, it was, it seemed preferable
to us from the state perspective
to instead take on the full
volatility of the price with
some of these insulating
measures and take the upside for
investment for for for the use
and and have protection against
the downside, um, with these
sort of caps.
But Mr. Chairman, Mr. Torres,
year over year.
Uh, was there any question?
That um
That a hedging
Approach
would tend to smooth.
Those.
Revenue s
Absolutely, Mr. Chair and
Representative Scott. I, I
think, uh, what I'm um
unsuccessfully conveying his uh
two strategies for smoothing the
revenues.
And, and, uh, from our analysis,
the, the one that the
legislature has taken is the
more profitable one from our
analysis on this, which I think
we did maybe a year ago.
OK. I don't believe I've seen
that analysis. Is it possible
that I could get a copy?
Mr. Chair, we, we have not
published it.
Uh, I will, I will confer with
our other economists to make
sure that we can get it to you.
Thank you very much. That's all
I have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Scott.
Next, we have Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
wanna kind of step back to, to
stuff that is close to me, uh,
or before I was in the Senate.
Uh
We sit here and we're we're
discussing revenue smoothing and
we're doing this and this and
this, and we're talking about
the state revenue.
Uh, what we do.
Too often.
Impacts the municipalities and
the counties in a negative way.
And so I think what I want to
get out to the, to the members.
Is it as this becomes
Working and getting something
done.
Is that we also look at, well,
how does that impact
Little Almogordo. How does that
impact uh
Albuquerque.
Because you go back and Senator
Munoz talked about it and Mr.
Torres talked about the food
tax.
When the food tax was was
removed and we go straight to
the uh old harmless payment.
Um, you know, that held
Communities.
stable
Except that then we decided we
needed to do away with the whole
harmless payment.
And show communities are facing
the lack of stability because
of, of that.
And then we come in and we do uh
internet sales tax.
And destination sourcing and we
still don't have that figured
out yet.
On what's the best way to
balance things out for.
Cities and counties, communities
across the state.
So we're
While we look at the, the bigger
picture, which is important.
We also need to focus down.
That picture that is
Required of us as well to make
sure that
The communities that we
represent.
are adequately cared for.
Uh, while we go about these
other, these other things.
Um,
Oil and gas, I, I find that all
interesting. I find that
discussion somewhat, oil and oil
and gas and changed.
And uh uh Representative Scott,
it's first I've ever heard it,
uh.
tied to like farming.
But
In essence it is.
Uh, what is, what has come to
pass.
And one of the things that I, I
think I've, I've seen is that
when we were having such a, such
a great boom with oil and gas,
the most recent boom.
We had a lot of of mid-level
independent.
Who
are not diversified companies.
And so the only way they made
money was to produce oil and
gas.
Well, a lot of those guys are
not there anymore.
They've been acquired by the the
Conocos, the Chevron.
Of the world. So there's a,
there's a uh
They, as they are diversified.
What they do is that's how they
protect their income flows is if
one's not doing super great.
For instance, if the if the
price of oil is action, so
they're getting a certain amount
for their production that isn't
what they like.
Maybe they're selling more
gasoline. Maybe they're selling
more diesel, maybe they're doing
some more on that at other side
that helps them stay balanced.
Uh, those are the things that we
need to look at as we're, as
we're doing this is similar
things, seeing and, and I think
uh Mr Chair and
Um,
torch that as you guys evaluate.
Understand that what he
mentioned.
Is is only gas is operating
differently.
They didn't have. And if you
have different things happen
internationally that we can't
control, with those, those are
are things, but uh, but oil and
gas should be more stable today
in the country than it's ever
been.
And the hope is that that's
correct and it makes your job.
Easier and you see how, how can
I take this excess revenue.
It's going here and how can I
put it here?
Because
I bet
I bet today that if I look at
every one of you,
You had more capital outlay
dollar request than you had
capital LA dollar.
Hm. But everybody had that,
cause we all do.
There's still tons and tons of
projects in New Mexico.
That need to be addressed.
Even though we haven't taken
care of all the ones that we put
the money aside.
There's still more and more to
be addressed.
And I think those are things as
we go about it, we look at
Well how much money you have for
allocation next year.
Should you have more?
Because
These one-time expenses.
While the money's available.
It's just
You know, those are, those are
things you've, you've got to
look at.
Because this money may not
always be available, or you may
fix one problem.
And not be able to get to it for
this other problem.
So this chair, I greatly
appreciate all of this. This is
This is the stuff that you guys
have the opportunities right
there in front of you and I hope
you can really, really do some
good with it. So thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Mr. Torres.
Thank you, Senator. Move on to
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, thank you for your
presentation. Um, so I'm one of
the few probably the few
legislature, legislators that
has actually sat on both sides
of the table in terms of asking
money for projects, spending the
money, etc. and, you know, it
really does concern me, Mr.
Chair, that um, you know, so
much money is sitting in DFA
waiting.
And not being invested and not
really making, not generating,
generating any.
Any interest for the state?
Um, the, the legislation that
controls that.
Um, what is the time frame?
For projects for money to be
spent.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Borego, um, unspent funds to
clarify, are invested with the
state treasurer. So we, we do
earn um interest on, on those,
on it
it's, it's less right now it's
quite, it's quite good because
of interest rates, but it's
certainly less than a long-term
investment. Um, the, the sort of
timeline you have to spend those
funds depending on the source of
the appropriation, um, special
appropriations, you have
basically a year and a half.
Um, from when you receive them
or when you can receive them,
recurring, you have a year, um,
certain capital projects, it's 3
years, so it just depends on the
legislation that appropriates
the funds, but it, it can vary.
So when we request the funding.
Like an agency, a city agency or
a state or county or whatever,
um.
Are they categorized then, and
they're put into different
categories that
They that money will stay there
for a year or 2 years or
whatever. That's right, Mr.
Chair.
OK. Um, and I'm just thinking,
you know, Mr. Chair, because
when I, when I, when I put money
into my bank or my credit union,
which I sat on a credit union
board for 13 years. Um, you
know, even credit unions have
fees or money that is unspent,
and I'm gonna give you an
example. I put some money one
time into US Eagle, which I'm
also a member of, um, and then I
went back like 2 years later and
I had like
$100 and I was like.
I put quite a bit of money in
there and it was like, where did
my money go? And they said,
well, there's these fees that
are associated with that, you
know, investment that you had in
the bank and it was just sitting
there for so long, and it was
inactive. And so I just think
about, you know, how um we could
encourage legislators to really
look at.
Um, projects that are
Uh, can be, you know, dirt ready
or immediate funding that an
agency could use right away
rather than just money that's
just sitting there, not.
Really doing a lot, so, I mean,
I'm just thinking out loud, Mr.
Chair, but I think that these
are things that we really need
to think about when we um put
the pencil to the paper to say
these are the projects that I
want.
Funding to be spent on.
And um,
And I know it's not always easy
because sometimes communities
come to the legislators or to
the city or to the county or
whoever asking for money for a
particular project and it's not
really ready to go.
So, I just wanted to point that
out as I was sitting here
thinking of um, you know, how we
can encourage that when we do
ask our legislators to, to put
that.
Or to allocate that funding for
those future projects, but
Thank you for that.
Thank you, Representative.
Is he appreciate your
presentation this morning. I, I,
we didn't fall asleep as he
first predicted, you know, when,
whenever you provide
presentations, you're always
very thorough. It's well thought
out, well written, and presented
in a way where I know for me
anyway, I continue to, to learn
from you and I can, I appreciate
you and your, and your knowledge
and everybody in the LFC the
same.
You know, in terms of interim
committees, we're all tasked
with
In regards to whatever committee
you sit on, right? If, if you're
a part of education committee,
then you're, you're hopefully
focused on improving education
in New Mexico, water, natural
resources, you know, water and
other matters around the state.
In this committee who would talk
about revenue stabilization and
tax policy, right?
We've, we've all been here very
various amounts of time, uh, no
longer than than our vice
chairman here, but I'm sure he's
can provide his own
recollections and stories of the
feast or famine, and it's not
just New Mexico, right? All
states go through this.
Everybody goes through a feast
or famine phase, and perhaps we
are a little bit more vulnerable
than others, but at the same
time, how we approach things is
I think the matter at hand
today, right? How can we
stabilize New Mexico during a
time
A financial abundance.
Right? And
When I think about that, to the
point of Senator Griggs, it's
exciting to know that we can
have an opportunity to stabilize
in this case, our revenue
streams or how we can avoid that
feast or famine, uh track that
we've been on for so long.
Right? And I think we've taken
great steps in doing so, right?
We're talking about the
severance tax severance
permanent fund, right? Or we're
talking about the fund that we
created to make sure that
capital outlay is not based
simply on or the feast or famine
method, right? We put money
aside so that we can begin to
use cash instead of bonding for
capital outlay in this state.
So, going back then to some of
the questions that were posed uh
from Senator Munoz when he was
here, Chairman Munoz when he was
here, he made mention of their
$60 billion.
Do in local capital outlay
unspent. There's $3 billion in
statewide capital outlay
unspent, right?
And
For me
It's a matter of going back then
to the questions of
Representative Borego and what
are the time frames that things
need to be spent by? Are we?
Serving ourselves or the state
or at least the financial
institutions of this state, uh,
A favor by continuing to
reauthorize these projects,
knowing that they're on their
5th year, 7th year, 10th year,
and, and we're just holding that
money aside when
If we have
A matter of we don't know how
much we're spending on
healthcare, for instance, as was
mentioned by Senator Cedilia
Lopez.
Should we then be looking at
Reverting some of those funds,
reclaiming some of those funds,
it's a tough love method that I
don't look forward to, to taking
because oftentimes the people
that are most hurt by those and
impacted by those are the small
communities, rural communities
that don't have the
infrastructure or the
efficiencies or the staffing to
spend those monies efficiently,
right? And so we don't want to
do that either, but when I look
at things and and to the point
that Senator Munoz was making
that if we have these dollars
available.
And if it's
$9 billion at this point or
close to $10 billion of unspent
capital outlay dollars to take
portions of those and, and
redirect them in some ways where
maybe to the point of that
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Health care services, addiction
support services that we don't
have to raise taxes to make sure
that we can provide for those
really essential needed services
all across our state. So I think
there's a lot of creative ways
to look at these things and I
know it's a heavy task to then
say, hey, Izzy, we're looking at
you, you're center stage. How do
we fix this? I think it's
incumbent upon all of us, uh,
around this table, the staff,
and, and those that are watching
online that if you have ideas,
uh, as a body, as as your legisl
Tours that we should be able to
listen and learn and perhaps put
into play some type of really.
Thinking outside the box, novel
ways of concepts that we can
look at things and how we can
then go to our charge in this
committee to stabilize the
revenues in this state.
And that in some cases may be
through doing certain things
like this and or looking at tax
policy changes. So,
Again, just really appreciate uh
you and and what you provide to
this committee, uh, looking
forward to the rest of our
conversations today and
tomorrow, but again, Izzy, we
appreciate you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Let's move on, uh, folks to our
next agenda item, which is
revenue stabilization, and I, I
am going to butcher this name. I
wait for you to introduce
yourself, but you are the
manager of the Pew Charitable
Trusts, and the Flores Georges
interview. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Mr Vice Chair and committee
members. My name is Ali Laconi,
and I am a manager with the Pew
Charitable Trusts state fiscal
health project. You should the
the PowerPoint is being passed
around now it
Maybe on the screen, I'm not
sure.
It's up to y'all.
If it's shows on the screen,
will it be shown like to the
public zooming in online? No,
OK.
Just
OK, we'll we'll have it in front
of us and if they put it up,
then we'll put it up. OK.
OK.
The pew is a nonprofit,
non-partisan fact tank.
Um, and within my portfolio, we
conduct research and provide
technical assistance designed to
help states budget sustainably
and with a long term view.
On the 3rd side, you will see
that the 3 fiscal management
practices that we look at most
often are rainy day funds,
long-term budget assessments,
and budget stress testing.
I'll discuss each of these more
in-depth throughout my
presentation, but I do want to
highlight that through our
research, we have found that New
Mexico is or has implemented and
is practicing these budget
tools. Um, and when Mr. Fisher
invited Peugh out here to speak,
I said, of course, we would be
happy to, but it would really be
focused on the fact that New
Mexico is doing quite well when
it comes to the fiscal
management tools that we
highlight.
So on slide 4, you will see um
the reports on rainy day funds
that we have presented or
published over the years, um,
our research has spanned over
the last decade. I'm on the one
with all of the little pictures.
Yep.
So our rainy day fund work has
spanned the last decade. We
published 5 reports, a research
started with defining the
problems of states experiencing
increased revenue volatility, as
we just discussed, and then
moved into discussing how to
harness this volatility by tying
rainy day fund deposit rules to
volatility.
We then focused on the
importance of having a
well-defined rule in place so
that policymakers know why this
um rainy day fund exists, and
why to use it, which led to our
report on best practices on
rainy day fund withdrawal rules.
Such as tying those rules to
volatility as well.
And finally, in our report,
rainy day funds and state credit
ratings. We spoke to the three
big credit rating agencies to
learn more about how they view
not only having rainy day funds,
but also using them when
appropriate.
So the research that I outlined
on the previous slide, lead you
to identify these best practices
for rainy day fund policies.
You can move to the next.
The first having a clear,
well-defined purpose for the
fund in statute. In order to
make evidence-based
determinations about how much to
save, policymakers must first
decide what they want to
accomplish with the fund, and
how and when its balances should
be drawn upon.
For New Mexico, our research
found that the operating reserve
fund meets this best practice by
outlining in statute that it can
only be used in the event
general fund revenues are
insufficient to meet authorized
appropriations.
The 2nd best practice of
recurring budget stress tests.
Budget stress tests we have
found are an invaluable tool to
policymakers when setting
savings targets.
And this analysis allows
policymakers to better estimate
how much they should save for
the next rainy day fund while
also being confident that they
can appropriate the remaining
funds. I plan to discuss this
practice more in depth later.
But for now, I want to highlight
that New Mexico was an early
adopter of using budget stress
tests to inform their savings
target.
And finally, tying deposit and
withdrawal rules to volatility.
Connecting deposit and
withdrawals to volatilities will
ensure that a state is saving
when times are good and that
funds are available when there
is the next inevitable downturn.
And if we take a look at the
next slide.
You can see how um New Mexico
and your peer states.
Have deposit and withdrawal
rules tied to volatility.
So as you can see, Arizona,
Oklahoma, and Texas have both
deposit and withdrawal rules
connected to volatility, or at
least one of their rainy day
funds.
And our research found that for
uh New Mexico's tax
stabilization reserve fund
deposits are tied to volatility,
but currently withdrawals are
not. And if we move to the next
slide. This graph looks at New
Mexico's rainy day fund over the
last 2+ decades. Rainy day
funds, excuse me. Over the last
2+ decades, with the gray bars
representing the three national
um recessions or downturns that
happened during this time
period. So you
The dotcom recession, the Great
Recession, and finally the COVID
recession.
And as you can see, New Mexico
has seen tremendous growth since
fiscal year 2017.
And now has 132.5 days of
government operating expenses in
reserves.
This puts the state well above
the 50 state median of 48.1
days.
And on the next slide, using the
same cohort of states as you saw
on slide 6.
New Mexico has almost 62 more
days in government spending in
reserve, then the next highest
state, which is Oklahoma.
Um, and just over 84 more days
of government spending than the
50 state median of 48.1.
So moving to the next slide, the
foundation of our research was
the 10 years of looking at state
rainy day funds. Um, and all,
all of them across all 50
states. In the last 5 years or
so, our research has expanded to
also look at long-term budget
assessments and budget stress
testing.
And in November of 23, we
published our landmark report,
uh, tools for sustainable state
budgeting.
And this looked at these two
fiscal management tools,
long-term budget assessments and
budget stress tests across all
50 states. It was the first of
its kind to do so.
Um, the key premise of the
report is that policymakers must
look beyond just balancing the
current year's budget, to have
the lasting impact that they
hope to have when it comes to
investing in priorities and
meeting the basic needs of
constituents.
And this is especially rings
true now that states are coming
down from unprecedented revenue
highs that were experienced
starting into the mid 2000s or
mid mid-2020 through the end of
2022.
In long-term budget assessments
and budget stress tests can help
states determine a path forward
I regularly measuring risks and
identifying ways to address
impending fiscal challenges.
Next slide.
So more specifically, long-term
assessments and stress tests
help states analyze two primary
threats to fiscal
sustainability.
Long-term budget assessments are
meant to help states proactively
address structural deficits,
because once in place, you know,
and our research has identified
that structural deficits are
incredibly difficult to come out
of.
And over time can force you to
take more drastic steps to
balance the budget, creating a
cycle in which structural
deficits lead to short term
fixes that end up making the
deficit worse.
And stress tests gauge whether
states are prepared for these
temporary shortfalls. As we
know, even states with
structurally balanced budget
will face years of economic
downturns and other temporary
events such as COVID that cause
revenue to fall short of
spending amounts.
And if states are not prepared
for these events.
Lawmakers may have to raise
taxes or cut services when
residents can least afford them.
Or turn to budget maneuvers such
as deferred payments that can
result in budget problems many
years after the economic
downturn is over.
And in this way, a temporary
shortfall can become a much
bigger problem.
Next site.
So focusing on long-term budget
assessments first. These
analyses start by identifying
revenue and spending categories
central to budget balance. And
usually they at least include
the entire general fund. Some
states choose to go broader and
also roll in transportation
funds or education funds. It
really depends on kind of what
makes the most sense for the
state.
Next, they project revenue and
spending in these categories at
least 3 years into the future to
show whether surpluses and
deficits are expected.
Obviously, as you know, New
Mexico looks much further out
than that, so, but he's research
has found that 3 to 5 years is
um kind of the sweet spot for
states that are getting started
and also states that are not
quite so volatile.
So the graphic on this slide is
a very simplistic view of a
long-term budget assessment. You
will see that um
Revenues and expenditures are OK
in the first year, but
expenditures expenditures start
to outpace revenue in year 3 and
grow from there.
Crucially, long term budget
assessments do not stop at
simply providing numbers. They
analyze ongoing sustainability
as well, by explaining the
factors that are driving those
numbers and policy options for
improving the long-term outlook.
And some of those drivers in New
Mexico's case would obviously be
oil and gas, but in some cases
it might make sense to look at
demographics, aging population,
things like that.
And on the next slide,
This map comes from the 2023
report that I highlighted, and
as you can see here, New Mexico
is one of 15 states that
completed at least one long-term
budget assessment between 2018
and 2023. So all of the states
that are in light blue are
long-term budget assessments and
all of the states in dark blue
are long-term projections which
fall just short of an
assessment. Um, and in many
cases, it's that third piece.
The analysis of the data and of
what is driving the um
The assessment that is missing
and did not make the cut for an
assessment.
So looking ahead at the next
slide, these are the 6 best um
or leading practices that Pew's
research identified for
long-term budget assessments.
And I'm not going to read all of
them, but I do want to focus on
the 5th 1 for this audience. So
estimating whether ongoing
spending aligns with ongoing
revenue over the long term to
assess structural balance.
Um,
In our report, we highlighted a
story out of New Mexico that we
also
Hold up to states when speaking
with them.
So at a July 2022 meeting of the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Staffers presented lawmakers
with projections for recurring
revenue and spending out to
fiscal 2050.
In the short and medium terms,
the state's position was strong.
But starting at about 15 years,
the projection showed that the
state would face regular and
growing deficits, driven mainly
by expected declines in oil and
gas production as the global
economy transitions to
alternative energy sources.
But fortunately, the LFC
staffers explained the deficits
were not inevitable. And the
state could improve its
long-term position by using its
temporary surpluses wisely.
And you, New Mexico's lawmakers
did exactly that in 2023.
To reduce the risk of deficits
and shore up long-term
sustainability, you added about
700 million to various
endowments and trust funds. A
massive amount for a state with
recurring general fund spending
of less than 10 billion.
And these, this investment will
generate investment earnings to
bolster the budget in
perpetuity.
New Mexico had produced
long-term projections for years.
But the difference in 2022 was
that LFC staffers brought their
findings directly to you and
offered a convincing explanation
of the problem and it's
And if you could skip ahead to
slides.
So now, looking at what is a
budget stress test. As mentioned
earlier, budget stress tests
help states measure whether they
are prepared for temporary
shortfalls, and if not, create a
plan for bringing the budget
back into balance.
Stress tests start by
identifying hypothetical
economic events that could cause
budget shortfalls, such as a
mild scenario, which is similar
to the dot com recession, a more
severe recession scenario, which
would be your great recession.
And then they identify how those
scenarios would affect the
budget.
To do so, stress test study how
far revenue collections would
fall because of each scenario
and how much spending demands
for programs, often such as
Medicaid and higher education
would grow because we often see
during downturns that those are
the two that grow.
And finally, stress tests
compare the size of of these
negative effects to the budget
contingencies available for
addressing them.
On the next slide, you will see
the map that shows that 13
states produced a budget stress
test between 2018 and 2023.
And here I want to highlight
that New Mexico is one of only 9
states to do both of those
practices in that time frame.
In the months since we published
our report, um, and you can see
the note on this slide. Colorado
and Oklahoma also published
budget stress tests, and Pew had
the opportunity to work with
both states through our
technical assistance to help
them produce their first stress
test.
So in Colorado, we worked with
the Office of State Planning and
Budgeting, and later the Joint
Budget Committee as they worked
to produce their first stress
test. That technical assistance
engagement looks like providing
um written memos for them and
helping them think through some
of the very early uh decisions
that had to be made, uh, when
doing their budget stress test.
And in Oklahoma, we were engaged
in the state for over a year
with the legislative Office of
Fiscal Transparency or loft, as
they completed their first
stress test. And with Oklahoma,
we spent a lot of time talking
about which um scenarios make
the most sense. They are also a
mineral-rich state, so they also
thought about looking at oil and
gas, um, and we also discussed
the different methodologies that
they could choose from or doing
a budget stress test.
And then finally on the back end
of the work, um, discuss their
findings with them.
So on the next slide, you will
see the leading practices that
our research identified for
budget stress tests, very
similar to our long term, long
term budget assessment, uh,
leading practices.
Um, and as you scan the list, I
just want to highlight the first
one of examining multiple
scenarios or a range of
scenarios, and estimating the
likelihood of each.
So in our 50 state report, we
highlighted that New Mexico's
revenue forecasters included 3
scenarios from Moody's Analytics
in its December of 22, stressed.
One anticipating a general
economic downturn, 1 for faster
than expected economic growth,
and a third reflecting low oil
prices. And as we've discussed,
um, now and during Mr. Torres's
speech, uh, looking at oil
prices may not make the most
sense for every state, but it
absolutely makes sense for New
Mexico and provided some really
valuable insights.
So when I was making my slides
before seeing um the addendum
that Mr. Torres shared. My one
recommendation or Pew's
recommendation, um, or budget
stress testing was to begin
looking at expenditures, you
know the next.
Thank you.
Um, so these two graphs are from
um Utah's 2022 budget.
The graph on the left shows the
um
Increase in expenditures and
decrease in revenues for a
moderate recession, a severe
recession, and a stagflation
scenario.
Um, the total value at risk or
budget gap.
For the uh moderate recession is
1.9 billion. The severe
recession is 5.6 billion
inflation is 3.9 billion.
And then the graph on the right
shows Utah that if they had the
worst case scenario, a severe
recession, they have enough
reserves to cover that entire
recession without making any
other changes, which we know
they are unlikely to do, but
provides the com I'm sorry?
OK, sorry.
Uh,
OK, sorry. Um
So looking and it's
Looking at 5 years, they could
cover the the downturn with
their um
Reserves.
So on the next slide, you will
see um a fiscal tool kit, and
this also comes from Utah. So
the usefulness of a budget
stress test lies in its ability
to inform policy, but leaders
must also plan for how to use
that information. In doing so
ahead of time and help avoid
crisis-driven decision making
when a downturn hits or
something unexpected happens.
So the physical tool kit you see
here, like I said, this comes
from Utah. These are not um the
options that may make the most
sense for New Mexico or any
other states, um, but this is
what Utah identified as making
the most sense for them. So
you'll see the various options
here from temporal balance up to
budgetary reserves.
And these are put in order of um
ease of access, which is defined
not only by what is in statute
or the state's constitution, but
also political will.
So in Utah, the temporal
balance, the cash flow
management, spending reductions,
those are all easier to do for
them than accessing their formal
budgetary reserves.
Um, this is an incredibly
helpful tool to have, but each
state, New Mexico, would need to
decide what makes the most sense
for you, the rules of your
state, um, and the political
will of the state.
New Mexico does outline a
possible responses to downturns
in what the legislative Finance
Committee refers to as the
fiscal challenge playbook, um,
It
He's research points to possibly
formalizing that process, um, or
that physical tool kit in a way
that makes the most sense for
the state, but I did want to
highlight that these are things
that you all are thinking about.
And finally, I just want to
highlight another tool from Pew.
On the next slide, you will see
um our fiscal 50 state
indicators. We recently
relaunched this tool, and there
are state-specific pages here. I
grabbed a screenshot of New
Mexico's age, um, there are
state pages to help you keep
track of trends that are
happening in New Mexico along
with interactive indicators that
you can see not only how
New Mexico is doing, but also
compare the state to your
neighboring states or any other
state that you would like, along
with the 50 state median, um, if
that is something that makes
sense for that indicator. Um,
there are 8 different
indicators, uh, some that may be
of particular interest to this
committee are the tax revenue
trends, reserves and balances
and tax revenue volatility.
So this lives on Pew's website
and is obviously free of charge
and available to everyone. So I
would really encourage you to
click around, visit it, um, it
has a lot of great information
on.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I will
turn to you and the committee
for any questions you may have.
Great
Thank you for your presentation,
uh, at this point in time, we
will go to.
Maybe for questions or comments,
and I know that there was one
here.
Representative Herrera, if you
want to ask a question.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
and thank you for your
presentation and I'm, I'm sorry
I missed the, the first half of
it, but
I mean, I
So, so what?
As I understand it, so Utah has
this plan that will protect them
for 5 years, correct?
Well, Utah in the case of a
severe.
Severe uh reduction.
Mr. Chair and representative.
Utah, when they do their budget
stress test, they can identify
that as revenues decrease in one
of the three scenarios that they
have outlined and expenditures
increase because we know that
there are some expenditures that
will go up when there is a
downturn, um, they can, they can
stack those together um to
provide them the total.
Value at risk or budget gap that
they could potentially
experience during the downturn.
And then they do match that up,
um, or compare that to their
reserve fund to know if the
reserve fund could meet the full
um budget gap that they would
experience during that downturn.
But we also know.
Not just Utah, but
Almost any state would not just
empty their reserve fund if
there was a downturn, they would
likely implement other measures
to manage it.
So
Mr. Chair and and um
Miss
Loan Laconi Laconi.
Thank you.
Um,
You know, the question is always
how much?
You know, and that, and that's,
we're a poor state. Half of our
half of our families are in
poverty.
That's the reality we face here.
Um, so it's always a question
of, you know, how much, how much
you're gonna give and how much
you're gonna save when you have
really desperate situation. We
also have uh climate change has
taken a toll on on not only the
nation, but certainly the state.
So we also have to find ways to
protect.
People in this state who have
suffered huge losses.
Huge losses.
I, I, I'm curious about how that
works into the factoring of your
I guess, uh, of your fiscal
management practices that you
recommend to states. How do you,
how are you figuring that in?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative.
So
I do, I always want to be clear
when I am speaking with the
states that I never want to come
across as the expert on your
state. You all are absolutely
the experts on New Mexico. I am
here to share our research, um.
In the case of
Determining saving versus
spending, but also saving for
other.
Issues that you are going to
face, um,
The budget stress test does not
point to and our research does
not point to
How you should necessarily think
of the competing priorities. The
budget stress has really just
simply outline.
If you were to face a moderate
recession or a severe recession
or a mild recession.
This is what
Based on what happened, you
know, during the Great Recession
or the dot com. This is what
that may look like for the state
and
Based on that, this is how much
you would want to consider
having in your reserve.
Um,
For climate change, Pew actually
does have a different uh team
that is focused on managing
those fiscal risks, and they
aren't actually engaged in New
Mexico, um, related to
wildfires. I'm happy to connect
you to some of that work if you
are interested.
Mhm.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, and that's the,
that's the glory of being a uh
researcher, right?
You know, as opposed to being a
legislator because we really do
have to decide how we're going
to spend this money.
when there's such a need.
And um
You know, that's your job and
that's our job and we'll, we'll
get there, I guess. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman Lo County
is few differentiate between
What I would call
Uh, long term strategic
reserves.
Versus
A rainy day funds which are
Reserves that are intended to
Sustains spending on
One
project or another.
Oh.
Compensate for year to year.
Variations
The, y'all make a distinction.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, may I ask a clarifying
question. So are you
distinguishing between like
rainy day funds and like
sovereign wealth funds, would
that be kind of the distinction?
Mr. Chairman.
County, that's great. OK. Vi
chair, representative, thank you
very much. Um, we
have looked at sovereign wealth
funds separately. That is an
older body of research when in
this discussion and in this
research, we were looking at
More just simple rainy day
funds.
Um, and for the graph on like
operating days.
Um, those are the rainy day
funds that New Mexico reports to
NASO, the National Association
of State Budget Officers, um, so
that's where we pull a lot of
our data from when working on
our indicators, but we look at
sovereign wealth funds
separately.
And Mr. Chairman, Ms. Lay, do
you consider
The New Mexico land grant
permanent fund to be.
Rainy day fund.
Mr. Chair and representative in
Our research for the 5 reports
that I highlighted, that was not
one of the funds we considered
to be a rainy day fund.
OK.
And
Looking out long term.
I mean, it's
It's public policy of this
state.
To write a sunset, one of the
significant revenue streams.
Uh
Provide funds for our budget.
And
And the trajectory of our
spending.
Over the last
5 years.
It's been
Pretty much substantially
vertically apart.
So
He's
The ultimate projection of the
reduction in revenues.
Versus the increases in
spending, you have a projection
New Mexico on
When those lines are going to
cross.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
I think that would
Potentially be the I would defer
to the LFC, um, I think that's
the long term.
Budget assessment that you
When revenues and expenditures
start to move away from each
other. So I think the state's
long term budget assessment
would be the one to answer that.
And that was all the way up to
2050, is that accurate? I
believe that's what.
I believe that.
OK.
Uh, thank you very much for your
answers and thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Senator Sao Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This
actually sort of builds on that
question because I had the same
kind of issues and so, um, we,
the, that's what I wanted to
know what is a rainy day fund
compared to a I don't, that you
said sovereign wealth fund, is
that the land grant permanent
fund, and then we have other
funds like the, I think it's
called the Legacy Conservation
Fund or?
Um,
You know, so we've created these
funds to support different
important policies of the state.
We have the early childcare, um,
fund.
How
How did this go into the mix of
Of our uh planning for the
future. When, when we know that
oil and gas will eventually
Eat out.
chair and senator, thank you.
Um, so for rainy day funds, we
were looking at the operating
with operating reserve fund in
the um
stabilization reserve fund, were
the two that are research looked
at.
Um,
I'm sorry. No, go ahead. OK.
Yes, so those are the two that
our research looked at as true
rainy day funds. OK, apologize,
I didn't mean to
and
I'm sorry, I
Well, what I, the reason, the
reason I'm I'm a little bit
When we think about
Planning for the future, um.
We know that it's, it's
unsustainable to rely on the oil
and gas revenues in the mining
revenues.
Forever. Eventually they're,
they're gonna run out.
Um, and, and the question, I
mean,
A lot of factors will, will
affect that end date and it's
been great having them, but we
also need to plan for the days
that we don't have them, and
it's important that we plan for
those days.
When it doesn't hurt so much to
To do, to do this planning,
right? Um, and that's why it's
important that we've put so much
money into funds that will
sustain us for the future.
Um, but we've done more than
just the rainy day type ones
that you looked at. And my
question is, is how
For me, they, they are a hedge
against volatility, um.
In the policies, because we have
state policies we care about. I,
our environment, that's, that's
what important, important.
That's what's important about
the legacy.
I, I forget the name of it, OK.
Is it the land of enchantment
fund that's for yourself?
I thought the legacy is in
there, but the land of
Enchantment Fund, the whole idea
is to make sure that we can uh
work to preserve our environment
in the future. Early childhood,
that's to make sure that our
children are taken care of in
the future. So those are, are
really important state policies.
So we're not relying
On the, on the general fund to
take care of those important
policies in the future and my
question to you is, how
important is it that we do that
and I know this study didn't,
didn't look at that. I, I, I was
pleased to see how well we're
doing.
With just stabilizing, but
What is, what are your thoughts
regarding enforcing or not
supporting our policies into the
future, no matter what happens
with our
With our volatility.
Mr. Chair and senator, thank you
for um sharing your question
again. I will say that is
outside the scope of Pew's
research. We
And not be in a place of
of telling states what their
priorities should be and how to
necessarily how to fund those
priorities. Our research really
speaks to saying these are the
fiscal management tools that
will allow you to not only save.
For the next inevitable
downturn, but also
Allow you to be secure in
appropriating the remaining
funds, knowing they shouldn't
have taken care of.
What may happen. Um.
But unfortunately that doesn't,
I cannot speak to that based on
Pew's research and not that I
would expect you to tell us what
our policies should be. It's up
to us to identify the policies,
but I just know.
I just feel that funding those
policies into the future will
take a burden off the general
fund.
In a good way, there'd be a
positive, a will have a positive
impact.
And um I think
It's not your study, and, and I
understand that, but I'm just
wondering how we could, is there
a way to measure that or is it a
way to think about it.
Um, I, just as an example, we
spent money on
Um,
Alcohol
The harms that are caused by
alcohol, addiction, um, the
emergency room services, you
know, all kinds of funds are
spent, um, and
We're gonna continue to spend
them, but if we had a fund that
could dedicate itself to
prevention and to, and to do
that.
I think it would take a burden
off the general fund, and it's a
similar question to what I asked
last time. How do we measure
that? How do we think about it?
Because in my mind, it's
planning for the future when we
don't have the abundance that we
have now, um.
Mr. Chair and senator, thank
you. I think we had a program at
Pew called the Results First
Initiative, and I'm not sure if
any of you were involved.
When they were working. I'm
pretty sure they worked
extensively in New Mexico, um,
and that program looked at how
states can determine um
If the juice is worth the
squeeze, I guess, for particular
programs, and like how they are
managing those priorities, and
I'm happy to connect you with
the director of that line of
work. Um, like I said, the
project itself has sunset, but
she is still at Pew and it's
obviously an expert and can
speak to that if that would be
helpful.
I, I think it would be helpful
because it, it to me that's very
challenging is as we plan for
the future, yes, we need to get
what you, what you presented is
extremely important, and I'm
glad that New Mexico is taking
all of these that we've been
taking these really great steps.
But then there's another, a
whole other level of planning
for the future and ensuring that
our important state policies.
are funded in the future.
Um,
And maybe we should be more
strategic about it.
Ah
Mr. Chair and senator, I will
connect you as soon as I get
back um home. I'm the woman's
name is Sarah Dubay, and I will
send that email. Sarah Sarah
Dubey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for a very informative
presentation.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
questions or comments?
Vice Chairman Campost, uh, thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
I really appreciate the
presentation and a lot of good
information. Uh, this in a sense
kind of ties the previous
presentation and this one as
well as you were talking about,
uh, let's say for example, that
long term planning and members
have already alluded to many,
many factors here.
So, so within that, the question
does come up when we start
talking about the expenditures
and if you will, the growing
expenditures and the request
that we continue to go ahead and
deal with.
And so within the mechanism for
these stress tests, a couple of
questions.
And, and I'm gonna premise that
a little bit with some of the
things that we're experiencing
now. So let's say for example,
At Intel, we're starting to go
ahead and see um employees being
laid off, and then we see the
shift of uh employment maybe
going to Facebook and other uh
companies that are being
located.
Uh, maybe in Los Lunas but in
those areas. So, so we're
starting to go ahead and see if
you will is that shift and then
you talk about maybe the 15 year
piece where our economy could
become weaker, uh, because if
you will, the shift from oil and
gas.
But, but in doing that, what is
something that possibly you all
have already looked at.
Um, maybe as a policy scam with
other states that would help us.
To better understand and prepare
if you will, for the shift in
the economy, um.
We'll just say in year 15 from
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Vice Chair. Um, just to
What would help New Mexico
better prepare for the changing
economy for less.
Reliance on gas and oil as a
country, um.
Our current research does not
speak to that. That is something
that I could go back and um look
into further of what other
states have done, um, in terms
of
Because that would be more than
just preparing for the next
downturn, which is kind of what
our research focus on this would
be a structural change. So while
I do not have the research to
speak to that today. I'm happy
to go back and pull that
together and share that with you
and the committee if that would
be of interest. I appreciate
that, Mr. Chair, if I may, uh,
with that, that to me is going
to be one of the integral
components.
For the state as we do go
forward and you've already
heard, if you will, the uh need
for some of the other priorities
to be addressed, and of course
that's going to be part of the
expenditure piece as we move
forward.
But if, if we at least have uh
some of the context of how other
states have prepared for this
because we're not going to
reinvent the wheel. We want to
go forward with it. Uh, I would
really appreciate that and then
possibly make that information
available to the committee.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, yes,
we can pull that together and
share that with you. I
appreciate that. Thank you very
much for your response and of
course the presentation. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Thank you again for the
presentation. Uh, I'm reminded
by uh Izzy who presented before
you that
All the work that this
legislature has done over the
past several years, uh,
Regarding revenue volatility
with the 7 tax permanent fund
with the capital outlay fund
now, uh, he mentioned that
It's actually moved New Mexico's
bond rating to a positive
outlook for the first time in a
long time, to a point where we
could actually be looking at a
bond rating increase next year
for the first time in decades.
But I think the work that this
Legislature has done or is
doing, uh, speaks volumes in
regards to what people are
noticing and, and the things
that we are doing for the state
and so, um,
Not to, not to gloat, but I mean
that's something to feel proud
about in terms of the work that
we're doing here. So, again,
thank you for your presentation.
Uh, we appreciate what you
brought to our committee. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair and committee
members. Before we take off
folks and, and there really is
no reason to take off because
lunch is being brought in, uh,
postsas is being brought in for
lunch at about 11:45, about 15
minutes, but before we do a
recess, if I could ask for a
couple of housekeeping matters
to look at our minutes from the
August.
And September meetings that are
in your packet, and we can
address those at this point in
time if you have any questions
or comments. If not, there a
motion to approve. So, Mr.
Chairman. Motions a 2nd, 2nd in
opposition, we have a minute
appro for the August and
September meetings for the
revenue stabilization Tax Policy
Committee, uh, at this point in
time, as I mentioned before, uh,
lunch should be brought in about
11:45 again Posas is on the menu
and we want to thank, we want to
think of the name here.
We want to thank the New Mexico
Grocers Association for
providing that lunch for all of
us today. So again, thank you to
them and please stick around and
we will uh reconvene at at 1:15.
Thank you all.
for them.
Yeah
How are you?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh
You
Uh.
Mhm
Hm
OK.
Yeah.
Oh.
and my hair is yeah.
Yeah.
Great. I'll see you in a while.
