Hi there. I'm Sidney Linneman.
I'm the deputy Cabinet secretary
for administration at the New
Mexico Environment Department.
Welcome.
Good afternoon. My name is
Santiago Rodriguez. I'm the
chief of the Radiation Control
Bureau.
Pleasure to be here.
OK, we have your
Presentation up.
For people to see.
You go ahead.
Great. Well, first. Thank you
all so very much for inviting us
to be here today. Um, as I
mentioned I'm the deputy Cabinet
secretary. Normally Rick Sheen,
our UM, division director for
the Resource protection division
would be giving this
presentation. Um, but he is,
unfortunately for us, and
unfortunately for him in Hawaii
right now, um so you get me
instead. And I will. I'll do my
best to answer your questions.
And if not, I'll go and make
sure that we have the subject
matter. Experts who can, um
Uh, provide any additional
background that you require, Um
We also are not joined here, but
we are joined at enemy D by a
new hazardous waste Bureau
chief. Um that's a position that
has been empty for some time.
And, uh, we're delighted to be
joined by JD Nance, who comes
from the private sector and the
consulting world and has worked
quite a bit, um, on the
facilities that I'll talk about
today, so he's got a fantastic
vision for the has waste Bureau
and and how we can continue to
really hold polluters
accountable, um, and take
advantage of some of the
Rules that are coming out of the
EPA that give us a little bit
more power to do. So, Um, so so
with that, um
I'm just gonna start by, uh,
we'll talk a little bit about
some of the the facilities of
interest. Um some new rules
coming down from the EPA as well
as some of our legislative
priorities that we're hoping to
put forward in the 60 day
session.
Um, but I'll just start with
this as a reminder Enemy D, um,
through either hazardous waste
or the Radiation Control Bureau
has regulatory authority over
hazardous waste like mixed
waste. Um
So that is when hazardous waste
and radioactive waste are mixed
together. Um and as well as
radioactive material from the
oil and gas industry, which
Santiago will get into into, um,
but not pure radioactive waste.
So, um, for example, those whip
drums that maybe you've seen
driving down the highway. Those
are filled with radioactive
legacy waste as well as kind of
other things that they have
around hazardous waste that cau
causes them to be mixed with.
Whole tech, for example, and
spent nuclear fuel are not
directly regulated by enemy D.
Although Senate Bill 53 from
2020
Two.
Prevents us from providing other
types of permits that we would
be required for, uh, citing such
a repository like groundwater
permits. Um, so if you will turn
to slide three
So Lionel, for example, has, um,
a resource conservation and
Recovery act permit that allows
us to oversee the current
management of their hazardous
waste and operations at the at
the lab. Um
So they
Use they May we? They manage
their hazardous waste through
this permit, and it's up for
renewal in June 2020 they
applied for a renewal that we
deem to be administratively
incomplete.
Um, we're currently awaiting
revisions on that proposal. Um,
one piece, for example, they
requested to, um add two open
debt detonation in one open burn
facilities to that recor permit,
which were not allowed by the
previous 2010 permit, which
would allow them to to burn or
detonate more toxic materials. A
lot of facilities, including DOD
are starting to move away from
this practice. Um, And so that
is a A place where we're
gathering more information in
particular.
Because the EPA just published
draft, uh, proposed rules that
would revise, um, the
regulations around, uh, open
burning and open detonation
units, So we wanna make sure
that we're being consistent with
those new rules that are being
promulgated.
Um
If you'll turn now to slide for,
um
We also have a consent order
that allows us to deal with
legacy waste that is waste from
past practices. Um and you, you
have likely heard the story that
stories about how in the
Olden times. Um, uh, radioactive
waste and was treated much less
carefully than it is treated
today. Um, and so, figuring out
how we work with land all and
DOE, uh, to deal with that waste
is the subject of this consent
order.
Um, the the previous consent
order we feel doesn't allow us
enough. Um
Regulatory tools to be able to
compel L all and DOE, uh, to
make the changes that we want
them to, as well as thinking
about, um
How we can enforce either faster
or more thorough action. Uh, so
we are.
Um
Working.
Tirelessly on on this piece. Um,
and if you'll turn to the next
slide slide five.
We did file a civil complaint
in, um in the first judicial
district. And I think since then
we've seen quite a bit more, Uh,
movement on the consent order.
We've agreed to 15 milestones.
Um And we, uh, are hoping that
in the coming months we will
have a a finalized version of
that consent order, uh, to
present to you that will give us
a better mechanisms to deal
with, uh, areas where we don't
agree.
So turning now to slide number
six.
Um
So the hexavalent chromium
plume. Uh as many of you may be
aware, potassium Dichromate was
used in cooling towers at the
laboratory Power plant. Um from
the the fifties to the
seventies, creating this, uh,
water contamination, which is
traveled down Santia Canyon, um,
and created a A sizable plume of
chromate. Um hexavalent chromate
hexavalent chromate is a nasty
if you've seen, um Aaron
Brockovich, then that was the
subject.
Of that movie. Um, it was also
the subject of my PHD thesis.
Um, which is how I know about
Aaron Brockovich? Because I put
a post a picture of it in my the
PHD defense. Um, my mom said it
was the only slide she
understood. But I digress.
Uh,
so we we are aware that there is
deep groundwater contamination
at some points as deep as 1000
ft.
Where in, um another situation
with the federal government
where we have a disagreement
about what the data and the
modeling shows.
We feel that we don't fully
understand the nature and extent
of that chromate plume and we're
concerned that when we're
performing, uh, pump and treat
so pumping the water out,
treating it and then reinjecting
it we are potentially
reinjecting it too close to the
edge of the plume, which may be
pushing it towards um the Pueblo
of Sin altas, which is very much
not the direction that we want
to be doing. And so until we
have additional data to
understand where that plume
ends, and make sure that
anywhere that we are reinjecting
That treated water. We aren't
just diluting the plume and
making it bigger.
Um
If you'll turn to the next page.
Because we have reached really
this impasse with, uh, Lionel
over what the data shows and
what they believe their modeling
shows. We've actually, um
Agreed to participate in an
independent technical review. So
we've brought in a group of
technical experts to analyze all
of the existing data and and
work plans.
Um, bringing in a huge amount of
background. Whether, uh, folks
from toe folks from private
sector academia, EPA. Um uh,
And I'll ask them to help us
understand. How are the interim
measures this pump and treat
allowing us to, um, control and
stabilize that plume?
Where do we need groundwater?
monitoring, Um, to help us make
these regulatory decisions. Um,
where should we be evaluating
where we should inject that
treated water so that we're not
moving the plume off towards
other populations that we want
to protect?
Um, how are we building our road
map to get to a final remedy? So
right now we're doing interim
measures, but we're moving
towards the final remedy. And
also, how do we design our
monitoring Wells? Um and I we
have seen a huge amount of
progress from this group. Um,
it's been a really interesting
new paradigm for us to consider
how we get through, Uh, disputes
like this with an organization
which obviously has a great deal
more resources to bring to bear.
Um, than we do we have a you
know.
Small but mighty team and the
deal. OE has
Oh, bigger and mightier team.
Um, so we're really pleased with
the direction that the
independent technical Review has
taken.
Um
And now I'll ask you to turn to
slide.
Eight.
So when we were here last year,
presenting during the interim,
we had prepared you that we were
going to have a hearing for the
whip permit renewal. Um, because
we did not believe that we
could. Um, we had negotiations
planned. We were They were going
to be mediated. We were gonna
work through some of the issues
that we had and all the
outstanding issues were going to
come in the form of a long and
drawn out permit hearing. Um and
I am delighted to report and you
may probably already know that
we were able
Um, complete negotiations in
that mediation and, um, bring a
final permit renewal forward
without the need for a costly
and lengthy, um, permit hearing,
which would take up a lot of our
time and a lot of our resources.
We're also really pleased with
the outcome of that, Uh, permit
renewal. Our feeling is that we
have, um we gained a lot in this
new permit. So, for example, the
new permit Condi conditions now
allow us to revoke and re and
reissue the permit if the
underlying Federal Regis
legislation, uh, the land
withdrawal act, uh, is changed
in any way. Um
It.
Requires that, uh, DOE analyze
the quantity of legacy waste and
prioritize legacy. Waste going
to whip? Um rather than new
waste.
It also requires the analysis of
additional repositories across
the US. This has been a big
contention of enemy that we feel
that DOE is just, um, hoping
that they can continue to use
whip forever, as opposed to
analyzing where else they should
be preparing to put this waste.
Um, as we have more and more of
it.
Um and then, New permit also
requires new, um, an additional
outreach to the community.
Um which is, uh, I think a a
really important piece of this
so that stakeholders understand,
Uh the risks and benefits
associated with citing, um uh,
the sighting of whip
One piece that is not in the
permit, but I'm interested in,
um
As a new Mexican. Uh Dey has
selected the website as um, for
a program called Clean up to
clean energy, so they're
planning to do an RSP for clean
energy development on 9000.
acres at whip. Um, as as some of
you may know, there are, uh
there are a lot of issues with,
um, electricity re resources in
the Permian. I think this is a
really exciting potential
opportunity to take advantage of
the large footprint that whip
has to
Both grow our clean energy
portfolio and help support the
governor's goals. And I know
many of your goals around taking
bold climate action and seeing
how that can, uh, overlap with
supporting the state's economy.
Um
Nine.
Um so a couple of other new
things Since we presented last
year, there has been quite a bit
of work, um at EPA around,
addressing forever Chemicals.
Um, these are the chemicals that
come from things like
manufacturing P, Uh, Teflon, um
Or, um, raincoats and, uh, tents
that are waterproof and
firefighting foam. Um, and I was
just I just learned today sticky
notes. Um, so these forever
chemicals are really ubiquitous.
Find them in Antarctica. We find
them in drinking water systems
almost everywhere. Um, and up
until now, we have had some, um,
uh, regulatory authority, uh, to
address these, but we've also
really been, um, fought by the
federal government in some
cases, as I'm sure many of you
know, um were in the midst of a
lawsuit with cannon over our
ability to remediate a very
sizable and concerning plume of
PFOs, um, in that portion of the
state, but we
We were deed by the EPA. Um uh,
promulgating new, uh, maximum
contaminant limits for, uh, six
PF types for all public drinking
water systems. So this is great.
This gives us a new, um
Um, a limit to try and reach
When we do clean up. It allows
us to take bolder action in
supporting water systems that
may have PFOs contamination,
which is a lot of them.
Um my biggest concern to this
point is, how do we make sure
that the all of the water
systems in the state are able to
have the resources they need to
address PFOs not just kind of in
the big cities, but you know if
you have a mutual domestic with
You know 60 users. What do we do
to support those water systems
to make sure that they're
benefiting from these new
limits, too? So we received last
week a $20 million grant from
EPA to help us start to set up
those systems specifically for
small and disadvantaged water
systems. And, um
That's great, but we're gonna
we're gonna need more. Um
And, um and we're
Pleased that the bipartisan
infrastructure law and um,
inflation Reduction Act has
created so many resources for us
to help these, um these
under-resourced utilities.
Um
The
EPA has also, um
Listed, uh, proposed to list uh,
P a certain PF as um, hazardous
constituents under Rick Ross. So
that's the the law that allows
us to do clean up, um, and hold
polluters accountable. Um, Under
this federal law, it allows us
to lead
Um And that was at the request
of, uh Governor Liu Hon.
Grisham. She, uh um and
Secretary Kenny produced a
letter, um and really kind of
took the lead on, um, pushing
the federal government to give
us access to more resources to
hold polluters like DOD
accountable.
We, uh, there another piece that
I wanted to mention with regard
to, um to PF.
We spoke last time about a blood
testing that was taking place in
Pennsylvania. We've now launched
our own PFS, uh, Blood
surveillance project that we are
planning for later on this
summer. Um, it's joint, uh,
Public health project with enemy
D and the Department of Health,
um, including veterans services
in Curry County and the
governor's office, So we're
planning to provide P fs blood
testing for up to 500. Voluntary
participants focusing on a
population of, uh, within
Four miles of the PFOs plume at
Canon Air Force Base. Um
So we're we're in the we have a
contractor signed on, uh, and
were in the process of setting
that up and we'll communicate
with you all more about that,
Um as we move forward, but the
aim is for us to understand the
the extent of PFAs contamination
and how it's impacting people's
bloods and blood and also allow
that allow, uh, individuals to
make more, uh, informed medical
decisions if they know the PS
levels in their blood. Uh, all
of that data will be private,
but we have a non an anonymized
version that will allow us to
See kind of broadly. The impacts
that that, um uh, plume has had
on people living in nearby
areas.
Um
If you'll turn to slide, 10
Um so
Like Leave, Um
I listen to the committee
hearing from last year recently,
Um and so, I. I know you have a
Much more in depth background on
this likely than I do. Um, uh
but we we do feel on Kirtland
that we're starting to make some
real progress. When we spoke
last year, we were at a bit of
an impasse again over data and
modeling. Um, we have brought in
an outside contractor. That's
done Some analysis on the work
plans that that the Air Force
has provided identified some
places where we, um, now feel
more comfortable with the data
also identified some data gaps
that help us understand, Uh the
nature and extent of
No, man. We really we, um are
here comfortable with the idea
that the plume is really
stabilized. They've done a good
job.
Um
Of of addressing the off base
plume, But now we're really
pivoting to start to think more
about the source area for that
plume, so things like, um, soil
vapor monitoring. Um so that is
you know it as the, um The jet
fuel evaporates. It can go into
business buildings and that can
make people sick. Um, so we've
approved that that is now
underway. Um, we're, uh, we've
asked the Air Force to take some
addition. Do some additional
data sampling. Um and
Reviewing that now, but we do
feel like in the last six months
or so. Since we brought on this
outside contractor, we have been
able to work through a number of
the issues similar to how we did
with the independent technical
review Having someone from the
outside. Who can, um, take a
look at these work products with
fresh eyes? It's been really
beneficial to the department. Um
and you know, we've been able to
help teach the contractors, the
contractors have been able to
help teach us some so
Um we feel that we are making
progress on Kirtland. Um and and
that
And that the, UM interim
measures are still working
reasonably well.
Um
Uh, slide 11.
So we have a couple of
legislative proposals that we're
considering that we just wanted
to
Speak with you all about. And,
um
These are still in the early
stages, but just for you to be
aware of the direction we're
heading. One of the pieces that
we're looking at is a non
essential PFOs band similar to
what was implemented in
Minnesota. Um, as I mentioned,
the administration has been
really forward, leaning on PFOs
and we feel the next step to
reduce the amount of PFOs in our
environment in our blood in our
drinking water is a prohibition
on PFOs in the state of certain
products.
Um, so the law would ban in the
manufacturers, sale and
distribution of a range of
products that intentionally add
PFOs. No, There are things that,
um PF is in things that
Are essential. PF is in some
heart pumps. Um, there are some
things that you can't take PF OS
out of or that we haven't been
able to identify an alternative
for them. This is not about
that. This is about making sure
that there's not PFOs in our
mascara or in our baby wipes, um
to two examples from my life. Um
Ah, so so that is something that
we are, Um, we are considering,
um, leading in going into the 60
day session.
We are also considering
amendments to the Hazardous
Waste Act, which will allow the
EIB to regulate toxic substances
before the EPA does so for
things like like PF, you know,
we know in the state of New
Mexico, we've been seeing people
in livestock getting sick from
Phos for a long time. We didn't
need to wait for the EPA to act.
We had identified the toxicity
and so this would give us more
local control over what we can
regulate and how we can hold
polluters accountable. Um
Uh, in order to clean up these
spills of of new whatever the
next PF is that we don't know
about yet, which is terrifying.
Thought, Um, uh
So in in places where we are
prepared, we think we have the
science that shows that, um
there is toxicity from certain
chemicals. We can act before the
EPA and the federal government.
One piece of legislation that
has, um, where we've been
talking about for quite some
time is figuring out how we at
enemy D can take more agency
over addressing abandoned and
contaminated sites in the state,
So there are a number of these,
um around the state. There's a,
um, an old dry cleaner in my
neighborhood.
Um, that is listed on the
federal Superfund list, but is
far enough down that nothing is
really happening with it right
now. And so our aim here is to,
um uh, provide the authority for
the development of regulations
to create a state led response
to the Superfund sites, Um,
investigating developing
remediation programs and funding
programs for these sites where
there is not a responsible party
that we can identify, but we do
want to turn them over right.
These sites still have value.
Um, and their potentially
polluting the neighborhood
around them. And they could be,
uh, opportunities for economic
development if they were
properly, uh, cleaned up.
Um
And then finally
We're thinking a lot at
The UM at the New Mexico
Environment Department about how
do we reduce waste? And how do
we use waste to? Um um, really
grow our economy. Reduce the
burden on small communities that
have to deal with all this
waste. We're joined by a new,
um, bureau chief for our solid
waste division. Um Shirlene
Sitton, who is also um who I
I'll bring by to introduce you.
But she also has a great vision
for solid waste. And so a lot of
this comes out of, um
Her ideas as well as the passage
of clean fuels last year. Are
there ways that we can, you
know, get gather methane and
other emissions from, uh solid
waste facilities. Can we, uh,
implement extended producer
responsibilities so communities
aren't left dealing with giant
piles of tires or mattresses or
paint? Um
Um as well as, uh, reducing the
amount of trash that we create,
Uh, to make it easier to
beautify our state. Um so that
that is the end of my portion of
the presentation. I think, um, I
My understanding is, um, that
will allow Santiago will go
next. And then we hold for
questions. Is that right?
Just kinda
Keep it moving along. Just what
we're kind of tight on time.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Once
again.
Um
Vice chair, Steinburner
distinguished members of the
committee. I'm here to speak to
you about some norm.
So, um, we we commenced an
initiative for the oil and gas
industry around January of 2021
in that initiative, what we did
is we issued letters to 20 oil
and gas companies, a couple of
which, oddly enough, were had
the same parent company. So you
know it brought that number down
to 19.
And what we did is we, um
reminded them of their
responsibilities. Um, as far as
the New Mexico Administrative
code is concerned, and so what
we did is we issued letters and
in response, the oil and gas
companies, um
Came back with surveys that they
had taken of, um
Wells, where they were, um,
conducting oil and gas
operations.
Um, so the surveys
They They should survey you
know?
During maintenance. They should
be surveying during different
activities that occur, um out at
the site and, um, have not been
doing so or at least had not
been reporting to us. So we we
put them on notice and let not
let them know that we needed.
Um this information for review.
Um
Surveys were reviewed.
Licenses were issued. As you can
see, we issue have issued seven
licenses and when I say licenses
specific radioactive materials
licenses, so this allows them to
possess use transport dispose
of, um Norm Um, and it's and
it's daughter, which consists of
various radioactive analys, Um
Through the through the compact
route side of the compact. We
also issued nine licenses to
service providers who help
assist oil and gas operations
that don't have the the
Staff or the ability or the know
how where the equipment to do,
the surveys of said locations.
Um, next slide, please.
So here are some examples of
where radioactive material IE,
Um natural occurring radioactive
material can be
Potentially found And so it's
identified with, um you know
some radioactive symbols and
then to the right side of the
side is the types of analytics
that we're interested in.
And so we issue specific
licenses to these companies and
to these service providers. It
allows them to do surveys that
allows them to collect store
again Transport and dispose of
this waste properly when they
When they don't have a license.
They can't get a permit through
the compact and therefore cannot
dispose of, um
Legally the um radioactive
material. I mean, they can
always dispose of it, but we
would like to know where that is
being disposed of, and how it's
being disposed of. So that we
can, um, properly track from
cradle to grave. Um, the origin
of this natural occurring
radioactive material.
Next slide, please. So this is
an example of a licensing
pathway for, um
National occurring radioactive
material found in soil. So in
the industry, um and we've
shared this at the, uh, North
American, um, Norm Conference to
educate, Um those individuals
that are
Um
Should be aware of the rules and
regulations and their
responsibilities and
obligations, helping them to
navigate this much easier. Um so
this, you know, flow chart tells
you
Um
Your action limits and then it,
um, tells you where to go from
there and, of course, anywhere
along the process If they have
any, um
Questions, thoughts, comments
concerns. They're always welcome
to contact the The Bureau TAS
Those next slide, please.
So here's um, the same.
Type of, um, flow chart with,
um, referring to produce water.
So again, the process actionable
limits. And what isn't what is
needed.
Um, in order to obtain a
specific license. Next slide,
please.
So produce what? UM, produce
sludge and
And scale.
They
Generally encounter this during
maintenance or
Pipe replacement and, um, again
in order to dispose of this
properly. You need to identify.
Um
What
Potential, um, natural occurring
radioactive material you may
have in there. X slide, please.
So here's some for removable
surface contaminate
contamination. So we know New
Mexico is dry. It's dusty
operations happen. Um soils can
accumulate in various areas. Do
surveys for this make a
determination of whether you
have, um, actions were were not
next slide, please equipment so
when equipment is taken out of,
um, service when it's replaced,
Um
It should be surveyed in any
parts that can accumulate scale
soil.
Any potential for national
occurring radioactive materials
should be, um
Evaluated. Next slide, please.
And so
What the bureau is doing
currently is we are, um
Conducting. We're going to
conduct our own field
verifications of sample data and
surveys that we've received.
Um, how are we gonna do this?
We're gonna do this by, um
Acquiring and outfitting a
mobile lab.
So, um
We will have a lab that we can
drive to locations to do on site
testing. The The mobile APP will
be modeled after what the EPA
mobile labs are used, or, um,
there is a a lead time to
To, um, create one of these were
manufacture one of these
And we're going to equip it with
the, uh, germanium detector and
with a liquid scintillation
counter, um, which will provide,
um, staff real time data on what
is occurring in the field.
And in addition to that, we will
continue to
Um, visit with, um oil and gas
operators with companies service
providers to help them with the
licensing process. We do that
regularly, and we are utilizing
our new and updated fancy
database that we've just, uh
Had created to incorporate
normal licensing into it. Normal
licensing is not O. The federal
government oversees a
radioactive materials licensing,
but they do not.
Oversee natural occurring
radioactive materials.
licensing. However, the
expectation is the same as far
as the requirements and
obligations and and what the
expectations are from, Um, the
operators.
And, um
Oops. Sorry. Sorry. We're
working towards uh um
Revising our regulations because
they're vintage. They're old.
Um, we want to bring them up to
industry standards. Um
Not to make it difficult for
anybody in any way, shape or
form, but so that we are what
the expectation in another state
is the same expectation that
they have in New Mexico, so
we're not people are
Able to transition easily, um
from one state to the other.
Next light. Thank you.
First we have S Stein. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair and good to, uh
Good to see you both. Uh
Santiago and Sydney. Thanks for
coming today. We appreciate it.
Thanks. Uh, for all your
department, guys, and thanks,
Secretary, Kenny. I mean, I
think a lot of these things we
fight are are tough fights.
Um, with powerful people.
Terms. It feels like we're not
making progress. And then we see
progress, and we're seeing
progress across a lot of
important fronts.
Which then brings in a focus
things that have yet to be
battles yet to be waged and
things we need to do and the
work just with a lot of work to
do here in the states, so, but
thank you for being up to the
task and for undertaking it.
That means a lot. Um, I wanna
just go over a few things real
quick.
They'll probably be more
comments than questions. Uh,
just be back, um, number one
consent. Order. You go, Um
I think
Yeah, I've been through so many
of those presentations like many
of us have where we see this
laundry list of 30 40 50 items
There may be focusing on a
handful of them because that's
all the consent order requires
them to do. And then the biggest
ones feel like we're not making
any progress like on the
chromium plum.
Uh, so it would be great if
we're driving hard a bargain
with the federal government and
we're asking for more clean up
on more things at a faster pace
or more aggressively moving off
that list and protecting water.
So go
As far as you can on that, you
know. Good luck. We support you
in that.
Um the ITR or the chromium
plume. The, uh the, uh,
Technical review Committee.
Kudos to this committee because
we recommended um
We recommended at a committee
that maybe we bring in a
technical review because we had
two opposing sides, and everyone
was receptive of that. Which is
partially why the suggestion was
made just to kind of move it
along.
Sounds like you're saying,
Lindsay, you feel like it's
making good progress. And when
would you anticipate
recommendations on like a final
solution?
Got you.
Uh, through the chair. Uh,
Senator Sanborn, I wouldn't want
to specify the date. I can get
back to you with a little bit
more of a road map. Um, uh, but
we do feel that we've made
significant progress. Um, so
thank you for that
recommendation. Um, and having
those new eyes has really helped
a lot, but I'll I will get with,
um that team and get you a road
map that gives you a little bit
more defined timeline for that
work and Madam chair and I don't
necessarily need to know when I
mean
Be interesting for the
committee, though, to see if
they've produced a map. This is
to clean up the chrom chromium
and Los almos to see what the
committee's technical goals are
as a committee If they have any.
I think that'd be really
interesting, cuz we
It's big issue, obviously, um
Abandon uranium mine sites in
the state.
There's another area. I've
talked to the secretary a lot
about. I know he's done work.
This is an area where I feel
like federal litigation
litigations probably needed
against federal government.
For creating this D all these
defense era sites.
And
Not having sufficient policies
to protect our state.
So I know there's lots of
discussions going on, but I'll
I'll just keep bringing it up
because
Think we need to change the
dynamic.
We need to elevate the approach.
Cause it's just not going to
happen if we don't and that's if
history has shown us one thing.
It's that no one is taking
responsibility.
And there's pathways out there.
And we need to get really
aggressive as a state.
Um
Having said that, you know, it's
great that we passed a law that
we did that created the
coordinator positions and that's
definitely a piece of that. And
that is some progress. Which we
hadn't done that That was good,
and we'll be hearing from them
down the road on the PF issue.
Um
Is there a talk about a suit
against, uh, dealing with
Holleman? Or does the
departments lawsuits and DOD?
Relative to Canon.
To that effect. The problem at
Holloman as well that we know
that there's a lot of PFAs
contamination and Holloman
I'm sure
Uh,
Through the chair. I am only
Um, following the canon lawsuit,
and, uh
There.
Unwillingness to allow us to
clean up.
Um, the PF contamination on the
Holloman side. I'm I'm sure you
all have.
Seen, um, the research that I've
seen coming out of UN, M and
others. It's deeply concerning,
um
So I'll I would have to, uh, get
back to you with more detailed
information about how we're
addressing that with the air
Force. Um, but certainly the the
canon lawsuit and these
additional, um
Uh, regulatory clarity from EPA
helps us to understand how we
can enforce cleanup at Hallman,
Although for many of these items
we believe that we had that
authority before, uh, the
listing of, uh, PFOs as a
hazardous constituent.
So OK. Well, I know you talked
about what's happening with
cannon and we heard from the
office of the Natural Resource
trustee today that they're
Interest in pursuing the injury
to our wildlife.
And that resource Um so anyway,
hopefully I know that that all
of it is on your list as well.
But I just wanted to flag it.
That's such shocking research.
And it's not the only place
where we're seeing PFAs
contamination in our waterways
We heard from the produced water
Consortium that they found PF
and the Pecos River.
Goes to say that what's living
in that river might have PF as
well and crops that are being
grown in that area and
Serious stuff We gotta get ahead
of and kudos to the department
for doing that. I mean, that's
serious stuff.
Um
Plastics, single use plastics,
So we had a bill that went
pretty far to ban single use
plastic bags in the state.
Which believe it or not, would
save 500 million plastic bags a
year out of New Mexico's
environment.
Save millions of dollars for
local governments and clean up
and congestion.
Um, save a lot of microplastics
from getting in our water.
I don't
Amidst the myriad of problems. I
don't know the solid waste
management Now we've tried to
just fees, but I think that's an
area we need to do more. And I
would say that abating single
use plastic pollution.
Is there of that list.
So I'd love to add that to your
radar of what you're looking at
this session. II. I think I'd
like to do that bill again with
others who got it really far,
but I'm reading about other
states that are doing more.
Then just plastic bags, but
that's obviously low hanging
fruit.
And then finally, um, the
abandoned sites. I spoke
The secretary a few days ago. Um
you all brought to our attention
that we have over 300 abandoned
sites contaminated sites in the
state of New Mexico. Like the
dry cleaner you spoke of in your
neighborhood, Um
I hope we can find a way to use
all this one time money. We have
to start to move the needle on
contaminated sites that are just
sitting across New Mexico, But
we've never had the luxury or
the money to really be. Go
aggressive. Go on the front foot
and I would love it if we were
to
You know, I know there's
different funds, but
Put that into a proposal. We put
it on our work plan, and I'm
talking about in the water
committee. So I'm hoping you all
will put together a presentation
that will really coalesce around
a cleanup fund idea.
About
You know what are what is the
hierarchy that you would love if
we were to give you $5 million?
We were to give you 100 million
what would be the hierarchy of
how we would address those sites
and
You know there's a lot of
different sites, and there's
different ways to pay for
cleaning them up. So
But some of them there's no
responsible party to pay for
that, so and some of them are
more threats to our water than
others. So anyway, that's just
something. I also wanted to put
on your radar. That
That we'll be fighting for. So
thank you for allowing me to
give my laundry list.
Today.
I'm sure Thank you all very much
for your work.
Represents just a quick sorry.
missed your presentation. But
since you were talking about
laundromats do you have on your
radar? Um, leaking, um want to
be and central because we were
going to put a fire station
there, But they said they
couldn't because the it is it OK
is there are Are you very far in
it or not? Really, OK, but at
least you know about it. So if
you're here for me and bugging
you, you'll be you'll be OK with
it. OK, thank you.
Senator. Thank you very much,
Madam Chairman and good
afternoon to Sydney. And of
course, Santiago. I may call you
by your first name. Thank you.
Um, just a quick question on
the, um, corrective action fund
that we have. And I. I wanna go
back and thank um uh, Senator
Steinborn because I serve on the
finance committee with him, and
I got to tell you he's really
the loudest the strongest and
they're fighting to keep our
environment clean, so he he
really supports lots of funding.
What I can't remember is what
Did with all his thoughts last
session and even the session
before. Did we find the
corrective action fund any more
than what it had been? Do you
recall that because that
corrective action fund Madam
Chair um is to basically take
care to the extent of the
funding Take care of those old
storage tanks that have been
sitting underground and leaking
for many years from old gas
stations and so on. Um and I
don't think in the past we had,
uh, fund
That action fund and for what we
did last year. Do you recall
Sydney?
Uh, through the chair, Senator
Rodriguez. My recollection is
that the petroleum storage tank
Corrective Action fund comes
largely through, um, gas tax. In
part, I don't recall additional
funding for it last session. Um,
but I also was not monitoring it
really well, so if I'm wrong,
I'm sure someone will text me
right now and tell me, um, but I
I'm happy to get you a more
certain answer. OK, thank you.
And and I
Cat. It also, uh but I just
wanted to to see if we didn't
find it adequately with it's
something we need to work on
this summer to be able to put it
into the budget for next year.
Um, and and then and maybe
recommended by the Environment
Department. What happens, Madam
Chairman? Uh, Sydney? Is that
when we get your request from
the environment department many
times if they're not prioritized
as side view there as opposed to
your priorities, so we may want
to look at prioritizing that, uh
And then, um, another quick
Question. I'm gonna move on
Madam chair is, um Can you just
give me a quick up update on the
plumes in Santa Fe? We had
discussed that in our meetings
before and I talked to you about
that. Do you know if, um
anything has been done? You know
the cleaners, for example, old
cleaners here in Santa Fe and
other things had created this
huge plumes That were really, uh
We problematic Can you tell me
where that is? Thank you that
through the chair, Senator
Rodriguez is that the, um plume
near the, um, National guard? An
airport? Yes, And it's the one
on Baker Street. There's a huge
one there that apparently was
already reaching to Wells in the
neighborhood and then another
one out there by the midtown
called the Old College of Santa
Fe. It was behind a cleaner.
There are many, many years ago,
and apparently, it's grown
really big, so I don't know if
you've done
Work on that.
Um uh,
Madam Chair, Senator Rodriguez.
We have and we've been working
closely with the Air National
Guard on Um uh
Trying to understand the extent
of the plume as well as, uh,
looking at the source of the
plumes. There's a lot of places
that the plume may have come
from, right. There's the, um,
the the one that I am thinking
of, uh, that has impacted
private wells near Lasa and La
Siana, Um
There's the airport there, which
I at a time we understand used
Atripla, the firefighting foam
There's the Air National Guard
repository. We understand that
they had a PF containing
containing firefighting foam,
and there's also questions
about. Um, uh, waste the
wastewater facility, which
spreads solids, which often
contain a hes, So we're working
closely with the international
guard to understand the sources
and the extent um
Uh, And from there, you know,
it's our intention to let that
data drive how we work with them
to clean up that, Um uh, that
plume once we have a responsible
party identified
Um, I will say one of the
challenges that we have is that
we don't regulate private wells.
Um, the funding that we have
very often cannot go towards
you, Um, testing for private
wells. Um
And so there is, um
Were able to to help out at
public water systems, but those
private wells really need a
different avenue for
remediation.
We heard anecdotally we heard a
canon that, um uh, The Air Force
has said that if they determine
that they were responsible for
PFAs contamination at private
wells. They may consider, uh,
providing private well owners,
um, with filtration. We have
seen no action to indicate they
actually will do that, And we
don't know what it means to say.
Yes. We have the data that
supports this. OK, Thank you.
Now, uh, let me just briefly end
this, uh, Sydney and thanks for
that, but I think there was a
report done already to
Herman what chemicals were in
there and to what extent they
had grown up prior to you coming
in just before you came in. You
may wanna check back and see
what the outcome was of that
that I know. They, uh, followed
up on that from the environment
department. I just can't
remember the the whole
Um
Information that was sent in
that, But take a look at that.
And then let's follow up
offline. All right. Thank you,
Madam Chairman. Thank you,
Sydney.
Ok, thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Uh, I think this question is for
Mr Rodriguez. So you mentioned
that you asked the oil and gas
companies to fill out a survey?
Uh, regarding um what
radioactive Anything and some of
their operations. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair representative
Brown. Thank you for your
question. That is correct. So
what? Our rules are specific in
that whenever you're conducting
set operations, you have to
conduct surveys of areas of
potential.
Contamination were potential
displaces where radioactive
material can reside. So that is
a requirement that they have to
do that because we need to keep
the people, the worker and the
environment safe. So, um yes, we
reminded them of their sibil in
the letter and require requested
that they submit surveys for the
wells that they own.
OK, Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Rodriguez, So they have a
reporting requirement.
And yet, you ask for surveys.
Are they the same thing?
Or were they not reporting
Yeah, Chair Madam Chair,
representative Brown. So,
surveys reporting and surveys
The reporting Their surveys in
their documentation is what it
is. And so those surveys provide
data.
Data points so that we can look
at
Um, soil samples.
A sludge, whatever, Um they were
submitting surveys of and we can
look at those and we can make a
determination of whether they
are triggering action. So do
they need a specific license to
be able to continue with their
process and to be able to
properly list
No chair and, uh, mister, I'm
not quite sure I got your
answer. So it is a reporting
requirement. I understand.
Correct. Yes or no?
And
Were
There are many companies not
complying with that reporting
requirement.
No, Madam Chair representative
Brown. That is correct. So
It gets a little bit
complicated, cause what
Oil and gas industry believed
was that under the rule, they
were able they were. It was
implied that they held a general
license. Well, general licenses
still have specific
requirements, which they were
not following.
So we put them on notice gave
them lead issued letters and
reminded them of their
responsibilities and gave them a
timeline in which to submit
surveys. And then we met with
the new Mexico and gas and, you
know, oil and gas operators and
service providers to further um
our message. You know, this is
your responsibility. You should
be doing this. You haven't been
doing this. You you're taking
the the stance that you are
generally licensed. But yet
you're not upholding the rule,
so
Um, we, you know, we nudge them
along and we have been working
with them and they have since
been getting, um, specific
licenses and the rules currently
say this specific licenses are
issued per site. The rules have
changed recently and now it's
going to be per location of use.
So it
Semantics of words. But
basically everywhere. There's a
well that potentially produces,
um natural or Nat Norm. Um
Um, can can be licensed, so it's
in their best interest to do
surveys so that they can
They can, um
They can prove to us that they
don't need specific licensing,
based on
Um, the rules.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr Rodriguez.
Is there a a fee involved for
the license? Uh, that you speak
of. Is that an additional cost?
Madam Chair, representative
Brown. Yes, there is a specific
licensing fee, um, for the
possession of natural occurring
radioactive material.
And Madam chair, Mrs. Could you
tell us what that fee is? Um,
madam Chair Representative
Brown. The fee is currently
$3420. The new the fees will
change effective. The rules are
effective May 1st the new fee
structure goes into effect July
1st, and at that point it will
be
Madam chair and and, um, Mr
Rodriguez. Um, so there's a talk
here of having a mobile lab that
would go around and confirm. Uh,
what was reported
Um is is there not a
A time difference in terms of
what was reported when that
occurred. And then when a mobile
lab might get there. What would
you expect to change if anything
in the
Madam Chair Rip is
representative Brown. Great
question and thank you for that,
Um, first and foremost, I'd be
remiss if I did not think
Um
The committee for, um, the
funding that we have received in
order to
But the mobile lab and make it a
reality. So, um, with
radioactive material, they half
life is
For the analytics of interest
are long so
The oil gas companies submit
their, um
Survey results We review this
survey results we go out into
the field. There shouldn't be a
deviation in the results. If we
do our surveys exactly the way
they did them. So, um there's a
you know, dialogue and and
investigation as to how they did
it, because if you do a survey
through
This for water. You're not gonna
get any results, right? So we
have to ask them what they're
doing, how they're doing it so
we can model what the or the
replicate what they're doing,
and then we can direct them if
they didn't do it.
Um, accurately. So to answer
your question. That was long.
But short answer is, um, there
should be no change if Thank
you.
Um Madam Chair and Mr Rodriguez.
So one unit One mobile unit, Um
How long would it take to
Confirm results for all the
wells that you would need to be
visiting.
Here.
Madam Chair, representative
Brown. Um, that is a difficult
question. Because there are so
many wells currently and there
are so many wells coming online
and going offline on a regular
basis, so we would have to
Work with OCD. Um
To determine
Number of active wells inactive
number of abandoned currently,
We don't have a mobile app. So I
mean that that that's a huge
factor.
And, um, based on our
Discussions with the companies
that can, um potentially provide
or build these. There's
Be to you to to to get a mobile
app. So time is of the essence.
So we're working diligently to
hit the ground running July 1st
so that we can spend that money
and, um, get the mobile unit.
Manufactured the word um
But yeah, it's it.
I can't give you an exact
answer. And Madam chair. I'm I'm
kind of leading up to this last
question on this particular
topic.
And that is there are some
really excellent
Um, independent labs that could
do this kind of measuring
Uh, are you opposed to using an
independent lab say
subcontracting with
Uh, uh, company or organization
or an institute that does those
kinds of measurements.
So, Madam Chair representative
Brown. Another great question,
So we are not opposed. Um, and
we actually utilize the
Department of Health Scientific
Laboratory division to do some
of our testing.
Um
And we have used outside
contractors and the oil and gas
industry they use outside
contractors. So, um, what we
have
Entertained is doing split
samples of what they are getting
and sending those to labs until
we get up to speed and the
purpose of the mobile app is so
that we can do real time
testing, right? So if somebody
submits something, and we see
some some, um
Um gross differences that we can
We can go out there and validate
that. The the lead time for
sample analysis from labs, you
know, can be weeks to months,
depending on
The lab so that that's kind of
how we're trying to navigate
that. And then my final topic,
Madam chair and I guess, Mister
Rodriguez, this might be you
again. Um so it it was mentioned
today that, um you're looking at
getting out ahead of EPA on
regulating certain substances.
Um
I just wanna give a caution that
with 50 states if every state
That the initiative
Of trying to regulate a lot of
things. It would probably be an
interstate commerce issue. Um,
we'd have a patchwork all across
the country and the
Alaska and Hawaii as well. And I
just, um
Little caution there. I think it
it could end up being, uh more
trouble and problem. I'm not a
big fan of the EPA. Quite
frankly.
Um, So sometimes I think, uh,
the EPA does a good job at I
just just ask about really,
really think that one through,
So thank you. Anyone else on the
committee questions? OK, Thank
you very much. I just wanted to
let you know that, um, when we
go to Hobbs, September, 13th
will be asking you back to talk
about the cleanup committee and
the annual report if that is
ready about that time
Um, that would be September
13th.
And then also, um, I think on
our work plan November 15th when
we'll be back in Santa Fe.
Um
We wanted to include
Um
Yeah. Oh, so that isn't just in
Santa Fe. Not in OK?
I think I take that back. It
could be just November 15th.
Yeah, The assessment of the
those are two different things,
OK?
Might have you in two different
committees. If you will will let
thank you very much for all of
this great information. We look
forward to
You know, hearing more and
seeing how things negotiations
with
The feds and trying to think of
what other thing? Well, thank
you very much.
Um and committee. Um, we're
going to go to public con. OK?
Oh, all right. Is there anyone
in person who wanted to make
public comment?
OK, see none. Uh,
We go to, uh
Camilla Felman.
Via Zoom. Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me? All right.
Yes, we can.
Go ahead. Well, I just wanted to
thank you and the members of the
committee for a great day of
very helpful meetings, and I
know many of you were at water
and natural resources yesterday,
and I'll say something similar,
which is I think it would be
helpful for the state to
understand the cost of pollution
and contamination on a macro
scale to our state. I mean the
scale at which we are going to
have to clean up
That we have yet to clean up the
uranium legacy. Um, our initial
attempts to clean up orphaned
wells, not to mention orphan
groundwater spill sites like the
dry cleaners that have been
mentioned.
We have to understand how the
way we operate in our state
impacts our water impacts our
kids health.
How climate change ultimately is
costing our state in the form of
heat domes even being outside
today, and it's not even quite
June as a reminder of what we're
doing to ourselves, Drought and
forest fire, So I come back to
the committee each year
wondering what is the cost of
the way we do business? We're
reminded frequently of the
income that comes from industry.
Um, But what are the costs to
our kids to our elders to the
way of life that we all know?
Well, so thank you for
Reminding us all how that
enforcement plays out and keep
reminding us what the cost to
our society are. Thank you so
much.
Thank you And I would think we
would all agree, so we'll keep
working as a committee. Um, we
kind of have a a long break
until, um, August.
T.
And, um so
I guess so. A good part of their
summer, uh, taken up between now
and then. So look forward to
seeing everyone and thank you
audience for being here and and
also all of the
Departments We really
appreciate.
And, uh, thank you staff, too.
