Representative Saraana.
Madam Chair, um, welcome
everyone. My name is Debbie
Sarignan. I represent House
District 21 in Bernalley.
Good Morning, everybody. Thank
you for being here. I appreciate
it. I'm state Senator Jeff
Steinborn from Las Cruces, and
my district goes from Sierra
County through your chili
reducing capital of the world
hatch.
to the historic district of Las
Cruces.
And even though there's only 3
of us, those of us who do this
work, no, we are mighty.
cared deeply about these issues.
So,
You have important
Subgroup here
A I'm sure.
and his vice chair. Thank you,
um, I'm uh Joanna Ferrari. I'm
also from uh Donana County in
Las Cruces, um, I do not include
hatch, but I just heard on a a
baseball talk show about how
they were going to entice um uh.
Bregman to uh one of the teams
uh with Hatch chili and Mexican
food,
so.
Yeah, well, yeah.
Um, so, um, with that,
It's like, um, to introduce uh
Tom Criska.
Our legislative council service.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Tom Kirschka, uh,
thank you for your patience this
morning and with us we have uh
Sarah Wiedmeyer, Paula Stock,
and Ian.
Thank you. And our first
presenters, if you'll um come
forward, um.
Greg Millow, Jake Gofflin.
And Michael Ketter.
And from enemyD OK.
That's all.
To the correct
corrected.
OK, and Greg will be uh joining
us online, uh, Joie Arran,
sorry.
OK.
Um, Mr. Mellow, anytime you're
ready, you'll go first.
You did.
Um
Should be working.
Hello
There we go. Now the audio
should be working.
Can you hear me mic, we're
having a hard time hearing you.
I certainly can. Is this better?
Um a little bit louder.
OK. Um,
I'm sorry, uh, that'll take just
um one second. Um,
the
Uh.
I cannot, um,
OK.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and
members of the committee, and I
appreciate your flexibility, um,
with, um, my wife and myself are
in Washington DC where we have
been, uh, meeting with officials
about some of the issues before
the committee, uh, today.
Um, and apologize also for not
providing written materials
sooner.
Um, but for the same reason.
Um
The
We will publish a video of some
of the conversations that we've
had, uh, with the administrator
of the NNSA.
Uh, on our website over the
weekend.
Uh, which will be helpful, I
think, to the interested members
of the committee.
Um, our overall assessment.
Uh, of the plutonium pit
production mission at Los Alamos
National Laboratory remains that
it is highly damaging to the
region and the uh country, in
fact. Some of the impacts that
we warned about
Uh, 5 or 6 years ago, uh, before
this committee, are becoming
realized, unfortunately.
Uh, we all suffer from a kind of
normalcy bias, and we, it's
difficult to see large, slow
changes that take place.
But, um, we fear that by the
time we become fully aware of
some of the impacts they will
Uh, have already eaten up.
Many of the opportunities for
economic and social development,
we have in the region. We don't
want these opportunities.
To slip by, while all of our
eyes and minds are focused on
Los Alamos. Now, we recognize
that we at the Los Alamos Study
Group are certainly probably
more guilty of this than
anybody, but, um, we all do the
best we can.
Um, it's a feature of, uh, such
a gigantic program that has so
many impacts that it, uh,
focuses our attention on it in,
uh, instead of on the economic
and social
Development opportunities uh
that
are uh alongside it. So,
So we're in a mess. We
understand that.
Um, we won't have the same views
as some of the other speakers
who we will on some issues, not
on other issues, so this kind of
spirited dialogue is important,
um, to have, and we're really
grateful for the committee for
uh having it.
Um
On the, on one of those, it
would be important, we think for
the Environment Department to
weigh in, uh, and here I'm being
a little critical as a, as an
environment department alumnus.
Uh, to weigh in publicly and
before this committee on uh the
question of contamination at
Acid Canyon, which is, can be
confusing.
And the fact that enemy D has
not, to my knowledge, um,
Weighed in on this yet, despite
decades of official attention,
uh, is itself a little worrying.
And
Uh, so,
Um, let's see. So,
I would like, uh, let's see,
another preliminary remark would
be that
Uh, as the committee knows,
there has not yet been
an environmental impact
statement.
Uh, that's up to date that also
analyzes the comparative impacts
of pursuing the pit production
mission at Los Alamos, uh,
versus not doing so or doing so,
uh, at different scales. Uh, we
had hoped that the committee
would endorse the creation of
such an environmental impact
statement before the decision to
commit Los Alamos National Lab.
to that mission was fully
patent, but, uh, that didn't
happen.
Um, neither did the governor,
uh, or the enemy D, um, stand up
and request an environmental
impact statement, which, which
is really policy neutral.
And that would have been very
helpful for the, this committee
and for all of us to
Have a little bit of um, have
some headlights as we speed
forward in the darkness.
Um, as, uh, you know, the
legislature as a whole.
Um
Deals with many issues this
committee with just a narrow
slice of them, and we struggle
to, again, to, um,
Embrace the totality of the
impacts, uh, on not just the
environment, not just as
mediated through radioactive and
hazardous materials, but, uh,
they go all the way to the
question of, uh, the sovereignty
of the state and its ability to
take autonomous action and it's
willingness to do so, the
imaginations of all of us.
Which we desperately need as we
face our
Really entrenched problems of
poverty, inequality, educational
inadequacy.
Uh, our lack of energy
democracy.
And many other
Challenges that we're facing
right now, uh, with, for which
All too often, the answer seems
to be
That the laboratories, the
national laboratories will
somehow, some way bail us out of
these problems. Um.
I, we don't believe they will,
we don't believe they have. Um,
The other preliminary remark I
would like to say is that this
was affirmed by conversations
here in Washington this week.
The pit production at Lane is
not a stable program.
Uh, it is unlikely to be
permanent.
Uh, because of the age of the
facilities and the overwhelming
costs and logistical problems.
Uh, which are involved with it.
The for the and for the NNSA,
these are logistical problems
for New Mexico, their impacts.
And
All of these are growing and
Uh, sort of, uh, like a deer
that gets larger and larger on
a, on a road at night, uh,
suddenly it's right there in
your windshield.
Uh, we want to slow down.
And we want to uh be able to
assess this problem a little
more fully and to avoid, uh,
what could be a really fatal
accident for the future of New
Mexico.
Um,
we
Uh, we, I was on the pit panel,
on the panel we discussion, we
organized at the National Press
Club on Wednesday.
There was a gentleman there from
the Heritage Foundation, who
advocated
Uh, getting rid of all Los
Alamos missions that were not
pit production.
Uh, pit production has risen to
the most essential
national security mission of Los
Alamos National Laboratory in
many eyes.
Uh, and the more this, uh, the
deeper we get into, uh, pit
production world, let's call it,
the more that reality will
impress itself on mines here in
Washington.
Uh, even the administrator and
uh and her staff at NNSA, uh,
whom we greatly respect and
Uh, uh, believed to be both
highly knowledgeable and very
goodhearted.
Uh, these individuals are only
intermediate on the bullwhip.
Which, uh, which the nuclear
weapons, uh, establishment and
the national security
establishment overall.
are wielding here in Washington.
New Mexico is the tip of that
bullwhip.
And we have very little say if
we give them full sway in their
activities.
And
Uh, I, I have personally met
with
congressional staff, executive
staff, White House staff, more
than 500 times here in
Washington. We have some
experience in this, and I can
assure you that the individuals
who are putting pressure on the
NSA have no regard whatsoever
for New Mexico.
That's the position we find
ourselves in, and, uh, it could
get worse if we don't, uh, exert
our autonomy and our own
self-determination.
Uh, with that, I'd like to
Uh, go to some of the slides.
Um, and
Let's see, um,
slide and pinch down.
But
The second slide.
Um, reviews some of the previous
Uh, testimony to the committee,
um, and I've kept their a
passage about, yes, about.
Oh.
Yes, I think I would try.
Is that working?
Is that working out?
OK, thank you so much.
Um,
So, uh, these.
Slides
Um, you I think you have by now,
again, I'm apologize for being
so late, um, these links go to
previous testimony.
Um
Then the next slide.
Uh, let's see here.
Yeah, uh, provide, uh to uh too
recent.
Uh, sets of resources, um, a
public event which we hosted at
the Sala Event Center in Los
Alamos.
And we have at least, uh, my
remarks, uh, this past
Wednesday.
And we will post the video of
the, of the meeting with uh NNSA
administrator Ruby.
Uh, GAO, uh, associate director.
Alison Baden, myself, and Robert
Peters of the Heritage
Foundation, uh, press releases
over the last year can be found
on the next slide which
I'm sorry,
you know, it's a lot of stuff,
but it is a big program and that
will give you more or less the
important um things that have
happened since the last time,
um, we met.
Um, now we go to the, these few
bottom lines.
Um,
we are really concerned again
that our imaginations are being
stifled.
Um, our living costs are, are
being increased in the region.
Of course, this happens without
anybody intending it, uh, the
median
Cost of a house in Los Alamos
has doubled since pit production
there was announced.
Uh, home costs are and rental
costs are increasing in Santa Fe
as well for other reasons also,
um, but these increases are
pricing out.
Um, the, uh, people who aren't,
you might say, in the upper
middle class.
Um, there are very few houses
available in Los Alamos.
The, um
Uh, Ted Weika, who is the
ranking andNSA official here has
twice spoken of the need for 90
or 10,000 additional housing
units in Los Alamos.
To house the increased workers
necessary for Los Alamos's
growth.
Uh, this would more than double.
The size of the town of Los
Alamos. That's a way of
understanding the scale of what
is being envisioned here.
Um, of course, there's no room
for that.
And the town doesn't want to
have
Uh, you know, a lot of uh 6 or 8
story apartment blocks, making
it look like a nuclear city in
the old Soviet Union. But
Um, that's how you'd get that
kind of density.
The road capacity is completely
inadequate for the mission and
Los Alamos' growth, we're seeing
increased accidents with
injuries. We're seeing deaths.
Uh, already.
Um
We, uh, the water needs of Los
Alamos are largely exported to
the surrounding bedroom
communities.
Uh, the electricity needs are
said to be inadequate, which has
caused, uh, quite a, um,
Uh, a lot of protest, right? uh
we are stand with those
protesters and are among them,
and perhaps some of the other
speakers will speak to that in
more detail. All the landscape,
yes, we running out of time. if
you could please um go to the
major takeaways, the key ones.
Yes, yes, all right. Mhm.
Um, we lower the quality of life
in the region at our long term
risk. Uh, we must not, um,
excuse me, uh, undermine our
traditions which are more
important than they may appear
in the moment. And
Um, and,
As I've said, uh, we believe
that production will be
temporary.
And either that it will, or it
will grow a great deal. Um,
The, we're concerned like others
who will speak about delays and
legacy, true waste removal, um,
and the conflicts with cleanup.
And I think I've already said
that um there is a danger that
if push comes to shove, uh, some
of the other missions at Los
Alamos, uh, could be moved,
changing the character.
Uh, of the laboratory in a
rather undesirable
Uh, direction. There won't be
tech transfer involving
plutonium, uh, here, or even
less than the other tech
transfer.
And I think those are the
essential takeaways. I
appreciate, uh, the committee's
attention and uh very much and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Uh, thank you, and if you'll
hold on for questions at the end
of the panel. We appreciate it.
Thank you, I will.
OK, next, um.
Uh, Mr. Ren, sure, go ahead.
There we go.
Green light
Um, I'm, and now I got to be
careful to.
Speak too loud. OK, I'm Jake
Coughlan with uh Nuclear Watch
New Mexico. Thank you, Madam
Chairman, members of the
committee for this opportunity
to present, uh, I'll attempt to
be a bit more considerate about
your time and.
Try to be a bit briefer.
Uh, than the previous speaker,
um, you have, I assume, my
written testimony, and I just
want to.
Uh, kind of highlight some of
the main points.
And the first thing I want to do
as a matter of background, um,
at least in my opinion, there's
very pervasive annually and over
the decades, a lot of economic
propaganda about the benefits of
the presence of the department.
of energy. Is this thing working
OK?
OK.
Yeah.
OK.
Um,
but getting to what I like to
characterize as a Department of
Energy Economic propaganda, um,
I mean statements get made to
the effect, uh.
That the economy of the state
would collapse without DOE
presence, but as a counterpoint,
I'd like to point out that
according to the US Census
Bureau per capita income in New
Mexico has fallen from 32nd in
1959 to around 46 or 47, uh,
now, and I, so I think that
contradicts the uh economic uh
propaganda that we hear all the
time. It should be pointed out
that
in this just past fiscal year
that DOE actually spent more in
the state of New Mexico, then
the state's operating budget, 6%
higher. I think that's an
astonishing fact, and it leads
me to question the good um that
the DOE presence and all these
uh expanding nuclear weapons
programs do for the average New
Mexican, I would note that we
remained a dead la.
ing quality
Of education
dead last in the well-being of
our children, so something's
wrong here.
Now to narrow my uh remarks down
to Pip production and why it's
not uh necessary. The main point
I would like to get across is
that no future pit production is
scheduled to maintain the safety
and reliability of the existing
stockpile.
It's all for future new designs,
so if you hear statements about
maintaining the existing
stockpile that needs to be
questioned and in fact we know
that pit designs are being
changed. We don't know to what
depth, but this could actually
prompt the US back into a full
scale explosive testing, uh,
which would have severe
proliferation consequences now
to get more specific.
Uh pit production and problems
with it first of all, it is the
most complex and expensive uh
program that the NNSA has
attempted to date, but yet the
government accountability Office
points out that in anSA has no
credible cost estimates, it does
not have an integrated schedule
of pit production between the
two sites now which are Los
Alamos and the uh Savannah
River.
Um, I really want to emphasize
future problems with the waste
isolation.
Pilot plant, which of course is
very germane to this, uh,
committee.
Uh, and first of all, there's a
presumption by DOE that it can
dispose of pit production waste
in whip even as far out as 2080.
Now this is in contradiction to
the new state permit which I
praise, um, but first of all,
the state insisted that permit
uh be renewed every decade.
And also insisted on the annual
report by DOE for its search for
an out of state replacement to
the waste isolation pilot plant,
um, my underlying point here is
that the DOE's assumption that
it can use whip.
To dump new bomb waste, uh, is a
very ill-founded, uh,
assumption.
Um, I want to touch upon uh a
little bit, uh, requirements
under the National Environmental
Policy Act, and that's Nipah.
And Nea requires the government
to give the public the
opportunity for public comment,
that is a requirement.
For so on September 30th, a
judge in South Carolina found in
an essay to be in violation of
Nipah by not having a new
programmatic environmental
impact statement for pit
production, and I'm a party, uh,
to that litigation.
And I can't speak about ongoing
negotiations, but both parties
have to submit, uh, a proposal
for remedies on December 12th
and we'll see what happens, um,
suffice it to say this should
have some impact on the future
course of uh pip production.
Um, at the same time, on as
another item under the National
Environmental Policy Act, um,
I'd like to point out that first
of all we haven't had a new
sitewide environmental impact
statement, uh, since 2008.
There is an unambiguous Nipah
statutory requirement that
environmental impact statements
be completed within 2 years.
From the initial published
notice of intent.
And in an essay did publish a
notice of intent in August 2022,
so in my view in an essay is in
violation of that Nipah uh
requirement as well.
And it, it's in my written
testimony, but I'd like to point
out that the sitewide
environmental impact statement
in 1999 was crucial.
In that as a result, the
laboratory and DOE implemented
some fire mitigations and fire
lanes, etc. uh, that helped to
prevent the Cerro Grande fire.
Uh, from reaching Area G, which
at the time had some 40,000
barrels stored above ground of
plutonium waste.
Um, so to close now, um, I'd
like to offer respectfully some
recommendations to the committee
and I'll first observe, you
know, it's not exactly in your
lane or under your purview. I'm,
I'm not suggesting that you
could possibly do anything
directly about pit production
itself, but kind of on directly
related issues, um, I would ask
the committee to vigorously
support the state in the new
whip permit, uh, this.
is crucial, and especially on
the requirement that DOE be
looking now for an out of state
replacement that is crucial.
Um, I would also, um, ask that
the committee support the New
Mexico Environment Department,
um, in its pursuit for
comprehensive cleanup at the
laboratory.
And what the lab in uh DOE want
to do is just cap and cover
leave permanently buried um some
um 800,000 cubic yards of
radioactive and uh toxic waste
as a permanent threat to
groundwater.
And now I get a little Pollyanna
or whatever, um, but in the long
run, I'd like to see budget
competition between genuine
clean up programs and expanding
nuclear weapons programs, we're
not going to be able to have
both. The day will come when New
Mexicans either get clean up,
which I think is our true
national security or endless
nuclear weapons programs, and
with that, I'll bring my uh.
Remarks to a close, uh, I do
want to point out that there is
extensive plutonium
contamination as it exists now
at Los Alamos, but Doctor
Michael Ketter, uh, will address
that. So thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you members of
the committee. Thank you.
Um
Sorens, did you want to go next
or last?
OK.
Mr. Ketterer, thank you.
doctor, I'm sorry. That's OK.
Uh, Madam Chair, and
Honorable committee members uh
thank you for uh uh allowing me
to come here today and to
testify in this, in this
hearing, um, you have my written
testimony in a one-page handout,
and I've also submitted some
slides that you can refer to,
but I'm going to try to try to
speak from my own heart, my own
words about what I see here, um,
I'm a I'm an emeritus professor
of chemistry and biochemistry at
Northern Arizona.
university. I'm kind of a
strange person. A lot of my
research involves studying
plutonium, and I've been looking
at this for the last 2025 years
somewhere in there, measuring
how much and where it's from. My
background is in chemistry. um,
why does somebody do this? Well,
it's a very useful tracer of
Earth's surface processes, most
of the samples that I
investigate are completely
innocuous and
Uh, but there are also plenty of
places in in this earth that are
contaminated with plutonium and
I study those two and I, in my
slides, you, you have some uh
links to papers and stuff like
that.
So
What I have to say here today to
summarize is Acid Canyon is a
very egregious example of
something that's 80 years old as
an unsolved problem.
The plutonium in the.
Sediment in the water and also
uptake into the plant matter.
Um
Is compromising the natural
resources of the state and in
particular its impacting anybody
who lives downstream of the
Pajarito Plateau.
Uh, this, this area is
completely in the open with no
warnings or access restrictions
whatsoever, you know, children
can go in there, uh, and anybody
can. The presence in the Los
Alamos uh uh origin plutonium in
acid Canyon in July in the water
is direct proof there that
plutonium is migrating. It's
leaving the site and it's going
somewhere else. I don't know
what form it's in in the water,
but there's plenty of it in.
the water.
Uh
I'm asking you here today to
consider.
Promulgating a new state
regulation or plutonium in
water. I'm going to ask you to
consider putting in place a
standard of 0.15 eco curries per
liter.
This number is the enforceable
standard in the state of
Colorado.
Under terms of the Roy flats
legacy Management Agreement. So
in this agreement, which is a
consent decree, the Department
of Energy consented with the
state of Colorado and with um
Um, US EPA to comply with 0.15
PO curries per liter in all of
the drainages from rocky flats.
And uh I'm very familiar with
that site, uh, because my main
home is in this is in the
neighboring county, Boulder
County. Um.
Anyway
Uh, I'm calling for a state or
perhaps even a federal standard
of 0.15 matching what is in
Colorado for that to be met in
all the waters of the state.
Uh, in, in the canyons draining
the plateau, there needs to be a
lot more remediation, said
another way, the material and
acid canyon is way too dirty to
comply with any kind of uh a
water standard.
Uh, the concentrations of
plutonium in the water that I
found were on the order of 50 to
80 mcg per, not, not micrograms,
sorry, Pico curries per liter
and in a 1 L bottled of water,
there's nearly a nanogram of
plutonium and in a 1 kg baggy of
soil, there's nearly a microgram
of plutonium. I think health
physicists will tell us that a
microgram is quite a lot in
terms of
Uh, human exposure.
So
I'm also able to
Say that the plutonium that I'm
detecting in these samples is
specifically from Los Alamos,
and it's not from something
else. I'm using something called
mass spectrometry, which
separately measures the two main
isotopes, 239 and 240, and then
I can measure the proportions,
and those are different from the
background from
Nuclear weapons tests fallout,
those are much different from
what is near the Trinity site in
the canyons draining Los Alamos
in the town site of Los Alamos
itself, which is also
contaminated the soils there are
contaminated, uh.
I can distinguish who's is who,
what's in acid Canyon is, is
some of the very oldest and
earliest produced plutonium it
probably predates the Manhattan
Project itself. So it's been
there 80 years. Let's say in
round numbers.
So I've been collaborating with
NukeWatch New Mexico and in July
on the 2nd and the 17th, there
was a little monsoon flow, not
very much water in the canyon,
and that's what I sampled.
Um
What I found, Madam Chair and
committee members in these
samples was the most plutonium
contaminated place that I know
of.
In the continental US and
certainly it's the most
contaminated one that I know of
that the public has unimpeded
access to. I'll add a caveat,
maybe there's some stuff around
the Ground Zero of the Trinity
site that's higher in activity.
I have perhaps you've seen made
comparisons in the media.
Uh, to places like Chernobyl or
Trinitite or the Trinity test or
anything like that.
That's what the numbers say. I
am.
Just making judgments based on
the number. I.
I am kind of like a
Uh, a gold judge as a hockey
game. Did the puck go in the
net? We can see the puck that
went in the net.
I found concentrations in the
sediments that exceeded 50 Picco
curries per gram, and they
weren't hard to find. That's the
uh clean up standard that was
used at Rocky Flats in the
central operating unit. It also
exceeds a level of 8 picocurries
per gram that the US Air Force
used to clean up the Beaumar
missile silo fire sight in New
Jersey. Neither one of those
sites does the public have any
access to, but there's no
postings I can go.
Anybody can go into Acid Canyon
and come into direct contact
with this material. I've had at
least one dog in my days that
would be stupid enough to drink
that water too. Um.
But Los Alamos is instead
telling New Mexicans, oh, no
pasta, nada, there's, there
isn't anything bad to see here.
In fact, the laboratory director
is saying that uh that
Health physics models, say we
can have 1300 Picco curries per
gram.
Uh, in the canyon. Well,
The problem with that is it does
not protect the natural
resources. It does not protect
the water. It does not protect
the
Plant life at all.
Um, I, I'll wrap up here. I just
want to touch on one more thing.
Uh, another consequence of this
canyon being left unremediated
or
You know, incompletely cleaned.
Is there's plutonium
significantly taken up by plants
in in many spheres people like
to say, well, plutonium is
relatively insoluble in mobile.
It doesn't do any of these
things well, it does, it does.
Plutonium is actually fairly
amenable to plant uptake in
these particular plants in acid
Canyon. And so what that means
not only of the natural
resources contaminated, but what
about a wildfire fire when it
happens, and I use the term when
because I live
in the same county in Colorado
that the uh uh 2021 uh martial
fire happened in about half an
hour, burned 1000 homes, killed
2 people, just like that.
Uh, that kind of a firestorm can
and will happen. What's going to
happen? All of this plutonium
that's in the plant matter turns
into fly ash and the
contaminated soils and sediments
that are in the canyon that
turns into a big burn scar and a
big uh, you know,
pond of flooded sludge, I would
think all efforts would be made
to save lives and homes. I've
been to the canyon and seen how
close.
People live to it.
This is going to happen at some
point in time.
So
You can't solve committee
members all these problems, but
I would ask you to consider
promulgating the water standard
or plutonium.
Thank you for your kind
attention.
Thank you.
You want to go ahead?
Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity.
To speak, um.
Uh, just to give you a little
history, I've been following
this committee since 1988 when
Bob Light representative Bob
Light from Carlsbad was on the
committee and others.
I wanna tell a story about why
I'm here today and specifically
about after this year of Grande
fire.
Um, protecting the Rio Grande
became a really big issue for
people and when we looked at.
stream
We found our we had already been
in.
Involved
In the um
With the radioactive liquid
waste treatment facility.
At lannel and specifically it's
across the street from the
plutonium facility.
And liquid waste from the
plutonium facility and other
plutonium facilities is piped
underground to the what I'll
call the RLWTF for the
radioactive liquid.
And so that's what we're
concerned about with expanded
pit production.
We need to um.
It's not being regulated
properly. It's being regulated
by it's not even being regulated
by the New Mexico Water Quality
Act, it needs to be regulated by
the hazardous waste Act because
it stores it treats and it
disposes of radioactive.
Um, excuse me, hazardous waste,
and it has done that since the
beginning began operations in
1963.
So we're talking about as Doctor
Ketters talked about facilities
that have been around for 60
years.
And so we have a basis for that,
um.
It, it started operations in
1963, it treats stores and
disposes of radioactive and
hazardous liquids, specifically
from the use of um the nitrate
liquid.
Nitrate operations at the
plutonium facility and other
facilities that handle.
A store and dispose, not
dispose, but handle.
Uh, plutonium waste and it's
yeah.
Let me go to the next slide.
So the problem is, is that they
water quality act only regulates
the discharge.
Doesn't unlike.
The hazardous ways to act as
implemented as it implements the
resource conservation and
recovery Act, the federal law.
Where we call Rick Rick.
Takes care and regulates.
The piping.
It regulates the tanks that
treat and store this liquid
waste.
And it
Looks at
The complexities of these types
of facilities that.
Um
Handle and store and.
Dispose of these kinds of liquid
waste and while the the
operations treat the liquid
waste and remove a lot of the
contaminants which are made into
sludge.
That sludge is stored outside.
And then it shipped eventually
to whip.
Because it's plutonium
contaminated sludge.
Um
So we're here today to ask you
to um.
Help us
Ensure that the.
Operations at the RLWTF are uh
are regulated under the
hazardous ways to act.
And
On the slide this slide you can
see the the actual outfall.
That goes into a fluent canyon.
Which flows into Mortenad
Canyon.
And goes.
Drewortad Canyon where the
chromium plume is.
Down to the Rio Grande, George
Rice and hydrogeologist back 20
years ago. It's amazing that
that much time has passed.
But he found that a particle
that left this outfall.
Could
Reached the Rio Grande through
the complex.
From the pipe through the
complex geological structure.
A distance of 8 miles in 26
years or less, and at that time
the laboratory was telling us
that.
That was impossible that it
would take 1000 years for such a
particle to reach Rio Grande,
even though that the springs
along the Rio Grande.
Show um contaminants from lannel
that have been, as Doctor Ketter
talked about fingerprinted to
beat from the lab.
Um, I have a slide about the
discharges over time.
And it's from 1960.
To 2000 and.
You can see the dramatic change
in the concentrations.
The reason that I point this out
is that as we this is the end of
the Cold War.
And historically now that.
Expanded pit production up to 30
pits per year could be produced
across the street.
From this facility.
Um, they'll be increased volumes
of water or this water that will
be discharged into the canyon.
And, and move and.
The important part about all of
this is that.
We've been CCNS has been
following this issue for.
1994.
And now it's time to address it
in a meaningful way so that
there's more regulatory.
structure around this facility.
Specifically.
Uh, uh, permit was.
Lionel asked for a permit or
renewal permit.
In 2010 and we really got
involved in that process.
What Lionel did is that they
switched from using the outfall.
To dispose of this liquid waste
to using a mechanical
evaporative system.
And so
For 10, almost 10 years, they
used the mechanical system, but
then when we when we challenged
the permit again.
They, um,
Started discharging into the
canyon.
And we don't know if the volumes
of the water at this point.
Is actually pushing on the
chromium plume.
So it's, it's very complicated
issue and the more regulatory
structure that we have around
this facility.
Um
Mm
It's, it's important.
So we have
fights in the in the PowerPoint
that shows.
Um
You know what we've done through
this process and our request
this morning is.
And we have a draft letter for
you if you're, if you're willing
to governor Michelle Luhan
Grisham.
to
Help us ensure that the RLWTF is
regulated by the.
Um
New Mexico hazardous waste act.
Um
Which implements the federal
resource conservation and
recovery Act.
And I think that there's the
draft letter is in your packet
there.
Thank you so much for this
opportunity to talk with you
today.
this important issue.
Thank you.
Um, we'll go to the committee.
Are there any questions?
Um
J Steinborn.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for the presenters. Appreciate
that.
Um, a few questions. It's
interesting. We've been hearing
about some issues for a long
time, and of course, people who
live and work on this, you're
experts and all of it.
But um
Acid Canyon is kind of a new
one.
And asked me why to the
committee.
Um, and, uh
Anyway, I guess somebody who
named it knew that there was bad
stuff there, right?
Acid Canyon.
But um
Yeah, there are trails there. I
was just kind of googling acid
Canyon because I wanted to learn
more about this, and there's
trails out there, so I'm just
curious, is that, is this part
of the consent order?
Madam Chair,
John, you, you, you folks, I
mean, is this part of the
cleanup schedule, the
contamination in Acid Canyon.
It's, it's not to my knowledge.
It's
It's been
Subject to several removal
actions in the past going back
to the 1980s. I'm not going to
try to quote accurately what's
been done, but it's been
remediated by the laboratory at
various stages and what I'm
sampling is what's still there
in 2024.
And, and so it's still
It's in my, in my yardstick,
it's still very contaminated.
Uh, but if I could add, Madam
Chairwoman and members.
Um, in the middle 1980s, the
Department of Energy
transferred.
The land acid Canyon to Los
Alamos County.
Without restriction.
So because it's not on lab
property, the, the short concise
response to you, Senator, is no.
It's nowhere near the consent
order. There's essentially
nothing governing a cleanup.
Um, at as can.
Yeah, OK. That feels, uh, thank
you. Thank you, sir. That feels
a little bizarre. Um,
Feels a little bizarre. So,
And, and so, real quick, I know
you're academic background cause
it's listed there. What are you,
you work for one of these
organizations or who?
What's your role in all of this?
Well, I'm I'm a retired person
and I'm conducting my own um
independent research, you might
say I am funded by a private
individual, uh, to
Uh, do investigations of of this
sort on a see what you can find
kind of basis. I am there's no
connection between my funding
and um um.
Where I go or what I work on,
uh, however,
Um
I'm just really familiar with
this from the standpoint of, um,
It's one of many pretty
seriously contaminated places in
the United States and I might
also mention Portsmouth.
Gaseous diffusion plant in Ohio
is another one that you'll find
my name in association with
studying contaminants off site
there, but to me it's, it's a
very serious problem. I'm not
sure, Senator, if I believe hit
the nail on your head and your
question, but that's
You did
His little, little vague, but,
but, but that's more information
than we had here, and I think
that's important, always
important to know where people
are coming from and.
You know,
Um,
Question, Madam Chair, about
the, the really interesting
suggestion that you made about
the plutonium regulation.
Needed for New Mexico. John, I'm
gonna ask you directly if I can
or.
from NE. Do we
Do we have a rag that looks at
plutonium in water, for example.
Um, Madam Chair and senator, we
don't have one specific to.
OK.
Thank you.
Yeah, that's really interesting,
man. I mean, you know, it's, and
then I'm thinking about, well,
what a test for plutonium.
Pick up
Contamination for uranium.
Or are they completely
different.
Yes
Um, a senator, uranium and
plutonium would be completely
different tests, um, and you, of
course, have to be able to
distinguish through them, uh,
between them, but um there's
probably other types of
contaminants in acid canyon that
I haven't.
Investigated at all, including
uranium.
Um,
So plutonium being kind of a
manufactured product, right? I
mean,
That would be a specific.
Issue for
The lamb, I guess.
Um, maybe near west.
Well,
But um
Yeah, that's, that's really
interesting, John. I, I wonder
if, if there's any funds
federally or otherwise.
Because of the nature of the
contamination being federal. Are
there any funds that exist to
help deal with that specifically
to test for that.
Madam Chair and senator, there's
not anything specific to that.
And we don't have specific
funding for it.
That would be typically
something that would probably be
looked at if it qualified under
er there's a potential that we
could do something with emerging
contaminants, but fairly new, so
we would have to explore that.
Yeah.
Thank you. Yeah, this goes under
that category you were talking
about, Jay, about needing to be
as passionate about cleanup as
we are about mission expansion
and more so because we have this
legacy of contamination that
Really should be like
Conversation starter.
creating more contamination, but
Um
Yeah, well, if I may, chairwoman
and senator, um.
I, I just to give an idea of
kind of the geographic scale
that we're talking about with
plutonium contamination that has
been identified back to Los
Alamos. This is not just global
fallout, um, but even since the
middle 80s, there's been studies
showing plutonium deposition in
Cochete Lake.
Fingerprinted to the lab.
Um, so that's something that the
public generally is not aware
of.
Yeah, that's interesting. I
mean, I, I definitely think it's
uh.
You know, me, I, I think we
should be cleaning up all the
contamination.
And pursuing it. And if that's
Kind of a um uh.
A hole in our.
Protection, regulatory regime,
then we should be plugging that
hole.
So thanks for bringing that to
our attention.
Um, finally, um, Johnny, I just
wanted to ask if you wouldn't
mind giving it, you said you
have a draft of a letter. We
haven't seen it.
So you might, I don't think
we've seen it anyway. So.
I have copies. Well, we should
get it because it's the last
meeting of the interim.
OK. So
Not that we're gonna be able to
take action, but
Probably do want to get us a
copy of that.
Yes.
Cogitate
we'll be sitting here.
Thank you.
that.
You any
Any other questions from the
committee?
OK, um.
Thank you, um, vice chair
Steinborne, I think you covered
the things I was going to ask
about also and um.
Also, Doctor Ketterer, um, I
think you were.
Senator Steinborn, talking about
adopting the point.
15 uh enforceable standard.
Yes, madam Chair, that's exactly
the.
The
They ask that I have for you
all.
OK.
And um
I think we should ask our uh.
Staff to draft something like
that and then start that
conversation. We won't be able
to do it for um.
Endorsement today, but in the in
the future and start working
with and um with the letter that
was sent to the governor, um.
Mr. Renz, have you had a
response?
Members of the committee.
Um, we drafted up a letter for
your committee to consider.
And I have it right here if you,
that's what you're just, it's
just a draft, it's not something
you've already sent, OK,
correct, um.
All right, and um.
May I add one thing? Sure.
With respect to there is a reach
in the of of the Rio Grande that
has that standard of 0.15 pico
curries a leader, and that was
established when the Buckman
project came.
was being developed.
That the Buckman took the, the
award took the initiative to go
through the state process to
establish it for the reach from.
Um
The bridge
That that you cross to go.
Um
Lammel
Down to Cochiti basically to
Cochiti and that uh it has a
special designation as a
drinking water source supply.
Um, at the 0.15 so.
Just a point of information.
Thank you.
So you're saying that it is uh
already established or just for
that area, just for that area.
OK, Madam Chair, just for that
area.
Of the river. OK, thank you. And
um Mr. Mellow, um, are you still
with us?
Yes, I am. OK, um, you were
suggesting that we have an
environmental impact statement,
um.
The um
Endorsed
Before we certify for lannel.
Hm,
more clearly.
Certainly, um,
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
committee. The, we had hoped,
uh that the committee would
request
A new site-wide environmental
impact statement before NNSA
made its decision to
Modify Los Alamos to produce
pits on an industrial basis. Um,
that is now in the rearview
mirror for the most part, Los
Alamos has not, excuse me, NNSA
has not come out with its draft.
Site-wide environmental impact
statement, the notice of intent
to do so, indicated that the
so-called
Um, no action alternative would
include the assumption that Los
Alamos continued with its
program of record, which now
includes industrial pit
production. Uh, we have asked.
Um, and I say that uh the no
action alternative.
Uh, be changed or another one
added that would
Be a true no action alternative
that uh does not include the
multibillion dollar expansion uh
of Los Alamos, uh, that is still
in the early stages.
So that, that's what I meant.
OK
Thank you very much.
Um, we'll have to look into
that.
OK, and you wanted to mention
something else you had your hand
up. Well, yes, thank you. Um, I
just uh wanted to
point out to the committee that
many of the long-standing
Uh, issues which uh John Yi has
brought forth.
And which were alluded to also
in uh Jay and Doctor Carver's
remarks.
On these. to the difficulty of
keeping attention on these
problems.
Um, some of them came before the
committee a long time ago, um.
And
They've been around in one form
or another.
Um, what our danger.
is, and I apologize for
presenting things in such a
general, you know, 65,000 ft
elevation way, but unless we
become very vigilant.
We will be playing a whack a
mole with these problems with
acid cannon, with the
radioactive liquid by treatment
facility with cleanup.
Um, and
will be chasing the plume
metaphorically speaking.
That La Alamos forever.
unless ways can be found to
institutionalize, um, more
vigorous.
Uh, um, watchdogging and
Um
Besides, uh, you know, the
harried, uh watchdog groups that
you see before you.
Thank you.
appreciate
statements.
OK. Thank you very much, panel.
Look forward to getting that
dress.
OK, our next panel.
is on chromium plume cleanup and
other environmental issues. Yes.
Doctor, not doctor, I'm sorry,
um, cabinet secretary, um,
Deputy John Roderick.
Um, Jessica Cole.
Um
From Los Alamos.
Field office.
And um
Truste Maggie Hart Stevens and
her executive director Kate
Gerry.
Oh, did she? OK.
Thank you. Um,
And we'll go ahead and start
with um Mr. Robert.
Madam chair and
me a pleasure as always to be
here.
Speaking with you today.
going to
An update on
The status of the chromium
plume.
Mediation and
the
And technical.
Committee
Yeah
Came into play earlier this
year.
I slide just shows the basic
footprint.
Of, uh
Los Alamos the plume in relation
to that.
And some brief history.
Now I will say that the handout
that we just gave you has a
significant number of slides.
Um
portion of them
lies that you have seen several
times before.
Um
Slide 3, just a brief history,
of course.
The chromium was first
discovered, uh.
2005 during sidewide
investigations of groundwater
beneath land.
Uh, and the interim measure.
was installed in the Gan.
016.
Pumpkinre system.
In 2021 we brought forward some
concerns,
uh, to.
That
to be increasing chromium.
down gradient of the injection
wells.
Then in 2022, we issued a notice
of violation for those exceeds.
did not get any proposed action
that would prevent.
For migration.
Of the response to that.
You know, be
cessation of the injection.
By April 1st of 2023, which did
occur.
Slide 4.
In working
With Lionel and with Samuel
Defonso.
to resolve this screwing on.
how to interpret
The information coming forward.
to convene the independent
review.
To look at everything to do
with.
it
And to help us identify.
best path forward.
We say going in that
participation, I think on all
outside based on probably.
Holy round
Nobody had all the answers.
I'm happy to say that the team
completed their work and their
report is currently in review.
I
Let off enemy
Office of state engineer and sat
Alfonso.
We anticipate that that report
published and made public
sometime.
December.
stays on track.
Uh
I think it needs to be noted
that the parties that were
reviewing this are reviewing for
factual accuracy, the report is
what the report is.
That's the thing about an
individual, yes.
Got a text from another member
that sound is a little messed
up.
So we're gonna have to work on
sound quality all day today, but
why don't you maybe maybe the
microphone a little
In front of you and maybe a
little closer to you.
a stronger
After the wet, very good.
That better.
I hope so, Mike.
sources text me and tell me if
that's better, senator.
Uh, yeah, you might get a little
closer though. I think it's a
little.
OK, just a little bit shit.
you
Um, so as I say, the
I
Retain completed its work.
And that
now under review by Lane enemy.
Of a state engineer and Samuel
Defonso.
managed to confirm
Actual
Um, as I said, the report.
an independent review team.
and nobody
to try and modify the results.
benefit one way or the other it
designed to be a tool.
He
path forward that's most
beneficial to the environment,
to our public and to clean up.
Yeah.
is uh is scheduled to be.
Uh, published sometime in
December.
And made available to the public
once that review is completed.
Those recommendations we used to
inform a path forward.
Chief compliance with our
regulatory requirements.
current status.
I think is, is probably one of
the
critical issues to discuss.
Is that
recommended
restart partial restart of the
treatment system.
And DE did restart.
Extraction and injection on a
limited basis is recommended.
On September 30th we try
restarting, I think it actually
occurred October 1st and is
ongoing.
Another thing of note is that
the consent order.
Which part of
Chromium plume
falls under.
Um
was revised and finalized uh in
September.
of 24.
And
That satisfies the
Action satisfy the 2021
complaint filed by MED.
Uh, does include settlement
agreement.
Modified the consent order.
So that's the, that's where
we're at.
Uh, the next slide, which would
be slide 6.
Simply says, thank you.
Everything beyond that is.
Again, historic information that
you have seen multiple.
Sometimes.
through that if you would like.
But uh,
empty
Serve everybody's time we have
to just give the update.
Answer questions.
Afterwards
Thank you, Miss Cole.
Thank you Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Ah
My name is Jessica Henkel.
I'm still getting texts from
various people that it's kind of
messed up on the on the web,
it's working in the zoom. So,
Sounds like possibly, I'm
wondering if that's a clear
microphone.
In the metal lines, and so it's
a little low for you, but maybe
after.
There you go.
And then uh for the people
listening online, we're gonna
test it out, we're gonna see if
we get a better sound volume,
then maybe we'll.
Everyone use that mic, thank
you.
This is a test. OK, web people.
This is a test.
Let us know if this is better.
I'm Jessica Kunkle. I'm the
manager of the Department of
Energy's Environmental
Management Los Alamos Field
Office, or EMLA for short.
I joined EMLA in June.
I previously had
previous
It does not seem to be
We're going.
We're gonna bring you another.
And the other one is turned off,
right?
See how this works.
Um, I joined EMLA in June of
this year. I previously worked
at the National Nuclear Security
Administration, or NSA for 15
years and had most recently
served as the deputy associate
administrator for infrastructure
life cycle Management where it
was responsible for maintaining,
operating and modernizing base
infrastructure across the
nuclear security enterprise. So
I have a strong professional
connection, uh, with the state
of New Mexico as I was
responsible for infrastructure
management, uh, and operations.
both fals Amos National
Laboratory in Santia National
Laboratories, but I also have a
very strong personal connection
with the state.
I was born and raised in Los
Alamos, New Mexico, and my
husband is also a native New
Mexican from Albuquerque. So
we're very excited to have
relocated back to uh connect
with our native New Mexican
roots and raise our 5 year old
daughter, um, here in the great
state of New Mexico. On slide 2,
I just have a very quick
snapshot of what our top
priorities are for the EMLA
office. So first and foremost,
we're absolutely committed to uh
aligning and uh performing our
commitments that we make within
New Mexico Environment
Department.
We are also continually to
continue to remain chiefly
focused on addressing and
mitigating the, the potential
spread of the hexavalent
chromium plume.
We're also focused on continuing
our shipments of transuranic
waste off-site.
That's focused on the legacy
waste.
Um, part of our, um, uh, so
remediation and waste shipment
um programs is chiefly focused
on uh what we call our
corrugated metal pipes program,
and I'll give a little.
Um, one of the key pillars of
our cleanup mission in Los
Alamos is a legacy soil
contamination investigation and
remediation, which is a, a very
um uh critical part of
protecting our groundwater
quality.
And lastly, I remain committed
to ensuring transparency and
engagement with our local
government, our stakeholders and
our pueblos.
On slide 3, I'd like to give a
quick update on the hexavalent
chromium plume, and you will
hopefully be relieved that my
update aligns very closely with
Mr. Roderick's update.
Um, so as you are aware, on
March 30th, Los Alamos shut down
operation of what we call our
chromium interim measures, which
is the network of injection and
extraction wells that have been
installed in order to address
and mitigate the spread of the
plume.
Uh, we shut down the intern
measure in order to comply with
the New Mexico Environment
Department's direction to cease
injection by April 1st, 2023.
As Mr. Roderick uh reported, um,
we are pleased that we have
resumed what we call partial
operations of our chromium
interim measure on September.
Uh, we're operating with 3
injection wells and 3 extraction
wells complying with the
authorization that was received
by the New Mexico Environment
Department.
Right now we're currently
successfully operating in what
we call a 24/5 schedule. So
we're running 24 hours a day
during the work week. We do shut
down over the weekend just to
make sure that if there is an
emergent event that we do not
have, um, an issue that we
cannot respond to. And as we
continue to uh resume and
monitor the system. Um, we'll
make plans to extend or expand
our operations to 24/7.
On slide 4, I provide an update
on the independent expert
technical review, which aligns
very closely with Mr. Roderick
said, um, so I believe it was in
the August 2023 meeting of this
committee that the committee had
recommended that the Department
of Energy and the new, uh, New
Mexico Environment Department
enlist an independent team to
resolve differing technical
opinions related to the chromium
interim measures.
The Department of Energy
listened to that recommendation.
And in March of this year,
working with NMED, we commenced
that independent expert
technical review team.
As Mr. Roderick reported, we are
undergoing factual accuracy
review of that commit or that
team's draft report, and we are
uh cautiously optimistic that we
will have a final report
available before the end of the
calendar year. And as Mr.
Roderick did state, that report
will be available publicly and
we are uh coordinating with the
New Mexico Environment
Department to uh plan a robust
public rollout, uh, engagement
series, um, and we'll invite
Doctor Inez Trie, who is the
lead of that independent expert
technical.
review team to meet with members
of the public and present her
findings.
On slide 5, I'd like to give an
update on what we call our
corrugated metal pipe, or CMP
project for short.
Um, so the CMPs contain
transuranic waste from a former
Los Alamos National Laboratory
radioactive liquid waste
treatment facility that operated
during the Cold War era, at what
we call technical Area 21.
There was a total of 158 pipes
containing what we call cemented
waste that were transferred from
TA 21 and buried at Technical
Area 54, or what we call area G
in 1986. It was always intended
that those CMPs would be
retrieved for futile future
disposal.
And I'm happy to report that um
in September, we completed 100%
of retrieval for all 158 CMPs.
Each of those corrugated metal
pipes is approximately 20 ft
long and weighs between 10,000
and 14,000 pounds.
Given their size, we do, uh,
engage in what we call size
reduction or cutting of the CMPs
into about 5 segments. Um, each
of which is loaded into what we
call a standard waste box that
will then eventually be shipped
to the waste isolation pilot
plant in Carlsbad.
Um, and so I do want to point
out the pictures on this slide,
the one in the upper left is
the, uh, the actual retrieval of
the final corrugated metal pipe.
Um, so you'll see that those
corrugated metal pipes were
buried, um, in place, um, at
technical Area 54. Um, you'll
see, we had robust, uh,
radiation control uh programs in
place to ensure worker and uh
environmental safety.
The picture on the, the lower
right is actually a picture
within what we call dome 3 375,
which is where we conduct our
size reduction activities, the
black box that you see on the
left-hand side of that picture
is actually an enclosed, um,
hydraulic press with a cutting
apparatus which is used to
actually cut the CMPs or size
reduce them. And that enclosure
actually helps to reduce um uh
workers uh risk.
And as of November, we've
completed 82% of all size
reductions of those, uh,
corrugated metal pipes.
On slide 6. I'm happy to report
that we completed successfully
completed, um, our cleanup of
what we call middle DP road. Um,
the work at this site included
extensive air monitoring, site
investigation, the removal of
contaminated debris in soil. Uh,
we did extensive sampling on
soil and debris, confirmatory
sampling sampling and analysis
and then we backfilled the
excavated areas with clean soil
and dispositioned all of the
waste. We're happy to
report that that site was
remediated to residential
standards and requires no
additional controls.
So that land was returned to Los
Alamos County for continued
economic development.
On slide 7, I'd like to give you
a quick update on some of uh our
soil remediation work. Um, so
what I have here depicted on
this uh slide is a map of what
we call our aggregate areas are
aggregate areas are watersheds
or canyons that contain
contaminated soil and debris
from legacy operations at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory.
So the work that we're doing in
these aggregate areas includes
extensive soil investigation and
sampling, uh, remediation as
needed or determined based on
that investigative work. And
then continued risk assessment
to both human health and
environmental risk.
This is one of our uh key
programs as I had uh uh
mentioned previously with regard
to our legacy cleanup as soil
remediation is a key component
to protecting the, the water
quality for uh the area.
And I would like to point out
that in fiscal year 2024, it was
the first year where we're
actually operating in 5
aggregate areas simultaneously.
This is important because of the
amount of pre-coordination and
planning, um, and able to
mobilize 5 distinct teams and 5
distinct areas across the Los
Alamos National Laboratory site.
So just a couple of highlights
of the work that we did complete
in fiscal year 2024.
At 2 Mile Canyon, we completed
the field work, including
completion of all sampling
activities and remediation.
A patrial fence and a patrio and
fence, we continue to sample
while protecting cultural
resources in the area.
And then Starber and Upper
Pajarito, we continued our
characterization and
investigation sampling and
collected more than 2900 soil
samples and 227 water samples.
On slide 8, I would just like to
highlight a few additional key
accomplishments for fiscal year
2024.
So I'm happy to report that we
did complete all of the, uh, 15
or what we call fiscal year 2024
Appendix B milestones under the
2016 compli compliance order on
consent or what's commonly
referred to as the consent order
with NMED. Completion of these
milestones is a demonstration of
our commitment to continuing the
legacy, uh, cleanup at Los
Alamos.
We also successfully completed
the installation of uh
monitoring while our 76 to
acquire additional information
regarding the hexavalent
chromium plume.
We also successfully shipped 22
shipments of transuranic waste
to the waste isolation pilot
plan.
Uh, this next bullet, I would
like to take a little bit of
time because this is a great
achievement. Uh, the, uh,
environment, uh, EMLA and uh
nuclear Newport News BWXTY LLC
or N3B for short, because of
course, we like acronyms. Um,
was selected on behalf of the
Department of Energy's
Environmental Management Office
to actually pilot an innovative
technology, um, that's called
the Universal dum Assay and
segregation system. In a
nutshell, it's a new waste
characterization.
technology that's designed to
more accurately analyze the
contents of legacy radioactive
waste drums, and the goal is
with this um more uh accurate
characterization of drums that
we can ensure that we're sending
only transuranic waste to the
waste isolation pilot plant and
disposing of what it could
otherwise be characterized as
low level or mixed low level
waste through other uh um
appropriate disposal means.
Uh, we're happy to say that
initial results look promising,
and we're awaiting the final
results of this new technology.
And lastly, we initiated um a
project to deactivate
decommission and remove what's
called the ion beam facility.
The ion beam facility is an
excess process contaminated
facility at the Los Alamos
National Laboratory. And so we
will be mobilizing for actual um
work in the early 2025. On my
final slide, I just wanted to
give an update on the revised
2016 consent order and much of
this aligns with what you had
heard from Mr. Roderick.
So on August 30th, 2024, the
Department of Energy and the New
Mexico Environment Department
reached agreement to settle the
litigation regarding the
compliance order on consent.
Importantly, the revisions to
the, to the compliance order,
uh, revised but do not supersede
the 2016 consent order.
As part of the terms and
conditions of the settlement
agreement. We have agreed to
make a payment to the state of
New Mexico to the hazardous
waste emergency fund in the
amount of $333,000.
Uh, the settlement agreement,
uh, was intended to compromise
on the disputed claims, and
importantly, it does not
constitute any admission of
guilt or wrongdoing on uh the
part of the government.
Uh, as part of the, uh,
settlement agreement, there is a
stipulation requiring the New
Mexico Environment Department to
complete its review of over 220
requests for certificates of
completion, uh, within the year
of the executed uh revised
consent order.
Uh, and they revised consent
order was executed by the
Department of Energy and the New
Mexico Environment Department on
September 30th. And I believe,
uh, copies of those revised
consent orders can be found both
on the New Mexico Environment
Department website as well as
the uh EM uh LA website.
And with that, that's the end of
my prepared remarks. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. R.
Oh, now it is. John turned it on
for me. Thank you, John.
Deputy Secretary.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Kate Gerard. I'm the executive
director for the Office of
Natural Resources Trustee. I'm
here on behalf of the office and
the trustee for our office,
Maggie Hart Stebbins, who is the
governor's appointed trustee. In
that capacity, Maggie is uh
trustee Het Stebbins is the
trustee for all of New Mexico's
natural resources, including the
groundwater that is the subject
of the plume.
Um
And that is the subject of this,
of this hearing. Um.
The purpose of the mission of
RNRT is to
Require polluters to pay for the
hazardous, uh, the natural
resource injuries that result
from hazardous contaminants
being released into New Mexico's
natural resources. In this case,
the, the polluter is DOE. DOE
also shares additional roles in
this case, as under the national
contingency plan and under
CERCLA, DOE is also a co-trustee
of the resources and in Atlanta.
Um, and so,
We are, um
The process of, of going on to
this, I'm sorry, but these are
not fully enumerated, but the
remediation restoration slide
that you have seen before, sort
of just delineates the
difference between what um.
Deputy Secretary Roderick's team
does with NMED versus what ONRT
does.
Deputy Secretary and and Ms.
Kunkel spoke about the
remediation process of the
plume.
What that is the cleanup to a
health-based standard. And what
ORT does is we seek compensation
for the, the actual restoration
of the, of the, of the injuries
that occurred to the natural
resources as a result of the
release. So they get cleaned up
to a health based standard and
we require the contaminator to
pay, so it, it is returned to a
pre-contamination level.
There are many phases to a
damaged natural resource damage
assessment process and
restoration process. There's the
assessment phase, there's a, a
negotiation phase, and there is
a restoration phase.
We are in the assessment phase
as part of a trustee council,
they'll speak about a little bit
more and, and of which um DOE is
also a co-truste.
The 3 primary phases, the 3
primary phases of the natural
resource damage assessment are
controlled by regulations
promulgated by the Department of
the Interior?
There's the injury determination
phase that establishes, um,
whether or not the natural
resources have been injured as a
result of the release of a
hazardous substance. 2, the
quantification phase, which is
determining the nature and
extent of the natural resource
injury and um.
And
The nature and extent of the
injury results in a
determination of how much money
would it cost to restore that of
monetizing that that that value
of the, the injured.
Of monetizing how much it would
cost to restore the injured
resources.
And then, so in the damage
determination phase, I
apologize, I got that a little
bit.
Mushed in the in the second.
At Los Alamos National
Laboratories, we are looking at
ground all the natural resources
in injuries that have occurred
as a result of the release of
contaminants since the beginning
of the, of the defense mission
at Los Alamos National Labs.
Groundwater, surface water,
sediments, contaminated with
radiological substances, metals,
organic compounds, cultural and
cultural service losses.
Our co-trustees are the
The forecour pueblossalfontos
Procociti
de Hemes and Santa Clara Pueblo,
also US Forest Service and DOE
which again serves as both
co-truste and as the potential
responsible party.
We have been in a cooperative
assessment, um, process with DOE
and the co-trustes that that
began in 2014.
And we are in an ongoing that
that process, the heart of it
right now is, is the
determination of the
groundwater, um, the extent of
the groundwater in.
The other thing that is
happening in our co-trustee in
our trustee council is we are
looking at, um, opportunities
for early restoration and early
um partial settlement of the
groundwater injuries so that we
can start to actually um
Compensate the public and
restore um.
The natural resources prior to
the end of the damage assessment
phase, which is, as you, you've
heard the remediation phase will
take a long time.
I have a slide here which is the
historic and current boundaries
of Los Alamos National Labs.
The black line is the historic
boundary of Los Alamos Labs.
The red boundary within that
black boundary is the current
boundary of Los Alamos National
Labs.
DOEM is the site manager for
this the red boundary right now.
What the trustee council is
looking at, however, is.
Is the Natural Resource injuries
that that occurred as a result
of releases in this entire
boundary.
And the injuries are measured,
um, not just within this site,
but we trace those contaminant
releases to the end to the
endpoint. So whatever injury
occurs as a result of that
release wherever that
contaminant may, may end up,
whether it be in the, you know,
the coach the Cochiti Lake.
Or um.
In the in in the Los Alamos, the
in the aquifer or it, it
doesn't, it is not just
contained to here. So we measure
it off all the way to the
endpoint.
I think you may have already
seen this slide in another um.
In a prior one of either deputy
secretaries or Ms. Kunkle's
presentations.
This slide comes from a 222021
land annual site report.
And one of the things I want to
say about our damage assessment
process is we are very grateful
that we are able to utilize the
records and the um data that
Lane has been collecting since
the beginning of their mission.
And so we don't have to go out
and find new samples or collect
new data, we are really able to
mostly rely on what Linnel has,
has, um, compiled since the 40s
and which is currently in the
um.
In the in the Intelis database
that that Lao maintains.
This is, um, a depiction of the
plume and we've added the
question marks because what it
shows is, um, as, as deputy
secretary and Ms. Kunkel have
have stated the nature and
extent of this plume is not
fully known. So part of the
reason why we need to continue
continue with the measure is
because is to actually get a
full extent of how far does
this, does this plume go both
horizontally and vertically.
There are well readings at
certain um certain wells have
readings that are highest at the
bottom. That doesn't mean that's
where the boundary is, that
means that it is likely further
than the bottom of that well.
5000 and 200 at the bottom is
probably not zero right under
that. It is probably higher than
200. So we still need to know
the, the vertical extent.
The
The same is true on the
horizontal extent. There are
some um wells that the reading
has the readings have gone down.
Um, we're really pleased that
the interim measure that the
modified measure has been turned
back on because there were
readings, it was when it was on
before it, we saw that there
were um.
There there was there were
declining levels, especially in
the wells that were at the San
Alfonso, um, boundaries. And so
we're happy to see that that's
back on because we really the,
the importance of containing
this plume and it not spreading
the santafonso and then also
getting an accurate um depiction
of and understanding if it has
spread is super important, but
we hope it has not spread, um,
and look forward to finding,
finding those results if they
happen.
The next slide is another, um,
Los Alamos slide lab. It, it is,
uh, it starts with the, the
chromium source. It's sort of
the history of the, of the
plume. And what I want to focus
on is the that 2005 discovery,
and all the work that went into
that 2005 discovery, and again,
this is, um, you know, I have to
give credit to Lael for all of
the work that has gone in over
these decades to really
understand how this plume came
to be.
Where it is, you know, where,
how did this chromium, um,
release happen, where did it
happen and how did it travel to
the um to the aquifer.
So in the in the the 50s, 1950s,
the 1970s, the power plant was
using chromium just as the there
was another um.
A reactor or the Omega Wes
reactor, both reactors use
chromium and the discharge had
chromium in it, and it was
released into the wetlands right
down, down gradient from the
power plant and it really is
the, the 60s and 70s because of
their standard testing was
almost found that chromium
started seeing levels above,
above level started seeing, you
know, micro, the readings were
much higher than the, than the
baseline level.
In the late 90s, there were
readings in the uh by, by the
late 90s, the, the chromium,
they found that traveled to the
regional aquifer and while the
the standard is 50 micro, um.
Microliters per, uh sorry.
Micrograms per liter in the
aquifer, the, the readings were
1000 to 3000. So we knew that it
was, it was incredibly high, was
almost found that, and so the,
you know.
As a scientist, I am not a
little sci scientist, but my
understanding is they take these
readings and then determine what
next. They, they say, OK.
It's here. Where's it going to
go next? We're going downgrading
it. We need to keep, to keep
tracing this down.
Eventually there is a plan that
leads to we think it might be in
the aquifer, we think it might
be down, um.
It may, there may be a plume
where we now know there it is,
there, there are, there's a
permitting process that is
engaged in with, with NMED.
There is a determination of, um,
where we should put monitoring
wheels.
That was not a um.
A decision without faces, they
use all of the data and research
and analyses that they have done
since the 1950s and 1960s to
decide like, oh, we think that
there's this, there's a good,
there's a.
We have a pretty good
inclination that there is
chromium down here in this
groundwater plume.
The result of that determination
is they need to get a, you know,
a permit to drill a well.
The walls, as you have seen in
your sights, they're not a minor
deal.
It costs a lot of money to, to
put in one of those walls. I
think $7 to $9 million is the
last quote we heard.
It takes years to get a permit
to get to that well.
So the idea that that this was
just discovered in 2005. That's
the first time they had a
reading.
That doesn't mean that's the
first discovery.
They knew that that was likely
to be found.
And every monitoring well that
is put in place still is based
on we have readings that
indicate that there might be
chromium in this spot.
There, there is a well that is
going to be placed in San
Alfonso, I'm monitoring well. It
would be delightful if we found
0 readings, if we, we found no
above level readings. Is that
likely, unfortunately, probably
not.
We don't know the full extent,
but we do know that there is a
vast amount of groundwater that
is contaminated in, in this,
this plume is a very large
plume. There are and it will
take a long time to clean up.
Just like other plumes in the
state, remediation of these
plumes is not an overnight
endeavor. The fact that we get
to a final remedy, that means we
have a final cleanup.
cleanup plan, but those plans,
as you know from other plumes
that we have talked about in the
state take decades and
And some, who knows, it might
maybe over a century. So the
primary focus is is has been
stated is to contain it.
That doesn't mean it's restored.
We have a damaged.
Um, injured, uh, aquifer, I, I
mean, groundwater plume that is
huge and vast, that's a natural
resource of the state that that
is incredibly valuable
groundwater in New Mexico is
more valuable than any other
place in the country.
And it doesn't come back easily.
Recharge levels, it's, are like,
you know, 2 to 5% at best.
And so this groundwater, this
remediation will contain it. We
don't know how long it's going
to be to restore it.
So the work of the trustee
council is not just to sort of
determine how vast is this.
Is the injury, but also how long
has it been there and how long
is it going to be there? We use
projections.
And we use those projections to
come up to um
A determination of what is it
going to take to restore that
injury and how much is that
going to cost?
And the earlier we do that, the
better.
Because
It's not, you know, we, we, you
know, groundwater plan that is
put in place now is much more
likely to have the uh be
successful than a groundwater
plan that is put in place in 50
years when we have less.
So the impact of time um for our
natural resource damages is the
next slide, and this is just
directly from the, the
regulations. Damages are
calculated based on injuries
occurring from the onset of the
release through the recovery
period.
The rest of it is any is less
any mitigation that happens in
response actions.
And plus any increase in
injuries that are unavoidable as
a result of the, of the remedial
action.
To show you how damages recrue
over time and the cost of delay.
Mm
So we are measuring injuries
back to um the initial release,
but because CEO was enacted in
1981, the monetary damages don't
start to accrue till 1981,
because that's when it circle
was enacted.
So the value of time um is
basically like, you know, sort
of like akin to interest on
money.
In 1981, a 100 acre feet is now
356 acre feet in 2034 and 10
years, it'll be 479 acre feet.
And so how much it costs to
restore.
100 acre feet.
Or 356 acre feet or 479 acre
feet is what we're looking.
And this this plume is not just
100 acre feet, as you know.
The rest of the slides are
really related, just updating
things we've talked to you about
before, um, our settlements,
which you know there's been $45
million in ONRT settlements over
since its inception, um, a lot
of that was in the last few
years with Gal King Mine, um,
this is the list of, of, of
those settlements. The next page
is, I think probably, I think,
um, Trusty Hart Sebbins was here
before you a month ago and um
gave you some updates on our
list of Going mine projects, um.
There's a lot more red, which is
our progress.
There's only 4 of these 13
projects that are not under
contract. We've already spent a
million dollars of the dollars
in this fiscal year on the
projects, all of them will be in
place and up and running, um.
We are at least our planned to
by next summer, um, and in the
next couple of months there will
be the the water release under
for the ISC, um, the water
release and the, the lease
agreement that they have with
the Hickory Apache Nation, um,
that will be another million
dollars spent.
And
The following the pages after
that are just the sort of the.
The results, the outcome of our
restoration, circle is, you
know, we, we look for the cost
of restoration, but when
restoration is impossible, we
look for, um,
Opportunities to replace or to
acquire the equivalent, so the,
so this is not um water that we
are gonna be able to restore
quickly and so we need to look
for opportunities to replace or
to acquire the equivalent.
Um, the Gold King Mine projects
are examples of how we do that.
We do that through this Aztec
reservoir, you know, the Aztec
had a a reservoir that wasn't,
wasn't lined. It was leaky, it
was dysfunctional, and
With our money, Aztec now has a
water reservoir for the entire,
you know that that's, that's
what that city needed. It is a
lion reservoir with clean water
that can be actually contained
and not leaked before it is
treated.
Um
We are
Really grateful that DOE is, is,
um,
It's policy really has been to
to state that they are
interested in early restoration,
early partial settlement, um,
and opportunities to begin this
the work of restoration.
In this place, um,
Replacing, acquiring the
equivalent of doing the work
that will help us save our, our
water in the future right now,
um, for example,
Who knows, replacing all the
Alamos County's leaky pipes or
the entire states, the, you
know, this is a vast amount of
water in the cost of restoring
this amount of water of
groundwater is going to take a
lot of work and the earlier we
begin, the better for all of us
and also the better for DOE is
it would allow them to actually
toll and and put a sort of a
pause on the accrual accrual of
future damages to the extent
that they are able to put money
in now, um, and we, we know
that.
You know, DOE is part of that
Los Alamos community. It is not
like they're just they're
overseeing this, they are
integral and it would benefit
them as well. Um, and so we look
forward to to our continued
relationship to um.
Toward resolution of, of not
only um the groundwater plume,
um, remediation and restoration,
but also of all the natural
resource injuries that have
occurred as a result of, of this
really important mission.
Thank you. Um,
Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
to see all of you and welcome
Miss Kunkle, uh, you and I
haven't had a chance to visit
yet, but I'm looking forward to
that in the, in the near future.
Um, I met with your predecessor,
Miss Kunkle, Madam Chair.
And, you know, I enjoyed working
with him as well, um, and I, and
this is not a reflection on you,
but I was disappointed that he
was only here for about 2 years
and.
And I used to chat about the
fact that you get a little
frustrated with federal agency
heads kind of circulating
through.
And Madam Chair, then there's
not a level of commitment to the
community that.
Um, I think it's really critical
to make sure this happens and to
ensure also, Madam Chair, that
there's actual buy in, um, so
I'm hoping you as a native well
we'll be able to stay with us
for a long time, um, glad to
hear you have a child in our
school system, so you have
something invested in uh in the
success of all these various
activities. Um, Madam Chair, um,
um, Miss Gerard.
Ah
What role does Los Alamos County
have in all of these things you
mentioned, of course, it's the
uh water system at issue. I am
just to be clear, I understand
the chromium has not.
Go to a place yet where our
drinking water has been
affected. Do we know that for
certain? Let's, let's establish
that baseline.
Um
Madam Chair Representative
Chandler, um, I think that that
is, that is part of the extent
of the the characterization that
MED is, is undergoing is
actually, um, that is part of
the ongoing study, and so, um, I
hope not.
I know that there are efforts
that went that the um when rain
comes down through the diversion
channel, there are, you know,
there's certain wells that have
been shut off in Los Alamos
County and so to prevent that,
I'm
I can't speak to that any
further.
Right
Could you help us understand
what the effect on the chromium
plume has had on the drinking
water supply in Los Alamos.
Madam chair and Representative,
uh, that is something that's
monitored closely by both Lanel
and the county, and then MED.
To date, we've not had
indications of contamination in
their water supply their uh have
been some shutdowns.
As in due to an abundance of
caution trying to not draw the
plume in a particular direction
while it's further studied.
Um, one of the conversations
that we have
Been engaged with some of the
other interested parties is.
In the event that contamination
is identified, it does begin to
show up in one of these drinking
water wells, having a
contingency plan in place to
address that.
Um
You know, where it, whether it
You
treatment because luckily we
have the science and the
technology that they can deal
with the chromium and pull it
out and strip it out of the
water and then
Return to fresh water, but it's
making sure that that those
alternatives are.
On the table and thought about
so that if they need uh quickly.
Agility is not typically
something that the state or land
is really good, better with
those things.
Um, but we have not seen those
impacts yet, um.
As was mentioned there, uh.
Final approval was given from
Samuel Defonso to put
It's actually at this point
scheduled to be 2 monitoring
wells with screens at different
depths on Sanai property.
Um, that took major buy-in from
their tribal council to do that.
Uh, and the intent is to close
gaps in our knowledge about this
plume where it's at, how it's
moving.
Uh, things of that nature and
that's of course one of the
difficulties in doing anything
with this plume.
Um, is that there are so many.
Historic and cultural
considerations, even on site,
uh, where it's not tribal land,
but it's uh it's within the
site.
And Lael has to be very
cognizant of that and so that
impacts where wells can be put
in.
Uh, a lot of times adds to the
time factor and the cost factor,
to be quite honest, um, and
we're aware of that, but at this
point in time,
That very long answer did not,
Madam Chair, give me a lot of
insurance.
You know, I'm just, I, I don't
know how the audience feels, but
I can tell you that didn't make
me feel. I, I used to go to
meetings where they'd say
absolutely, we know for a fact
it is not in our drinking water,
and there we are, but I just
heard along relatively, we don't
think so kind of answer and
don't worry, we have a
contingency plan that hopefully
will be quick move quickly
implementable that.
So, um
Madam Administrator, do you
wanna?
Jump in. Yes, just very quickly.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, I did just
want to elaborate on the deputy
secretary's response. So the
closest drinking water well for
Los Alamos County, um, to the
hexavalent chromium plume is a
well called PM3. That was shut
off a number of years ago after
the discovery of the hexavalent
chromium plume out of an
abundance of caution, as my
colleagues here at the table
had, uh, noted. Um, the
Department of Energy has
installed what we call two.
Sentinel wells to serve as early
detection wells to determine
whether or not the, the, uh,
hexavalent chromium plume is
migrating towards that closest
well, again, that's a well
called PM3, and so far to date
we have not detected any
chromium that gives us any cause
for concern that the plume is
migrating toward that, um, well,
that is the closest proximity to
the plume. So we have every, um,
uh, utmost reassurance that this
The drinking water in Los Alamos
County remains to be safe.
Thank you for that answer, just
to clarify, PM3s shut down. I
thought I heard you say. It is.
OK, so what whales are there
whales in that vicinity that are
pumping drinking water to the
community. I don't believe, I
think PM3 is the one that's
closest to proximity of the
plume to the boundary of the
plume, so that was shut down out
of an abundance of caution.
OK. Um, I'm not sure I got an
answer to that question. I mean
I'm sure maybe it's because I'm.
Not paying close enough
attention, but.
I, I do believe we're still
drawing our drinking water from
that area, no, is that not
correct?
Madam Chair and representative.
There are no.
Drinking water wells.
In the immediate vicinity of the
plume that are considered to be
at risk.
From the plume based on the
information that's coming from
the sentinel whales monitoring
wells that are in place.
OK.
OK.
But that still is an area where
we draw drinking water from,
correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
that.
You're drawing water from the
basin, but the extraction wells
that the that the county and the
city utilize for drinking water.
Are not in close proximity to
the plume and are at this point
not at risk from the plume. OK.
But we still get drinking water
from that area. You're saying
the plume has not reached the
drain the wells. That's what I,
I'm hearing that part loud and
clear, but I still wanna confirm
that still has been considered
an area where we're drawing a
drinking water, and I had
understood that was our major
source of our drinking water,
that area, is that not correct?
Madam Chair and representative
the aquifer.
That you're drawing is.
Is the aquifer and the intent of
the.
The uh remediation, the interim
measure is to prevent the plume
from moving further into to the
aquifer where it could, but they
are not currently impacted.
Oh, OK. Oh, Madam Chair, and
going back to Miss Gerard in
terms of um.
Damages, I, I guess I don't know
how to articulate it, but uh,
you were referring to things
that could be done because we're
losing.
Um, valuable water as a result
of this contamination. Um, have
you consulted with Los Alamos
County as to what they would,
they would benefit from, um,
since that would absolutely be
part of the process represents
Madam Chair, Representative
Chandler, that would absolutely
be consulting with our public
with the public, especially the
impacted public communities it
would absolutely be part of that
process that you know the damage
assessment process uses um.
To get to a monetary value.
We come to what would it cost to
replace or restore the
equivalent thereof, so we would
look at things like how much,
you know, and we use a debit,
there's a debit system, so 100
square acre feet of of of water
is damaged, what would it cost
to replace that or to, you know,
to acquire the equivalent to
acquire the equivalent of it.
And so that could be through,
um,
Saving
Water from from from um misuse
or mismanagement by leaky pipes.
That was the example I used.
That's, that's a hypothetical.
So if we have the the.
When the dollar, once we get to
the point of being able to
discuss, um, monetary value and
like I said, DOE has made um
clear their intent to work, work
on, um, funding early
restoration and partial
settlement, we will be able to
um look further into those,
those ideas and solutions. We
were, we look closely at um
local and state water plants.
For example, um, there's
another, there's a plume um
outside of in outside of Las
Cruces as a result of
contamination at the White Sands
test facility. We've worked
closely um looking at
restoration projects through
looking at the less um Las
Cruces water plan, the
twenty-year plan, the 40-year
plan. What did they plan to do
and how could we help fund those
things? So we really do look at
um what does the the community
need and want and how they're
their concerns about how to fund
it. So yes, we will absolutely
work with you.
with all the four chords, um.
To determine those.
Those ideas, but we need the
money as well. There are 4
impacted pueblos. I thought
there was one impacted Pueblo.
There are 4 chord pueblos that
are part of the the Los Alamos
trustee council, um.
Yeah the natural research damage
assessment plan, and that
includes all the phones so that
might be sendonso might be the
most impacted in this, in this
instance in terms of the
groundwater, but the other three
pelos are also impacted. For
example, those drills go through
sacred public sites, that there
are other things that are
impacted by this.
So no consultation yet with Los
Alamos County, Madam Chair and
Miss Gerard, is that what I
heard you say?
Madam Chair, that's what I heard
you say
Almos County is.
Um
Our office, our office is holds
in trusteeship, all the all
resources um in the state,
including the, the resources
with Los Almos County, we will
absolutely consult with Los
Alamos County when it is time
that the internal process right
now is with the trustees and Los
Almos County is not an
unfortunately, and not to, no
disrespect is not a uh a
designated trustee legally under
the law.
Um, Madam chair and nothing
precludes you as the
representative of the county to
actually consult the county. Not
at all.
representative, absolutely we,
we are delighted to consult with
Los Alamos County.
And like now why not
if that it would be the
invitation, I don't, I don't
speak for the county, but I
worry a lot about local
communities um being represented
by the state's interest.
Because you, Madam Chair, you
may think you understand what
the needs of that community are,
but it's not necessarily so,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Chandler, I, um, I, I hear you
and I, um, if to the extent Los
Alamos County has not been
included.
We, we will take action to make
sure that Los Alamos County is
included. At this point, we are
at the point of all trying to
understand the nature and extent
of this plume.
And
To the extent DOE is engaged in
encouraging early restoration
opportunities. That's the point
when Los Alamos County would be
consulted.
Thank you.
Thank you. um, representative
Sara.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I always learned quite a bit
every time you guys come before
us.
Um, I
My first question is for Miss
Kinkle.
Um, across the lannel site. When
did DOE first detect chromium.
Above the um state standard in
the regional aquifer.
I would like to take that for
action. I don't wanna misspeak.
Um, I believe I know the date,
but I would like to make sure
that I get the correct date.
Anyone.
Or can anyone
Go
OK.
Madam Chair representative um
Saana,
I'm not gonna give you an exact
date, but I will point you to
one of our slides, which is a
Los Alamos, um, produced slide.
Which is
It's the slide that I slide with
the chromium.
The cooling plant.
Which shows.
Um
Los Alamos this is report, you
know, references their testing
back to the in the 50s, 60s,
70s, 80s, and 90s of the
chromium that was being released
in the discharge from those
plants.
I can't say which date in those
there, but in that vicinity,
um, again, Ms. Kunkle, there was
a chromium release from the
Omega West reactor into the Los
Alamos Canyon.
Um, has the release reached
ground.
I would have to take that for
action as well.
Um
I know you're new, so
right, another question, um,
from his comical also described
the investigative work DOE
emergency management did to
study the chromium release into
the west wetlands and surface
water in Sandia Canyon prior to
2005 discovery.
chromium in the groundwater
under lannel.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would like to take that for
action as well to get you a
thorough response.
One more question.
But to DOD
Um, what led DOD to think Probia
might have reached groundwater.
Um, so my understanding is that
um the Department of Energy
after, uh, the discharges were
made, um, back in the 1950s and
1960s, which at the time was
standard practice for uh
industrial facilities. They're
what they continue to be
monitoring um within those
canyons, just standard
monitoring, um, and I believe at
that time, you know, there was
additional monitoring that
determined that it had reached
the groundwater plume. So that
would have included soil and
sediment samples as well as uh
groundwater samples. Thank you.
anybody
add any more of that?
Sure. Thank you, um, Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters. So a few things.
Number one, the mic is working
better, and we got that
feedback. So to legislative
council, I know these mics are
really problematic and they're
really temperamental, so my
feedback might be especially
with the session coming up.
Whatever this short microphone
is, seems to work really well.
These are the ones seem to not
be.
Maybe we could
get the technology that's not
working well and.
Just adopt the shorter mics, and
it'll be better for everybody
involved.
This is a suggestion, um.
John
Excuse me, Deputy Secretary
Roderick.
Um
Question for you, if you're able
to discuss DOE as well, and I
understand if you're not, the,
the technical review committee
on the
actions on the chromium plume.
I realize it's a draft, it won't
be released until later. Are you
able to talk at all about the
top line recommendations that
seem to be coming out of that.
Madam Chair and senator, I, I
can talk to it just briefly, um.
One of the things coming out of
that is that the, uh, there are
gaps in the, in the
Information available,
additional monitoring wells are,
are necessary.
To better understand the nature
and extent.
Um, there is discussion about
Um, whether the
Extraction injection is the only
methodology that needs to be in
place and whether or not the
actual contamination.
In the soil
Uh, is continuing to
To leach down into the
groundwater and there may need
to be some action taken to
remove the source if you will.
Um
There is discussion about
alternative locations for
injection, uh, to increase the
volumes, I think everything
agrees that the pump and treat.
is probably the best solution to
deal with this.
The issue is where to best
extract and where to then
inject, uh, and those
recommendations are coming out.
It also contains some
recommendations with regard to
well construction.
Um, which of course falls under
office of State engineer purview
and their technical teams are
looking at that, uh, to
determine if there's uh uh
Alternative methodology that can
be employed that will.
Speed up the process of getting
monitoring.
OK. Do you wanna say anything on
that or?
That's suffice. You don't have
to at this point in time because
the report is drafted, I'd like
to defer my comments until the
final report is public.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
What you just said, John.
Um, additional monitoring, well,
you know, from a layman's
standpoint when you continue to
hear year after year, we haven't
characterized it. We haven't
characterized it. What do we
need to characterize it, and we
need more monitoring. I mean,
that would be
From a layman's perspective,
something that seemed like.
Good thing, more, more data the
better, more monitoring the
better.
So hopefully that's what that
means, what you just
What's kind of there. Um, real
quick, I guess everyone has a
very high degree of confidence
in these experts that you've
brought on because everyone's
agreeing almost like arbitration
too.
What they're recommending, is
that fair to say?
Madam Chair and Senator, I will
say that the uh.
The group that was on this
committee that were jointly.
Um, our experts in their fields
and took this to a deeper dive,
uh, than it has been passed and
they looked at.
All the historical data.
Up to this point to to determine
and make recommendations on the
path forward.
Um, and as I say, the intent on
all party side is that the
report is the report. They're
independent findings will be the
tool that's used to to determine
next steps and path forward.
Well, thank you first of all to
both parties for kind of
accepting this nudge from the
committee that to do this. I
mean, I think that we sense that
there was an openness to doing
this as a solution, so I'm glad
that you all embrace that. Then
I guess the question is, so they
say,
We recommend more monitoring
wells. Does that mean the DOE is
going to fund that?
Is that gonna come out of
existing.
environmental management budget
or is that going to be additive
on top of?
What you're funded to do or
speak to that a little bit.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. So the department of
energy has and remains committed
to abiding by the findings and
recommendations of this
independent technical review
team.
With regard to the question
about whether or not additional
monitoring rules would be funded
within our existing budget, that
remains to be seen. Um, we do
have to, uh, receive the final
report with their
recommendations and then then
determine how best to proceed to
implement those recommendations,
um, either within our existing
budget or appealing for
additional funding from
Congress.
Thank you. Well, I mean,
obviously we're going to
encourage you to do everything.
Um
And this is where the consent
order needed.
Revisions because
can't just be a lowest common
denominator we do.
You know, we just accept.
You know, a certain set of
resources and then we can accept
a slower timeline or slower
remediation or slower
characterization process like we
need to be putting our foot on
the paddle, giving more
resources to Lane and to this
issue federally. Um.
So
I hope that
The approach is taken, I hope
our delegation also pushes
Lionel and DOE on that.
Um
And of course NMED and all the
good work you're doing.
Um
Yeah, and then I hope that
ultimately this leads to a
faster.
Characterizations so we can move
into final remediation
strategies.
I mean, does this move the ball
on this whole project and
Hopefully it does. So, um, thank
you for that. Uh, you know, and
because it's our last meeting of
the interim and we won't be
meeting again until next summer.
I would ask if you all can maybe
send it to the members of the
committee this report when it's
done.
I think we'd all be really
interested in seeing what's
recommended.
And then, yeah.
were involved.
All right, moving on, um, to,
uh, you, Mr. Ard, on the um
natural resources that you've
been working on damage
assessment since 2014. It is a
moving target, so you kind of
don't know.
How much to send a bill for if
you don't know the extent of the
damage.
But um
Has enemy has the trustee.
Issued any damage penalty or has
there been any money collected
from Lane for any contamination
to date.
Um,
I don't know if NMED has issued
any penalties or things like
that for the remediation
process. The the the the natural
resource restoration damages and
assessment plan that how we're
not at that point.
The work that we are doing right
now is to assess the, the extent
of the injury, the natural
resource injury, including the
scope of the injury over time.
Um, and at the end of that
process which, as we said, we
know it's going to take a long
time to get to a final remedy,
um, and then obviously to
recovery and so it could be if
we followed that path that the
monetization of this of the
determining of how much money to
restore this could take many,
many more years. We are hopeful
that DOE will start engaging in
what is is the early
restoration, early settlement
opportunity to actually.
Put some money into to restoring
and replacing, um,
This, the water that we know is
going to be damaged, is damaged
and is already injured right
now, um, into tolling what will
be the event eventual money
amount. Thank you, ma'am Chair,
and then another question for
you, Mr. Is the federal
government bound by whatever?
You say your determination of
the damage collection or or is
that always a kind of a
negotiation and then possible
litigation.
Do we have any teeth in the
matter to collect for the
federal government? Yes, we do,
um, Madam Chair and and Senator
Steinmore, the, the process that
we're following is dictated by
the federal regulations if we
choose to follow the regulations
which we are as a as a trustee
council, we have decided to
follow that path. The end result
is, is, is a settlement
agreement that if we end it that
if it doesn't work we go to
court with a rebuttable
presumption that we are right.
Um, and that is helpful. Um, so
yes, this is all leading to the
federal government has teeth in
this. They are also by the
national contingency plan and
DOE even has policy under
recognizing there are a federal
designated trustee and
responsible um as a trustee and
the responsibility separately to
restore this.
OK. Thank you and thank you as
well, trustee Evans, thank you
both for your commitment to
Cleaning up New Mexico.
Making right by us, and I
appreciate your, your really
good work that you've done here
since you've been in office. Um.
Ask real quick about the gold
ing mine and I saw your projects
and I'm curious kind of tying
you together with NMED back when
this happened, we're talking
about the Gold King mine spill.
And releasing all this bad stuff
down the Animas River. There was
a need for, I think, more songs,
that's right, Word, the
monitoring.
equipment, and I know that that
was expensive, and I'm just
wondering, does NMED
Have enough resources to
continue that, is that
continuing and what settlement
money be a good source of funds
if you needed more.
Madam Chair and senator, we are
continuing with that enemyD
received funding from the Gold
King Mine settlement, um.
A couple of different mechanisms
portions of that that are being
used for additional monitoring
not only in the Farmington San
Juan area, but other areas in
the state under our grants
through US EPA.
It's also funding staff to
To be involved and monitor in
the Farmington San Juan area
specifically.
Uh, through our Superfund
program. Uh, we are engaged, uh,
directly with.
The state of Colorado, the USCPA
with Gold King mine, the other
activity going on now is
declared a Superfund site where
technically,
Downstream doesn't make us part
of that, but we're actively
involved with them on updates
and monitoring of the entire
process. So it.
You know, the, the funding that
was received while it's an
unfortunate act to do some
enhanced sampling and, and
protection not only in the San
Juan area.
But other areas of the state.
Well, well, I hope that we are
continuing to monitor the same,
you know, the Animas River and
uh knowing that we have heavy
metals and things that we
felt would be there a long time,
although it sounds like data
that we collected a year or two
out. We didn't see any evidence
of
Laing contamination, but anyway,
I'll just
Put that out there. And finally,
for the natural Resource
Trustee, I know that you're not
going to be on the next panel,
but thank you for
Flagging that you anticipate
doing activities on uranium
cleaner.
Is that's an area where our
state really needs to go
gangbusters, so.
Um
Good to see that and good luck
on that.
We'll be talking about that for
years to come. That's all I
have. Thank you all. Thank you,
man.
Are there any other questions?
OK.
Um
I just uh wanted to follow up.
Um, what happens to land or land
that has uh been cleaned up.
And uh Miss Kunkle, you
mentioned that the middle DP
road um has been transferred.
To uh Los Alamos County.
And why not the pueblo or?
to the
So I can't speak to that
specific, uh, decision, so the
Department of Energy,
Environmental Management is a
tenant and a national nuclear
security Administration on site.
So they are the ones as the
landlord of the site who make
those final determinations on uh
land transfers.
I can help you with that if
you'd like.
No, go ahead.
It was in maybe the late 90-ish
1997, 1998, 99, there was
legislation that Senator
Dienici, um, championed and got
through the legislature that
identified parcels that might be
available for transfer to either
the county or San Al Defonso
Pueblo. Um, the way that
legislation was structured was
parties had to agree as to which
parcels would be transferred.
Um, so, uh, Los Alamos County
got the lucky parcel that was
severely contaminated, well, for
example, San Odofonso got a.
About 600 acres at the base of.
Of their, you know, outside of
Los Alamos County, so it was a
negotiation. That is how that
particular parcel in particular
was identified as were other
parcels in the, in the county,
um, most several of which,
frankly were contaminated and
now I have to get cleaned up.
Um, I wonder if that includes
Acid Canyon that we were just
talking about, um, that area's
been in the county's possession
for for quite some time prior to
this negotiation.
Just gratuitously, I'll add we
hike it all the time and happy
to take you guys up there. You
can see it, but there's a lot of
it's developed trails, people
use it.
Interesting to see that someone
is parachuted in now contending
it's not clean. It has been
tested and tested and cleaned
and cleaned for some period of
time now, and I think the
residents of the community.
That cleanup effort, Madam
Chair.
OK, I guess there is some
dispute. Um, did you have
anything else there?
of the panel.
Chandler's question about Los
Alamos County, um, you know,
conferring the, the damage
assessment process, there is a,
a process by which you come up
with a monetary damages award
restoration projects aren't
decided by us.
They are decided by the
community. We solicit and engage
the community in proposing and
we have criteria, but that makes
by which we make decisions and
so um I don't want to, I just
want you to reassure you that
the community actually is the
final decision maker on the
restoration projects that that
occur.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um
Senator Seiner, thank you, Madam
Chair. You know, to the I'm
sorry.
Uh
Um,
Mr.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, I did also
want to add my um sentiments,
uh, in addition to
Representative Chandler's about
Acid Canyon, uh, the Department
of Energy does maintain a robust
sampling and monitoring program
in Asset Canyon, and I'm happy
to share that Doctor Ketterer's
findings actually align with our
own sampling results, uh, that
confirm our findings that Acid
Canyon has been and remains safe
for recreational use.
In.
Go ahead. Thank you. Well.
So this document we were given,
Madam Chair, by Doctor Ketter,
and again, I don't know.
What funds it, etc.
But says that it's the most.
Plutonium contaminated place in
the US.
And you're saying it comports
his research comports with what
your research is. So,
terminology being used here is
very different. And the mean and
message we're being given is
very different.
And just, um,
I guess what I'm wondering is,
is, and I'm not saying that this
is peer reviewed and you know.
Without knowing qualitatively
who has more accurate data or
Um
from the standpoint of the
resource trustee.
If
You feel like you have data in a
place does have some
contamination, and as you say,
the scope of your timeline goes
to inception of that damage.
Even though now it belongs in
the county, is that something
you would look at.
And
evaluate, I mean, if you have.
Data being given that says it's
the most contaminated, but just
looking out for the public
interest
represent um Madam Chair and
Senator Steinbor.
Hypothetically, yes, I don't
want to give, I, I have not the
specifics of the assessment that
is being done in that specific
spot. I do know that um the land
has been transferred to DOE like
to the county in possession DOE
legacy management still has a
role in overseeing the the
safety and the
the, you know, the study of
that, we agree that with the the
results of that study that that
in that lannel, um, data is, is
actually the, the primary source
of the, of the findings, um, and
to the extent there are above.
Level, um.
Readings that they are that that
are natural that that account
for a natural resource injury
that would actually that would
absolutely be part of what the,
the trustee council would be
assessing.
OK.
Thanks ma'am. I'm not trying to.
a controversy, but it's, you
know, it's pretty startling, you
know, to be.
All this and given this data.
So, I think it's probably worth
doing a deeper dive just to make
sure.
Yeah
That everyone's comfort levels
where it should be. I say
something? I live there.
And I think it's unfair to the
community be raising concerns
that have not have been
validated.
Um
We prepared this panel.
It's understood that this
gentleman has done this study.
One could easily have invited
someone from the lab or from
the, the members of that
community who could have spoken
to his data in a way where
there'd be a real votes that
would actually challenge it, and
that didn't happen. Instead,
We have some piece of paper that
claims that it's the most
plutonium contaminated thing. I,
you, you can write anything on a
piece of paper.
And I think we have a
responsibility here on this
panel to provide data,
information that is balanced.
And is challengeable and that is
not being structured that way.
Um, we did invite.
Lannel to speak on this panel,
but they have decided that they
will only give us information
through executive session that
we are going to have later.
Then I disappointed to hear that
and perhaps we could hear from
our members of this panel as to
why we can't have a public
conversation about something
that others are challenging
publicly.
Because I don't think it's fair
to the community.
Madam Chair, you know, earlier
when this gentleman spoke, I
asked him under what capacity.
He was here because I wasn't
clear and I'm saying, you know,
also, we don't know if this is
peer reviewed, etc. etc. I'm
just raising it.
Because that's what we do.
Watchdogs, but um we'll let the
experts.
And I appreciate your comments
about the research that's been
done.
From the lab and
Well, I, but I would like to
know it is we can't get people
on the record from the
government.
Well, I will just add.
No representative Lane the last
several years does not want to
come here and give public
testimony. It's, we've it's been
an issue the last several years
on other concerns.
So, but maybe this is one that
requests some more information,
so.
Though we are meeting in
executive session later to talk
to him. Maybe we can ask him
about it.
Any comment from the pan.
Yes, Madam Chair.
Um, I just want to reiterate
that the Department of Energy's
Environmental Management, Los
Alamos Field Office, maintains
an incredibly robust sampling
and monitoring program,
monitoring for plutonium across
the Los Alamos National
Laboratory site.
The data that we gather are
analyzed by certified an
analytical laboratories that are
certified not only by the
National Environmental
Laboratory accreditation
program, but also by the
Department of Energy's
Consolidated audit program.
Those sample results are not
determined by the Department of
Energy. The sampling results
are, are determined by those
accredited accredited, uh, an
analytical laboratories and our
findings are well below the
acceptable.
threshold, uh, that DUE has
established for recreational
use. So I would like to, uh,
re-emphasize that Doctor
Ketterer's findings do align
with our own sampling findings
and uh confirm our
recommendation and our findings
that acid canyon does remain
safe for recreational use. Uh,
there is a control that it can
only be used for recreational
use. Um, the comment that was
made earlier about no
restrictions is absolutely
false. Uh, the current, uh, uh,
legal allowable um activity.
In Acid Canyon is recreational
use, that uh includes hiking,
biking, birding, um, and along
with uh Representative Chandler,
I'm also happy to share that I
do my uh myself take my family
hiking in Asset Canyon as well.
If I had any concerns that there
were any uh safety of or risk to
health or human impacts, uh,
particularly to my daughter, I
would not be hiking in that
area, but I am, uh, happy to
share that there are no concerns
about the safety of ace can.
For recreational use.
Thank you.
I don't see any other questions,
so.
Thank you again. Um, these
issues and the remediation,
we're really appreciative of all
that's going on throughout the
state.
OK if you could take your
discussions out in the hallway.
We're going to start with our
next presenter.
Um
Mr.
OK, he's here.
OK, next we have uh uranium
reclamation report.
Yeah.
OK, please.
Miss Mori,
um, harms with uranium mine
reclamation coordinator uh from
NMED and Mr.
Flint Chisler, a senior
reclamation supervisor and
acting radio mind reclamation
coordinator.
Um, with M nerd.
Depart
So thank you.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, as you stated, my name is
Miori Harms. I'm the uranium
mine reclamation coordinator for
NMED or New Mexico Environment
Department, and I will be
co-presenting today with my
counterpart at.
The energy, minerals and natural
resources department, Mr.
Chisler.
He presented with me last year,
if you remember, but uh, he is
now the acting coordinator over
there, he has since taken a
position as the senior
reclamation supervisor in that
department, so we will be
bouncing back and forth,
presenting the uranium mine and
milk cleanup in the state.
Per the annual report
requirement.
And the way we're gonna organize
the presentation is we'll give
an overview of House Bill 164
from 2022 and then we'll go into
state permitted sites for
uranium.
And then we'll look at the
bigger picture of clean up under
mill sites and federal cleanups
as well and discuss a little bit
about what our state has been
doing, um, at the, uh, with the
Council on Environmental Quality
in the White House as well.
Should I wait for the
PowerPoint to show.
Thinks so on slide 2,
We introduced the house was 164
that passed unanimously in the
legislature in 2022 to take a
new approach to uranium
reclamation in the state and it
called for not just permit
actions, but also coordination
at the state agency level,
federal level interactions with
tribal governments and impacted
communities and also to develop
a workforce reclamation.
Program or programs, job
training programs to help keep
money that comes in for uranium
cleanup in the state. And so we
have developed our, our
presentation is
On those, um.
Efforts that we've done under
House Bill 164, including a
strategic plan, which is in
front of you now. We finalized
the strategic plan this year.
Um, we finalized the dashboard
earlier this year, um, and I had
mentioned that last year in our
presentation, and we've added a
lot of digital files to that
dashboard, which I'll explain a
bit in a bit.
And of course, um, it required
House Bill 164 required us to
report annually to the
legislature, which is what
brings Mr. Chisler and I here
today.
Slide 3, just gives a little
more detail on what was
Mandated in House Bill 164, and
you can see how Ener and enemy D
are both working together to
enact and implement that bill at
the state level.
The main difference here is that
NMED leads the workforce
development initiatives with the
Economic Development department.
And the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Emer
leads the the eminent
coordinator, the big difference
in his role is being the
permanent lead in the regulatory
and technical lead on the
uranium mine sites for his
department.
So slide 3 is a general overview
of where the uranium mine sites
are in this state, and you can
see they're scattered all over,
but they're concentrated in the
northwest corner of the state,
primarily in the Grans mining
district that you see in pink
and in the uh cross hatch area.
the
Sorry, it's going, the sound is
going in and out on my hands so
not sure how things were getting
hurt, um, slide 5.
shows the
Uranium dashboard that we
published earlier this year. And
what we've added to it is more
files and reports that are site
related. So if you go to this
website and you're interested in
a particular area, you can zoom
in, click on one of the points
and a pop-up window will come up
with general information on the
site.
So so the mining history.
The landowner, the operator,
whatever information is
applicable, and we've added a
line for NMED site assessment
link. If you click view where it
shows in in the red circle, that
that will bring you to the
collection of files in the NMED
database.
That are associated with that
site or that area. So we're very
proud of that work that we've,
we, we've continued to add to
and we'll continue to add to in
the future. This will be an
ongoing project.
Slide 6 discuss uh lists all of
the
Coordinating state agencies that
are part of House Bill 164.
And if you'll notice towards the
bottom, we have added the Office
of the State Engineer, they were
not originally in the bill, but
since they are required for any
well drilling operations and
permitting, we decided to add
them, and they've been a great
partner in this.
Work.
And finally on House Bill 164.
It developed or it established
the uranium mine reclamation
revolving fund.
Currently, there's no funds
available in the in the fund.
For cleanup, but in the future
if we do receive uh money in
there, we can use that towards
everything related to clean up
from the site assessments to
Groundwater surface remediation
and long-term monitoring.
Now we do have some recurring
money that that was appropriated
with House Bill 164, and we have
about $127,000 in contracts that
we can in the future put towards
reclamation.
And with that, I will, uh, move
into the next section. I'll hand
it over to Mr. Chisler to
discuss the uranium mine sites
that are under state permits.
Is that one not working?
the short ones.
OK.
Adam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present here today, uh, the
slide I'm going to go over right
now are the the permitted sites
that are permitted through
Mner's mining and minerals. So
these are, these are the sites
that are currently under
reclamation, that that I'm that
I'm working on through my
department.
I'm just gonna go through each
mine and give a brief update and
um I can answer any questions
afterwards. I just, I don't want
to get into the weeds too far
with these. Uh, I'm gonna start
with the Mount Taylor mine.
And so the Mount Taylor mine is
a mine in uh over near San
Mateo, New Mexico. It's, it's an
underground uranium mine. It's
currently under a reclamation
permit and
The mining and minerals division
in conjunction with other state
agencies are, are in the
commenting process for cleaning
up the Mount Taylor mine, which
includes two main things. We're
expanding the repository on the
site.
To, to bury the rest of the
contaminated waste on the site.
So that's one project, and then
also,
Uh, Rio Grande Resources, who is
the responsible party for this
mine is working with the Office
of the State Engineer to close
the two shafts. There are two
very large shafts on the site
like.
14 ft 24 ft in diameter and like
3000 ft deep. So that's.
The other part of the work on
cleaning up this site.
Um, that's the Mount Taylor
mine.
The Saint Anthony mine, the next
mine on the list is a mine. It's
another uranium mine and it's a
mining the jackpole formation
north of Laguna Pueblo on the
Seboeta land grants, uh, just
north of I-40.
Uh, the Saint Anthony mine is
Doesn't have a permit yet. We
are holding financial assurance
for it, however, in the interim
and
We've come to agreement on most
of the big ticket items for the
closeout plan on this mine, and
I'm anticipating we'll have a
permit in place next year and
start reclamation shortly
thereafter for the Saint Anthony
month.
The next line is and and I'm
sorry, the the Saint Anthony
mine is a mine that's the
responsible party is UNC United
Nuclear Corporation.
Another United Nuclear
Corporation mine is the section
27 mine found out in Ambrosia
Lake. Uh, this is a mine.
That is also that that's under
permit and we're
Right now they're, they're just
finishing up characterization
work because the mine had been
previously cleaned, cleaned up,
but it doesn't conform to the
standards of
The 2000s, we have a, we have a,
a joint cleanup guidance between
the mining and minerals division
and New Mexico Environment
Department and the, the cleanup
that was done in the past.
Doesn't come to this level, so
they're going to have to
basically re-clean up the mine
and then also some areas around
the mine that weren't identified
before uh this characterization
work for that area is, is being
completed within the next couple
months, and then we're going to
move forward with a more
comprehensive reclamation plan
for the section 27 line.
I'm gonna skip over section 12
because we actually have a slide
specifically for that one here,
uh, the next slide.
Um, so I'm gonna talk a little
bit about the old stoke leech
mines, which are Rio alga mines,
uh,
These mines are under permit
through the mining and minerals
division also.
Uh, they're also part of Region
Six's Trono settlement.
So we haven't.
We haven't really come up with a
comprehensive reclamation plan
for these mines until the EPA.
Makes the decision on, on what,
what's the EPA going to do? And
then what is the state going to
do on these mines, so we're,
we're we're kind of in limbo on
the old stove bleach mines.
There's 7 of those total.
The next mine is the JJ number
one and I'm sorry, the old stuff
leech mines are found in the
Ambrosia. The next line on the
list is the JJ number one mine
that is, that's a mine that was
associated with the Ear ill,
also north of Laguna Pueblo over
over in the subway at a land
grant near Bibo, New Mexico, uh,
Rio Tinto's managing this mine.
They're the responsible party,
and
As of now that the mine's been
reclaimed. Uh, there was some
erosion that was happening. Uh,
we have an erosion mitigation
plan which they're implementing
right now. I was out there last
week looking at some of the work
they're doing. And
Should be done in the next
couple of weeks. We're gonna
wait a year and make sure that
that work is sufficient.
Do one more vegetation survey
and uh of the minds on this
list, the, the JJ number one
mine will probably be the first
mine that'll actually get
released from the New Mexico
Mining Act.
So it's, it's almost there.
11 more thing to point out on
the slide if you just look at
the photo, all of these mines
are encompassed within that
photo on the slide there.
Flipping the wrong way on my
Here we go.
Section 129. Um, so this section
12 mine, we've been working for
a long time, uh, with the
operator under a director's
order. It's not a permit. We did
it through a director's order so
that we could move a little bit,
little bit.
Faster with the with the cleanup
of this mine.
Uh, since that time, the, the
operator had passed away and his
estate went into a trust, uh, so
currently we're working with a
trust.
Uh, the issue with this mine is
that
There's only so much money left
in in the estate. So what we're
doing at the mining and minerals
division is we're working with
the trust.
To clean up everything that we
possibly can with the money
that's left. Uh, we're hoping to
be left with a repository with a
temporary cover over it that'll
stabilize things in the interim,
um.
I see this mine as possibly
becoming part of the uranium
reclamation program, the work
that we do because it's gonna
essentially become abandoned
once.
They run out of money.
Um
We're in the last stage of
approving the final reclamation
for this site. So, uh, because
of the weather, I'm hoping that
the actual work that's gonna
happen on this site will happen,
uh, in the spring.
OK, you, Madam Chair, I will
just note on slide 10 that enemy
deed does permit the same sites
that we just discussed.
Um, under Ener's permitting
actions, and we hold abatement
and discharge permits for those
mines and the difference being
the discharge permit is put in
place to prevent pollution, the
abatement plans are put in place
to characterize the nature and
extent of the pollution and come
up with the
If you'd like more detail, you
can always go to Appendix A and
B of the final strategic plan to
get more information, detailed
information on the history and
clean up, um, status on each one
of those mine sites.
So that concludes the state
permitted site section and we'll
go ahead and move to the federal
actions.
On slide 11, we have
The Department of Energy's
defense-related uranium mine
program.
This is a large scale national
program that is conducting VNV
reports, um, they're called
validation and verification,
very similar to a site
assessment.
For all federal, tribal, state,
and private lands in New Mexico,
and they are hoping to complete
this work for state lands.
By the end of this calendar
year.
Um, they started doing site
visits um to to state sites more
recently and they invited our
teams to go out with them, and
so this year we started.
Going out to the sites, watching
their methodology and we do plan
to adapt, adopt a lot of that
procedural and methodology into
our own uranium mine cleanup
program.
This program does sunset in
2030.
And that means um it needs to be
renewed or it's a, it will be no
longer funded, but while we have
it, we are trying to get out
with Department of Energy for
collaboration as much as
possible. What you see on the
slide is.
A typical small mine site. This
is a typical neglected abandoned
uranium mine that um you see on
the right picture is about a 4
ft tall at it and the mining
material was
I did uh extracted.
Back about 20-30 feet and then
we can't see any further. We did
not go inside of it, but the
material was just placed right
outside of the mine opening, and
we could take radiation surveys,
um, to, to
To characterize how far that
radioactive material.
Went left the opening site.
And with that, I will hand it
back over to Mister Chisler to
talk about the Trono settlement
that was the billion dollar
settlement from a few years back
that.
was in part, um.
Push the 164 to help keep that
money in the state.
Thank you. Um, this slide here,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, I'm gonna talk about two
different EPA actions, uh,
regarding uranium work in New
Mexico, uh, the first is is EPA
Region 6. This is everything
within the Tronach settlement
that is um not within the Navajo
Nation. Uh, so they had 2020
mines in the beginning, all
these mines are in Ambrosia Lake
and 12 of them had surface
expressions, so those are the
minds that the EPA is currently
working with, um, there was one
that
answer mine that was reclaimed
uh by our, by our abandoned mine
lands program with BLM funding
in the past.
But enemyD and MMD have both
been uh closely closely involved
in this process, and we attend a
lot of meetings with the EPA
Region 6, and provide a lot of
technical assistance and, and
make sure that everything that
the EPA is doing fits the
regulations, uh, also of the
state, um.
So if you look at, if you look
on this map, pretty much
everything in the Region 6 Trono
settlement is in Ambrosia Lake.
This is associated with uh Rio
album,
uh,
Rio alga mining company. Uh,
there's a couple other mining
companies in the area, United
Nuclear Corporation and
Homesteke Mining, which the EPA
is also working with, but the,
the Trono settlement when people
speak of that, it's just
speaking about the Rio album
work. Um,
And like, like me already said,
it was about a million dollars
settlement about a little over
300 million of that went to
Region 6, and, and, and a larger
portion around 600 million
through Region 9, which is the
next slide.
So,
There's many sites on on the
Navajo Nation, uh, that are
associated with Tronox that the
EPA Regionine is working with,
uh, the ones that the state of
New Mexico is working with
directly is what's known as the
the uvea waste. Uh, these are
also known as the Church Rock
sites.
A little bit west and, and north
of Gallup, New Mexico. And then
if you go a little bit more west
and north of I-40, there's the
section 32, 33 mines. So these
two mines were, uh, the
responsible party is, is Rio
Alga, uh, that's who's
associated with Tronox.
And the, the reason we're
presenting on, on these specific
minds today is because the
waste, uh, so within the circle
process, uh, for these, these
two sets of minds.
The preferred alternative, um,
which is kind of towards the end
of the circle process.
The selected alternative was to
dispose of this waste in a
repository, uh, in New Mexico,
um.
The location that was identified
is near the Red Rock's landfill.
Um, it's not the repository
wouldn't be part of the Red
Rocks landfill. It would be on
land adjacent to it, but it, but
it is owned by the Northwest New
Mexico Regional Solid Waste
Authority. It's a governmental
consortium between uh grants.
The City of Gran, the city of
Gallup, uh, McKinley County.
County, is there another one?
And the village of Milan, so.
They, they've expressed interest
in having this repository on
this land and, and having it
permitted, because this land is
not near the Quvera waste or the
section 32, 33 ways, it's
considered off-site disposal to
the EPA. So it would be
permitted uh through the state
of New Mexico through MED and
the New Mexico Environment
Department.
Um
Right now within the circle
process.
This area near, near, near
Therou, New Mexico, uh, next to
the Red Rocks landfill.
was selected as the the
preferred alternative. Um,
currently the EPA is in their
2nd round of tribal consultation
regarding this. Next would come
the action memo.
And then after that would be
when the state would receive
applications for their
permitting process, um.
This has been a little bit of a
contro controversial thing and
political, so I can't speak to
what the action memo is actually
going to be, but that that is
where we're at right now.
With the with the work that we
do direct.
OK, thanks, Clint, um, to other
EPA led sites, um, the national
priority list or NPL synonymous
with Superfund.
There are 4 super fund or
superfund alternative approach
sites in New Mexico, NMED is
involved with 3 of them.
Home steak UNC church rock in
the central study area. We have
technical support for EPA on
those and but we do not uh work
on the Laguna Pueblo jack pile
mine site.
And I'll talk a little bit about
uh the the home steak mill.
In another slide, so.
Um, slide 15 is.
A little more positive, we do so
we have some cleanups in the
state that have occurred by
federal agencies, so the BLM and
the Forest Service have cleaned
up mines.
In the state and EPA is leading
a lot of cleanup on other minds,
so I just wanted to point out
that there is progress being
made. Um, I, I know it's not as
fast as everyone would like to
see, but.
But I did want to make a slide
16 is my only slide on Mills,
um, technically you're.
Nanamidi does not regulate mill
sites, that falls to the NRC to
do any regulation on
The beneficiation of uranium.
However, we do hold.
Permits at the Ambrosia Lake
West Mill, as well as the home
steak mill, and our teams are
very involved with coordinating
with the nuclear regulatory
commission, the Department of
Energy and the EPA on those
sites. Finally,
Um, in April,
Our state governor as well as
the governor from Arizona.
Governor Hobbs wrote a joint
letter to the Council on
Environmental Quality at the
White House.
And in that letter, they called
for
More federal coordination of all
the state of of all of the
federal agencies.
To tackle some of the largest
roadblocks facing our states
when it comes to uranium
reclamation.
The CEQ did respond.
Um, as I noted there on the
slide, we've had two meetings so
far with our agencies and.
This Council on Environmental
Quality staff.
And they are expecting follow-up
meetings later this month, um,
with the governors.
So the, the Council on
Environmental Quality is part of
the White House and they don't
typically get involved in this
detailed conversations, but.
The federal coordination and and
the federal working group was
formed 2 years prior, but they
had never had a facilitator for
those conversations. So the
governor's letter, the joint
letter from the governors really
pushed CEQ to get involved and
help facilitate those towards
more productive conversations.
So we look forward to seeing how
that goes in the future, and we
hope that the CEQ.
With, we thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Um, do we have uh
Senator Pinto
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Yeah.
Um
Oh
Listening to other present
I
These areas
We didn't test for anything
else.
Uh,
I can speak a little bit.
Um, so
It depends on where you're at,
but the, the major, um, so the
major constituent to to identify
the uranium is radium 226.
That's what, that's what's
tested for and the gamma
surveys.
Um, there's the testing of
uranium occurs mainly in the
groundwater. um, and then if
there's anything related to
milling, there's, there's also
uh some other elements that are
regarding the, the breakdown of
uranium and and that process
like thorium and caesium and
different, but.
So they're, they're, there are
other things that are being
looked at, uranium is the main
members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation. Um,
but also with your um website
and some of the data you
collected, the work you are
doing.
And
There's to that there seems to
be some pushback of whether it's
really valid data.
Um
And be really, you know, stand
the test of time.
And I think with that too.
Do we actually have it?
test that exists that will
really.
If you everything.
Um, instead of just doing one
test mean and as we move
forward.
Um, our economic development
comes in in further extraction.
Um, when we talk about
disturbing some of these areas.
That there could be other.
Even
I mean, we're, we're going out
into space now.
That didn't bring stuff back.
Or process or whatever they're
gonna do with it.
Um, do we have anything in place
that could really tell us?
Everything that's held in it
and.
And that's protection.
You
Good.
I, I can, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, what I
can say is that the work that
the EPA is doing is risk-based,
so, so they, they look at an
area and they'll they'll not to
speak too much for the EPA, but
it's, it's risk based, so it's.
It's based off of what, what the
future land is going to be used
for, and then they, they
determine the cleanup level. Um.
The state has guidance for for
cleanup, uh, but, but
You're correct that
What we're looking at on uranium
sites, uh, mainly is radiation.
That's what we're concerned
with, um.
There is other soil testing that
happens through the companies
and, and, and groundwater
testing through NMED that might
identify something else, but the
main thing we're looking at in
the state.
The the state process has, we
have parameters for what we say
is clean and what's not clean
and what level to clean it up
to. And it's all we base it off
of background levels of some
area that's like and and then
we'll clean up to a certain
level above that background area
and then call that clean and
safe. Uh, it ends up being very
close to what
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so that basic
foundation of this is what it
was before is gonna is entailed
into your data on this space,
this database.
Is it available there or are you
just doing the after.
After the fact.
If, if you wanted to, to, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, senator, if you
wanted to, if you want to find
the each site has a different
background area that it's
cleaned up to. You could use the
database to look at that site,
and then that would lead you to
the document that would say, so
the Saint Anthony mines being
cleaned up to this level because
this is the background level
that was identified in an area
near Saint Anthony.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you had a list of
the, the sites that completed.
The amount
Because when we talk about
putting funding into this other
fund. I don't think we really
got down to an amount yet.
Roundabout
Yes, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
that's a great question, and I
only have amounts for the forest
service uh Taffy mine, um, the
mine.
I can pull it up and there's 5
lines, those mines were
completed in 2016 and they cost
about $22 million. Um, they were
all dry mines and so the the
clean up costs for a dry mine is
gonna be a lot less. It's more
earthwork and earthmoving and
revegetation as opposed to a wet
mine where you're dealing with
groundwater contamination, um, a
plume that's moving that you
have to characterize the nature
and extent on. So when it a mine
is wet, it's significantly
increases the cost.
Um, so I would just say that the
the Forest Service cleans for
the 5 mines for 2 million is
probably a low estimate for
expanding that into the cleanup
cost Madam Chair, members of the
committee, do we actually have
anybody that even
gathering my numbers.
Um, for us even on
like a preliminary cost, OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. So I
just wanted to make sure I
understood the question, so we
have done some because we get
this question a lot and the true
answer is it depends on what's
at the site, how many features
do you have? If you have pits
and piles, it's a lot easier to
clean up than a shaft that's
3000 ft deep.
And so the, the variation is
huge, but we, we did try to
address this set up.
big scale. And what we did was
we found the Department of
Energy's estimates for.
The cleanup of dry and wet mines
and the size of it varied, um,
based on, it was defined by the
number of tons of ore that was
produced to each, so we had
small, medium, large, medium,
large and small medium
and um they developed what it
would generally cost in 2014.
Um, each of those categories.
So we forward moved that to 2024
and then we we extended out
based on inflation out to 2034,
and um just for the neglected
sites, so not all sites in New
Mexico, but just for the ones
that the state would have to
clean up where there's no
responsible party and there's no
other cleanup um action
involved, and we're not
accounting for staff time. It
was somewhere in the ballpark of
75 to $100 million there's only
in our neglected site list,
there was only 4 wet lines.
And so most of them were dry
mines.
Thank you, Senator Stein. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you both
for being here and thanks for
all your work on this.
We appreciate it.
So, just have some questions.
Number one, do you feel like the
fact that both your positions
are there and you're doing this
work that
If you see the ball moving
forward and the big 30,000 ft
question I always start with.
Yeah, thank you for the chair,
uh, thank you for the question,
uh, Madam Chair, and I think,
yes, I.
I don't want to toot my own
horn, but I feel very satisfied
that, you know, I have the
ability to see where there's a
roadblock, and I can go in and
try to move that roadblock out
of the way. Um, I really enjoyed
working with the federal
agencies and sometimes it's just
a matter of asking questions to
get things to move along. And I
was really excited that we our
state took it, took it to the
CEQ level took took a different
approach that's outside of our
normal processes, so I felt like
very, very satisfied.
that this is the approach we're
taking.
So, on that note, uh, Madam
Chair, now that we have a new
administration.
I would expect CEQ to look.
They'd be very different. Do you
think any of there will be any
Madam chair, I.
I can't speak for the CEQ and
the mops of the president, but
um, what I do know is that they
were trying to set up a
framework.
That could be carried forward in
another administration, whether
it was the Harris of the Trump
administration. So the framework
and I, I do believe that um the
conversations were happening at
the deputy level and you know,
at at the.
The more
Granular level, it's a lot of
the same players having the same
conversations over decades, um,
and so that gives me hope that
we can continue to have
productive conversations. The
other thing is that we, we've
had a lot of bipartisan support
of uranium cleanup. It turns out
most, mostly, um, everyone wants
to see you and cleaned up and so
we do have that going for us.
It's great.
Well, the, the main thing is
we're a main thing is the money.
And, and I, if I had any.
Disappointment with what we did
with the CEQ. It's that we
didn't ask about the money. We
talked about the coordination,
but we didn't talk about.
Where's the money? And
Um,
What's the plan right now to get
money for this fund to deal with
these abandoned sites.
Is there, is there a plan in
your world?
That you can talk about.
Thank you, madam chair.
Um, I, I'm hopeful that we're,
we're gonna try multiple
strategies, um, now, as with,
with the CEQ we we asked for
federal coordination because the
funding is one of the major
roadblocks that impairs it.
Another one is identifying a a
disposal site. So, so one of,
you know, the CEQ is is set up
to.
Set up the framework to to
address those issues. Um, we are
looking at different funding
sources right now, um, you'll
see that in Appendix C of the
strategic plan.
It may be
A different source of funding
for every single mind, um, now
we, we have, we're looking at
brownfields EPA funding.
We're looking at settlement
funds.
We are looking at going through
a title search and finding
responsible parties for the
cleanup.
And we're also
Um
Asking in the next legislative
session, our agency is asking
for $150 million to address
neglected contaminated sites.
Some of which are uranium sites
and so we'll try to make as much
progress as we can there, but
that money would be protective
of human health and it would
promote economic development in
the state as well, right.
Um, um, chair, thank you. So, so
we are requesting like a
supplemental 150 million.
You want to speak to that
channel.
for that house.
That's so good to hear, Madam
Chair, and I would, um,
Request that we consider if we
have we're able to do so if we.
A quorum develops here or
otherwise uh send a letter as a
committee endorsing.
This supplemental appropriation
request.
who the head of the LFC.
And the
finance.
Corporation Committee.
This is a monumental moment for
us. We have billions of dollars
of one-time money.
We have legacies, decades,
generations of contaminated
sites. It's a perfect use of
one-time money to finally
address these sites and shame on
us if we don't do it now.
So, um,
This is huge.
Kudos to the department, kudos
to you for championing this.
Both departments. So, um, and
the, the, the governor's office
for their work and the
secretaries and just can't thank
you all enough. A couple other
real quick questions.
Um
On page
For here it's page 4.
your presentation.
The listing of sites.
Is this land ownership is this?
Basically, the number of sites
and then which
Owner of those.
Of the land
Am I reading that right?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, the, sorry
for the confusion, that is the
surface land ownership.
But also then the number of
sites on those.
On that ownership.
OK, so 261.
That is really interesting.
And um within those, how do we
define a site as a site like one
area needing clean up or
multiple.
areas that need clean up within
a site.
But I'm sure, that's a good
question, and it causes a lot of
confusion because some people
lump them features into one site
and some people consider
features their own sites because
it's very hard to tell the
historical operations.
An enemy D and M nerd, so the
state agencies always like lump
it based on the operational site
features as one site, so there
might be um an added.
A pile, a waste pile.
An exploration trench, those
would all three features would
be one site in the state.
OK, so you're talking multiple
different.
Sites within a site.
That
OK, and the reason I asked the
question is, you know, we
started this work, the number
that would get thrown around is
1000 abandoned uranium sites,
but then that included multiple
little locations within a site.
Is that still kind of an
accurate number, Madam Chair, I
believe, I believe so, um, it
just, it's just a matter of how
you define a site
it's a really
Good.
Characterization cause each
little area may need to be
cleaned up with poor Tom. So we
ask these guys to do everything.
It was just multifunctional.
Team member here. Um
All right, so I want to ask you
a question about the drum
program on page 11.
Aside from, um,
Strongly objecting in the name
of their sight.
The redhead drum site. What's
that about? But anyway.
Um, we're a persecuted class, us
redheads. We really are.
But um
uh but I do have a question. So
the drum program dealing in
Defense-related, am I
understanding this to mean that
it only does this work on
federal and tribal lands. Is
that correct? No.
Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Steinborn. So the drum
program, they, they're, they do
these these uh verification
validations for uh
AUMs all across the west on
tribal, federal, state, and
private land. Um, they, I'm not
remembering it right now, but
it's based off a limited, uh,
uh, a number of or a certain
amount of ore production that
was sold to the Atomic Energy
Commission back in the day,
that's, that's how they decided
what they were, the DOE is going
to be responsible for.
OK, well, Madam Chair.
Let me, uh, I mean, this is
everything in New Mexico. Tell
me if I'm wrong, but it was all
events related, uranium was. Um,
madam, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinborn, a large portion of
it, a large portion of it was
defense related, um.
But not all of it. Some of it
was for energy, um, and some,
some are mix, but all, all of
these drum sites were, were, um,
Defense related.
From the DOE is taking
responsibility for. So what is,
thank you, ma'am Chair. So what
is this program pay for? Does it
pay for cleanup as well. OK, so,
um, Madam, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinborn, the drum program,
they're, they're doing the, the
verification validation reports
and before that, they, they had
a long process of doing a record
search to figure out what, what
there was. Now they're doing the
VMVs. They do have money for
safeguarding. Um, so that would
be like safeguarding it.
add it or anything that would be
uh dangerous for a human that
would get near it as far as like
a physical hazard, um, shaft at
it.
Large high wall or cliff. They
don't have money.
Allocated for cleanup, like
let's say there were some
radiation and some waste rock
piles, they don't have money.
OK.
So they do some assessment work
and some.
destabilization work to keep
There from being further injury.
People around it, but not kind
of cleaning it up.
All right. And so I, I guess
this is a pretty important
program for for what we're doing
in the day, yeah.
fair to say.
OK. And then I just have one
final question, Adam Chair,
which is the office of the
Natural Resource Trustee. So
given your work, Madam Truste,
if I may ask, the trustee a
question. How does your office
interact with these programs?
up.
I
short
Yeah, that's the one that works.
Madam Chair and Senator Simon,
thank you for that question.
The, the assessment work of our
office includes, um, as you
noted, a number of Nerda cases
uh with involving grants, mining
district uranium mines. We have
one active case, and we have a
strategic plan, um, that we have
actually spoken with um.
Um, Yuri in her office and other
uh other of the agencies
involved that we are looking for
um a.
Comprehensive, feasible way to,
to pursue natural resource
damage claims against viable
parties, um, so that they can
help pay us for restoration. Any
dollars that we would acquire
from those um those uh.
Assessment cases.
Would result in restoration
projects for that specific that
addressed that specific injury.
That's what all of our dollars
have to work. So any uranium
mining restoration dollars we
would eventually acquire could
go towards.
Restoring the the natural
resource injuries that are all
of these uranium mines including
the, you know, the, the, the
minds that that Mi and Clint
have spoken about, so we would
love to be able to say one day
that we are um
We have a funding opportunity
for that purpose. The um, the
other thing that um we would
like to note is that we also,
the Office of Natural Resources
Trustee also has a special
appropriation request, um, to
fund our um assessment fund for
the purpose of pursuing these
assessments. Um, the, the
uranium mining assessments are,
are going to be long and
expensive and as um this
committee knows the return on
our investment is pretty high.
But it's not a, it's, we need to
have the money to be able to do
this, what is your uh special
appropriation.
25 million.
Mhm. OK.
OK, uh, real, real quick, um,
Madam Chair
Um
But what, what um the workforce
solutions training have have
there been conversations with
them about
Thank you all.
Have there been conversations
with them about.
job worker training to do
cleanup if we got a bunch of
money.
They came out a chair,
absolutely. We um expect our job
training program to start in
February of 2025 and we are in
close, uh, we, we signed an MOU
earlier this year between San
College.
And Department of Workforce
Solutions to reach out to
candidates, create an
employer-led curriculum for them
that was um.
Supported by employers in the
industry to make sure that any
graduates do have a, a stable
career coming out of that
program. Workforce Solutions has
been great in helping us find
funding sources for candidates
so that it can be at no cost. So
those include the energy
transition Act funding source,
higher education department.
And uh Yowa, which is a
federally funded workforce
innovation and Opportunity Act
program.
Good work, y'all. Good work.
Well, finally, Madam Chair,
colleagues, uh the person, one
person out there I haven't lost
yet.
It's all about the money, so
hopefully, thank you all that
are pursuing money, but um,
The Federal government needs to
write a big check, right?
Very big check. All right, thank
you all.
Thank you,
good work.
OK, thank you. Um, I just have,
thank you for the report, um.
will have late, oh wait, we're
not done. I'm, I'm, I still have
questions. I'm sorry.
I was distracted.
Oh yeah, um, so thank you for
the report. We'll have great
late night reading and catching
up with all of this, um, but
also, um, do you know, well, you
do know, but um.
have
For Mr. um
Chisler, can you tell me what
does M nerds permit allow.
Madam Chair.
So
The mining and minerals
division, we, we permit mining.
So if it's an active mine, the,
the permit, if, if you're going
to mine in the state of New
Mexico, uh, uranium included,
you need a uh New Mexico.
Mining permit. So our permits
allow mining in those instances,
uh.
The main, the main reason for
the permit is the close-out
plan, which is
Put in place
With the full reclamation for
the plan as the, as the mind
progresses, and then we hold
financial assurance.
So if the operator were to walk
away, we would have a certain
amount of money to actually the
state would have to clean up the
site, um, thank goodness that's
not happened yet. But
So those permits allow for that.
But we also have an all the
minds that I talked about today
and in this position, um, we're
just the uranium coordinator
works solely with mines that are
under reclamation. So those,
those mining permits are
closeout plan, reclamation
permits, the, the permit the
reclamation of the site, so
that's we're not.
Those permits aren't allowing
more mining, I could say that.
Um, so.
Does the permit allow for
release of hazardous substances.
Uh, Madam chair, so the, the New
Mexico uh mining and minerals
division permit.
Just as an example on uranium
site, they would have to clean
the site up to a certain level
of radiation. It's, it's, uh, a
small amount over background.
It's an accepted level. Normally
that gets put into a repository.
And then the site is, uh, is
scanned again and we see that
it's radiologically clean for
whatever the post mining land
uses, normally it's like grazing
or wildlife, um.
Then we would hold the site for
we, we have a, we have a minimum
of 12 years that we can hold the
site. And during those 12 years,
we watch for erosion and
stability and the establishment
of vegetation. And then after
that point, if, if the mining
operator can prove that the site
is clean radiologically and the
erosion has been taken control
of and they meet the
revegetation standards that are
in the permit, then we would
release the mine site, um,
that's, that's what we're
looking at.
with uh JJ number one that I was
talking about earlier.
Um, so it sounds like the minds
can leave hazardous materials on
the site.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I mean, in a sense they
can because they're they're
they're buried within a
repository, um.
Because
The way, I mean, it's gonna have
to go somewhere. The issue is
nobody wants it where it is and
nobody wants it where you want
to take it to either, so which
is kind of what we're running
into with some of the cleanup.
I will say that.
Most of the waste of, of the
uranium mine sites in the state
is overburden, it's rock that's
what we call a non-economical or
anything that was economical
that could have been milled has
been shipped off and has been
mailed.
But there are piles left of
material that's what's noncon
economical. So we're cleaning up
rock and dirt that's.
It's not even good enough or to
be processed in a mill, but it
still is higher than the
background of.
Of an area.
Um,
so do you take into
consideration when you.
Um
Give a permit
Of
How that
Land is going to be.
Um, left with the hazardous
materials, some of it.
At that sight
Uh, Madam Chair, yes, we do, uh,
each mining permit has what's
called a PMLU, a post mining
land use.
So whether it would be, we want
this to be an industrial site or
we want this to be uh grazing or
wildlife, uh, we, we approve
those PMLUs so they don't just
tell us what they want the PMLU
to be. They apply, we approve
the PMLU and then it is cleaned
up to a state where it can can
reach that future use.
So do you do that PML use before
you permit.
The, the decision of what the
PMLU is going to be is through
the, through the permitting
process.
Um, now I can't say that most of
the mines we're talking about
had, they had begun mining
before.
The the New Mexican Mining Act
was in place, so we're trying to
figure out what to do with what
was done before there was any
state regulator. OK. Thank you
very much.
Any other
representative, thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chisler. Um, does
Emert have a list of defense
related uranium.
A mine sites and is that public.
available to
Um
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Saturana, is that correct? OK.
Um, we do that that's on the
dashboard. So there's like a
There's a big database that has
columns and and we, we, we went
through it and said, OK, these
are the defense related ones and
then that gets transferred over
to the uh to the actual
dashboard where you can click on
a site.
And, and you can actually see.
Um, if it's a drum site, it's
defense related.
Thank you, any other in the
committee?
OK, thank you very much. Can I
say one thing, Madam Chair, I
just wanted to say thank you to
the committee. I transitioning
into another position and we
just pulled the list yesterday
for the M nerd. It looks like a
good list, so we're going to be
interviewing and next year I'll
be in the audience.
Well, thank you for.
Your service. OK, we're now
going to take a short break, um,
