do in the Senator Hickey.
Uh, if you would please talk
about
Your proposed endorsed
legislation and begin with uh
citing the 202 number on the
bottom.
Begin reciting the 202 number on
the bottom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you members of the
committee for allowing me to
come and present this bill for
potential endorsement, the bill
is 0.229292.2.
And this relates to essentially
taxation on nicotine. Uh, we
have historically had a $2 tax
on cigarettes, um, and smaller
taxes on cigars, little cigars
and what have you, but what
we're looking to do,
particularly is the use of
nicotine and the delivery
methodology is now changing, and
we know this from surveys and
particularly this is targeted.
Uh
Any revenues from this are
targeted towards education
prevention in youth, and we know
from a new survey that while we
saw a dramatic increase in
uptake of vaping in high school
or in middle schoolers. Uh, we
now know that they are moving
from vaping in school where
there are smoke detectors in the
bathroom, and they can therefore
get caught so vaping is outside
of school, but they are moving
in droves to the pouches.
That they simply slip in, uh,
between the uh the gums and, and
the cheek and get their nicotine
that way.
The, um, so this bill is to
cover nicotine delivered in
virtually any form to equalize
it. We have no taxes on these,
uh, other methods of nicotine
and as I presented it in
different committees over the
last two years, nicotine is the
gateway drug to addiction,
nicotine is what impacts the uh
Craving area of the brain, uh,
as well as giving a momentary
high, it does have a letdown
afterwards, but it is a very
addictive drug, and again, it
builds that uh craving pathway
that is building that is
connecting between the frontal
lobe and the rest of the brain
in the teenage years, and so
while it's not smoke per se
damaging lungs. It is nicotine.
setting up for other addictions,
and as you probably know, Mr.
Chair and committee members, uh,
New Mexico has a highest
alcohol-related mortality, uh,
in the country, and it's double
the national average. Uh, we
have an addiction crisis on our
hands. We know that. We know
that from the work being done
this summer, this is where it
starts. It starts with nicotine
addiction in the teenage years,
and we know from several
s t ud ies that the best
Uh, method to reduce nicotine
uptake is to increase the cost.
Most several states have been
very proactive in this and it's
essentially almost a straight
line correlation between the
higher the cost, the less the
nicotine uptake. So we're
presenting this bill to, and I'm
gonna have my experts here with
me or have them introduce
themselves in a moment, uh,
about the specifics and, and
we've been working with Ms.
folks uh to try and get this all
down pat, but basically it's
kind of an equalization across
the board of nicotine delivery
system, uh, on cigarettes, it
goes from $2 a pack to $3 and
then about 67%, uh, the
wholesale price on all other
nicotine delivery systems, and I
believe I have that correctly.
I'm getting a nod that I do. And
so, uh,
Uh, this, again, the additional
moneys appropriated here would
go to nicotine education and
prevention between 5 and 25
years of age, uh, there is a
attack on at the end of the
bill, which was in bills
previously, uh, an appropriation
for enforcement to go to RLD,
um, if that ultimately is
something that we feel should go
into some other appropriation
mechanism, we're very willing.
to talk about that, but again,
uh, we can write all the laws
that we want. I was just at the
OSI for enforcing behavioral
health parity. Um, they have
done a tremendous job with that
money, and they are about to
start enforcement and it's just
basically being ignored by the
health plans. It's the same case
here. This has to be enforced,
and without enforcement and
helping enforcement, um, it,
again, it's just, it's
It, it's a law on the books, but
uh it's not just simply a law on
the books as mental health
parody might have been. It's
actually because the cost goes
up, the uptake is going to go
down, and we're gonna help
prevent other addictions for our
children as they age into
adulthood. And with that, uh, we
will stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator. Let's open
it up for questions or comments
from the committee, uh.
Looking around the table.
Questions or comments from the
committee.
Nobody.
OK,
no one has any questions. I'm
looking at Scott, I know he
always just quit. Representative
Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, how did you settle on
the increase.
Uh, the, the increase for the
67% of wholesale price is uh
what we've seen other states who
are effective in uh decreasing
the uptake of nicotine products
and then to equalize that, uh,
we increased the uh cigarette
tax from $2 to $3 per pack.
And again, this is what we're
learning from other states, and
again, what other states have
taught us is that the higher the
tax, the lower the uptake. And
again, this bill is really
focused on youth.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator, do
you have any peer reviewed?
studies that you can point us
to.
Uh, we will, we will support
that position, we will provide
those to you, uh, Representative
Scott.
OK, uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
as a rule, I
A few tax policy as a method to
collect taxes, not engineer.
Social thing.
Responses.
So from that standpoint, I am
Skeptical, but I will.
Certainly be with willing to
listen to the rest of it.
conversation. Thank you, sir.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
questions or comments? Vice
Chairman Campos, uh, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the committee,
and of course, Senator Hickey,
thank you for being in this, uh,
bringing this piece of
legislation forward, just, just
a few questions whenever it
comes to, if you will, the uh
The taxation and if you will,
the fiscal aspect of this is we
deal with these type of bills,
and of course we don't have a
fiscal impact report before us,
but have you or uh possibly your
experts calculated some of what
the revenues would be, uh, as a
result of this particular piece
of legislation, if it was uh uh
passed.
Um, last year when we had a bill
to just do vaping and knowing
that vaping is going down and
nicotine is a pouches are going
up, that estimation was about $5
million so that would be in
addition, right now under all
the taxes as they exist, about
$5.3 million go to the
Department of Health, uh, for
prevention and education, uh,
the CDC has a recommended amount
to spend.
Or every state in the country,
um, back in 2020, that was about
$20 million for New Mexico, so
we're estimating that since then
inflation is probably about 25
million. So we would then have
out of this at least $10 million
to work on the prevention and
education component. So, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Hickey, as we
move forward, then the other
aspect as we deal with, if you
will, some of the recovery.
some of the benefits for
education, uh, what's your
concept in terms of
How we're going to use these
resources for the recovery and
treatment aspect and also the
educational aspect.
Uh, in the educational aspect to
start first uh Senator Campos
and Mr. Chair. Um, there are
several programs now, uh, that
are particularly attuned to Gen
Z. Um, I'm not attuned to Gen Z,
uh, multi-social media programs
myself, so I can't give you uh
all the specifics on that, but
during the tobacco, uh, revenue
settlement oversight committee
this summer.
We did hear about a number of
those programs I don't have
those folks from the Department
of Health, uh, they have a
candidate to fill the new PAC
director position, and it's an
offer is out, um, and hopefully
that individual will be brought
on board, but they, they
subcontract with a number of uh
regional uh education programs.
Um, we have also asked them, and
as it says in this bill to work
closely and uh through
As directed by the Department of
Health, both PED and HED, um,
uh, particularly PED, um, have
agreed to work with them to have
programs that fit the uh middle
school, elementary school and
high school, and HED, uh,
there's a program at UNM that
the other universities, uh, now
use and so there would be more
money to get that education, uh,
particularly.
at that very formative time as
as well, um.
The um
and you, you asked about
The distributions to, I'm sorry,
I refresh my memory so Mr.
Chairman and and Senator has
moved forward, how would you use
the distribution of these
resources for education, uh, and
then for also the advocacy if
you will, as we work towards the
recovery in some of these areas,
right? The, um,
Pretty much by the time someone
has reached their twenties, um,
if, if they're gonna continue uh
to smoke, they're gonna continue
to smoke. There are definitely
programs in the Department of
Health, uh, that give access to
patches and help people in
quitting, uh, and so those would
continue as they do, but again,
the, the, the big payoff, the
big ROI if you would have it,
uh, Senator Campos is in
preventing youth.
And uptake and again the, the
best tool to do that is
demonstrated by many studies in
other states is to raise the
price. So thank you very much
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Hickey, as we work directly with
uh RLD if that's gonna be the
case. Have you talked to anyone
there and it would $500,000 be
enough to administer, if you
will, the enforcement of uh what
you're indicating within this
piece of legislation.
Uh, thank you, Senator Campos
and Mr. Chair, for that
question. Uh, no more, would
definitely be more, good, I
mean, more is more, and it would
be helpful. Um, this figure was
arrived at in preceding bills is
kind of a potential compromise.
They take the money, they work
with uh the state police, local
uh departments where they have,
they employ you to go in to buy
and they don't get checked and.
for their age cause you have to
be 21 and then they go on and
inside them and uh there are uh
a level of penalties that are uh
put together progressively, um,
more punitive in in the monetary
sense and also uh closing down
for a period of time, I can't
recall all the details, but they
said $500,000 would go a long
way to helping them to get the
local.
Department state police to bring
people into this enforcement
methodology. So, so, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Hickey, as we,
uh, and this is going back, uh,
several years, and of course
into the future as well as we
deal with resources coming in
directly to the general fund,
uh.
It seems like we continue to
earmark and that continues to
create a a significant concern.
However, the issue that you're
dealing with here uh has a high
level of validity, and as we, we
know in New Mexico, it
definitely is an issue and uh
your efforts to continue to
address that are, are, uh, to be
well commended and really
appreciate that. That's all I
have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Let's move to Senator Tollman.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Doctor Hickey for being
here and trying to do something
to improve the health of the
Mexicans. So,
Where do we rank among the
states.
Now, and where would we rank if
this
legislation is enacted.
Thank you, Senator Tom and I, I
think I get the gist of your
question, uh, I think, and I
would turn to my experts, um.
That we rank quite low.
Um
I where this would put us, I
can't give you a specific, but
less low.
If that, but I do, I, I've
turned to that for more
specifics. Mr. Chair, Senator
Tom and Linda Siegel with the
American Cancer Society, Cancer
Action Network right now for
cigarette taxes at $2 a pack, we
are 20th.
And the list, and we are at the
very close to the bottom in
taxes on other tobacco products,
so I think we're in the 40s or
something with other tobacco
products were very low. In fact,
some other tobacco products we
don't tax.
Oh, thank you for the answer,
and I have one more quick
question, Mr. Chair.
Uh, what percent do you have to
raise the tax in order to have
an impact on use.
Um, I'm, I'm now regretting that
I didn't bring the studies with
me. Um, I, I can tell you that
as you go from state to state,
as you see a higher percentage
of tax, you see less uptake.
There is a core, there is a
significant correlation between
the two. So, um,
Again, uh, the, the, I mean,
this, this bill has two
purposes. One is active
prevention, education, which uh
I understand from folks who are
in Gen Z, the, the, uh, I'm
beginning to understand social
media after my election
campaign, something I never
understood beforehand, but after
I saw the 280,000 people did a
full 15 2nd uptake of my
positive ad, um, it
It can be I'd say, wow, this is
pretty powerful stuff, so I'm
sure that it is with them and,
and so that is one part. The
other part is to say, you know
what, I only got so much money
to spend this week and uh I'd
rather spend it on clothes or
whatever rather than on uh
nicotine. And again, that's what
the other states bear out for
us.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all I have. Thank you again, uh,
doctor, for bringing this uh
legislation forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for bringing this uh
legislation for endorsement. Uh,
quick question, you mentioned
about the drop in, uh, vaping
usage, I believe, in the
schools, and, and that might be
the case. I.
I do substitute and I still see
it's still an issue. And so I
just wanted to confirm with this
still increase the taxes on
vaping products that contain
nicotine, will it still address
that issue as well. Yes, uh,
Senator Pope, it, it would, and,
and you're correct. I was
recently at El Dorado, and they
were saying, yeah, there's a
smoke detectors, but sometimes
you go into the bathrooms and
they're just, it's like walking
into a fog in London, so yeah.
But yes,
this would tax.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
just think it becomes an issue
where it's still a product where
you're not having to have an
open flame and smoke and and so
it's still being used. So that's
all I have, Mr. Cher. Thank you.
center, let's go to senator.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for bringing this
again. I just want to
understand, so, so basically
there's 3 different categories
here. One is cigarettes, we're
going from $2 to $3 a pack.
Uh, we're redefining tobacco
products to bring in the
All the different
versions of what used to just be
a vaping and explain.
But we're shifting the, the tax
there from 25%.
Of the product value to 67.15%
of the wholesale price, just
walk me through the, the fur
packs really easy to understand.
I just wanna make sure I
understand exactly how that's
going to work the wholesale
price.
Versus the product value, um,
thank you, Senator Worth, the,
the wholesale price versus other
pricing methodologies is a great
topic of discussion between um
the uh legislative council
service and my experts and I'm
going to turn this over to my
experts to answer that question.
Go ahead.
OK.
Mr. Chair or Senator Wirth.
So
The basis of this bill is to
make cigarettes, taxes, and
other tobacco product taxes
comparable, so that people don't
go from one to the other right
now, we know that a lot of
people go to the other tobacco
products which are
Not taxed in some instances and
very low in others. So the 67%
is what
Legislative council figured out
through LSC, I think, to look at
the
Price or to look at the
wholesale price of all these
products, and then raise them so
that that.
That comparability with
cigarette taxes and other
tobacco products is achieved.
And
That's as far as I can explain
the formula.
So Jared, that's important
though. I mean, it's trying to
set up.
Kind of similar.
threshold increase, so.
I mean, for, we're going up.
2 to 3 is what, 33% increase on
cigarettes. I mean, is this a
similar comparable?
Overall, I mean, I, the way you
get there is through the
wholesales is complicated, but
basically what I'm hearing, the
seagulls, it's the same.
Kind of in that range of
Increase is, is that fair? Yes,
yes, and then, Mr. Chair, the
third is cigars and little
cigars.
So they're in their own
category, I mean, are we, is the
price, and I remember this.
Magically showed up in the 2019
tax package.
Uh, is this increased from
What was it 25, 50 cents per
cigar to $1.50 per cigar. I
mean, is that a, that seems like
a bigger potential increase
percentage wise, uh, so I'm just
curious about where those
numbers come from. Um, Mr.
Chair, Senator Wirth, I, I'm, I
think.
We couldn't do the percentage on
cigars. I mean, here's the
rationale from the cigar
companies. There are $400
cigars, right.
hard for me to imagine that, but
so putting a 67% tax on the
wholesale price of that cigar
might make that cigar.
$200 more. So this is like a
total compromise that
We probably don't like, but um
that that works with the reality
of the cigar situation.
And Mr. Chair, I appreciate that
because I know this is one of
those issues that we heard a lot
from constituents about final
thing I just want to, when, when
we did this, when we did pieces
of this in 2019, uh, the, the
then vaping industry continued
to come forward and say, oh,
there was some compromise that
could be reached, I know.
During the omnibus bill 2 years
ago, Senator Hickey, I think at
one point you thought you had an
agreement. Uh, have you been
working with a tobacco industry
folks, um.
And have any input from them on
this bill. Uh, for this specific
bill and the timeliness of being
able to get it done in front of
committee. Um, I have not had
any direct discussions with
them. Uh, I understand that I
need to have those discussions
with them, and we'll have those
discussions, uh, there may be
some, uh, room for compromise
here. No question about it.
Uh, the
Impetus for the bill as you know
for me from 2 years ago and 1
year ago, it's, I'm trying to
save kids from uh uh uh an
adulthood of addiction and when
there's an addiction in the
family, it causes ACEs for the
whole family.
And that's what I'm trying to
prevent. And then people then
after the ACEs, medicinally
treat themselves with
Whatever alcohol, fentanyl, I
mean, it just goes on and on, so
that's the origin of where this
is coming from, and again, you
know, where we have to make
compromises, but again, this is
for the, the health of New
Mexico to say nothing of the
future expense and chronic
disease.
Mr. Chair, I really appreciate
that and I think actually the
A broader definition of tobacco
product is super important
because again, this is one of
those that
Push down in one place and it
just moves to another, so I
think you're, you're on to
something with that. So again, I
really appreciate the work
you've done on this and I'll
certainly vote for this
endorsement. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Let's go to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
A couple of things about this.
I'm, I'm interested in and, and
um I apologize I didn't hear it
this summer. I was recovering
from an accident that I had.
Um, on the, on this bill, is
there anything particular that
would change how um people who
are not upholding the law.
Is there, is there anything
particular to that that uh
different penalties, shut them
down from being able to use that
or sell that product or anything
in that.
Korea.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Duncan, um, I can
give an overview to that, but
I'm gonna turn to my experts to
give it more detail.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Duncan, I think, uh, the
e-cigarettes, the FDA approved,
I think 30 of them, 30, 33 of
them.
Uh, that are on the market, but
There are thousands of
Products that have not been gone
through the FDA process, but
they're in market and they're
made locally.
So it's, it's really impossible.
To determine how many products
are on the market because they
keep changing.
And what this bill does is, is
redefines what a tobacco product
is.
And that includes synthetic
products, synthetic nicotine
products, and natural nicotine
products and which we currently
don't tax at all.
And these are the most popular,
you know.
Products on the market by the
kids and, you know, the, the new
product right now, it's called
Smart Wave.
And it's got a video games on
it.
And you have to puff it.
To play the game.
And these cost about $12 and
then you get discounts.
And so it's got anywhere from
5000 to 10,000 puffs capacity.
So
The these products are not taxed
right now, so we're we're trying
to encompass all those new
products that are not taxed and,
you know, California and other
states are taxing these, and we
feel like the state is losing
the revenue on it.
And so, I mean, it's only 30
products are approved by.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
guess, I, I guess I go back to
what I've said before, um,
We have lots of money. So if
you, if you needed the money to
take care of.
Be it advertising education, we
could get that money from
somewhere else, another pocket
that we have. Oil and gas does a
great job for the state, but if
we're not going to and, and if
we're not going to be able to
tax those other
000 or however many um other
things are out there then, then
how are we going to solve this
problem?
I mean, if they're going to
continue to, to be able to be
sold to our kids and that's
where this starts. I've never
been, never smoked tobacco in my
life. I don't want to. And I
feel horrible for people who do
get addicted. But if we're not
going to stop it at that teenage
years, then, then what are we
doing?
That's precisely what this bill
is doing because it would, even
though they aren't a registered
product, they're still sold and
they're still subject to the
tax. And so this brings those
the vape and the pouches that um
are sometimes manufactured here,
pieces come from China. I mean,
there's all sorts of ways that
literally 6000 and um
But they still, there's still a
wholesale price being paid and
that price will be taxed at the
67% for all of these products.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am
I, I, I guess I would feel that
there would be a reason for
another bill to come forward
that would maybe make stiffer
penalties for those who are
selling it to minors or getting
it into the hands of miners as
well. Uh, I think that's one of
the things I've heard today and
so thank you for that.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and Mr. Chair, I will take that
uh under consideration as the
bill moves forward into
committee hearings during the
session, but I, uh, that's my
own personal, um,
Belief that there should be
stiffer penalties, um.
And uh I, I know an area that I
am an expert in mental health
parity. Um, when in Illinois,
when an insurance, Blue Cross of
Illinois, I believe, violated
the provision of their state law
and mental health parity. This
is one provision, there was a
fine of $500,000 that, that was
more than a shot across the bow
to the other health plans in the
state about the seriousness of
mental health parity. So I think
in some ways.
You know, I, if it's workable,
some concept where we had some,
or at least uh 2 or 3 times that
there's a very significant
penalty, but thank you for that
suggestion, representative.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Let's go to Senator
Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I've been off, I'm sure there,
I've had the opportunity to sit
on that tobacco settlement
oversight committee for a number
of years.
As we get more data.
Um, we're, we're not getting
better. We're getting worse. We
talk about access for smoking
products, especially for our
young people.
Um, I have a, a daughter who's
in middle school.
So, I hear daily what's
available and what happens in
the restrooms in the hallways
outside before the kids get on
the school properly.
Um, it's crazy.
And we
I understand that there's a
freedom for people to be able to
smoke if they so wish.
However,
In order to be able to provide,
I think, education and a
deterrence, you know, any other
words you wish to use for our
young people.
It is education, but it hits the
pocketbook.
And if you raise the prices and
the data is there, Mr. Chair,
um, we've heard it so many times
in in test rock.
Over the years, if you raise the
prices, it does reduce use.
And if we can take care of a
generation of young people who,
I mean, it, it's crazy for what.
What they do to market to the
young people.
And nobody's immune from it.
I'm, I'm grateful that mine,
she's refused the offer.
It's there. And I just hope, Mr.
Chair, that during this session
we really pay attention to this
legislation, I think it's the
right thing for us to do, and I
know we're not alone in doing
this across the country, um, but
I just wanted to give that plug.
This is the right thing for us
to do, Mr. Chair.
It's good and benefits us um for
later healthcare issues that we
have to pay for.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Representative.
Uh, Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the sponsor and um.
today I, I was a sponsor of this
bill, one of my first bills that
I did. So how many iterations
have we had or how long have we
tried to pass this type of this
bill, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and representative,
um,
I don't think anything happened
in 21, that was my first year,
but in 22, 23, um 24. OK, 2020
and before I was around, so I
think it's, there have been
different variations of this for
quite a long time. Um, this
particular focus on youth
started in 23 and 24.
Um, so we're coming back and
thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
I'm asking that, so, um, from
that time, even from what you
know, 4 years ago that I, I was
working on this bill to present
time and how things have already
evolved and changed in usage.
What is their language in the
bill that is adaptive to those
changes, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and Mr. Chair, the, uh,
essentially there is a
definition of tobacco products,
which covers everything that uh
is any type of nicotine delivery
system. Thank you. And great, so
I and I would agree with um.
Representative Duncan on and
looking at this panel, well, he
his perspective is penalties
with with the regulation aspect
of theirs, is there any
guidelines or regulation, um,
language in this bill. I'm
sorry, I don't have the the bill
in front of me, but I'm familiar
with it.
Um, the, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair and uh Representative too,
um.
Uh, the, the regulation is
essentially put into place
through the uh education,
prevention, etc. in the
Department of Health and there
are programs, we would, uh,
again, like to get through the
Department of Health, through uh
the Department of Finance to the
uh PED and HED uh regulation
about building the program, the
educational materials, so it is,
there is
regulation within, particularly
the DOH that uh applies to this
and also I should note that
there is money, uh, and we're
trying to coordinate through the
Tyro committee, there is money
in the HCA uh for Medicaid, and
they also have um prevention,
treatment, uh, for people uh who
are already, uh, addicted to
nicotine and uh so forth. So
yes, there is, there is
a lot of regulation, uh, that
applies through both uh
departments at this time. Thank
you. And my last question, Mr.
Chair is what is the pushback
that you've had in these last,
these recent years on this
legislation.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Lujan and Mr. Chair, uh, the
pushback on it is, um, you know,
it, particularly for people who
live in poverty, um.
Why are we, why are we taxing
and making it difficult as they,
as, as this is a medicinal uh
approach to deal with all the
things that that poverty brings,
and so, you know, I understand
that concept and so I think it
becomes a concept of
What has uh
What has priority here and the.
The emphasis I'm trying to bring
Representative Lujan is the
health of the children and, and
the families, uh, probably even
though things are, are
absolutely very, very difficult,
uh, and impoverished situations,
but to save our kids from the
aces and so forth and the
addictions. My judgment is that
has priority, and, and I do have
the bias of the coming from a
clinician. Absolutely, and
would, I would just emphasize
some of the discussion we have
here and some of the the
statistics and numbers that um
we are looking at as a state
that has the highest, some of
the highest addictive, uh,
addiction rates when we're
talking about the opioid uh
crisis we're in, and when we're
talking even about the um,
alcohol, which is even higher
than the the opioid fentanyl,
um.
issues we're having in our
state, but we do have higher
than national uh rates, uh, and
so to work from a place where we
can address this, uh, at the
start of usage and addiction, I
think is why I support this
legislation and have in the
past, so I mean.
We will try again this year, and
I wish you the best, but, uh, I
just wanted to make sure that
those points are covered as this
is growing and things are
changing. I think online
regulation is absolutely
necessary, but I think that's
going to come from our federal
government. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan,
I just did an observation under
your observation. You're just
spot on here. Um, this is a
nuclear reaction and it starts
with the absorption of nicotine
that builds the addictive
pathways. And so other
addictions will be impacted.
In a good way, reduced by not
having exposure. Thank you for
your observation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey. We
come to the end of our list. I
have a couple of questions
perhaps comment on that
question. I want to just first
commend you on the work that
you've done thus far in regards
to bringing attention to a
problem that plagues New Mexico.
And as you talk about it in the
way that you, you've done so uh
this afternoon, we talk about
we're trying to create education
for those children so that
they're not placed into an
adulthood, um.
Issues that lead to where you
talk to about a gateway drug to
other drugs, correct? And so
when I think about that, I think
a lot about, you know, certain
aspects of those people that are
already afflicted by addiction
to nicotine, right? And, and you
touched on this a little bit
about the, the equity part about
are we focusing on them to raise
all the money so that the kids
will be saved, or are we looking
at raising the, the tax, the
kids don't have the money to buy
these.
Harmful products. You know what
I mean? So I think there's a
number of ways to look at things
and ah a a part of my comment,
or maybe this is the question
is, uh, and they will touch on
a.
Comment made by Representative
Duncan is, is, have you talked
to um the Department of Health
in regards to putting more money
towards a program like this. If
we know that it's a problem
today, why should we try to push
to pass a tax.
If we know it's a problem. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. That's an
excellent question. Um, I could
take up the rest of your
afternoon, explaining how the
tobacco revenue settlement funds
are uh appropriated and then,
uh,
Dispensed in all the different
places and it gets into the
university and moving some of
that money out, um, but the
amount of money basically when
you go through all that
regulation and all that
complexity, we're still ending
up in the Department of Health
in terms of this funding at 5.3
million to prevention. Now there
is some prevention money that
goes in through Medicaid, can't
recall that number. It's, I
think it's like 3 million or
something again, still pretty
small.
Um, if, if we could get, if we
could appropriate money, uh,
from the, uh, tobacco fund, the
way that it's settled every year
and it has to do with how much
money comes in through the
settlement, and when the money
that's produced by the fund
exceeds with the settlement
money is for that year, then
more money comes, but if I
remember, did I explain that
correctly? Um, to my friends in
the taxation, um, until we get
there, we're still kind of
stuck.
would love to put more money in
direct tax wise, but that
opportunity has not afforded
itself. OK, thanks for that
explanation. I just, if, if we
have an issue, that's an issue
today, let's not wait till
tomorrow to try to fix it, uh,
by, by passing a tax, which in
this case has gone on for many
sessions as according to our,
our colleague Representative
Luhan, um, finally, I will ask a
question on page 12, you talk
about your exemptions, and you
talk about uh.
Section A, subsection 2 related
to Native Americans. Talk to me
a little bit about how that
works.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, in my experts
and correct me if I'm wrong. Uh,
I believe that they have
historically been exempt, um,
from this tax if it's sold on
the res and that's, that's been
here since long ago.
And, and so, and if, if we can
check with the tax department,
then, uh, do tribes still have
to pay tax or establish your own
tax rate for for cigarettes if
you're trying to increase this
rate here in the state.
I believe, and again I'll turn
to my experts that that is an
autonomous activity up to the
each individual tribe, how they
deal with that, and they are
exempt from federal tax as well,
right? I guess so my my question
then further uh evolves into
when there are signs um at a
reservation saying tax-free
cigarettes.
That is the truth or is not the
truth.
Um, Mr. Chair, I would have to
defer to each sovereign nation
in terms of how they market that
and what it really means, um.
The, I mean, essentially, if
they're not taxing it
themselves, um, then I guess
it's tax-free. If they are
taxing it or they have a
roundabout way to put a tax on
it through, you know, some sort
of transportation tax of the I
have no idea, but I'm sure
they're very clever ways that
they could generate some
revenue, but again, that's up to
each sovereign nation.
Uh, thank you, Senator, and, and
just to go back then to uh page
12, section A, you talk about
the product value, striking that
out and going to the wholesale.
So you're taking it from the
retail and putting it at the
wholesale, the tax, correct?
Uh, that's correct.
Um, I have another question or
comments, uh, anyone else?
Serve
Has, uh, thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman, just, uh, for a
second time and to uh go back to
one of the points that you, you
raised, but when it comes then
to providing, if you will, the
education and going back, if you
will, to the sovereign nations.
Uh, how do you, uh, intend to go
and participate so that
people that uh would also be
affected by, let's say for
example, the adversity of what
we're dealing with.
Uh, how do we, how do we deal if
you will, with those sovereign
nations as well, for the
education and if you will, the
uh the prevention and, and
hopefully the recovery.
Thank you, Senator and Mr.
Chair, uh, I would certainly
Uh, hope that all of the
educational materials that we
are able to purchase if in some
way, they, they should be made
available through the Department
of Health and PED to the tribal
uh entities that would like to
make use of them, uh, I don't
believe that there's a purchase
of them, but I think a lot of
them are there it's a matter of
just them having the desire to
want to utilize them, but
again is a decision I believe
they have to make.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you at
this point in time, Senator
Hickey is here to uh seek some
endorsement on his legislation.
What is the will of the
committee?
I make a motion.
These emotion made by Senator
Wirth is there a second?
2 by sinner Stephonics, uh, is
there any opposition or should
we take a role? OK, let's, let's
call for a role of, we'll begin
with um
Let's just
Do.
Just voting numbers, OK, if I
know who's a bully member here.
Can we call it, uh, Martin,
please? Thank you.
Senator Brant, Brandt says no.
Representative Duncan.
No.
Representative Duncan says no.
Senator Pope
Yes, the Pope says yes.
Representative Scott.
So Scott says no.
Senator Stephonics.
Nurse Stefano says, yes, Senator
Wirth.
And says yes.
Senator Campos. Yes.
Narcopo says, yes,
Representative Monte.
Yes.
Monte says yes, we have 5 in the
affirmative, 3 in the negative,
has endorsed the bill.
Thank you very much. Thanks,
Senator.
folks, next on our agenda, we
have the revenue forecast here
with us this afternoon as
Secretary for Tax and revenues
definitelyharon Clark. We also
have Wayne Props, secretary for
the Department of Finance and
Administration, uh, Leo Delgado,
who's the chief economist for
the DFA's also invited as well
as our own Ishmael is Torres,
chief economist for the
Legislative Finance Committee.
folks, whenever you're ready in
whatever order, the floor is
yours.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be here with you to
to present the revenue estimate,
um, for some of you, this will
be a 2nd time receiving this
presentation from LFC last week.
Um, I'll be taking us through
the macroeconomic forecast and
really kind of focusing on
what's changed in the
macroeconomy from the August
forecast till the new December
forecast. Talk to you a little
bit about some of the underlying
data in our larger revenue
streams, and then turn it over
to Secretary.
probes to give you the general
fund outlook that comes out of
that, and then third, um, Izzy
will go through the LFC brief.
Alright, so starting on slide 3
is just a reminder of who puts
together the consensus revenue
estimate. It's put together by
career economists of 4 agencies,
Taksin Rev, Department of
Finance and Administration,
Department of Transportation and
legislative Finance Committee.
On slide 4 as an overview of the
baseline forecasts, um, that are
put out by some subscription
services that we use as, as a
state. Those are mainly Moody's
analytics, S&P Global, and UNM's
Bureau of Business and Economic
Research, and so just high
level, um, the Moody's, uh,
forecast is came out in October
and at that time they were
anticipating one more rate cut
by the Fed, uh, in addition to
in November.
with another rate cut here in
December. Um, they were
expecting inflation to reach the
Fed's target of about 2% by
early 2025, um, real GDP growth
was anticipated to be a little
stronger in the near term as
interest rates fall, um, real
GDP for the US economy is
expected to increase by 2.7% in
2024 with moderating growth of
2.3% in 2025, 2.1% in 2026, um,
but
A trend that you'll hear over
and over again through the
macroeconomic data we're sharing
is that we've we'll, we'll
expect to see growth tapering
off and flattening over the next
couple of years in the forecast.
And that's both the US and the
New Mexicoeconomies. I'm turning
to S&P, they assumed two rate
cuts from the Fed in 2024, um,
inflation again reaching that 2%
Fed target in 2025, just a few
months later than Moody's
expected it, um, again, they
have a flattening expectation
for national GDP growth, um,
2.4% in 2024, 1.6% in 2025.
And then, um, they lowered their
national unemployment rate peak,
uh, it's expected to peak at
4.6% instead of 4.8%. So in
general, the national economic
baselines are just a little bit
stronger, but the trend is is
that we will expect to see
tapering, flattening growth.
Um, UNM's Bieber, similar story,
um, they slightly revised up the
baseline because of a couple new
months of stronger data than
expected, but they have lowered
their expectation for growth,
um, from 0.3 to 0.2%.
Um, and a note for when uh
Secretary perhaps speaks later
about the baseline forecast
risks, all of this, uh, these
baselines came out before the US
election, and so there are some
risks associated with changing
federal policy around trade,
immigration and things of that
nature.
Turning to slide 5, I'll dive
into some of the data, um,
slide, let's see on slide 5, the
the the solid line is the new
forecast, the dotted blue line
is the former forecast that we
presented to you back in August,
and so you can see that recent
data came in a little stronger
than expected for US GDP growth,
and so they have revised upward
the level of GDP, but the curve
or the the rate of growth is
about the same, roughly
unchanged. I'll go on to the
next.
slide and look at a similar um
slide, but now focusing on the
New Mexico economy. We've got
real gross state product and
again New Mexico's recent months
of growth were higher than
expected in the August forecast,
so we've revised up the uh
baseline forecast, but again,
we're expecting flattened
economic growth in the forecast
period.
Some of the leading contributors
to New Mexico's gross state
product growth right now or
wholesale trade, finance and
insurance, arts and
entertainment, and
manufacturing.
Slide 7, we turn our attention
to employment or job creation,
and so for total non-farm
employment. There's just a very
minor slight upward revision,
um, we've heard for months on
end that the US economy
continues to add more jobs than
expected in past months are
often revised upward, and so,
um, again, we've just seen a
slight upward revision to the
expectation for employment,
which is important for the
revenue forecast because it
funnels into wages which funnel
into personal.
And then on slide 8, we look at
the same data, but for New
Mexico, and again you just have
a very slight upward revision in
the employment forecast for New
Mexico, um, growth averaged 844
jobs per month in calendar year
24 in New Mexico, employment
grew by 2.74% in calendar year
23 and we're projected to see
that flatten to 1.5% growth in
calendar year 24.8% growth in
25.3% growth.
26.
On the next slide, slide 9, we
delve into employment changes by
sector in New Mexico. You can
see that across all sectors, we
added 12,600 jobs between
October 23 and October 2024, and
then we've broken out the job
growth and contraction between
each sector, manufacturing had a
very strong year, um, gaining
3.2% or 900 jobs, um, financial
activities were also strong, as
was mining and state government
and and on.
down the list. I won't cover
those all in detail.
Going to slide 10, we compare
the unemployment forecast, uh,
for the US economy and the New
Mexico economy, and again, um,
you know, we're glad to see that
the New Mexico unemployment rate
did not reach nearly as high as
a spike during the COVID onset
as the US economy did and um and
that we're basically tracking
the national unemployment rate
in New Mexico right now, of
course, we'd like to be lower,
but being on par with the
national rate is something that
New Mexico didn't.
achieve and always in in decades
past, so we're happy to be
there, right, about equal to the
national unemployment rate.
On slide 11, we provide some
expectations for inflation and
interest rates. Again, the Fed
has been reducing the target,
reducing the Fed funds rate
target a few uh 0.5% rate cuts
per year, and we expect 1 to 2
more rate cuts in the calendar
year, um, with the Fed funds
rate coming down to a target of
about 2.2% as far as inflation
goes, inflation has moderated
pretty significantly since the
COVID and post COVID period.
Gasoline, uh, decreased by 12.2%
um compared to October 2024, so
energy costs are part of what's
uh easing off and causing
inflation overall to come down,
but the inflation in housing and
shelter remains one of the more
stubborn areas, and we know that
housing affordability, we, we
see that every day in our
communities, so that is, um,
leading to stubbornness in the
national inflation.
Picture.
Onto slide 13, we'll start to
turn our attention now to some
of New Mexico's largest revenue
sources, so we turned to oil
prices. Um, we'll go through oil
price and volume production and
then turn to natural gas. So,
um, one area to, to note in the
new forecast as we have brought
down the expected price per
barrel of oil by $6 per barrel
in the current fiscal year,
fiscal year 25, and so it's come
down from uh expectation of
$76.50.
cents in August to $70.50 now,
but you'll hear a little later
on in the presentation that, you
know, in years past before
putting in some of the um
strategic ways that our revenues
distributed outside of the
general fund, we would have
really felt that volatility
firsthand in the budget year
that you're about to consider
appropriations for, but now
instead that $6 downward
revision to oil is actually
gonna be coming out of the set
asides that we that are putting
away for things like um the.
stabilization reserve, the early
childhood Trust Fund, the
severance tax permanent fund,
so, um, very notable and we'll,
we'll talk about that more in
the, the slides.
On slide 14, we look at um the
relationship between oil prices
and then production and rig
activity in New Mexico. So as
always, there's always a strong
relationship between prices
causing more the higher the
prices, the more rig activity we
see in New Mexico and the more
rig activity, the more we see
produced. It also feeds in very
much into the gross receipts tax
and then the oil and gas related
taxes. So just charting that up
on the top left, um, as far as
Williams expected to be
produced. We have a slight
upward revision, uh, in FO 25,
we've come up from 735 to 745
billion barrels are expected to
be produced, and then a slight
downward revision in FY 26 and
27 onto slide 15, we're looking
at natural gas, and for the
natural gas forecast, um,
You know, it's one of the market
factors that's important here is
that with oil remaining at
record high production, we also
expect to see natural gas
production remain high because
the natural gas is coming up
along with the oil, and so
natural gas production forecast
has increased to a high of
33,000,570 BCF in FY 24 and that
was produced at an average price
of $3.16 for MCF.
And we expect again the natural
gas production to follow the oil
production, um, trajectory a
little higher, and prices are
expected to moderate, uh, due to
Um, continued supply growth in
the outyear's natural gas prices
are expected to gradually
increase as US demand increases.
All right, turning on slide 17
will turn our attention to the
grocery receipts tax, which of
course is the single largest
general fund revenue source. Um,
you can see that the growth
rates, um,
really moderated in FY 24, not
so much due to underlying
weakness in the New Mexico
economy, but because of
legislative implementation, uh,
we intentionally reduced the
gross receipts tax rate, and so,
while GRT revenue grew by 15% in
FY 23 that came down to 2% in FY
24. In the out years, we expect
GRT revenue to grow at a pretty
moderate 4 to 5% tapering down
to about 3% in the out years.
The FY 25 forecast increased by
73 million compared to the
August estimate and for FY 26
and 27, uh, the estimate adds
114 million to the forecast in
FY 26 and 103 million for FY 27.
Onto slide 18, we kind of break
out some of the growth in the
GRT tax base by industry, um,
you can see um in the chart on
the right, the construction
group, it's a, it's a large
sector of the GRT and it also
grew very strongly at 7.3%, uh,
another strong growth was in
professional scientific and
technical services, um, and, and
on down. We only had contraction
in a couple sectors, um,
So construction, manufacturing
and professional and scientific
and technical services currently
there are some of the most
dynamic sectors.
Oil and gas extraction GRT
growth uh based grew by 1.1% in
FY 25 quarter 1, which is, is
much more moderate than growth
was a year prior at 6%. On slide
19, we delve a little deeper
into the taxable uh the GRT
based in just Eddie and Lee
County because it's such a
strong factor in the overall GRT
base for the state. Um, you can
see the growth that occurred in
Eddie and Lee in different
industries over the last 3.
school years, so really strong
growth as expected in mining,
uh, came up, um, that was, that
was, it's the largest sector in
the base and it also grew the
most.
Um, quickly, as well as trade,
transportation utilities, which
is closely related to mining.
On slide 21 will start to um
share some data on the personal
income tax, and similar to what
I said a moment about about GRT,
you know, we saw a 12%
contraction in personal income
tax in FY 24, but again, that's
not signaling weakness in the
New Mexico economy. It's it that
is really reflecting
implementation of legislative
changes, tax cuts. So for FY 24,
uh, we do estimate that pit
contracted by 12%, um, part of
that also is
an accounting shift uh between
the way that pastor entity tax
is being shown. It was
previously accounted for in the
personal income tax, and we've
moved that to the corporate
income tax. Um, it has to do
with, uh, the form that passed
through entity, uh, taxpayers
are using, they're using the sit
form, it's much more streamlined
for them to report it under sit
and we feel like that's a just a
a more um likely place to put
it. So you have pit coming down
190 million, but corporate
income tax.
was revised by the same amount
to offset that, um, but there's
also legislative adjustment
included in there for FY 25,
we're expecting an 8%
contraction in personal income
tax again, having more to do
with legislative changes then
weakness in the base. For FO 26
and 27 for budgeting purposes,
um, if we 26 we're forecasting
3.9% growth, which is up a
little over 1% from the August
forecast and for FO 27, we're
increasing 3.8%.
growth, again, up 1% from what
we previously expected. On to
slide 22, uh, we've got some
data on wage and salary outlook
in New Mexico, of course, uh,
wage and salary comes to us
through withholding tax on
everyone's paychecks. And so
it's a great leading indicator
of what's going on in the
economy and with the tax base,
and so you can see the strong
growth year after year that
we've experienced in withholding
and um the first quarter of FA
25 again exhibits strong enough
growth over the.
2 were basically again just
reiterating that growth is
expected to come downward um
slightly uh to the 4% range,
wage and salary growth in the
budget years.
He slide 23, and we provide some
detail to the committee on
legislative adjustments that
have been reducing the amount of
revenue collected, um, mostly
reducing and one legislative
change that's adding revenue,
that's the narrowing of the
capital gains deduction, but um
the main contributors to that
are um the child income tax
credit that we already spoke
about this morning. Also we've
got the pit racket reform that
was enacted last session, uh,
clean car tax credits.
Social Security exemption, all
of those are contributing to a
lower pit revenue, despite
having strong economic growth
going on in the base.
Next on slide 25, um, we'll
focus a little bit on those
outside of general fund
distributions of oil and gas
tax. I mentioned when I gave the
oil price forecast that oil is
expected to be down $6 per
barrel, and to kind of put that
in context, a rough estimate
that is $1 in the price of oil
would reduce state revenue by
about $50 million. So $66 300
million dollars in the old days
before some of the changes
That have been made in statute
that that take that windfall
revenue outside the general
fund, we would have been coming
to you saying maybe oil revenue
is expected to be down 300
million, and GRT and Pitt are up
a little bit, so it's, you know,
might have been a bit of a wash
or maybe the sky would feel like
it was falling, but instead
we're about to tell you that
actually the oil revenue to the
general fund is going to be
unchanged because it's still
above this FY 24 baseline level.
So we'll feel that instead
coming out of these
distributions that are shown on
slide 25.
Um, rather than receiving the,
the amounts that would be going
to the severance tax permanent
fund and the um early childhood
fund and the tax stabilization
reserve, they are going to
buffer the general fund from
feeling that reduction in oil
revenue. It's a wonderful job
planning, and I think it's, it's
worth all taking a moment to
recognize the efforts that went
into that, that make your
budgeting cycle, much less than
with that. I'll turn over to
Secretary Prost. Uh, thank you
very much, Madam Secretary. Mr.
Secretary, please proceed.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr.
Chairman. My name is Wayne Props
with the Department of Finance
and Administration, uh, as is
usual for this presentation, I
get to give you the good news,
and, uh, happy to be able to do
so once again.
Uh, start off on slide 27. I'm
gonna go through this the next
few slides pretty quickly, um,
and Mr. Torres is going to cover
a lot of this more in depth, but
uh 527, Secretary Shadon Clark
has covered a lot of uh the
information on the slide, but I
do want to point you to the 4th
bullet under uh in FY 25, uh.
Investment income for FY 25 is
estimated to increase by 11.3%.
That's part of the remarkable
story that Secretary Chardon
Clark was just describing on the
previous page.
Uh, it won't be too long, uh,
hopefully, and almost certainly
within my lifetime, uh, that the
The most significant contributor
to the increase in our revenues
will no longer be oil and gas,
but it will be investments on
earnings on the investments that
you have made over the last 2
years, and in particular through
Senate Bill 26 that was passed
two sessions ago.
Uh, that's an incredible story
for the state of New Mexico and
again incredible, incredible,
uh.
Story for the legislature to
tell uh Mr. Torres sitting to my
left, often gets credit for a
lot of that along with Senator
Gonzalez, who carried Senate
Bill 26.
but Izzy's the first person to
give the credit to others as
well, including uh Miss Stokes
on your staff that worked on
that legislation and have
continued to work on legislation
since then to ensure that as
Senator Wirs said to sessions
ago, we take some of the
windfall that we have right now
and don't spend it all, but put
some of it aside for the future,
and it's uh
I'll just keep repeating,
repeating myself. It's really
remarkable, remarkable story.
On slide 28, uh, Mr. Chairman,
uh, this is what most people
tune in for, uh, what is the
total new money that the
consensus revenue forecasting
group is projecting for the FY
26 session, that's represented
in this graph on the, on the
very top uh under uh above FY 26
estimates, the total uh new
revenue is $892.3 million.
That's generally the pool of
money that we look at as
potential reoccurring money uh
during that you have available
to appropriate in the upcoming
session.
Doesn't all have to be
appropriated as recurring, some
of it could be appropriated as
non-recurring.
Perhaps some of it not
appropriated at all, um, but
overall the recurring budget uh
increase that we are expecting
for the upcoming legislative
session is $892.3 million below
that, you'll see that we are
also estimating there's
approximately $2.5 billion that
can be appropriated in the
upcoming session for uh
non-recurring uh purposes.
Slide 29, Mr. Chairman.
members of the committee, um,
I'll draw your attention to a
couple of things, uh, in each,
in each of these blocks under FY
24, uh, most notable is that at
the end of FY 24 general fund
reserves are estimated at 3.16
billion or 33% of recurring
appropriations.
You'll see under FIA FY 25 box,
Mr. Chairman, uh, would
highlight that general fund
recurring revenue.
Uh, is, is estimated to increase
slightly by 1.6% in FY versus FY
24, I believe when we presented
this consensus revenue forecast
to the LFC and to this committee
in August, we're expecting a
0.2% growth, so slightly better
growth than anticipated in the
August consensus revenue
forecast and for FY 25 reserves
are estimated at 3.92 billion or
38.4% of recurring
appropriations.
that's uh before we start
appropriating in January, uh,
and finally, Mr. Chairman, it's
not in this uh noted in this
box, but uh above the uh about
the August consensus revenue
forecasts, we are now estimating
that there is an additional 2.
247 million in non-recurring
revenue that can be appropriate
in the upcoming session as well,
uh, from Flight above FY 25
August uh forecast.
Overall, Miss Chairman, FY 26,
as I mentioned, the total uh new
money, 892.3 million in August,
we reported that figure at 659
million, so a difference of 233
million more in the consensus
December revenue forecast.
Slide 30 is generally a
duplicate of the slide before,
so let me go ahead and skip this
chairman to slide 31.
As Secretary Sheridan Clark
mentioned the consensus revenue
forecast group does a lot of
analysis of both downside and
upside risks to the forecast.
Uh, I won't go through all of
them. Some of them are quite,
uh, quite obvious if oil prices
uh, end up being lower than we
are projecting, that would have
an impact, but they're also
upside, uh.
Possibilities as well, perhaps
oil and gasses comes in higher
than what the consensus revenue
forecast is for, for this month
and this point in time.
But we do, uh, as Chairman and
members of the committee, I
think it's one of the most
important things that the
consensus revenue Group does,
um, it gets together, uh.
It establishes as a baseline
that both the executive and the
legislature can work from, uh,
but it also, uh,
tries to help inform
policymakers such as yourself as
to what some of the downside and
upside risks to the forecasts
bar.
I'm gonna
Go to the next two slides cover
kind of a follow on uh is is
stress testing.
Um
We run 3 different scenarios.
One that's a slightly more
optimistic scenario, we have a
moderate recession scenario, and
in our worst case scenario is a
lower oil price scenario.
And I really want to kind of
draw your attention, I guess
it's more on slide 33, but if
you look on slide 33, you'll see
that red dotted line that kind
of goes down, and then sort of
starts to go back up the very
smaller dots.
That's the worst case scenario
under the stress testing that
the consensus revenue Group
does, and you'll see that even
under that worst case scenario.
The, we have more than
sufficient revenue coming in to
cover all of the recurring uh
expenses that you have approved
to date.
reported many times because I
said it a couple of times, but
this is where I, I say, even
under the worst case scenario,
we're not going to have to force
state agencies to go in and
start looking for dimes and
nickels and cushions.
Uh, and selling off assets. Uh,
this is almost in some respects
as a, as one of the chief budget
officers for the state of New
Mexico, almost too good to
believe, but again, as a
testament to the hard work that
has been done by the
legislature. I like to think
that the executive has
contributed to it as well.
Uh, to ensure that the
incredible revenue picture that
we've had for the last few
years, and that continues while
moderating into the future,
uh can set New Mexico up for not
only uh next year's fiscal year,
uh, but really potentially for
decades to come, and so I wanted
to point that out on slide 33.
Um, slide 34.
It
Slide 34, Mr. Chairman, uh,
members of the committee, uh,
this is where we talk a lot, a
little bit about how in the
actions that have been taken by
the legislature and the
executive.
Uh, over the last few years.
Have
Added stability to our revenue
forecast, um.
In simplest terms as chairman on
slide 34, when you see those two
lines diverging, that's
instability, that's revenues not
matching up with expectations.
But when you see them coming
together, that's stability, uh,
and again, the work that we've
done have led and demonstrated
by the consensus revenue
forecast, the work that's been
done, uh, has taken a
significant amount of volatility
out of our revenue forecast.
Largely because again, we are
starting to rely more and more
on other sources of revenue
including those investments or
return on investments that I
mentioned at the beginning of my
presentation.
And less on oil and gas, which
we all know can be a
Somewhat volatile revenue
source. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, I think that wraps up
my section and I'll turn it over
to uh Mr. Torres. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. Secretary, and
again, uh, please proceed. Thank
you very much, Mr. Torres. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon.
Um, I'll be speaking to the LFC
brief titled Money Matters with
the Blue Header at the top. I'll
give you a second to, to change
over there. Looks like you got
it.
Awesome. Uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, as the secretary
has mentioned, this revenue
presentation looks a lot like
the August presentation. If you
look at the chart at the bottom
of page one, this is the growth
trajectory we are currently
estimating in blue, and our
previous estimate in a light
gray, and you can see these are
pretty much the same line, other
than the FY 25 blip, which is
slightly higher in the current
estimate, and that really leads
us to our estimate of about 2%
higher than where we were in
August. So, ultimately,
Uh, uh, margin of error for us
as economists, but what that
translates to in terms of budget
numbers for you all is about
$200 million. So not
insignificant, um, revision up
there. And what that translates
to is an estimate of $13 billion
in FY 25 and FY 26 revenue
estimate of 13.4 or excuse me,
13.6 billion in FY 26 and 13.3
billion in FY 25.
And compare that to where we
were in August, we had a small
decline in FY 25 again about 2%
higher this time around, and the
same can be said for FY 26.
And what we're looking at is uh
shown graphically in the chart
in the middle of the page there
titled Revenues Less
Appropriations as Secretary
props pointed out, the blue line
represents our revenues, the red
and the green represent the
collective appropriations that
you all made during the previous
session. And so the difference
between the revenues estimated
and the total appropriations
made last year is $892 million.
So if you all were to make the
same amount of non-recurring and
recurring appropriations, you'd
have $892 million.
and surplus, or that's the
additional amount that could be
available for you all to spend
on top of the previous
appropriations made last year.
Um, if you turn to page 2,
What this translates to for the
state's balance sheet is about
$3.2 billion in reserves, or 33%
in FY 24, about 38% reserves
estimated in FY 25 as Secretary
Props mentioned before, any
spending in the upcoming
session. So we certainly expect
that amount will be uh much less
than the 38% after the session.
Uh, if you look at the chart at
the top of the page here, this
is a representation of where the
revenue growth is coming from in
FY 25 over FY 24. You can see
the gross receipts tax is a
large contributor to the growth
in general fund year over year,
income taxes, um, as
Secretaryharon Clark mentioned
in her earlier presentation
before lunch and then just now.
Legislative changes made to the
income taxes resulting in those
uh decreases along with some
other changes. And uh Secretary
Per mentioned interest earnings
is really the driver of general
fund growth in FY 25, and as
we'll see here in a couple of
pages in the out years as well
as those investments began to
spin off more and more into the
general fund. So GRT and
investment income, the largest
contributors to general fund
growth. And there you have the
$200 million in revenue growth
in FY 25 over FY 24.
Um, I'll, I'll quickly move
through the economic forecast
because Secretary Sean Clark did
a great job. I'll point out the
chart at the bottom of page 2
shows US consumer prices growth
rates, so that's inflation, a
measure of inflation. You can
see our expectations from the
previous estimate.
In August in orange, and the
current estimate in blue, we are
seeing better, uh, progress on
inflation in the near term, this
year, and we also expect that to
continue into the next year,
although we do expect it to be
about the same moving on from
there.
If you turn to page 3,
Um, I'd like to draw your
attention to the chart in the
middle of the page. I find this
one particularly interesting.
It's the growth rate, the year
over year growth rate for New
Mexico compared with the rest of
the country in the Southwest
average, and you can see that
after the pandemic, actually New
Mexico was leading not only the
region, but also the country in
terms of employment growth, um,
all the way through 2023, about
midway through 2023, that that
slowed down for New Mexico and
the Southwest A continued to
exceed New Mexico's rate, and
New Mexic.
is currently pacing with the
national average when it comes
to employment growth, um, but
that is slower than the rest of
our, our peers in the area. So
that's something of a new
development and something we're
keeping an eye on. Uh, if you
look at the chart at the bottom
of the page, more good news
here, uh, wages and salaries for
New Mexicans has continued to
grow even faster than we
expected in August, and that's
contributing to an increase in
our expectations for personal
income taxes. Moving on to oil
and gas, if you turn to page 4,
you all are very familiar with
this sort of miracle.
here in New Mexico, where you
can see uh New Mexico, North
Dakota, and Texas and uh New
Mexico's oil production.
Skyrocketing over the last 5
years, uh, to become the 2nd
largest oil producer in the
country, but maybe more
Starkly is the oil production
growth rate since 2017 shown on
the bottom of this page, New
Mexico almost quintupling oil
production in the last 7 years,
uh, much higher than the rest of
the oil and gas producing
states, and now contributing to
about 50% of the total oil
production growth in the country
coming from New Mexico.
Um, we do expect that oil
production growth to slow down
considerably, sort of the same
story in oil and gas as we're
seeing in personal income taxes
and gross receipts taxes. We've
had record high growth in the
last, um, handful of years, but
we are seeing that slow down for
oil, uh, we saw about 30% growth
in production in 22, almost 24%
in 23%, but we've seen that come
down to about 8% in 24, and we
expect that to continue to slow
to below 5% in 25%. And again,
heading towards that nominal
rate of 3.
to 4% in the out years.
As Secretary Shaon Clark
mentioned, the downward revision
in prices is offsetting any
revenue gains we would expect
from increases in production, or
an on net decrease in revenues
despite that, uh, growing
production, as I'll speak to
here, a little more in a second.
Moving on to the gross receipts
taxes, um, Secretary Chardon
Clark pointed out that Eddie and
Lee counties are, of course,
growing in in importance to the
gross receipts tax for the
state, and we can see how that,
um, why that is in the pie chart
at the bottom of page 5, you can
see Eddie and Lee now
representing almost 1/3 of the
total gross receipts tax
collections for the entire
state, of course, um, largely
driven from activity in the oil
and gas industry.
Um, we're seeing the same story
here of slowdown in economic
activity, we actually
experienced over 21% growth in
FY 22, that slowed down to 14%
in FY 23, and then the 6% in 24%
and we expect that to keep down
shifting in 25 and beyond. But
despite that 6% growth in 24, we
actually only saw about 2%
growth in the revenues
collected, and that's because of
that gross receipts tax rate
reduction that took effect in FY
24. So, um, the total
collections were a little lower.
than the total activity growth.
Um, but if you look on page 6,
here's another representation of
the charts that Secretary
Sheridan Clark, um, went over
with you all. We're seeing our
growth. If you look at the chart
at the top of the page here, top
of page 6, our growth in 23 and
before that was largely coming
from the mining sector, almost
45% growth in the gross receipts
tax coming from mining, that's
slowed down considerably in FY
24 to below 5%, and we're now
seeing our gross receipts tax
collections being driven by
construction and professional
scientific and technical
services.
So you can see that represented
at the top of the page, but also
demonstrated in the table in the
middle of the page, you can see
the, the percent growth in each
industry on the far right
column, but the nominal growth
and their contribution to total
growth in the middle column
there year over year growth, uh,
mostly coming from construction
and professional scientific and
technical services.
OK. Uh, if you'll turn to page
7,
These are similar charts, uh,
that were presented in the
executive presentation, um, but
I want to spend a little more
time digging into that decline.
So the sum of these bars, the
blue bar plus the green bar,
plus the orange bar. That's the
total revenue collected for each
of these revenue categories. So
at the top we have the oil and
gas emergency school tax at the
bottom, we have the federal
mineral leasing payments, which
are also oil and gas, um,
revenues to the state. And you
can see that the total bars
actually declined from FY 23 to.
FY 24. And we also expect them
to continue declining from FY 24
to FY 25, and that's because of
that price reduction, even
though production's increasing
the decline in global prices for
oil is decreasing total
collections from oil and gas,
um, uh, my, my quick back of the
napkin math was something about
$700 million. So as Secretary
Chaon Clark pointed out, if
these distributions to the early
childhood Trust Fund or to the
severance tax permanent fund
didn't exist, that would mean
that the general fund would be
experiencing that much of a.
in these years as prices
decline. And so that's something
that we've avoided that you all
have avoided by the
implementation of these
stabilizing mechanisms, these
distributions to other funds
from these revenue sources.
And what's that, what that's
translating to on page 8.
At the top of the page, you can
see the source of general fund
revenue growth by category.
And you can see, uh, by and
large, the largest growth in the
general fund is coming from
what's labeled here as interest,
but it's investment income
that's distributions back to the
general fund from the permanent
funds, and also from the state
treasurer's office, and that
growth rate, um, as Secretary
perhaps mentioned is about 11%
in the near term, but it
averages about 12% over this
forecast period. That's 3 times
more than the average general
fund growth rate across all of
the other categories. So a
significant source of revenue
growth, and it is also
Uh, based on a study that we
did, uh, over the interim and
presented to you all the most
stable source of revenue in the
general funds. So not only is it
the most stable, it's also the
fastest growing, which is really
good news. Um, for budget
planning and budget development.
But one new source of volatility
is that old source of volatility
is, is being addressed through
distributions to the permanent
funds and those stabilizing
mechanisms. There are a couple
of new sources emerging, um, and
you all may remember this from,
I, I believe July, the
volatility analysis that we did
for you all, one of them is the
state treasurer's office
earnings, you can see that state
treasurer's office earnings to
the general fund in the middle
of the page here. You can see
just how volatile that revenue
is on a month to month basis.
Some months it can be a
positive, almost 100 million
dollars, and that can go quickly
go negative in any given month,
almost $60 million to the
negative, so it's a draw down
from the general fund. And what
that translates to is a
significant amount of
uncertainty that, of course,
I'll get into here in a second,
but, um, uh, uh, it means that
Very quickly, this revenue
source, which is a, a boon to
the general fund can become a
dragon, like I mentioned, I'll,
I'll get into that a little more
here shortly.
If you turn to page 9,
These are, uh, income taxes
represented in the graph at the
top of the page, the orange
representing what we estimate
our collections would have been
had tax changes not been put in
place over the last um 75 years,
I guess, and then the blue
represents where we're currently
estimating now. So you can see
reductions of almost a billion
dollars for income taxes, and
that's uh revenue going back to
New Mexicans there.
Um
If you turn to page 10,
This is a, uh, another source of
volatility for the general fund,
um, coming from reversions from
state agencies or versions from
appropriations that were not
spent during the fiscal year.
What we're seeing though is that
actually recurring
appropriations are not a
significant source of
uncertainty because agencies are
spending, continuing to spend.
About 99% of their budget. So
what we would expect in a
typical year is that about 1% of
recurring a little more than 1%
of recurring appropriations
might be reverted to the general
fund, and we're seeing that hold
true if you look at the graph
that will share of recurring
appropriations reverted. So it's
holding steady to about 1%. Um,
we had a little bit of an
increased uptake in FY 22, but
that's since come back down. The
real source of volatility coming
from reversions is from
non-recurring appropriations,
specifically appropriation.
made for non-recurring purposes
that aren't being spent by
agencies. You can see that
represented in the graph at the
top of the page in the orange
bars.
Um, moving on to forecast risks,
uh, as Secretary Props mentioned
the number one or secretary
Shaon Clark, maybe both of them.
The number one risk to the
forecast remains oil and gas, as
she mentioned, about $50 million
in revenue affected for every $1
price change. That's obviously
a, a significant risk to the
forecast based on um global
market dynamics. Uh, another
significant risk is, of course,
a recession. We do expect the
likelihood of a recession has
been declining over the last
several years, so that's a sort
of
receding risk to the forecast.
We also expect inflation in
federal policies to be a growing
risk to the forecast. If you
look at the bottom of page 11,
there's our expectations for the
federal funds rate, that's
highly dependent on the path of
inflation, we do, um, we are
watching closely for any changes
in federal policies like tariffs
that could increase inflation,
which would reverse the trend
and the direction of the federal
funds rate, which would be a
significant risk to the forecast
for many reasons. Um,
But also, we are watching
closely for any changes in in
spending at the federal level,
which could be significant
impact to New Mexico. New Mexico
is the number one recipient of
federal funds, um, per capita,
and so any pull back in federal
spending could be a significant
risk to New Mexico's economy and
of course, uh maybe a particular
interest to you all, the
extension of the tax cuts and
Jobs Act, which is set to expire
in the coming year. Um, we do in
this forecast expect that that's
extended, but if that is
different, that would certainly
change what we're estimating for
you all here.
OK. Moving on to revenue
volatility, the bottom of page
12, here's a graph representing
the volatility of the major
revenue sources in the general
fund, the yellow line represents
the state treasurer's office.
You can see that it's actually
on the right axis, it has a
volatility score of 1000.
Compare that with oil and gas,
which is sitting around 30. So
you can see how much more
volatile the state treasurer's
office distributions to the
general fund have become as the
size of their investment.
have grown, but also as um uh
federal interest rates have
risen sharply. But another
significant source of volatility
is the corporate income tax. It
scores about 80. The corporate
income tax is highly dependent
on the oil and gas industry in
New Mexico. So of course, as
that industry shifts and and
moves, so do our corporate
income tax collections. And so
those two are now the largest
sources of volatility in the
general fund.
OK. Moving on to page 13.
This is the stress test that the
Consensus revenue estimating
Group does for you all, and
What we have here is a little
bit of a different
representation as Secretary
Props mentioned the red line
shows the most severe downside
scenario, which is a low oil and
oil and gas price crash, which
of course results in lower
production and that has it's um
knock-on effects as well. But
what we've done here is tied it
to spending levels, the blue
bars represent recurring
spending, and you can see in all
of these scenarios, the, the
worst case does not cut into the
recurring spending. So that's
certainly good news. But we do
See that it could cut into
non-recurring spending
represented in the gray, if
those are maintained at the same
levels, you will have a, a
revenue below total
appropriations, and what that
results in is represented on
page 14.
The graph at the top of the page
here shows how much revenues
could be below, uh,
Um, spending levels if spending
remains constant. So with no
spending growth,
How far below appropriations
would revenues be? In FY 25, we
see that's over $600 million in
FY 26, that would be over $1.4
billion for a total of about
$2.1 billion. So in this
scenario, in this low oil price
scenario, how much cash might
you need to have on hand to
cover the appropriations you've
already made, and it would be
about 2.1 billion with no
additional spending. So for
example, if you were to spend
100% of the total new money,
$892 million you would add that
to the 2.
1 billion, that gets you to
about $3 billion in cash on hand
if you didn't want to have to
pull back any of the
appropriations that you all have
already made.
And funny enough that maybe not
funny enough, that for with
reason is about 30% uh would
translate to about 30% reserves,
which has been the reserve
target that you all have
typically in the past couple of
years targeted.
Um, moving on to the trend
analysis at the bottom of page
14. This is another good tool
that the consensus group uses to
um gauge maybe how far we could
fall, how far revenues may be
trending outside of the norm
and, and sort of the unease that
that that comes with a revenue
estimate outside of the norm.
You can see that our revenues
have been trending back towards
the trend. So, uh, we previously
had been significantly above
trend, and that was a source of
concern, as we expected, it
could come back down.
We are seeing it come back down
in a moderated way, not in a
crash, so that's certainly good
news. But if you turn to page
15, we can see that the source
of the return to trend is coming
from severance taxes. So, of
course, that was the source of
above trend revenue, but as, um,
a lot of that upside revenue has
been sent to the permanent funds
and other investments, the
severance taxes are coming back
on trend. And we see the same
for GRT and personal income
taxes, you all have made changes
that have reduced those
collections and brought them
back towards the trend.
And what all this translates to
is, uh,
Graphically illustrated for you
on on page 15 at the bottom, you
can see how our reserves have
fluctuated over the years and
grown um during this revenue
boom, but uh we are seeing them
come back down along with the
slowing of revenues, and I'll
make one last plug on the last
page of our presentation, we
have, um, for those in the
audience or those watching at
home, a downloadable and
interactive dashboard of our
revenue forecasts on our website
at nm legis.gov/econ.
Good. Thank you very much for
the presentation. I
Thank all of you for being here
with us to share the good news
to share that news as we move
forward to uh help us if you
will, to continue with the
Uh, ongoing good planning that
has taken place throughout the
last several years and I think
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
go and start with our I guess
our miracle story, uh, in terms
of questions. So we're going to
go to Senator-elect Scott.
Oh, I see that look on your
face. There some.
There's, uh, it's very often,
uh,
That we hear from him, but today
for some reason, there's just
not much coming out. I guess
it's the miracle, right? The
work that's been going on by uh
our uh elected officials are
appointed officials, our staff.
Well, here, here he goes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman in the
with the increases in
construction, I believe there
were 2.
Fairly significant bar charts
there that had construction and
something else.
Uh
Significantly improved.
Can you
drill down just a little bit to
tell.
Us exactly what went into
construction.
You want to go ahead.
I, I'll probably answer that,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Scott more generally than Izzy
well, but you know it's, it's
statewide, um, it's, it's
strengths statewide, it's
building permits, it's
commercial and residential, um,
so that, that, I think you're
talking about the grocery
receipts tax base, and it's,
it's just grown as a part, but
then also we keep in mind that
the construction receipts are
subject to inflation too, so
there's.
There's that growth is feeding
into it as well. I add anything
to see. Sure, Mr. Chair and, um,
Representative Scott, we can see
it broken out by public and
private, and we do see large
growth from both sectors. So,
um, the, the federal dollars
that are flowing for
construction, but also the state
dollars which are significant
going to construction or
contributing to that increase in
activity, but also we're seeing
it from the private sectors,
large construction projects on
the east side of the state
transmission lines going across.
We see significant bumps there
in counties where that are
hosting that um project. I mean,
then the other question I think
you had was to professional
scientific and technical
services, um, those are the sort
of um primarily maybe like what
would be considered white collar
jobs, primarily coming from the
labs, we're seeing a lot of
growth coming from both of the
labs in those sectors, in those
counties as well, and, and the
affected areas. So I'm not sure
if that answered your question,
but happy to follow up with you
if you have additional.
Mr. Chairman and presenters, can
you point to anything else.
That would have a material
effect.
Outside of the petroleum
industry.
So one or several big projects,
making these.
Significant
contribution increases.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Sunsia was
the one I was speaking to
earlier on, the we are seeing a
large.
Uptick in construction, grocer
receipts tax activity from that
project. Um, but we are seeing
them across the board and so it
uh for many counties. So it, it
may not be as easy as pointing
to just one project, but it
seems in general that the sector
is doing very well across the
state. OK. Thank you for your
answers, Mr. Chairman. That's
all for now. Thank you very
much, Senator-elect Scott. Next
we go to represent Parajon,
please.
Thank Mr. Chair and members of
the committee had welcome
everyone. My name is Christina
Pajon and I'm the representative
for House District 25, um, which
is in Albuquerque, and I, my
questions were very similar to
representative Scott, um, about
the construction sector and
thank you for clarifying that. I
think, um, my question was
whether or not it was like if
that increase was because of the
construction prices that have
gone up, or if it's because
there are more projects
themselves.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Parajan, it's nice to see you.
It would be a mix of the two
because the inflation, you know,
one of our charts just for
example, shows construction up
7.3%, but inflation in that area
was something less and
population growth added to that
with something less too, so it's
a mix of increased activity and
inflation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much for your
presentation.
Thank you very much,
Representative Parajuan. Next we
go to Representative Lujan,
Representative Luhan, please.
All right. Thank you. Um,
Mr. Chair, thank you for uh.
Give me a second chance to
listen to the presentation, um,
but I think, um, I'm gonna go on
the same line of questions
regarding the construction, um.
Increases
We learned that in New Mexico it
was costing us an upwards in
some places 30% costs for, um,
um, for all sorts of reasons.
Can you, can you put that into
perspective of those costs and
the continued increase in
construction for us to check.
Mr. Chan represented Wuhan, uh,
I'm happy to take a crack at it,
I know that we have done some
study at LFC specifically our
analyst Kelly Carswell, um, with
respect to construction
inflation, and there is, because
the industry is doing so well,
there's so much demand for
construction across the country,
but also in the state. That also
could be a contributor to rising
prices. There is um a shortage
of supply of construction
activity, and so, um,
As private and public entities
demand more construction
services.
Uh, the prices have been going
up with them.
Thank you, mister, because, you
know, that's, that's one of the,
the barriers to us, uh, in our,
in our finances and for our
state and and with those
construction costs and and the
supply chain as you said. So is
it getting, are we getting
better? I mean, I did hear uh
secretary say that the primitine
is getting better. Is that, and
that was a major factor in
getting projects, um, you know,
to, to, uh, to fruition, if you
will, but can I think we need,
I, I, I would just like some
more
in the conversation because we,
you know, from last year to this
year to see this amazing growth
is, is encouraging, yet what are
we paying?
And how much more expensive
without inflation. It is because
in New Mexico we're playing, you
know, upwards of 30% more than
other states.
That's
What I'd like you to expand on,
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair and
Representative Luhan, um,
I think from my perspective, I
watch employment in construction
closely. I know that there is
significant demand for more
labor in construction to meet
the demand of those projects and
um we have seen employment in
construction growing and to
representative Parajon's point,
that's another indication that
it's not simply inflationary,
it's also demand based because
we're seeing the employment in
that sector grow, but um,
I, I, I, it, it's clear that the
demand is certainly higher than
the growth that that sector has
experienced and as long as those
uh positions remain open. I, I
expect that we would continue to
face inflationary pressures.
Thank you. I just wanted to
point out that New Mexico is
paying higher inflation, um,
prices in other states. Um,
secondly, Mr. Chair, in regards
to um our um in our energy
sector in production and and uh
versus pricing of oil and gas.
Um, we're producing a
You know, incredible rates that
we've never seen before, um, but
it comes down to the pricing and
OPEC and, and how we, how that
Uh, is involved in our
production because we can keep
producing, producing, but we
can, we can reach a level based
on on their pricing and
adjustments. At what point does
it, does the industry say, OK,
we're gonna slow production.
And for the, I guess for that
specific purpose, Mr. Chair, and
what effect would that have?
On New Mexico's economy, Mr.
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chan, Representative
Luhan, I think I'll be first in
the secretary Sharon Clark may
take a stab at it as well. Um.
I, I, I would start by saying
that I don't think uh New
Mexico's firms are looking to be
price influencers, their primary
decision point is, um, it seems
at this time, um, shifted
towards shareholder returns. So
there, there seems to be an
increased interest um for
especially the majors and the
public companies to have a very
disciplined, um, capital
expenditure plan that um
Almost regardless of price.
is going to be met and the
profit above that amount is
likely to be returned to
shareholder. Um, we do also see
that breakeven prices in the
Permian are much lower, um,
than, than anywhere else in the
country and so there is an
ability for New Mexico producers
to produce, um, maybe despite
Um, all PEC pressures, of
course.
Um, lower prices are certainly
not uh a benefit to producers in
New Mexico, but may not be as
much of a deterrent as they used
to be. I hope, I hope that no,
we're seeing that in, in the,
the data, but please continue.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Lu Han. I, I
agree with everything as he just
said, and I wanna just say
you're right that, um.
There are major factors way
outside of New Mexico's control,
including OPEC supply decisions
and global demand for oil, and
so, um, those big factors
influencing global supply and
global demand really can put us
in a tailspin and really impact
the forecast a lot, um, you
know, if I were to think back to
say 6 years of of giving this
presentation, usually the things
that we say have caused a
revision to the forecast have to
do with OPEC plus or
someone else reducing or
increasing their supply. I mean
in this case, I think Saudi
Arabia, part of the downward
revision of Saudi Arabia is
planning to supply more, um, but
also we're, we've seen
moderation in the expectation
for global demand for oil, you
know, and so you look at the big
factors between the US market,
the EU, and Asia. It's, it's
looking like the entire world
will demand a little bit less.
I, I want to say too that, you
know, in this case and in a lot
of times we'll have price go up
or down.
and volume do the opposite, so
that our revenues are a little
bit unchanged or hedged against
that, but.
In the very long term New Mexico
isn't indifferent. We would
rather for our coffers would
rather produce a smaller amount
at a higher price because then
our limited natural resource
lasts longer, so this is one of
those where um a price decrease
is being offset by an increase
in production, but that's more
quickly depleting.
I appreciate that overview and,
and also that we have put in
legislation, Mr. Chair, we
talked about in now let's see
and in other communities about
how we, we have a tempered, if
you will, that volatility for
our state, um, so,
I just say we need to do, we
need to look more at that, as
you know.
What is going on with the
production and the pricing and
all and and how.
I guess my concern is Mr. chairs
that you know, when we are
looking at the, even the federal
permitting and and those sorts
of things. I don't think it's an
issue for our state. I think we
need to reassess those, um,
those types of arguments, and
we're going to be hearing them
during.
This year and other years, I
think that we, these are the the
real factors when we're looking
at our market and and how the
the volatility and how we're
trying to control that
volunteer, uh, volatility for
our state, and I want to commend
um those who worked on doing
that and it's, it's pretty
impressive, but um.
I think for the sake of time,
that's all I have. I mean, I can
go on and and say, you know, as
we're growing in the growth
sector for the renewable
industry is, is that true that
that is a major growth sector,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Luhan, um, we, we're definitely
seeing it in the construction,
um, data, and, and we, we see it
in the new agreement signed at
the state land office, um, or
the growth in renewable energy
production, certainly. Thank
you.
Thank you very much for
representing Luhan, and uh, you
bring up a good point too in
terms of time. We went ahead and
we moved up the uh next
presentation to 2:30, so we're
gonna go and try to stay on
schedule for that. But next I
have Representative Duncan,
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One
quick question is all I have.
Um, as we look at oil and gas,
uh.
Tapering off, um, how much more
do we need in our, in our, uh,
funds to keep us where we need
to go without dipping into
others as we look forward in the
next.
Mr. Chan and Representative
Duncan, um.
We did a revenue estimate in
September, um, that showed the,
the current trajectory of oil
and gas production would be
enough to create enough
investment income to offset
declines, any future declines
long term future declines in in
oil production, um, but of
course, that, that might result
in uh uh
Very modest or or small revenue
growth in the out years, so, um,
any additional amount powers
higher growth and any less could
um result in revenue declines,
but currently it seems to be an
equilibrium with the amount
being invested. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much for Duncan. Any other, uh,
going to Senator Worth, please,
just one quick question. Um,
super interested in the
investment income and of the
11.2% increase.
What percentage of that is the
Increased contribution and what
percent is the investment
earnings.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Worth, um, by contributions, you
mean the oil and gas into the
those funds. Absolutely. So
we've got both two things
happening. One, you've got huge
influx of new corpus, and then
you've got the State Investment
council doing what I think is a
pretty good job. I'm just
curious.
What's the percentage? We always
were so focused on the
percentage of investment returns
because we didn't have such big
distributions in, uh, so I'm
just curious if you have a sense
of that, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Wirth, the lion's chair is
coming from increased
contributions, especially over
the next 5 years, um, maybe
beyond 10 years, that changes
that switches over to investment
earnings, but the uh average
return is maybe around 7% for
the land grant, less than that
for the severance tax permanent
fund.
And we expect that the severance
tax permanent fund, for example,
will likely double over the next
5 years. That is not coming from
a 7% return.
So I just highlight top of page
82.4 billion into the land grant
permanent fund in 23 and 24. Is
that correct each year?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
So again, it just uh having
Been involved in the debate
about whether to take a little
percentage out of that fund all
those years and I just remember
the handouts with numbers,
corpus numbers substantially
below 30.
32 million, which is where it is
now. It's just amazing. So,
thank you.
Thank you very much, Majority
Leader worth. Next we go to
Senator Tomlin, Senator Tomlin
plays.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, uh, panel for your
Interesting and form of
presentation. I'll be the first
to admit that yes, that
statement was very prudent.
And you had a lot of foresight
to create all these trust funds.
So, is there gonna reach a point
maybe in 20 years where
These uh
The interests from all these.
Permanent funds in the in the
money from the trust funds.
Will not offset the decrease in
oil and gas.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator Tollman,
uh.
Well, I don't know off the top
of my head what year that would
be, but I would expect in the
2030s.
The 2
30s. That soon?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Thank you very much, Senator
Tollman. Any other questions?
Seeing on going to Senator Burr,
Senator Burr, please.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Just a
quick question. Retail sales are
down.
The retail category is down
significantly. Is that due to
inflation, is that due to online
sales or is there something
else?
Involved in retail that
Just kind of curious as to why
that.
is down.
I'm sorry, I don't remember what
page that was.
I'm just looking at the panel
and, and others behind me. I, I
see on slide 9, yeah, we've got
800 less jobs in retail, which
is a 0.8% contraction. Mr. Chair
and Senator Burr, we do see that
the sector is growing in gross
receipts tax, I think that is
specific to employment, if I'm
not mistaken. This one's
employment, yeah, and, and it's
important to note that this is
24 to 23. There was uh
Really huge employment gains in
retail following the pandemic,
and we've seen some of that come
back down, so likely compared to
um.
Pandemic lows, that sector is
actually still up. It's just
that it sort of came off of a
water uh watermark year in 23.
Um, that would be my, my guess
as to what we're seeing there
and.
One night,
Mr. Mr. Chair and Senator Burr,
yeah, if I, if, if I turn to the
GRT slide on 18, um, right,
we've got a point, I think it's
0.3%. I can't read it, the
numbers on top of the red, but
uh uh a slight contraction in
retail GRT base, but again,
yeah, the last bullet confirms
that's a
slight decline because of the
post pandemic expansion.
If you picture all the consumer
spending that occurred with all
the federal and state stimulus
post COVID. This is kind of
returning more to trend. So
we're still feeling the impact
on the effects of that.
Well, right, the, the year just
after um the onset of COVID was
such a strong year with consumer
spending, and which a lot have
occurred in retail, so I think
it's just leveling back to
normal after that.
OK. All right. Well, that does
clarify things thank you thank
you very much also, uh, Mr.
Delgado, would you like to go
and also respond to this one
particular question.
Please, please, please go ahead.
That's fine.
Alright. Thank you very much.
Any other questions?
I don't see any other questions.
We want to thank you all for
your presentation, the hard work
that you continue to do on
behalf of the state of New
Mexico. Thank you all.
Thank you all.
OK, so we're moving along on our
revised schedule, and that was
basically because of the uh the
timing. So we're going to the uh
we was scheduled for 3 o'clock
is now at uh scheduled for the
2:30 uh time frame, and that's
gonna be the report, the
laboratory partnership with
small business tax credit and
the technology readiness,
groceryceipts, tax credits, so
with the uh presenters, please
come forward and then um what,
what I ask for is that uh you
Once you were situated, um,
Please identify yourselves and
then uh go forward in the order
that you all have discussed,
even though we have an order on
the agenda, um, I would prefer
that you all uh feel comfortable
in terms of how you would like
to segue through, if you will,
this presentation. Thank you
very much. Please proceed.
All right.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so my name is David
Kisten. I'm from Sandia National
Laboratories, and we are here
today to talk about two tax
credit programs, the New Mexico
Small Business Assistance
Program, and the technology
readiness grocer receipts Tax
Act credit.
Um, and we will go down the
line. So we're going to provide
an overview, uh, talk about some
of the metrics from both of
these programs. And then we have
two companies, so remote well
Solutions and Cairo's power.
Joining us today to talk about
their experience with the
program and, and how they've
been able to take advantage of
these uh tax credit programs.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Julia Wise. I am out of
Los Amos National Lab, and we'll
be, um, presenting some of this
information as well.
Um
Thank you. Excuse me. Yeah, and
actually,
Present first. Oh, just to
introduce.
OK, we're past what we're
passing out right now is an
economic impact study authored
by New Mexico State University
for
A project that we're that for a
technology that we've developed,
understood, and, and please
introduce yourself and then from
there we'll get started with the
presentation. So just very
quickly, please. I'm, I'm, I'm
sorry, um, it's not a problem.
My first time doing this, so I'm
Mikelis Remote Well Solutions.
As my wife Karina, she's, uh,
she's an owner also of remote
Solutions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the
committee, um, my name is Jack
Ia von Furen. I'm from Kara
Power, and I am one of the lead
engineers on the annular fuel
fabrication team.
OK, so please proceed and I
understand then uh Mr. Kisten,
you're gonna uh start the
presentation, is that my
understanding. Yes, thank you.
Please proceed.
Uh, so members of the committee,
we are really happy to be here
today. Uh, both of these
programs are unique, uh, in, in
the National Lab Network, um,
and in the state of New Mexico,
they are tax credit programs
that allow Sandia and Los Alamos
to engage directly with
businesses around the state. So
the New Mexico small business
assistance program, uh, provides
up to $2.4 million in technical
assistance annually to companies
in the state, uh, for those that
are in a
area, you can get up to $40,000
worth of technical assistance
and for businesses that are in
urban areas, $20,000. Uh,
there's no cash or equipment
provided to participate in
businesses. This is really just
technical assistance from the
labs. Um, recently, we started a
program called Trigger, the
technology readiness gross
receipts, tax credit program,
uh, which is kind of a mouthful,
so trigger, and this program is
really designed to help
companies take products to
market. So unlike NMSBA where
Businesses just come with
technical challenges, uh,
trigger, correct. The trigger
program uh is really designed
for businesses that have
inactive license agreement with
the labs, so they've taken a
technology out or a
collaborative research
agreement, so there's, there's
an agreement that's in place,
and we're really there just to
help mature the technology and
get it ready for market. So
Trigger is a younger program, it
sunsets in 2027. Um, and so
right now it's really starting
to gain steam.
We're starting to see that we're
getting closer to full
allocation for this tax credit,
NMSBA is one that has been
around for decades and so it's
pretty well known in the state.
Um,
And yeah, so both of these are
just fantastic. They're unique,
they stand out in the national
ecosystem for how labs and
businesses work together, uh,
not just with the Department of
Energy, but uh for all national
labs and all research. And so
we're really, really pleased to
be able to partner with the
state on this, and look forward
to talking more about it. Uh,
Julia Wise from Los Alamos is
gonna.
Jump into some of the metrics
from the past year. Great, thank
you. Please proceed. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Again, to echo what
David said, a big heartfelt
thank you to you all for your
support, um, and to the state of
New Mexico for this very unique
partnership that brings the
technical expertise of the labs
to our businesses in the state.
So, thank you there. So, in
2023, thinking about NMSBA, the
New Mexico Small Business
Assistance Program. We were able
to serve 240
1 businesses providing about
$4.49 million worth of
researchers' time across both.
Laboratories. In the lifetime of
the program, um, we really,
we've served over 3300
businesses and 61% of those are
within our rural New Mexico
communities.
Um, we've served and worked with
3 of New Mexico's 33 counties.
And we've created this program
has created 12,199 jobs. And the
businesses participating have
utilized this technical
assistance offered to um
increase the revenue over the
lifetime of the program by 538
million.
And invest an additional 192,000
million in New Mexico goods and
services. Finally, they've
succeeded in raising and
generating over $297 million
worth of additional funding.
As mentioned, a trigger our
technology readiness group seats
program. This is a younger
program.
And so,
We've
And so in 2023, you know, we
worked with 17 small businesses
and offered just about $955,000
worth of assistance to the
businesses.
Um, since our program inception,
we've been able to serve 27
high-tech and deep tech
businesses across New Mexico,
providing about $2.4 million of
technical assistance.
Um, finally, since the program's
inception and as the program is
really ramping up in businesses
or figuring out how to best
utilize it. Um, are the
businesses we've worked with
have created 27 jobs, um, and
obtained $23.6 million in new
funding and financing, so,
again, thank you so much for
having us today and thank you
for, uh, enabling this
partnership.
Thank you very much for the
presentation. Next, please
proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. So we'd also like
to uh open this up for 2
companies, 2 beneficiaries
of these programs just to talk
through their experience. So
with that, we pass it over to my
list.
Please proceed. Mr. Chairman,
excuse me for earlier. I didn't
follow protocol we're, we're,
we're fine, just, uh, please
proceed nice and relaxed and
Mr. Chairman presentation. I'm
sorry, Mr. Chairman and
committee members, good
afternoon and, and um I'd like
to introduce myself, Mike List,
my wife also Karina is behind me
where the owners of remote well
solutions.
And um
Uh, I wanted to share the
experience of working with the
NMSBA program with you and, and
just how critical it's been for
our, our development to offer
the commercially now the water
distribution technology that we
have to give a background, um,
we live in Otero County. I'm
sorry, I'm too loud.
We live in Otero County and I've
owned a cattle ranch in Lincoln
County for the last 20 years.
I'm a retired electrical
engineer. I spent most of my
career in the semiconductor,
aerospace and extrusion
industries, and I worked heavily
with controls and power both and
that kind of feeds into what
we've developed here.
So anyway, Crane and I started
working on remote well solutions
about 10 years ago. Um, we saw a
need in the western livestock
industry, and it's because the
the ranch is, so many of the
livestock branches were
operating inefficiently the way
we see it, and it's mainly due
to poor water availability for
the livestock. So what we're
talking about is we have 4 each
out in remote locations, but
it's just too too far for the
livestock to walk to and then
walk back to water, cattle
primarily are what we're focused
on.
And, you know, they'll walk
about 1 mile, a little bit over
1 mile, but then they turn
around and come back to the
water. So you get these areas of
concentrated grazing. I'm sure
you've all seen this with these
big long lines of cattle walking
in the hot summer. Well, they're
headed to water, that's what
they're and they're they're
they're not dispersed much, so
you'll see concentrated places
of grazing. So,
We started working on a solution
for this.
Um
Many, many of, if, if not all of
these ranches that we've, we've
seen across the West.
See the same problem, and it's
been, been a problem since the
existence of ranching in the
west, and it's, it's a poor lack
of water distribution, so, um,
It's, it's, it's pretty common
to find ranches this way and
where we found the, the most of
these ranches are on the Navajo
Nation. That's what we're going
to share here in a minute, but
how I was introduced to the
NMSBA program was soon to Mexico
State University and Dr. Kramer
Winningham, he, he's been our,
our guidance, uh, as we work
through it and he's the one that
authored his, his team authored
that impact study that you have
and we, we sure want you to, to
look at some stuff that we think
you'll find it very compelling.
Um, through the NMSBA board,
we're assessed in, in
development of the technology
and then also the analysis of
water. It's just something that
would have taken us a great deal
of time to accomplish on our
own, um, we found the NMSBA
program working with Sandia to
just be this large pool of
science-based talent that was
very important to develop what
we, what we've developed here,
um, you know, whether it was
analyzed in the water, uh, some
of the engineering disciplines
that we
We lacked it, it really
expedited our ability to, to
offer a commercial product.
So, our goal was to develop
something that that conserved
water was easier for the
ranchers, um,
And when we say conserved water,
we're talking about windmills.
You've all seen them for the,
the, the windmill keeps turning
producing water, the tank fills
up and then the water just
spills over. But most of that
water is lost to evaporation. It
never does get back down on the
ground. Our systems, when they
fill up the water, the water,
the pump shut off and it's and
it's it's completed. It's all
solar, 100% solar, and um,
And
Anyway, we think it's a game
changer. uh, we wanted to
develop something that was
robust, dependable, and, but yet
still easy for the rancher, and
we think we've, we've done that.
Our systems are fully automated.
And uh they operate without
batteries, without radios,
without transmitters and uh and
without receivers, the
Like I say, the technology
eliminates the overflows and the
water that's wasted each year.
So
we've spoken many of these
Native American events and, and
talked about some of our, our
technology that we've developed,
and I guess that was kind of the
genesis of this, but in 2022, I
received a, a, a call.
From then Vice President Myron
Lizer, the vice president of the
Navajo Nation. I received a call
from his office on a Saturday.
He wanted to talk to us just as
soon as possible. So we
We called the the grants, um,
Uh, oh, an office up in Grants,
we got a conference room. He
came down, met with us, and a
one hour meeting turned into a
4-hour meeting, and I think he
saw what he felt was a solution
to the, the burden for the
Navajo ranchers, you know, he
explained, he said it's the
income stream is not just
important, but it's part of our
heritage, uh, across the Navajo
Nation is, is, is livestock
production. And so we've kind of
teamed up. He championed the
cause, and, um, and he found
funding about.
$502,000 to install a pilot
project, so we went up, we put
in.
We put in pumping plants and
some water distribution on 4
ranches, and ranches were
ranchers had been hauling water
for generations with trucks and
trailers.
They never had to hold another
gallon since.
So we take the water from where
it's at, and we distribute it
across the landscape. It's all
done automatically. We pump up
to the highest point in the
pasture and that maybe 4 or 5
miles away, we keep those tanks
full and then we put a network
of uh of piping across the
ranch, and then they can have
the cattle can have drinkers
every every half mile, every 3/4
of a mile depends on how the
country lays out, but what it
does is it takes that.
Those long, those long trips
that I discussed here a little
bit of a while ago, it takes
that away when it's 100 degrees,
95 degrees, so the animal gets
to perform better her lactation
is better, um, the calf weights
are, are higher, so that the,
you know, the, the market ready
calves are a little heavier.
But the, the big thing that it
does and what we found on the
Navajo Nation is the ranches are
capable of supporting much, much
more in the way of livestock
loads. So typically what we're
finding up there's about 60
animals. Now, I have a ranch
myself, about 8 sections, and I
can stock at about 100 animals.
Their stocking at 40, in the
same size ranch, but got, they
have better ranches, uh, larger
ranches, uh, that we've seen
still 60 animals. They could
carry 300.
So the income for these ranchers
last year, around $1400 a market
calf was if you had 60 calves
and they all, they all went to
market. That's about $84,000 in
gross income.
Um, Westbrook fi or ranch up
there, 15 sections that support
about 300 calves, so that that
ranchers gross income instead of
being 84,000.
Potentially could be 420,000.
Uh, we see other ranchers still
at that 84,000 mark, 220,000.
This is what and and these are
real reasonable numbers, but
they have to have the water. You
can't just have feed alone.
So anyway, we went ahead and and
and did this installation
systems have been running for a
year and a half now without
issue. We haven't had a problem.
And um
In this past summer, the Navajo
Nation Department of
Agriculture, Sandia Labs.
Um, the Mexico State University
in Navajo Technical University
compiled together and to uh
apply for a grant uh RCPP grant
to the USDA.
And um they were rewarded in
October, maximum ward of $25
million to put in water
distribution on tribal ranches
in New Mexico.
And so
The result of that, uh, you can
see on, on page one in your
handout, uh, New Mexico State
does this, this analysis and
it's kind of a good, better, and
best, but up to $32 million a
year of reoccurring impact.
Uh, another good part of this
story is, is.
If we get contracted to put
these systems in, now we're not
a part of the grant because
we're the, we're the contractor
and a service provider, so we
can't be a part of the grant,
but, uh, on the grant team, but
if we're contracted to put these
in, we'll bring our core people
up to do the training, and we're
gonna hire Navajos. We're gonna
have have Navajo installers,
Navajo supervision, and we're
gonna hire engineers out in
Navajo Tech University. We need
all of these people, and
there's, they'll, they'll be
quite a cast of folks, and then
we're gonna have supporting cast
also.
And um and that's, that's in an
area of our state that has
pretty high unemployment, um,
and, but there's, there's a
great deal of talent. You see a
lot of these, these kids that
are graduating from NTU and
other places as soon as they
graduate, they move away. We're
gonna try to keep some right
there and give them full-time
jobs.
Um
But the best part of the story,
I think for for us.
is the greatest benefit.
is the people that are ranching.
They they're the ones saying,
you know, we benefit as a
company, we have to, we have to
make some money, but the
rancher, it continues on
forever. So we think that's,
that's all super important. And,
and this just wouldn't have
happened. I mean, without this
NMSBA program and this pool of
talent, it's, it's, it's like
you've just expanded your staff.
With all these incredibly
knowledgeable people. And, and
it, it brought it together. We
would have been years getting to
the point where we're at without
NMSBA. So this is a wonderful
program. Uh, I don't know if it
fits in all cases, but it's
really been successful for us,
and now we think the people in
New Mexico and uh and the Navajo
Nation are going to be the ones
that they get to benefit from
it.
So
I guess, I guess that's it, um,
do you have any questions, I'd
be happy to answer them.
00, you know what, there is one
other thing, Mr. Chairman, uh,
not only the Navajo.
Projects, but we have another
$600,000 in
In quotes that are out to the
Laguna Pueblo and and also the
Hopi nation too.
And this is our first time of
doing that. Truly appreciate the
uh presentation, a lot of
passion between you, your
family, and others that are uh
working on this, and I just, I
really appreciate the testimony
moving along then to the other
uh story that we have.
Sure, please proceed.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. Karasow is a nuclear
engineering design and
manufacturing company focused on
commercializing our fluoride
salt-cooled high temperature
reactor.
The company embraces a novel
approach to nuclear development
that includes iterative hardware
demonstrations and in-house
manufacturing to achieve
disruptive cost reduction and
provide true cost certainty.
At our manufacturing development
campus in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Taras power produces
specialized components from
stainless steel and graphite,
you stamped pressure vessels,
non-nuclear tricep pebbles and
other parts of our test
programs.
Using non-nuclear testing
systems, Kairos is demonstrating
high temperature operations for
many aspects of our first
nuclear test reactor, the Hermes
reactor that we are currently
constructing in Oak Ridge,
Tennessee.
Karos is partnering with Los
Alamos National Lab to construct
the low enriched fuel
fabrication facility or less
with the intent of manufacturing
enriched fuel for a Hermes test
reactor.
Paros is currently working on
demonstrating the capability and
technology for manufacturing
high quality trisoparticle and
annular fuel pebbles, the type
of nuclear fuel that will be
used in our home's reactor.
Paris was the Albuquerque
facility is prototyping the
process equipment for length and
developing the procedures for
manufacture of non-nuclear
tricep particles and in unit
pebbles.
The non-nuclear product
manufactured at our Albuquerque
facility will be used as a
validation for the equipment
that we install in life at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory.
The funds from the state of New
Mexico are offsetting our costs
in the design work for less and
is accelerating our fuels
manufacturing program in
collaboration with Los Alamos
National Lab.
On behalf of Kara Power, I would
like to thank the state of New
Mexico for funding we have
received and the value it has
added in our efforts to deliver
to our commitments.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for the brevity of the
presentations, and of course
the, the testimony that you all
uh continued to provide to so
many people and the information,
of course, is in your booklets
as you go along, if you have any
questions, uh, we're open to
that now, and if not, I wanna go
ahead and ask for some final
comments.
OK, so we're going to
Representative Duncan.
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I, uh,
my family comes from ranching,
so this is a this is a wonderful
thing here, um, how many, you
said you were awarded $25
million.
Uh, or getting ready to do that.
How many uh ranchers will that
impact on the Navajo Nation?
Well, that's kind of situational
based on the size of the ranch.
We try to
Place the drinkers.
Anywhere from 0.5 mile to 3/4 of
a mile apart. Uh, there's 35
ranches that they've targeted.
Some of them are pretty big, you
know, some of them are 8, 10
sections. There's one that's 100
sections. So, uh, I don't really
know how far they'll all get,
cause I haven't been on all of
them, but we'll get a, we'll get
a pretty healthy cast of them
right there in McKinley County,
um, I would, I would imagine
we'll, we'll get probably
upwards of 25 or better.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
uh, just one last question then
how many ranches are there on
the Navajo Nation, for example?
We think the 35 ranches that
they've targeted represented
about 1%.
So the ranches that we're
talking about, they're held a
lot of different different ways.
So there's ranches on, on the
Navajo proper, and then there's
the ranches we're talking about
are, are off the reservation. So
if, if you're a rancher in
McKinley County or San Juan
County, and you, you boarded the
Navajo Nation, you decide to
sell your ranch. They come in
and buy your ranch.
And then they lease it out to a
Navajo rancher.
And so, um,
There's about
1.9 million acres is what
they've told us there's are the
tribal ranches. So these are the
tribal ranches that set in San
Juan County, McKinley County,
probably some down around.
Socorro County and other places.
Uh, I, I haven't been on all of
them. OK, well, I think that's a
great opportunity for those
ranchers. It might be a
lifesaver, uh, to keep that
heritage going as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for Duncan. Uh, any
other questions? OK, so we're
going to Senator Tom and if you
all notice Senator Tollman
doesn't even raise a finger, but
he, uh, he knows that he's on
the list, so Senator John,
please.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, uh, panel for.
Being here and with presenting
uh interesting information. So,
Mr. uh
Um
Lisk
Uh, it says in the book that
you, uh, your solution was
patented. So just briefly, what
was your, what was your
solution?
OK, Mr. Chair, Senator Talma,
um, what we've done is we've
developed a controller that's
that's solar, it's, it's we.
The we use all renewable energy
and we take the water from where
it's at, and we'll pump it
across the landscape to hype to
a high point and we'll sense how
much water is in in a tank from
34 or 5 miles away just through
tiny changes in pressure from 5
miles away, so when that that
level drops, the pumps at the
well or the, the spring will
will keep that tank full, and
now we gravity feet across the
ranch, and it's all automated.
There's, and if there's, there's
no need of an on-site.
op er ator
So we've patented that
controller, uh, which works,
like I say, with solar power,
you know, the, the solar power,
it varies quite a lot. And, uh,
every night,
Our controller just turns off
the next morning it turns on, it
checks how much water is in
different, you, you know, we
might be pumping into two
different ranches. In one case,
we have ranch number one here,
he had a well in his ranch, and
so now we've got water
distributed not all across the
ranch, but in other places he'd
never had water before, but his
neighbor has been hauling water
from 80 miles away, as long as
he's had the ranch.
About 1000 gallons at a time.
Now we've taken water from this
ranch, and we're sharing it with
that, that, the neighboring
ranch too, so he hasn't had to
hold water anymore.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
obviously, it has to be solar
because you're off the grid.
Yeah, it's pretty much all off
the grid, yeah.
Sorry,
interesting uh story.
Thank you for being here and
that's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much, Senator
Tomman. Any other questions?
See none then. I just want to go
in brevity, uh, if you all will
close. I know that maybe there
were some questions here that uh
uh maybe created, if you will,
some additional information that
you'd like to share with us, but
again, I thank you for the
innovation, for the commitment
to the state of New Mexico, and
as we continue to deal with uh
energy and new ways, innovation,
is definitely is a step forward,
so going back to you for some
final comments, please
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, and I think
just in closing,
I mean, you know, this is a, a
great program, labs love working
on these, and, you know, it
really is a, a privilege for us
to be able to
Engage on this and get to work
with all these great companies.
So thank you all.
Thank you very much again. Thank
you for your presentation.
OK, next we go to uh our final
presentation of the day, and
that's gonna be the municipal
legislative priorities.
And I believe we have our
presenters that are coming up to
the presentation table.
OK, so we're ready for the last
presentation of the day, we're
going to the municipal uh
the uh municipal legislative
priorities, and of course we
have Mr. AJ Forte, who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico Municipal League, and
then we also have Alison
Nichols, who is the director of
policy, uh, for the New Mexico
municipal League. Please
proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. AG 40 municipal
League.
Allison Nichols, director of
policy with the municipal
League.
Yeah.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we've done a lot of
work over the past several years
gathering data. We want data to
be able to explain what the
needs are of our communities, of
our cities.
And many of you on this
committee have seen up front and
center what the needs are, and
you've come up with ideas on how
to help them. But I want to turn
it over to Alison to kind of
explain the data and the
differences amongst our cities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee, it's nice to be
here. Um, so just before we go
into our legislative priorities,
we wanted to do a bit of um a
fiscal snapshot of where our
municipalities are at the
moment, uh, we know that that
revenues, GRT revenues are up
for most cities, not all, but
most over the last several
years, uh, that's important
because our cities are very
reliant on GRT overall over 70%
of municipal general fund
revenue comes from.
GRT, um, so you can see at the
on our first slide at the bottom
left.
That overall cities are highly
reliant on grocery seats tax,
however, that really varies
widely between municipalities.
So, you know, well, we can kind
of look at the average or the
overall, that doesn't
necessarily tell tell the full
picture of individual cities and
um their needs or how they're
they're earning their revenue.
So on the bottom right, we've
just selected kind of a, a few,
a few cities to show the, the
variety in revenue sources. You
can see that although most are
fairly reliant on GRT, um, some
are much
more reliant on property tax,
for example, even the property
tax only makes up 10% of total
municipal revenues, and then for
our very small municipalities,
most of those are highly reliant
on um other revenue sources,
which mostly is small cities
assistance fund revenue, that's,
um, the, the green shaded bars
on the bottom, right? So
although local governments have
seen big increases or not big
increases, but modest increases
in GRT in the last few years.
They have not seen the big
increases that the state has
seen due to um.
the oil and gas boom. In
general, local governments don't
receive direct revenues from oil
and gas activity, um, you know,
they received GRT revenues on
associated activity, but, but
they're not receiving direct
revenues, um, from, you know,
those extraction industries.
Like I mentioned, they're highly
reliant on grocery seats tax.
That's a volatile revenue
source, um, it tends to go up
and down, uh, fairly
significantly with changes in
economic conditions, as you
know.
And municipalities generally
have limited uh capacity for
raising other revenues other
than GRT.
So while they've seen modest
increases in their revenues. We
also know that inflation rising
infrastructure costs, and a new
state and federal mandates which
will touch on briefly also
impact municipal spending
capacity and uh limit what
they're able to do with their
revenues.
Page the is probably the most
important page if I could draw
your attention to that.
You know, we, we hear this
narrative a lot. cities are
doing so well.
The rich, the revenues are up.
I think page 3 really shows
where cities are at, right? We
have managers uh on this
committee. We have mayors, uh,
you all know what it costs to
run a city.
And when you're
Right out of the top uh 20 that
are on the left here. How do you
run a city on 600,000.
On 6.1 million.
An ambulance costs the same
whether you're biscaro or
portalis, as it does
Albuquerque.
And so we really want to address
this narrative that cities are
doing so well when the majority
of our cities have very little
to operate.
In the cities whether it be
Almogordo.
Or Hobbs
The infrastructure needs are
significant, and when we get
into our request, the cost of a
water treatment facility.
And where the EPA is moving with
particulates going to reverse
osmosis is very expensive, and
even our largest cities, we've
seen that in the requests from
Santa Fe, 80 million for a
treatment facility.
That's the same cost for our
smaller cities as well. It's not
at scale, but it's still very
expensive. So
Just to have context, this is
one that where we worry every
day, how can we help?
The small ones, the medium ones.
Um, and what you all have done
in the past several years,
you've been doing that, you've
been addressing it, and we'll,
we'll touch on that in in just a
few slides.
So Mr. Chairman, on, on page 4,
This is one of those where.
We want to show the impact.
Of fiscal decisions that the
state makes. Some of you are
here and, and had to make these
hard votes.
Some of you, we, we want you to
know the impact on decisions
that were made in the past.
So, we all know the food and
medical discussion, right? We do
not take a position on tax on
food.
But we take the position on is
if the state wants to make these
decisions.
Don't hurt the local
governments.
And that decision was made.
Then there was the deal, right?
Well, we're gonna make this
decision, but we're not going to
take your revenue.
Until you took our revenue.
Right? Until that deal was was
broken.
And the impacts of that are
still happening today, that
phase out on hold harmless is
happening every year. When you
look at our largest cities.
Albuquerque is not receiving $25
million.
This year, because of that
policy decision that the state
made.
We asked what could Albuquerque
do with that? We know there's a
public safety need. Half of
their budget is public safety.
So when we, we now can show the
outcome of those decisions a
decade ago or two decades ago
with the data.
When we look at
Whether it be 67 million.
Total on the food and medical.
Or the 1225.
Right, this 1225 when we, when
we lost a piece of it when we
did destination sourcing. It was
just in the language in the
bill.
That you look at our oil
producing communities, whether
it be Carlsbad.
Hobbs
Right.
We, we, there's been a lot of
work done to show what was lost
in those communities.
And what has happened is the
state general fund got a $50
million bump.
And it was at the expense of
those communities in the
southeast.
In the northwest part of the
state.
So those implications we can now
show the outcome, and we see it
in the budgets.
We see every year and we support
state police getting those
increases.
But it just means the locals,
they got the revenue cuts, now
have to try to keep up.
And whether it's the smaller
cities or Albuquerque, they
can't keep up with the oil
money, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so switching gears a
little bit, uh, we want to
present a couple of our
legislative priorities for this
year, um, and these really focus
on building infrastructure
capacity, uh, AJ mentioned, you
know, some of the issues with
water, waste water, water
facilities and and learned
spending capacity, so we want to
focus on that and then we also
wanna focus on leveraging
existing revenue sources for
public safety, um,
building on on some of the the
policy choices you all made last
year, which were very thankful
for.
So our first legislative
priority is to fully fund water
trust board projects, um, to
address those significant water
infrastructure needs. Uh, we
know that, that, um, municipal
water systems account for about
10% of total water systems in
the state but serve about 70% of
water users, so we think it
makes it a good investment, uh,
to invest in municipal water
systems. And our second key
priority this year is to
leverage EMS fund revenues
through bonding, um.
We know that, uh, the local EMS
services are really benefiting
from some of the, the policy
decisions you made last year and
we want to continue to build,
build on those revenues.
And Mr. Chair, I, I want to
touch briefly on, you know,
we've mentioned that you all
have made the decisions to help
local governments in the past
several years, and I want to
remind everyone and thank
everyone for those votes, those
hard votes that you make, right?
You did not take 110 million
from the locals with anti-pydy.
We thank you for that.
What was done last year to
support what for us is rural
healthcare, right?
Center for decade, a decade
running an EMS bill.
And finally getting an increase
to the EMS Act.
It had been 30 years since that
increase had gone into effect.
So EMS Act is receiving 2.8
million.
And got an additional 10 million
last year. What that means for
the smaller communities is they
got a $12,000 distribution that
now went to 112,000.
Still can't buy an ambulance,
but with what we're hoping to
accomplish this year is they'll
have the ability to bond it so
that they can pay for it over
time.
Those are incredibly positive
moves that the legislature has
made, right? The, the
administrative fee, something
that had been there since the
Big Mac, right, where the state
was taking locals money to
administer their own revenue.
You realize that was real money
that the locals could use. It
was only 3%, as you can see on
page 3, it means a lot for those
communities. So what you all
have done over the past several
years has made an impact and at
least given us the ability to
try to keep up um with what the
state has.
Thank
So on page 6 we go into a little
more detail about um the, the
proposed ask for funding for
water infrastructure projects,
um, we would like to ask the
legislature to consider fully
funding, um, vetted projects
through the water trust board
process, uh, that's a great
process. Uh, it works well. We
think it gets money to systems
that need it, um, with good
guardrails and good betting in
place. So for this year there's
um a gap of about 95 million.
In between project applications
and the projected funding, um,
on the municipal side alone
we've identified over 1.2
billion in needed but unfunded
water projects, um, we looked at
at municipalities, ICIPs as well
as um um applications of the
wider trust board that have not
been funded and uh drinking
water state revolving loan fund
projects that have not been
funded, so when you look at all
of those projects and take all
the duplicates out, you end up
with about 1.2 billion.
need and that's just for
municipal water projects. Um,
so, you know, some of those
risks the long term supply,
including the increasing costs
for upgrades, um, and those
federal mandates are really
eroding municipal spending
capacity at a time when they
need to upgrade these systems to
be able to provide clean and
reliable drinking water. And as
I mentioned, you can see on the
right that municipal water
systems only account for 10% of
total systems, but they serve
70%, um, a majority of users in
the state.
On the horizon we're concerned
about um costs of complying with
some new federal mandates, uh,
the lead and copper rule and
federal PFOS rule, you know,
these are, are good rules to
make sure that we have clean
drinking water, but they're also
going to be very costly for
municipalities. Um, the Latin
copper rule estimated about 5.5
million annually for New Mexico,
New Mexico's municipal water
systems, and then the federal
PFOS rule is going to be um.
More expensive by an order of
magnitude, that's going to be
about $77 million annually for
municipalities to um comply over
the next several years with the,
the monitoring, the public
notification, and then
ultimately the remediation of
these systems, um, so, you know,
that, that's we're concerned
about, about that, um, on top of
all of the existing needs.
So we'd really like to to see
more money put in now to the
water trust board process to try
to get some of these, these
projects funded and on page 7
you can see this is just a
sample of some of the projects,
um, the municipalities have
identified as project needs. You
can see some of them are are
quite large, some of them are
small, but all really critical
to those communities, health and
safety and economic development.
Mr. Chairman of the committee,
right, we
We put this out as the question,
right? If, if not now, when?
Uh, we contemplated running
every project, right? as, as a
message to show how much each
community needs to have fully
operational compliant water
system.
Obviously, it's not feasible to
even get the contractors.
To get that done.
But every year we wait, we know
the inflationary cost makes it
more expensive.
And, and, and this is going to
be a shared responsibility. Yes,
we're going to need help from
the state to complete these
projects, but we also have to
increase wages to operate them,
cause even if we had the money
from the state to build them.
We need the workers to operate
them.
So there's a key component
there. We do not have level 3s
and level 4s in our communities
at the scale we need to actually
run these treatment plants. So
we on our end are doing the
analysis to show our members,
what the wages need to be to
recruit the level 3s and level
4, so they have these good
paying jobs in their community.
Mr. Cha, page 8,
Our next legislative priority is
to leverage emergency medical
services, fund revenues through
bonding. So as you may recall
last year, um, you all passed a
bill, Senate Bill 151, um, and
Senator Campos, Senator Burr
have been huge supporters of of
fire and EMS services. So, you
know, especially appreciate
them, but thank you all for
voting for that bill. Uh, that
increased funding through the
EMS Fund Act from about $3
million a year to about $14
million a year. That was the
first.
Real substantive increase in
that fund in about 3 decades, so
huge for for our um local EMS
services, especially in rural
communities where some of them,
I think AJ mentioned, were
receiving like $12,000 a year,
so not, not really enough to do
much of anything with, um, so
you know that was, that was a
huge upgrade to the fund
recognizing that, especially in
these smaller communities, EMS
is, is health care. People rely
on that for healthcare as well
as for support, um.
Or, you know, other industries
in, in those areas.
However, we also know that um
EMS equipment is very expensive.
You know you can see on the
right an ambulance starts at
175,000 and and goes up probably
to about 500,000, so even with
increased funding, most
communities.
May struggle to, to afford an
ambulance, so we would like to
ask um for consideration of
using those funds for bonding
for debt service. So currently,
um, municipalities and counties
can pledge fire protection funds
for debt service. So if they buy
a fire truck, um, for example,
they take a loan through the New
Mexico Finance Authority public
project revolving fund. They buy
a fire truck, they can use their
fire protection funds to repay
that loan. Um, we would like to
see the same structure for these
EMS.
fun. So if they buy an
ambulance, they can take a loan
through NMFA and they can repay
the loan with these revenues. We
think this would be um a good
way to leverage these funds and
just make their impact go a
little farther, um, amplify
what, what cities can do with
these funds, but again, this
was, this was a game changer for
a lot of our our rural EMS
services, so really appreciate
you all for, for making that
policy choice.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We stand
for questions. Thank you very
much for the presentation and I
know these are uh very much
needed issues as we move
forward, so I'm going to
questions, going to Senator
Stepanics, Senator Stephanics,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you for your, your
presentation. I agree that we
need to look at um
Some kind of threshold for fully
funding or providing
0.5%, 0% loans something.
We have many
Communities, towns, villages,
cities that have no tax base
whatsoever.
And those entities are
struggling, so let's say they
get
Put on the water trust board,
uh, project, they still have to
come up with a percentage for a
match.
And that
Oh, I'm talking about grants,
but
That can be very uh hard to do
if there's not a tax base, and
you don't have a good rating to
go out for bonding.
Um, the community can oftentimes
rise up and say you're not gonna
do that to some mayor, and um
Really keep
Public health and safety from
occurring. So I see this in
water projects, wastewater
projects, the EMS, public safety
vehicles. So I do think that
this is something, and I don't
sit on send up finance or LLC,
but I think this is something
that should be addressed for
some of our communities in the
state. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Senator
Stephan's point well taken and
uh we are looking at some of the
uh the things that you're
talking about, but, uh, you just
gave us more incentive in order
for us to try to come up with a
solution
during this next session. I
appreciate that very much.
Next we go to center-elect
Scott, center like Scott,
please.
Mhm.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ford, I recall some
conversations.
The last legislative session,
and I completely
Agree with you.
That while the state
Currently floats on an ocean of
money.
The municipalities within the
state.
Aren't doing all that well. So,
The solution that we discussed.
For the last session.
It was a formulaic distribution.
Of a portion.
Of the states.
Gross receipts, tax revenues.
To be distributed back to every
municipality in the state. Now,
because
The southeast communities.
have been
More heavily impacted.
By all of that.
petroleum industry activity. I
waited that formula.
The shade
Those distributions slightly
toward the southeast.
But the fact was, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Ford.
That every community in this
state.
Benefited
Basically from the oil and gas.
This was distributing a portion
of that oil and gas revenue
stream.
Back to the communities.
Whether the community supported
Or were needed to support those
oil and gas activities at all.
Now, as I recall the numbers.
That we developed in that
formula where about 7%.
Of the
Revenues coming into the state
from the GRT, which at that time
was approximately $300 million.
Now this
Benefited my community because
the formula took into account.
Population
In each one of these
communities.
Uh, my community of Hobbs.
I, if I recall correctly.
Was going to benefit by about
10, maybe $12 million.
But the city of Albuquerque.
Because of the concentrated
population was going to benefit
to the tune of about.
$90 million.
So
The question that I have and I
mean we can bond EMS vehicles,
but in the smaller communities
to Senator Stefanik's point.
These folks don't have any
revenue stream.
To bond against, so we, at the,
at the same time, we
accomplished this.
What we should be doing is
guaranteeing the smaller
communities.
Some revenue stream.
Or guarantee is the wrong word,
they would participate.
It's a percentage level.
In the revenue stream that is
being developed.
By the petroleum industry.
It gives every community.
In the state, the stake.
In that oil and gas revenue. Is
that something you guys could
get behind?
Well, Mr. Chair, Senator,
What you'd put together last
year for us, but yeah, that
distribution formula works. I
think where we left it was
That bigger discussion of if
we're going to do it, let's
basically address small cities.
Let's start there and make sure
we're helping the ones to your
point and Senator Spanic's
point, the ones that truly need
it, building them up to that
floor, and then doing what you
suggested is that distribution
formula.
And that's where we had left it.
So we're in, right? What, what
is palatable?
Uh, what is affordable and
we're, we're willing to do the
modeling.
Mr. Chairman, they did some very
sophisticated modeling to
prepare that formula, and I
think that process should
definitely be revisited during
this sixty-day session.
Thank you, sir. That's all I
have. Thank you very much,
Senator-elect Scott, and to that
point, and I hope, as you all,
uh, take the consideration of
what the committee is offering,
uh, that with those pieces of
legislation, those individuals
that are expressing an interest
that you make contact with them
in hopes that we're able to go
ahead and fulfill some of these
uh these these questions, and of
course uh directions in the form
of legislation to see how that
that could be put together.
Thank you very much. Moving
along, then we're going to uh
Senator Burke, Senator Burke,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
And thank you all for the
presentation. Um, the needs for
communities are are great, um,
just a couple of questions, uh,
page 7.
Um, the village Ridoso, uh,
Those requests on there.
Were those fire or
Or flood-related projects or
were those on the books prior to
that event.
Mr. Chair Senator Pryor. OK. So
they've, they've been
Be vetted and, and uh are
prepared to go or they
I don't know, 160, 90%.
Prepared and
Uh, work and all that stuff,
yeah, they've been through the
process. Redos has been through
the water trust board process.
So they're, they're ready. It's
just now the funding mechanism,
right? This year, everyone's
going to get something from
water trusts or just not the
entirety of what they need.
OK, and that was my other
question that that none of these
will be in the capital lotly
requests. They'll all be on the
water trusts board, is that
correct? Yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator, it's all, all in the
water trusts board request and
there's about $100 million delta
between uh what the needs are
and the funding available. OK.
Yeah, I, it's just and, and I've
talked to a few folks, uh,
Senator Stefanis for one, and
uh, you know, we put significant
money into Rodoso and the short
session we had.
Uh, but there's a huge
supplemental that needs to be
done in this session.
For, uh, Ridoso and Lincoln
County for that, um, preliminary
figures are anywhere from 250,
300 million.
Uh, to 500 million and it may be
more than that, quite frankly,
by the time we get there, uh,
when we left the special
session, I think there was uh
interest in doing a
supplemental, and I hope that
that will carry on and people
will be interested in moving
that forward. Uh, the needs
continued to be great, um, and I
think, uh, Representative Harlem
Vincent will probably ramrod
that, that deal, uh, with some
help from uh my successor, Nick
Paul. um, but I
The, the legislation,
legislature will seriously
consider that.
Cause it's, it's
You still need to drive through
there if you haven't yet look at
the damage that still remains is
pretty dramatic.
Um
I won't take a whole lot more
time, um.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, a bonding
for ambulances to me that should
be a no-brainer, and I hope that
that can be done, that just
brings parity up with regards to
firefighters and so on and so
forth, and that's when we need
to get EMS and, and, and, and
eventually up to a, a level that
uh
Not compete with, but is on the
same level, I think, with the
state police. I think he's all
these entities, these agencies
need to be at a certain level,
uh, which
Gains the number one, the, the
respective thing that they need
and #2, hopefully the funding
that they need to maintain their
operations. Uh fortunately, fire
has some additional monies that
they uh get from uh the
insurance and all that stuff, so
that will be a help too. So I
think bonding is a great idea
for that. Um,
I, and I won't take up time, Mr.
Chairman, but hold harmless
continues to be an issue, uh,
even all these years down the
road, way even before I got here
and I've been here 14 years. Um,
I don't know if there's any long
term real fix to that, but I
hope we continue to look at that
because that is the one thing
that's why we're having this
discussion is because hold
harmless.
Uh, and, and taking that tax off
of food.
Um, as, as
Really put municipalities in a
bind.
And and there really needs to be
a better way to
To compensate for that and, and
go on down the line, uh, as a
conservative and a and a
typically non-tax guy, uh, there
needs to be some
For some way to make that
happen, uh, because it's just
is just pinching pennies and
things that used to get done in
my community when there was tax
on food are not getting done
now, and it's, it's, it's a
little embarrassing when you sit
here with one to develop
economic development and uh and
take the assets that you have
and uh you drive down streets,
even around the post office and
and they're they're just greater
life, they're just in terrible
shape because a community the
size of a girdle doesn't have
the money.
to to fix a something like a
street repair.
You know, this an overlay
anyway, um, get on my shoebox,
but um I hope that there is a
long-term fixed to hold harmless
somewhere along the line that we
can fix it.
Because I think it's gonna
continue to be an issue.
Until we can get to back to
those levels and
Make that that funt grow along
the way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
time. I appreciate that. Thank
you very much, Senator Burr.
Thank you very much for your
long-term advocacy for
Or your district, but
particularly as the uh Lincoln
County, the Riodosa Riodoso
Downs area had gone through some
of the more tragic events as of
recent, and uh we've been there,
we've taken a look at that and
we'll continue to uh work to see
how we can help them recover and
again to Senator Stephanics as
well. I know that's part of the
area and she uh also has been
very strong in that advocacy,
but again, we're gonna miss not
only your voice, but what you've
done, but I know you're gonna.
be working from the outside to
continue to go ahead and support
uh your district, the district
you represent, but uh also
Lincoln County as we work
towards recovery.
You got it, that is, he just
said that it's a labor of love,
so we're moving along then to
Representative Duncan.
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. As a
former mayor of a
A small community, um, the small
cities assistance sometimes was
incredibly important.
We, I come from a county that
works closely.
With our municipalities and the
municipalities work closely with
the counties.
And uh sometimes we help each
other.
Oftentimes we help each other as
much as you can.
Um
But in some of the areas,
perhaps the counting one doesn't
have any money and perhaps too,
they're not getting along very
well. So then our partner is the
state.
That doesn't work very well.
I agree with Senator Burke and
accomplished. There's, we need
to do something of these smaller
communities.
somehow to get the funding they
need, uh, maybe we should take
the 5% and give the state the 1
point.
2 35%, whatever that would be.
I won't carry that bill, by the
way, but there needs to be
something done for these
communities, so.
Thank you very much. That's, I
just have to comment. Appreciate
it very much, Representative
Duncan. Next, we're going to
Senator Tollman.
Senator Tomlin, please. Oh,
thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, uh, Mr. Forte and
Miss Saison for being here.
Uh your requests seem very
reasonable, and
I hope that they will be
enacted. So I want to publicly
thank you for a couple of years
ago, you helped me write a uh
He kept a reform bill and you
made some suggestions that made
the bill a lot better.
So
He said you municipality is the
$1.2 billion.
And your ask is 95 million, so
is that
That is straight appropriation
or is that create a trust fund.
Uh
Mr. Chair, Senator, what's the
specific ask is it just the
delta between the funding
available through Water Trust
board, right the severance tax
carve out and the requests that
came in for Water Trust port
projects.
So it's about $100 million delta
that we're going to fund the
projects, we're just not going
to fund them in their entirety
because we just don't have
enough revenue coming in from
the severance tax carve out.
Not a trust fund just fully
funding the individual projects
that were requested.
So how are you gonna fund the
the remaining billion dollars.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator.
It's going to take
I
And this is where, that's why
we're not asking for the, the
1.25 billion.
We don't have the contractors.
We don't have the workers. Um,
it's going to be a very long
process to get our
infrastructure updated.
So, obviously you I'll be coming
back to the legislature for
additional money in the coming
years.
Mr. Chairman, members, I think
the best model is to, to just
reinforce the water trust board
process. It works. It's a good
process. And there, there is a
good system in place for the
matches, right? If you have a
very low MHI you can get a 90%
on this, a 90% grant, and you're
right, that 10% for some of the
small communities is hard, but
water trust board works, and I
think just backfilling the delta
between the requests.
And the distribution is probably
the right model to get it fixed
over time.
Oh, thank you.
Also, just a comment, I remember
several years ago, uh.
Either December of 22 or 21, the
state engineer quit.
Resigning he publicly stated the
reason he was
One of the reasons he was
resigning was because he didn't
have enough.
Money to uh
properly
Um
Maintain and improve the water
infrastructure.
So in November of 21.
President Biden signed the $1.1
trillion.
Um
Infrastructure bill.
And some experts say we could
have spent the whole $1.1
trillion throughout the United
States just on
on water infrastructure, you
know, to build water treatment
plants, desalinization.
He the lead pipe problem, pipe
water from areas where they have
a surplus, the areas where they
have a drought.
It's
interesting, um.
Chapter 11 there were 13
categories in that bill, and
just one of them was uh
Water infrastructure.
So I just
So I passed on obviously a huge
problem with being.
Uh, terribly underfunded.
So, that's all I have.
Mr. Chair, thanks again for
being here. Thank you very much,
Senator Tollman and uh went back
are there any other questions?
See, now that I just have a
couple of uh brief questions and
in a, in a statement, uh,
there's a community like Vaughan
that uh needs to replace its
water tank and water line.
Uh, estimated cost is about a
million. They didn't have anyone
to put together, if you will,
uh, their request before the
Water Trust board. So ultimately
it means it would probably have
to be a direct appropriation.
How are you helping some of
these municipalities that uh
are small that maybe don't have
the resources in order to go
forward, like maybe some of the
larger ones to do the planning
and then from there the
implementation of the resources
that they secure.
Mr. Chair, um, through the
municipal league, we, we do have
a grant specialist on contract,
so he's available to help all
our members, um, at no cost to
them, and he's helped a lot, uh,
especially our smaller members
put together, um, you know,
preliminary grant applications,
do research on what kind of
funding they're eligible for,
um, and
You know, we can always connect
those small communities with
further resources if needed,
cause yeah, we don't want, you
know, a lack of capacity to fill
out an application to be a
barrier to getting a million
dollars in funding, so, um, we
can certainly connect with, with
that community and figure out
how we can help. So, so as we go
forward, what seems to be the
breach or if you will, the
disconnect.
Uh, and Maxwell, they needed a
million dollars for their water
line, for their water system.
They fell about 3000 to $40,000
short, and as a subsequence,
they were not able to fully
enact, if you will, those
improvements, and again, here's
another small community.
Through the municipal league as
you deal with those incorporated
communities.
How, how do you handle that or
what can we do in the future?
The ties in legislation and at
the same time, um, some form of
understanding so that these
communities aren't left behind.
I could bring up a whole lot
more, uh, and to raise another
uh situation where they're
possibly looking at
incorporating their
unincorporated and uh we have so
many of these stories around the
state, and I just hope at some
point we can also bring some
solution to them, and I don't
know if you wanna, uh, remark in
terms of the
Incorporated incorporated
communities and in particularly
the small communities that maybe
don't have access, if you will,
to the expertise that you all
are talking about.
In, in, and Senator, I think
that's what
I think the best way to approach
those is is what we discussed
earlier in, in having the
legislature set the policy on
what that floor should be for
those small communities.
So when we
When we revisit small cities'
assistance.
Take into account the basics
that they have to have, and most
importantly, what the costs are
associated with running, and I
think we just met with Pannery
today, um.
For Vonn, yeah, we'll, we'll.
Our contractor can do that
application for them, they just
have to ask. But having that
floor in place and language to
say yes when you go through the
water trust board and you're
Vaughan and have very little is
their language in the
legislature's been good about
this, giving Water Trust Board
money for cost overruns, but if
you have a certain level of
revenue, but it's just fully
funded, right? That bare minimum
needs to be met and watch the uh
the other issue that I bring
forward as we uh improve if you.
our wastewater treatment
facilities, and we talk about
the level 3s, level 4s.
In small communities when
communities that invest, if you
will, in ensuring that the
education and the expertise and
of course the experiences
developed, so you get a level 3,
level 4 operator in that
community, then
They're usually recruited to
some of the larger systems and
larger communities, and so, uh,
we need to take a look at that,
particularly through the
Department of Environment to
ensure that the smaller
communities have a very basic
but functional and uh uh to
provide, if you will, the the
the the safe resources, and of
course the uh safety for uh
domestic and of course uh our
wastewater treatment facilities,
uh, in, in going forward with
that, how can we
Sure, if you will, some of these
mid-sized communities that um
they don't need the, the gold
standard in order to uh provide,
if you will, a functional
wastewater treatment facility.
Consider that that.
That's a much more complicated
answer, because you're right, we
have some very small communities
um that have built
Cadillac, right, they've done
the full toilet to tap model
very expensive models where
Maybe they could have just fixed
the pipes that were leaking.
They didn't have so much waste
to loss.
That's something where we're
trying to do it through
education. So we, right, we
represent every layer of local
government. We have the water,
the water folks, the EQA group.
And we try to have that
conversation, right? Do you
need, uh, what the engineers
are, are telling you, right?
There's that what you want and
what you need.
You need something that you can
operate.
And if, if, if you have 60% loss
in your delivery system, let's
fix that first, rather than
getting the Cadillac water
treatment facility. And so for,
for us it's education, and this
is where Alison comes in with
her contractors to educate that
community on what works best,
and we'll do a lot of. Thank you
very much. Any other final
comments?
If not, then thank you all very
much and again please uh reach
out to members of this committee
who wish to either uh help to
sponsor or co-sponsor a piece of
legislation that you all are
considering. Any other questions
from members of the committee.
See none then. Now we stand in
recess until 8:45 tomorrow
morning.
Thank you.
