Ending from looks like
Got that. Okay. All right. Well,
I will kick us off and we're
gonna pass back and forth a
little bit here, but just let us
know if you've got questions or
the chair would like to hold
them till the end. Whatever your
preference is, okay.
Alright, Well, we're giving a
tax policy overview to you
today. Um, we've made
Some updates to the past version
of this slide deck that we had
given and I think it was myself
and Izzy and Richard Inkling had
given something similar in the
past. And we've, um
Updated it. Um and hopefully
you'll find it informative.
So just to give an outline first
will be just kind of giving a
broad overview of New Mexico's
revenue structure. It's focused
on the General fund, but not
entirely. Um, then we'll talk
about tax expenditure reporting
tax expenditure, budgeting and
evaluating tax expenditures will
go through a highlight of the
tax changes that were made in
each of the past several
sessions and then follow up with
some commentary on tax burden
and regressive versus
progressive progressive
taxation.
Um, so first to kick us off on
revenue structure will go to
Lucinda.
Yeah. Sorry. No problem. Good
morning, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee Happy to be here.
I'm gonna walk you through some
of the revenue sources and then
handed off to Brendan to take
you through the rest of them.
And if we start on slide for
just an overview of the General
fund revenue sources and the
chart, um stacks the sources by
percentage, um
With the highest percentage
there at the bottom at 32% for
our sales taxes going
progressively up to our other,
which are little taxes, which
will walk through youth through
these slides, But I'm not. I'm
gonna stick with the bullets
Because importantly, um we
talked about oil and gas a lot,
so just a reminder that direct
taxes on oil and gas
Or estimated 3.1 billion in FY
24.
But the next bullet point is to
also emphasized the indirect
revenue from oil and gas through
our G R T, especially, but also
income taxes as that industry,
um generates revenue in those
two big revenue tax programs as
well.
And then finally, um, as it was
emphasized this morning infant
investment earnings are now
contributing 1.9 billion or 14%
there in in the chart.
And that importantly, has helped
stabilize General fund revenues
as we as we substitute our
direct oil and gas revenue
volatility with those investment
earnings through through the
processes that you passed with
the five year average
distributions
So
Turning to slide five doing a
deeper dive into grocery seats
tax.
Again. This is the largest
revenue source at 4.1 billion
estimated in this clear 24.
And importantly, this is a broad
based tax so
Most things are taxed under this
program, but we'll you know,
we'll talk about the exceptions
as we go through.
But it
Compared to many states, where
one of the few that includes
services in that broad based so
that's um been very beneficial
for New Mexico. Um and then this
tax, of course, has the state
portion and then your local
options. So while the state rate
you have decreased to 4.875%
through legislation with that
step down function
There's still a local options
that are tacked on top of that,
with currently the largest then
when you combine the two is Tau
Ski Valley at 9.43. Some five
So the state rate is
competitive. But when you when
you start to, um
Put on those local options that
can that can lead to less
competitive itiveness when you
compare it to so turning to side
six.
importantly, legislation that
you passed, Um
Did two things in the past
couple of years that I like to
pair together, and that is one
is adding Internet sales to to
the tax base, which again made
it even broader and then with
destination based sourcing the
two combined brought in, um,
that out of state revenue that
could then be sourced particular
locations.
The consumptions by those
residents was now benefiting
those communities. Now there are
some exceptions to that,
including listed here
Professional Services
construction, real estate
commissions, but generally most
items that are
Delivered or exchanged the
grocery seats is then source to
that, um, location.
Another tax policy. Um, statute
change was pyramid ng. We talked
about that, Um
That with grocery seats tax
Transactions that occur before
the final consumption. Those are
often taxed so your business to
business services.
And those layers and add tax.
The real rate of taxation is
higher by the time it's
consumed.
But in recent years you passed
anti pyramid ng grt deductions,
particularly in the
manufacturing sector.
Turning to slide seven.
We have the compensating tax.
This is the companion of the
grocery seats tax. It is for
purchases that are out of state,
but the final product is used in
the states. So this um, this
allows that that companion
transactions that you get you
get the revenue from those
But any any purchased out of
state? You do get a credit if
there's taxes and other states
so that you know there.
Taxes, not
Being compounded because of out
of state purchases.
Um, there is now local options
that are parallel to gross
proceeds, so any compensating
will also benefit the local
governments.
The state share of compensating,
um 75% of that goes to the
General fund.
And that was estimated 83
million in FY 24.
And there are two distributions
off of the state shared that go
to our small cities 15% 10%,
respectively.
If we turn to slide eight
We're not gonna leave our broad
based grocery seats tax and
we're going to talk about some
excise taxes that are
specifically and specific
consumption of products, and the
first is tobacco and we have to
taxes. As you know, there's a
cigarette tax and the tobacco
products tax.
The cigarette tax is a rate of
$2 per pack of 20 cigarettes,
and the tax foundation has found
were about 19th highest in the
country, so kind of middle of
the pack with them and we listed
the range there.
This revenue is sourced
primarily to the General fund
79.8% to the General fund. But
then there are some smaller
distributions to other funds.
And then there are the bottom.
We have the tobacco products
tax.
That has a rate depending on the
type of tobacco product and
we've listed them there. Um
For you to see.
And that revenue is entirely
distributed to the general fund.
So there is no special
distributions for that.
Fraud. Um, for that tax.
In total. And if you look at our
General fund from the Craig, we
list the revenues from these
together and for fy 24. We're
estimating 71 million from the
combination of these two tax.
Turning to Page nine. We go to
another.
Excise tax on liquor.
This is, um, um, imposed at the
wholesaler level.
And the Tax foundation waiting
all the different rates
depending on the product. We're
about 24th highest in the in the
country so very much in the
middle of the pack for this, um,
for these tax rates, and these
are on the volume, so we've
listed the rates here by the
various products and volumes.
This.
Particular revenue source. 50%
goes to the General fund and
other distributions to those
grants funds listed there.
On slide 10. We have the
insurance premium tax.
And there are two taxes in this
program. We have the premium
tax, which is imposed every line
of insurance. And that right is
3.003%, and this is in lieu of
other taxes except for property
tax.
And so in the middle there this
revenue source, depending on the
line of insurance distribution
will go to several funds other
than the General fund. So to the
law Enforcement Protection fund,
we're taking 10% from the listed
lines of insurance there.
For the fire protection fund,
property and vehicle that entire
those entire lines of insurance
premium tax goes to that fund
100%.
And then starting July 1st 2025.
We're going to start to
distribute 5% of health
insurance to the New Emergency
Medical Services Fund.
At the bottom. There is the
other tax, which is only on
health insurance premiums.
That is now at 3.75%.
And that's uh, tax revenue is
distributed 55% to Health Care
Affordability Fund and 45% to
General fund.
Previously you would have that
phasing out the health care
affordability fund. But now with
new legislation is going to hold
those two distributions.
Now, um, the number there at the
top of 367 million. That is both
taxes, so that's the premium tax
and the surtax. That's the
estimated revenue to the General
fund from those lines of
insurance from all learning to
slide. Lemon is the gaming
excise tax.
There are different rates,
depending on the type of
transaction, and, um, it takes
and that isn't this revenue is
entirely distributed to the
General fund, and we're
estimating 68 million in fiscal
year 24.
On site 12. We have our newest
excise tax. The cannabis excise
tax, which started April 1st
2020 22.
And it's at a rate of 12%
currently
Starting in fiscal year 26. The
rate will increase by 1% until
we reach 18% in fiscal year, 30
This is imposed and
recreational, um cannabis, not
medical cannabis and on the
retail sale price of cannabis.
This distribution is two thirds
to the General fund and then one
third to the local government,
where the respective sale took
place. And finally, the last.
Ah, selective sales. I will
cover is on slide. 13 motor
vehicle excise.
4% on sales of new and used
cars.
This tax is in lieu of grocery
seats tax.
Our rate is in the middle of
pack. You see, some states don't
have don't charge a motive you
exercise and the highest is
8.25%.
Um, like other revenue sources,
this one as various
distributions of the General
fund gets 59.39% of motor
vehicle excise tax.
And for fiscal 24 arrests,
mating 167 million from this
revenue source.
With that I will hand it over to
Brendan.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair
Committee members. My name is
Brendan Gray. I'm an economist
at Lfc. Um and I am going to
follow up Lucinda's
presentation. She covered the
largest revenue stream. The
state has that gross receipts
tax and then all the small
selective sales taxes and I'm
gonna cover our income taxes and
then end with our
Um, energy taxes. So, um, start
on slide 14 with the personal
income tax. This raised just
here over $2 billion in fy 24.
Personal income tax income taxes
overall, our our third largest
revenue stream and for the
personal income tax, I think the
most important important
intuition to have is that we
start with the federal income
tax. So we piggyback off the
federal system. That means that
when I fill out my taxes in next
spring, I'm going to start by
filling out the federal income
tax. Find my federal
Adjusted gross income, and then
I'm gonna fill out the state
income tax.
As you can see this formula on
page 14. We start with the
federal form. Make any new
Mexico additions. We take out
the federal standard deductions
Any new Mexico deductions.
That's our New Mexico taxable
income, and that's what we then
apply our rates to, um for my
tax.
Taxes that I owe on page 15 that
shows a little bit more detail
on our personal income tax. It's
a graduated rate ranging from
1.5% to 5.9% at the top.
And we're pretty much in the
middle of the pack. 30. Other
states have graduated personal
income tax system 14 have a flat
personal income tax and seven
have no personal income tax.
Um are top rate is is pretty
much right in the middle. Um
And then on page 16.
This is the other income tax
that Mexico has our corporate
income tax. Personal income
taxes, primarily wage earners
like me. Also businesses, some
businesses elected their income
tax through personal income tax,
and we also have the the
corporate income tax. This
raised 305 135 million and FY
24. And then we also paid out
102 million in film tax credits
out of this revenue stream.
It's a 5.9% flat tax rate as of
tax year. 2025. It's pretty
moderate, maybe a little on the
higher end, 28 highest in the
states. Most states have a
corporate income tax, where
again pretty much in the middle
One change that you'll you might
start seeing more here is that
the past through entity tax
Which is that
Different tax on pass through
entities is now going to be
within the corporate income tax.
Um
And not in the personal income
on the next slide this again.
Illustrates that the corporate
income tax starts from the
federal, um, income tax system
and then we add and subtract
specific New Mexico factors. And
then the last thing on corporate
income tax is reporting methods.
This is a somewhat important but
complicated issue. Um
I default come companies filing
corporate attacks file worldwide
combined reporting that's
required for unitary groups
Unitary group is a group of
corporations that are related in
some way, maybe by ownership or
some other some other principles
that have to file together under
this mechanism, and then they
can also elect
The file Water's edge.
Which is if less than 20% of the
property sales or payroll is
outside in the U. S a file that
way and then consolidated. That
follows the federal guidelines.
So just saying those words I
know it's complicated and not
always to relevant but a good
thing to review And then the
last thing is another very
important topic on slide 19.
The allocation and apportionment
of corporate income tax. So of
course, a corporation doing
business and more than one
state. We want to tax the new
Mexico portion and the way we,
uh, where we do that is by
requiring companies to apportion
their income. Based on a series
of factors. We have three
factor apportionment in New
Mexico based on the property.
Payroll and sales in New Mexico
versus everywhere else, so they
report their total income.
report. The those three factors
and that's how their tax is
identified.
That covers the income tax on
slide, 20 all pivot now to oil
and natural gas taxes, So this
is the second largest income
stream. We have direct energy
taxes are very important for New
Mexico, um, or oil that
Active combined rate is 8.27%.
We estimate and for natural gas
is 8.97%. On average. This is
largely based on the work of my
colleague Jennifer Fabian, who
did an excellent report on oil
and gas revenues in New Mexico.
Um, either recommend looking at
that brief.
Uh, but that's where all these
numbers come from.
So within our energy taxes,
there's two main that go to the
General fund. First is the oil
and gas emergency school tax.
And the second is the severance
tax, oil and gas emergency
school tax that goes to the
general fund, also to the stack
Tax Stabilization Reserve Early
childhood education fund
Severance Tax Permanent fund.
And then the severance tax is
distributed entirely for debt
service, Um Capital Ali
So those are the two major taxes
and then you also have other
conservation tax and Advil Forum
taxes.
20 slide. 21 breaks down those
tax rates in greater detail.
I'll go over this briefly but
will again pitch my colleagues
work, which not only shows these
taxes but also shows where all
that money flows within the
system. So very important, um,
but in the blue box, that's
generally what we tax on because
the net price of oil and the
price of gas or over those
thresholds.
And then you can see the oil and
gas emergency school attacks oil
and gas severance taxes. 3.15%
3.75%, and then those smaller
Advil or um and Advil or on
taxes and that women gas
conservation tax.
That covers the income tax and
inter direct energy taxes, and
I'll conclude with a couple
remarks on non first on non
general fund of funds that
you'll see throughout the
session. These are listed here
don't need to get into them.
Overly much on the next slide is
unemployment, unemployment
insurance tax? This is a very
important tax Mexico levied on
employers, um and is important
in times of recession. So
something to um
Always having the slide deck,
but I won't spend too much time
on it unless there's questions
and then lastly on slide, 24
local and tribal taxes all slow
down a little bit here to cover
these so local taxes. There's
there's two big sources of local
tax er, T and then property
taxes.
Um
Again. I will pitch some great
work from Jennifer at LFC. She
found that 18% of local
government revenue comes from
property taxes, and that's
pretty significantly lower than
the national average.
Nationally, most local
governments get about 30% of the
revenue from from property
taxes, so we're relatively over
Reliant.
Local government finances are
over, reliant on grt as income
source to fund their operations
and then, lastly, tribal taxes,
Probable governments don't have
to align with New Mexico taxes.
They do it as a matter of
convenience, and for 21 tribal
entities. TRD administers and
distributes their revenue to
those tribes.
And in FY 24. That amount was 34
million or some context.
That concludes my remarks will
pass it back over for the, um
Next portion. Okay? Thank you,
Mr Chair and co presenters. I'll
start on slide 25 now and talk a
little bit about tax
expenditure, evaluation and tax
expenditure. Budgeting. Um and
I'll start in 26 and just to
kind of cover what a tax
expenditure budget is, and I
know this is familiar to the
committee. And, um, but you
know, for any listeners that are
sort of thinking that doesn't
make sense. What is a tax
expenditure because taxes money
coming in expenditure.
Is there going out? It sounds
very strange, but the idea and
why I think it's called that is
that, um
Items in the tax code that forgo
revenue. The idea is to give
them as much evaluation as you
do the competitive nature of the
appropriation process. So a tax
expenditure budget basically
puts together a listing and
analysis of each area where the
tax code forgoes revenue. We
don't include in it things that
are done to set the tax base to
prevent federal preemption
things. Things that just define
the base.
But really what's in there in
the report that tax and
publishes each fall? We have an
estimate of the foregone revenue
and the basis for every tax
credit deduction exemption and
preferential tax rate. And
really, these are all the things
in the tax code that are meant
to incentivize one type of
behavior or another. Um, so the
idea is to make sure that
policymakers across the across
government have the ability to
Evaluate each year whether that
money is that foregone revenue
is serving its purpose or
whether we should make a change.
Um so it's an important
transparency tool. Um, and for
those that are wondering where
they can get a hold of this
document. They're all published
on the tax and Rev. Rob website.
You go to the Tax department
website. You click on forms and
publications and then drill down
to tax expenditure reports under
our publications and everyone
that we've produced since 2012
is there.
Um and I'll also add that the
tax expenditure budget used to
be produced annually under an
executive order that I believe
was from 2011 or 2012. But now,
thanks to new legislation that
was enacted in 2023, it's now a
requirement of statute so that
is now required in section 7184.
Okay. So on to slide 27. We'll
talk a little bit about the
different types of tax
expenditures and how they're
different. What it means.
Um first and exclusion is really
something in law that is meant
to define the tax base. It's not
really a preferential rate. It's
not really incentivizing
behavior. But like I said,
before, it might be making sure
that we're not double taxing a
certain activity. It might be
that we're preventing federal
exemption attacks, taxing things
that were not allowed to things
like that.
But the real exemptions I would,
I would say are mostly these
exemptions, real tax
expenditures would be
exemptions, deductions and
credits and to pause for a
second on the difference between
all those things because the
legislation does come your way.
It helps to kind of know the
difference in exemption in a
deduction have the same impact
on the total amount of tax
that's ultimately going to be
paid.
The difference is generally
reporting and whether the
taxpayers has the burden of
telling us what they did, and
then
Removing it from taxation, so
we're sort of blind to
exemptions if certain business
receipts or certain income is
exempt from taxation, the
taxpayer generally doesn't have
to tell us about it doesn't file
a return doesn't report and they
don't pay tax on it.
Whereas a deduction is the same
tax do but with reporting so a
business or someone with their
income might report to us
certain business receipts and
then claim a deduction making,
taking those receipts out of the
taxable base. So they same
bottom line. They don't pay tax
on the receipts, but they do
report to us so that we have the
information available to
Create estimates for you and and
evaluate whether it's a good
thing or not.
And then so those two I would
call sort of above the line tax
expenditures. You change your
tax base make it narrower
through exemptions and
deductions.
Credits are typically below the
line. So you take, um your tax
base. Whether it's your receipts
or your income you multiply it
by a tax rate to figure out how
much taxes due credit is
generally a dollar for dollar
reduction in your tax liability.
So if if I may be my business
sells $100,000 worth of
receipts. I pay eight percent
tax on that $8000. But maybe
there's a credit available that
just dollar for dollar brings
down my tax bill, so that's the
difference. High level between a
deduction and a credit.
Onto the next slide. Um, each
tax expenditure budget that we
produce puts each tax
expenditure into one of five
categories. Citizen benefits is
by far the largest category, and
it's been especially large in
the last two fiscal years, shown
here because mainly of non
recurring rebates, those would
be the main thing that has
pushed FY 22 and 23 higher than
years past.
But other major areas or
economic development,
environmental conservation
efforts, healthcare related
things and then tax expenditures
for some very specialized
industries.
On the next slide. We've ranked
for you the top 10 most costly
tax expenditures.
You can see as I mentioned in
the last slide. The rebates are
part of what has pushed, um
citizen benefits higher in the
recent years, but you can see
the largest tax expenditure in
2023 report was a 695 roughly
million dollar income tax
rebate and then followed by the
recurring cost of the food and
medical services.
Deduction and the associated
hold harmless and and actually,
the 444 million. That's number
two is only for food and hold
harmless associated with that,
Um, after that another large one
is for prescription drugs. Um
then you get the 60% g r T
deduction for hospitals and on
down the list. Um so I know that
we talk all the time about
trying to clean up the tax code,
and there's this idea that we
want to use representative
Harper's analogy. We want to
melt down the Swiss cheese. Take
the
Holes out of the tax code and
then maybe use the revenue we
gained to decrease the total
rate.
Um the lower tax rate is, you
know, the less it distorts
economic activity. That's a good
thing. But when you look at the
real money that we're for going
here it does. It does call to
attention that the things that
really cost us a lot are kind of
hard to get rid of. You know, it
would be difficult. I think for
just about anyone to contemplate
putting the tax, for example,
back on food on groceries.
Prescription drugs. There's a
compelling public health reason
for them to be exempt, uh,
deductible from tax and on and
on. So a lot of these, you can
see why they are maintained.
Okay on to slide, 30. We just
give a snapshot of of all the
tax expenditures included in the
tax expenditure budget.
Consistently about 88% of the
foregone revenue is state
revenue, and that's because
we're capturing basically
personal income tax corporate
income tax. Those are only for
going state revenue and then G r
T. To the extent that there
isn't a hold harmless comes out
of a mix, but it is more state
than local and the rebates in
the last couple of years have
been only general fund so
Um, just kind of to put that in
context.
And I'll turn it back over to
Brendan. Mr. Chair I wanted to
to jump in quickly and, um all
of that great presentation on
the text. Your budget, which is
great document produced by TRT
and go through our attacks.
Actually expenditure policy
principles so the Legislative
Finance Committee has approved
is, uh
Policy principles, if if you
didn't know LFC also approves
budget guidelines every year, so
l C approves its budget
guidelines to direct its staff
on how to evaluate budget
requests into the session, and
they've done a similar thing
with tax expenditures. And so
they've directed staff on how to
evaluate tax expenditures and
these are what those are and
you'll see these in our I R. S
in the session.
At other points as we're going
through tax expenditures, so
first vetted that they've gone
through an interim committee
like this targeted, its purpose
is clear. It has a long term
goal, transparent accountable.
These are really helped by the
new reporting requirement that
that all tax expenditures be
included in Texas senator budget
that they're effective, for
example, that an economic
development tax expenditure
passes the but for test but for
test that you know that activity
wouldn't have happened except
for the tax expenditure, and
then that they're efficient and
cost effective, So I just wanted
to put these here to your
attention to briefly and happy
to answer any other questions
that that you have about.
Yeah.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. I'm going to take
over and just highlight.
A few legislative changes as
starting in 2019. So if you
turned aside 32
I'm just going to highlight a
few from each of the years, um,
starting in 2019 importantly,
the bullet one and Bullet three
as I mentioned earlier, the
partnering of taxing online
sales, which brought in the tax
base and then um, combining that
with destination based sourcing,
um provided revenue for the
General fund and also for local
government. So
Um, those two important changes.
Then fourth from the bottom. I
want to highlight the working
families tax credit, which we're
going to hear a little bit more
about tax program progressivity.
That's changed. There were 32.
This is the first where this is
taking a percentage of what
taxpayers get and the federal
earned income tax credit. We had
previously been at 10% this
legislative change change that
up to 17%.
And then finally, the last one I
want to. I want to highlight
you. You introduced the
dependent deduction and this was
to counter the impact of the tax
cuts and Jobs Act.
Which took away personal
exemptions, and that had a
detrimental effect. For those
with dependence, so Children and
other dependants and
You know if the federal
government that that worked for
that system but for states it
had the unintended, um, impact
that increased state taxes, so
you pass it dependent watching
that countered that so return
the tax base, basically pretest
Cuts and Jobs act, and that's a
good example of something we
don't consider an expenditure.
Because we are we are making
taxpayers hole by the unintended
consequences of federal law.
Turning to side 33 tax changes
in 2020 21 Bullet three as we
mentioned earlier, we now have a
new tax program that Cannabis
tax act.
But five is was the second
change that you made to the
working families tax credit.
You increase the percentage of
the earned income tax credit
first to 20% and then now in
text your 2023 25%, where it
will hold
And then you also, um expanded
the eligibility to those with an
individual taxpayer
identification number.
And those that are childless.
Working adults.
Um, which, at the federal level
those were excluded. So you've
expanded at the state level.
And then just below that, um
The low income, comprehensive
tax rebate. You expanded, Um,
the eligibility for that rebate
as well by increasing the income
eligibility from 22,000 to
36,000.
And then you have now index the
actual rebate to inflation. So
that, um that that rebate
At least the rebate portion will
say, um, in line with inflation.
Onside 34. We have the tax year
2022 changes And as the
secretary mentioned you, you've
introduced three rebates. These,
of course, were non recurring.
Um, and they primarily impacted
fiscal year 2022 and 2023.
And then the third bullet, the
change to the state grocery
seats tracks rate from 5.125%.
Down to 5% and then finally to
the 4.875% that we're currently
at.
And then going down to bullet
number five.
You exempted Social Security
benefits from personal income
tax at certain income threshold
levels.
Just below that pairing that
with military retirement, which
at that time was going to be,
um, temporary and was going to
be a stair step effect, and as
we'll see in a couple sides that
is now permanent.
And the child income tax credit
was created.
And then finally, I would like
to highlight the past through
entity change where we now have
what's called an entity level
tax, where pass through entities
can now elect to pay that tax,
as opposed to, um
Passing on the the tax due to do
the partners.
Turning to side 35.
Again. There was one more rebate
that was introduced in that
session.
The child income tax credit was
touched again where you increase
the rebate for the lowest three
income levels.
And then, um, expanded the film
tax credit.
Um, and also did some gear T d d
r T deductions under the health
practitioners deduction and
removed cannabis excise tax from
grt another pyramid ng example.
And finally our last session a
lot in here, but I'm going to
highlight just a few, Um for
importantly, the first one,
which is reformed brackets. This
will be effective for tax year.
2025 so you'll start to see the
impact and you're withholding
this coming January.
Following that, with some new
credits. We have the clean car
credit, um, and the charging
unit credits and then a new
advanced energy equipment
credit.
Um, skipping down as I mentioned
the bullet, six the armed
services or military retirement
exemption from personal income
taxes now permanent.
And then
Going down to the bottom. Um, as
we talked about this morning, we
have some here cheap credits for
wildfire victims. We also have
some credits within the income
taxes for those who are affected
by the wildfires in recent
summers and finally want to
highlight that the corporate
income tax rate will be
flattened to 5.9% as Brendan
mentioned.
And that is also effective tax
year 2025.
And with that I will handle once
again to my colleague. Mr.
Chair. I wanted to spend some
time on the personal income tax
exchanges from the 20 24th
session on slide. 37. This
breaks down. What those what
That effect is so Lucinda
mentioned withholding will be
going down for all wage earners
beginning in January, so very
big deal for tax policy at this
table breaks down the benefits
by, uh
Tax bracket and so because we
lowered the rates at the lower
level, and throughout the, um
Throughout the income tax. All
taxpayers will see a some tax
relief between
204 $100 per year. Um, and you
can see that those benefits are
really concentrated on the
brackets from the 3rd, 4th and
5th rackets. You can see the 3rd
4th and 5th brackets. Average
taxpayer relief goes from $200 a
year to around $400 a year and
so just for some context that
ranges from those, um
Taxpayers have an income of
between $25,000 per year all the
way up to 353 $115,000 per year
for single or for joint filers.
And so you can. That's where
those benefits are. And that's
where the most of the taxpayers
will see the benefit.
And then lastly, uh, your I also
wanted to put a slide from the
consensus Revenue estimate
Revenue brief from LFC
recurring General fund
volatility over time. This is
typically included an lfc slide
decks. It's It's a good one to
include and to end on for Lfc
presentation.
The Legislature and really led
by this committee has taken many
steps to reduce revenue vault
volatility, and you can see that
and that's reflected in the
consensus revenue estimates, but
some sources of volatility
remain some work by Ismael
Torres shows that um state
Treasurer's office has
tremendous volatility. As our
general fund balances have
exploded.
Corporate income tax still
demonstrates a lot of
volatility. Um and so
conversation of volatility has
improved a lot from from 10
years ago, but there's still
some areas of back over.
Okay, We're ending our slide
deck on the theme of
progressivity and tax burden.
Basically the concept of who
pays and and is the state's tax
system relatively progressive or
relatively regressive. So kind
of an overview. The source of
slide. 40 is I TEPP you heard
from their expert earlier today,
but just kind of put us all on
the same page. A progressive tax
system is one where the higher
your income level
The more share of your income
and the more share of the
state's tax bill that you as
that higher income earner tend
to contribute regressive tax
would be the opposite. The lower
your income, the greater the
share of your income goes
towards tax versus other things
and then a proportional tax
would be one words flat across
all income levels. Um, and so
I'm really proud to say that in
New Mexico we've really moved
the needle on this mentioned
that a little bit this morning
in the Revenue Estimate
presentation, but
Um, slide 41 is a really great
way to kind of eyeball the
changes that we've made. You can
see, Um, the progressivity of
New Mexico's tax system,
improving pretty dramatically
between 2018 and 2023. And then
the changes that we've just made
In the last legislative session,
For example, the bracket reform
that was included in House Bill
252.
Will further improve this, but,
um, you know, in the in the
light blue bars, you can see the
regressive itty the clear,
regressive itty of the tax
system in New Mexico as of 2018
with 10.6 and 10.7% of income
being paid towards taxes for the
lowest, um, 40% of taxpayers on
down to 6%, the lowest
Amount of income or the lowest
percentage of income paid by the
highest income 20% top. That's
the 1%, and now it's we're far
from the most progressive you
could be. It's not going
straight up and up and up across
incomes, But we've really moved
the needle on that. We've we've
seen about 3.5% reduction in
income paid
Towards taxes for the lowest 20%
and at the top 1% of taxpayers.
Their share of income towards
taxes. There's increased 2.1%,
so there's always more work we
could be doing and I think
reasonable people could argue
about what this should look
like if we achieve some sort of
win, But I think most of us
would argue that this is a more
fair and balanced system then we
had five years ago.
Slide 42 kind of breaks that
data down into different major
revenue streams You can see in
the upper left. We're looking at
the percentage of income paid to
gross receipts tax by each
income level there. We've made
some progress, although not as
much. Um, but you've got the top
1% of earners. Paying about 1.1%
more towards G R T and the
lowest income earners getting a
little bit more relief
percentage wise.
Property tax has has not changed
dramatically. Um, but where we
really do see a huge, um, change
in our progressivity as in the
income tax on the on the bottom
chart. You've got the lowest 20%
of earners getting a larger net
increase. Basically, they pay a
negative amount because of
refundable tax credits. So
between expanding the working
families tax credit, which is
refundable and Lichter, which is
refundable.
And a couple other programs.
We've really moved the needle
with about 4.5% more income
going back to those lowest 20%
of earners. And then, um, you've
got a little bit of
progressivity shown in the in
the pit, also for the higher
income earners, and then just to
to finish. I kind of mentioned
this already this morning that
you know, we we calculate. We've
cut taxes recurring by about a
billion dollars per year that
and that's being enjoyed by
families and businesses.
Is all across New Mexico.
Um, but particularly you can see
it in the progressivity of the
personal income tax,
particularly for lower and
moderate income earners. And
here we just kind of on slide
43.
Put in an order of magnitude
where those cuts are the G R T
reduction by a quarter percent
to saving new Mexicans and every
consumer in every business is
joining in that savings by about
$234 million per year. Um, the
child tax credit will cost about
$174 million per year. But
again that's very well targeted
to the lowest income families,
families with Children and it
phases out very gradually as
incomes rise.
Um, and the working families. I
know we talked about that a lot.
But you know, that is a
wonderful poverty reduction tool
that incentivizes work at the
same time you have to have
earned income through wages
basically to be eligible for
that, So you have to be in the
labor force to benefit from that
refundable credit.
With that I we have a couple
more slides. Lfc slides on
earmarking that are after the
questions as sort of an appendix
if you want those, but I believe
we're ready to stand for
questions.
I love it. Thank you all for the
presentations afternoon. We do
have a list. Going first on our
list is senators to phonics.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you very much for your
presentations. Um, Madam
Secretary. You made a comment
this morning.
Uh, about using deduction rather
than a credit.
And I have been asked by
volunteer firefighters.
To set up a tax credit as a way
to, uh increased recruitment.
So could you talk to me or just
explain again? The difference
and why you're saying the
deduction versus the credit?
Yes, I am. Thank you, Mr Chair
and Senator Stefan IX, and I'd
be happy to talk to you about
that specific, Um, scenario and
help you plan what would be the
best way to approach that? Um,
the comment this morning was
really about in the grocery
seats. Tax. Um, credit in the G
R T is fairly few and far
between, and deductions tend to
be much more straightforward.
Um, if you're looking at an
income tax credit, and it sounds
like you might be my comment
probably wouldn't apply. So
let's talk about that. Um, but a
G r t deduction is very easily
administered. Um, basically the
business that has the deductible
receipts just claims the
deduction on their tax return
files that with us remind audit
it. It might go straight
through, but it's it's simple.
Where as a credit against G R T.
The tax return comes in the
credit. The credit has claimed
that credit has to be certified
by an agency like rld or M nerd.
Then it has to, you know, it's
it's it's much more
administratively complex,
especially in the G R T.
Okay, So thank you for that now,
Um, I called you down during the
interim for a constituent and
you don't need to remember this.
And, um, also, something
happened to me where I was
contacted by one of the tax
auditors saying I had number
five my taxes three far four or
five years ago and I had proof
of everything. So I thought that
was a little weird. Number one.
Secondly, um
I have a situation with a
constituent who who are part of
the larger group.
They own horses.
They have, um, a service where
they trained people to ride
those first horses.
And they're taxed twice.
And when the individual
Um, try to talk to somebody, Um,
It had already gotten to the tax
audit phase.
So when they tried to talk to
somebody about it
There wasn't a clear, um,
discussion understanding.
So in this situation, the best
thing I could do Mr chair was to
encourage them to get their
association.
To work on changing the double
taxation there. The pyramid
Is that an example of pyramid
ng? Mr Chair and Senator
Stefanik, So I'm I'm not
familiar with what the two
levels of tax are in the force
training scenario, But it's
another one. Where, um, you know
a good resource for that might
be our tax policy office and
they have an email address. I
can give you that, um they can
ask answer Questions of
interpretation. Make sure you
know that the statute is being
interpreted as intended. And if
not, we can work together on
revisions.
But they always take questions
that policy dot office at tax
that in him dot gov. And that
might be a good place to reach
out with that question or to me
directly and be happy to
research it, So I'm not sure
what the two levels of tax are
on that. Well, I think since I'm
not the horse trainer and the
person who solicits people to
come and ride my horses, I think
I need to have them.
Proceed, but
I saw it might be appropriate
for an association versus
individuals come forward so that
they could plan
Some kind of change your
advocacy.
Yeah, I tend to agree with that.
Mr Chair and senator because if
a taxpayer is under audit, they
can really kind of only talked
to their auditor. And of course
we can try the taxpayer advocate
and things but once an audit is
open, our hands are somewhat
tied to just honor the audit
process, whereas an association
could simultaneously um, look
into the underlying statutes.
And if we find there is an
unintended duplicate taxation,
we could look at a bill draft.
Okay. Thank you very much, Mr
Chair.
You're welcome representative
Eagles.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for the presentation today
on page 12 of your packet
regarding cannabis exercise tax.
Um
There's all the cannabis text go
to the General fund.
Mr Chair and Representative
Diego's All of the state's share
goes to the General fund. So two
thirds of every tax dollar that
comes in from the cannabis
excise tax goes to the General
fund. And then one third goes to
the local government where this
sale occurred.
And Mr Chair. Um
And Secretary could you give me
I know you're gonna have to
guess, but I guess it would be
okay. Um about what that amount
would be from the state. So, Mr
Chair and Representative Diego's
for the General Fund. The amount
received was 32.7 million in FY
24. And then I believe the
revenue estimate would just show
moderate growth in that year
over year and then the local
government share would be
exactly half that So about 16
point some million
Thank you. Uh, yes, Madam.
Secretary, and Mr.
Thank you. Thank you. Anyone
else questions or comments?
Represented Harper. Yes, sir.
Absolutely. Thank you. Chairman
just
One short comment Well, first
thank you, secretary and and
Channel for the Great
presentation. I really
Love the high level kind of
picture of what what's going on
across the state. I just wanted
to mention something on
Slide 13 here, which I
I think we should all be very
proud of
Um, So when I
Started here 12 years ago. You
know 100% of the sale of the
vehicle. The motor vehicle
excise tax went to the General
fund.
And and if you look at the past,
you know several decades of
where that money goes.
When we have been hurting to the
general fund offset problems.
When we were doing well that
money would go to the road fund
so we could build roads and and
I feel like you look at that.
We've made some good progress on
Now that we're doing well,
moving a lot of money to the
road funds. Only about 60% of
that money now goes in the
general phone. The other 40%
goes, It's like almost a half
and half split between the state
road funds in the local road
finds
I was just talking to our mayor.
Um, uh, Tuesday evening. And he
was just talking about how
That increase has been huge for
helping some of our roads and
rail Rancho
And I can always tell where my
wife was when she was calling me
on the on the road home because,
you know, I hear this gunk gunk
your gunk as she was crossing in
China Hills Boulevard, and there
was a cracks all the way through
the road. And and finally, we
have that road completely
repaved, and it's just really
nice to drive on and it gives
the whole area facelift right.
The houses look nicer the
businesses along the road
But nicer. And so I think we all
agree having good roads.
Infrastructure is great for New
Mexico, and so I just want to
say, you know, Uh, yeah, but
this is a great benefit and
let's let's look at again as
things are going well and we
move some more.
Funding to two roads. Um
So anyway, I just wanted to
Mr Chairman. Thank you. Thank
you Represent Harper,
representative Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Rather
question I do have a comment.
I do want to appreciate, uh
Secretaries, assistants and the
staff's assistance.
Over the past few years I've had
Um, real for
Seniors have
That's the questions and issues.
I want to commend the secretary
and your staff forgetting on
that immediately.
Um, it's always nice to make one
phone call and have problems
solved.
Especially for constituents who
don't really understand the
complexity complexities of some
of these issues. You do want to
appreciate you and your staff
taking care of that.
Thank you.
Vice chairman Campos. Thank you
very much, Mr Chairman and thank
you very much for the
presentation. Uh, lot of
enlightening information as we
go forward, just just a couple
of general questions. The first
is in regard to our working
families. And there's a There's
a group um, that are somewhat uh
Continuously adversely affected
in there the, uh young business
people if you will, and others,
So we really talk about pit
reform and the schedules that
are going to be coming out. Is
there still room for
Improvement there to provide
more incentives for that group
That right now continues to go
in and carry a heavier tax
burden.
Mr Chair vice chair. I think
that's an excellent, excellent
question, And the only point
I'll make is that the state has
not made
Very many changes overall to the
personal income tax. Um, racket.
This was the largest change
remained in a while in 2024. And
so I think, continued progress
towards that and then focusing,
you know, on a on a specific
demographic, certainly within
the within the realm.
So so along. Um, those lines
also, as we look at some of the
specific users if you will have
some of the taxes, let's say,
for example, in the liquor
excise tax, and we continuously
see that there are more
addictions and the need
If you will for resources for
recovery, um, within our system
as we move forward, are we
looking at? Uh some additional
specifics.
Set up additional programs that
possibly would help statewide as
we did with the premium attacks
over the last several years.
Help with fire safety and
emergency preparedness, Those
kind of things, But now as we
start dealing, particularly with
some of these other issues, Uh
do you all have any thoughts in
terms of
How we might be able to go ahead
and strengthen if you will. Some
of these programs through the
use of some of these these
specific dollars Mr Chair and
Vice chair. Compost? Yes, I
would, and Lfc might have
comments of their own on this.
I would say that, you know,
there's been a lot of discussion
in recent sessions about your
marking different revenue
streams for different special
purposes like to representative
Harper's point, you could change
the distribution of motor
vehicle text or gasoline tax to
the road fund. Um, you could
earmark tobacco or liquor or
other sort of sin taxes if you
would
You can earmark those two
treatment programs or things
like that. Um, I would say tax
and, Rev. Um
Has a word of caution about
complicating the distribution
system. But with that said, You
know, uh,
One time just changed to, for
example, change the percentages
of where the liquor tax goes.
It's pretty manageable for us
where we really get
uncomfortable is earmarks that
create like all new
distributions, dreams or all new
disk types of districts are all
new recipients of our of our
revenue distributions. Those can
be incredibly costly for us. Um,
but I think we'll see those
those come up again.
Um, maybe the word of caution
and I don't want to get ahead of
Brendon. But, um, you know the
downside of earmarks is that the
more you earmark your revenue,
the less um, appropriating a
discretion The legislative body
has each year and so needs for
particular project will come and
go. Maybe they'll only rise, but
you know, an earmark of a
certain revenue stream doesn't
necessarily ensure
That the amount of revenue will
meet the need really appreciate.
Right? Brendan? Go ahead, Mr
Chairman, Mr Vice Chair,
reiterate everything, the
secretary said. I'm happy to
assist in those discussions that
will be having as your
economists in terms of
earmarking the fiscal revenue
side but also want to point out
that the LFC has additional
staff working with
LHs on the on the health policy
side, and so that's outside of
our our domain. But certainly
we're having those conversations
were thinking through. Um what?
What That could look like And I
think, um
They can also offer some some
good analysis really appreciate
that. So, Mr Chair, I fully
agree in terms of the more
earmarking that we do, the more
restrictive we become,
particularly in times when maybe
those needs to shift so it leads
to the other question,
particularly, let's say, for
example, with our various
agencies
How can we best prepare for some
of these things that are
occurring and and? And go ahead
and do
And fund if you will some of
these things
For limited periods of time
until we're able to go ahead and
work through if you will, the
issues that are affecting our
population. So again, Mr Chair.
I want to thank the panel for
the work that they've done.
This is very enlightening. And
of course, I hope that every
member of the Legislature gets a
copy of a packet like this, so
they better understand our tax
structure. Thank you very much.
Here. Thank you, Vice Chairman
before we continue electoral
recognize Senator Brent who
walked in this afternoon,
Senator. Good afternoon. Wish to
introduce yourself. You can if
not
Mhm,
Miss Chairman. I'm sure by now,
but most people
In this state know who I am, but
I'm Senator Brandt and Senate
District 40 Rear Rancho.
Usual. Glad to be here and
learns, you know about our tax
system. That's so exciting.
Thanks.
Right. Good to have you
Before we do, Uh,
That you all off the hook. I do
have a question and I think it's
a continuation of representative
Diego's question. Garcia
Cannabis Um, you know, in the
state from a small town to every
large city, you'll see cannabis.
Stores right and I can think of
my local
Community, which is a town of
Bunol. Leo. I could probably
throw a rock.
Mm South to north and hit about
every single cannabis store
there.
And I'm not that strong.
Um And I asked the mayor. How
much are we making from from
cannabis and and the number was
alarmingly low.
My question is how does your
department track the sales of
cannabis?
In the state, Mr Chair. That's
an excellent question and
And actually, um, we have more
visibility into the cannabis
industry than we do most
industries because it is so
highly regulated. Um, for for
consideration, every cannabis
retailer has to use the bio
track system, which is the seed
to sale tracking system so every
it's it's like I said, it's very
highly regulated for production
purposes, and that translates
into us being able to really
know what was sold and ensure
compliance more than in most
programs.
Some programs. You know we do
our best, and we have a lot of
data sources that tell us a lot
about where there might be
texted. Cannabis is, you know is
very easy to pinpoint, and so we
have seen more compliance in
that industry as the tax has
that in the businesses, it's
kind of matured since 2022. We
did a large compliance project
about a year, maybe a year and a
half ago.
And we sent out a bunch of US
preliminary assessment letters
saying, you know, based on bio
track data. It really looks like
you owe tax. You shouldn't
either pay it or, you know,
expect to hear from us again.
and with that about half of the
noncompliance was just
immediately cleared up and then
we've been working on the
remainder. So
We actually do think that that
program is one of the most
compliant because of our
visibility.
Thank you. Just a question. Uh,
Senator Worth just just a quick
question. I'm curious. I mean,
again, looking at the
The last six years. It brings
back lots of memories. I
mentioned the pants, Stokes and
sure she's having drafted each
one of these different bills.
Lots of memories for her as
well. I'm curious is the
administration beginning the
process of thinking about the
next session, and it goes to
your question Earlier, Mr Chair
about
Okay, We've done great work, and
I think
Legislature and executive should
be commended for the six years
here.
We got two more years with with
your leadership. I'm just
curious what you all are
thinking.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator
worth, you know, based on the
revenue estimates and the
pressure to keep recurring
growth in the budget, as well as
recurring tax cuts early,
moderate this coming session,
you know, I I don't think we're
probably going to go into the
legislative session planning on
a really large number of
recurring tax cuts like we have
in some past sessions, but I'm
sure there will be things that
that come together and you know,
I would consider, um, I would
look at it differently between a
recurring tax cut versus
Says, Um, legislation to move
revenue from one place to the
other. Like, for example, I
wouldn't call moving motor
vehicle tax from the General
Fund of the Road fund is
As a return against recurring
tax cut. That's just moving
revenue. But I do think that's
going to be moderate, probably
from from the next session, and
probably Lfc would would mostly
agree. Um, but we are coming up
on a 60 day session and tax
revenues been working very hard
on a tax code cleanup bill. We
were able to get a first draft
of that over for Pam's.
Magic Magic wand a couple of
weeks ago, so I do anticipate
coming to this committee in
October with a discussion draft
that hopefully can review and
give us feedback on and
potentially into endorse and
like, I believe it's your
December meeting.
So, um, just about every
business day something comes up
where we realize Oh, that
language could be better in the
tax code, and we just put it on
the list and compile them for
each 60 Day session. So, um,
it's going to be hundreds of
pages long this time, but it
also has a very long list of
repeals of things that are just
obsolete and coming up the tax
code and making it shorter as
well. So
Looking forward to that. Thank
you, Secretary. Thank you,
Brendan. Thank you for your
presentation this morning
represented Harper. Chairman.
Thank you. I'm I apologize. I
forgot to ask one question Um
and Secretary um
We talked about this earlier in
the interim, but looking at the
Imminent repeal of major
portions of the federal Tax cuts
and Jobs Act.
Um, I heard earlier that you're
all looking at that and how that
would impact New Mexico and I'm
just wondering if you have an
update for us, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Harper. Thank you for bringing
that up. Um, And actually,
Brendan here is has been doing a
lot of the work. Um, Our plan is
we started this summer and we're
looking at intensive.
Um, review of what the fiscal
impact will be in our plan is to
have something for the December
presentations to actually, um,
actually give you figures for
what we estimate the impact will
be and again, it will be, um
We'll have to do the extreme
like we can't. We don't know
what the federal government will
do. So we'll say what if
everything goes away? This is
what we'll estimate and you
know, we feel like there will be
some
Kind of some things will stay.
Some things will go so
We'll try to give that range. Um
again. We'll be looking at the
December revenue forecast to
pair that with the revenue
outlook of that estimate of that
announced
If I can add to that Mr Chair
and representative Harper,
there's one thing that is very
obvious, and it's in today's
slide deck. Um, the dependent
deduction that New Mexico
created after the federal one
was went away. The language of
that actually makes ours go away
If the federal comes back, so
the languages it's nicely
crafted to basically say, if the
if the federal dependent
deduction is zero than ours is
equal to this, and so that would
automatically go back out of
state law.
And that's costing about 28
million per year in foregone
revenue to the state. There's
one upside risk.
Yeah, So, So thank you, Chairman
of Secretary and
Lucinda and
Brandon. Yeah, my
My my read of this is that
Even in the extreme situation,
it's all
Extra revenue for New Mexico.
We're essentially sunsetting.
Um, tax cuts and since we
piggyback on the federal system
Any increase in a G I is gonna
result in increase in New Mexico
tax revenue.
So do I think part of the reason
I'm asking. This is
You know, as we're
Not just raining and money.
We're drowning in money.
Um, maybe we could look at using
some of that money to offset
You know a tax package.
Right? I mean, I don't think any
of us is excited to see
You know the 28 million to come
back from, you know child tax
credits, and that's great if the
federal ones reinstated.
We don't need to just keep that
28 million. Let's use that to do
some good tax code reform.
Great. Thank you for that. For
that comment, Representative and
again. Thank you, folks. Thank
you, very secretary and and
others for getting a little bit
earlier than we thought we were
gonna have on the agenda and and
as he brought up secretary
because we're heading into a 60
day session and planning for
that, Uh, we do anticipate in
this committee to at least take
up and entertain any type of
Endorsed legislation in our
October meeting. So those of you
that may have some ideas those
of you in the administration.
They have ideas. Please do
Consider that October meeting as
the date that we will entertain
those and have a hearing on them
that we can and hopefully
address them and approve them or
not in the December meeting, So,
with that being said, Thank you
all again for your presentation.
Thank you.
Perfect timing. As I said, uh,
Secretary Ricky Sterno walk in
The Department of
Transportation.
And again. Same to you,
Secretary. Thank you for showing
up a little bit early.
Removing today so
Whenever you're ready,
Secretary, the floor is yours.
Yeah. Flora's yours, man. Do
whatever you want.
A little excitement for a Friday
afternoon. I appreciate you
having us. I know we stand
before you and
And your weekend likely, so, um,
again, just, uh, my name is
Ricky Serna, Secretary for
Department of Transportation of
Michael Morrison is our chief
economist at
Uh, the department and he does a
really good job and, and I'm
gonna credit him for, you know,
the, the figures here in the
presentation, he pulls them
together, does the revenue
estimates, of course, with um.
His colleagues at other agencies
to get concessions then if you
want to introduce the team,
Mike.
So we have to economists, we
have, uh, Jess and uh
Fucking watch it,
they're a new senior economists
with NMDOT.
So this is our, our PowerPoint
and it has some page numbers.
I'll I'll flip through the 1st 3
and then uh when they get
difficult to read, I'll kind of
demonstrate a little bit about
um how we want to convey our
budget.
And um some things that we're
considering, um, on the first
slide here, just a reminder of
the magnitude of the department,
um, our vision statement, our
mission statement, you know, our
commitment to a safe and
reliable and efficient
transportation system, of
course, is inclusive of
multimodal solutions,
pedestrians, cyclists, um,
multi-modal solutions like
train, like rail, like aviation
division, things like that.
Um, but you'll see here the
agency by the numbers, um,
anywhere between 1.2, 1.3
operating budget, which we'll
talk a little bit more about,
uh, 2500 employees, we've been
very, very excited to tell what
we've done by way of reducing
our vacancy rate, which is now I
believe at 14% compared to over
22% for the state.
Uh, we're trying to calculate
the right figure to claim the
best paying agency in state
government, um, especially with
what we're doing to really
recruit and retain our licensed
professional engineers and
engineer technicians, and we've
done a lot by way of partnering
with higher education workforce
solutions to create some um
workforce pipeline partnerships,
in fact, we ran an RFP to get
some proposals to get that done.
Um, at any given time, anywhere
between 80 and 100 active
projects totaling 1.2 billion.
So in addition to our operating
budget because our funding kind
of withstands the test of at
least a few fiscal years at a
time. We can be managing upwards
of $2.3 billion altogether with
projects that are kind of
overlapping multiple years and
then you'll see the rest here,
the center lane miles or cruiser
construction offices and I'd
like to point out to 82 patrols
um across the state and, and
harp there for a little bit on
our knees.
For Capital Oley support. We
have the 2nd largest footprint
of any state agency in the state
of New Mexico, the only one
larger than us is New Mexico
Corrections Department. And so,
in fact, our foot, our square
feet over 1.4 million represents
about 21% of the total square
feet.
That FMD operates that
essentially owns and oversees,
and for as long as we can
remember the agency doesn't
receive any capital outlay to
help with its building
maintenance and so over the
course of the next few months,
we'll be talking about that to
capital outlay Committee.
On page 3, just a little bit
about our road conditions every
single year we partner with the
associated contractors of New
Mexico to release what's called
the trip report.
And then we, we actually timed
the release of that port that
report with the front end of the
legislative session and will
typically deliver it to Senate
Transportation and to um house
um transportation committees.
Um, I'm sorry, it's Senate tax
and House transportation
committees. And so, um, we did
that last year and these are
some figures from there, um,
just to show a little bit about
what the, the current condition
of our roads cost New Mexicans,
it's about 3.3% annually, 1.4
billion in vehicle operating
costs, 9.9%.
$119 million in safety costs and
$1 billion in congestion costs
just to break out that 3.3
billion annually.
And um what's estimated, given
the sum of our existing um
A st, um, meaning the unfunded
projects and what we need for
roadway maintenance. We have a
funding gap of $6.6 billion the
Department of Transportation. I
just want to point out something
with that number, that's
existing assets and so that 6.6
billion, for example, doesn't
come into play in a discussion
about, like, increasing the size
of I-40, right? Because that
would be new assets. So this
number is in a wish list, right?
This is what do we have planned.
And so if you see that table
there at the bottom, uh, what we
are essentially are looking at
is, um, is a deterioration of
acceptable lane miles in the
state of New Mexico between 11
and 2022, we've gone from 75% of
our roads being acceptable to
67%.
And so you can see obviously
that, you know, we fluctuate in
the number of miles that that
we're responsible for
maintaining.
The same is true here for our
bridge conditions.
Um, you'll see here the trends,
the gradual, the gradual
decrease in the number of
bridges um that we've identified
to be good. Several years ago
there was a report that y'all
may be familiar with that really
looked in on McKinley County,
the northwestern part of the
state, Navajo Nation included in
the number of bridges that we
had there feeding, um, faring
poor and so, um, this
essentially talks a lot about
where we're gonna be in the
future in terms of the number of
bridges that are going to move
from um from fair to poor over a
period of time.
And so, on page 5 is where I
kind of wanna demonstrate a
little bit. I give you a slide
purposefully that you can't
read, um, and then realize I
should probably do something
about it, so I pulled out Mason
jars and, and poker chips, and
so, um, and I can stand here
just so that the microphone
captures me, but I wanted to
talk a little bit about
Um, our operating budget and um
and, and, and hopefully it'll
kind of spark a discussion about
or uh or maybe I'll use a pond
fuel a discussion about um why
uh we've got to really work
collaboratively, collaboratively
to understand how we sustain
transportation in the future.
And I think the context is
there's a now and there's a
then, right? I mean, um, right
now we understand what you all
have done for us and we're
appreciative of over $2 billion
since 2019.
Of one time appropriations to
chip away at major
infrastructure needs in the
state.
But, um, in conversations with
our contractors, we're reminded
that um in order for them to
start making the investments
they need personnel wise,
equipment wise, right? Um, they
need to know what the future
holds for infrastructure
investments, OK. So I'm gonna
start off here with um
essentially NMDOT operational
budget.
And this just take these two
colors of chips here.
take a couple out of here.
More out here, right?
And so the $1.2 billion
operating budget, right? Is the
sum of the state road fund and
our federal apportionment, two
big chunks, all right? And you
all recall that when BIL was
released, there was a lot of
discussion about money raining
from the sky for federal
infrastructure investments and
we spent the following session
talking about from where that
money was coming and to where it
was obligated fundamentally in
BIL, but it's really two things,
those increases were to support
new programs, OK, so more.
Funding for more programs. One
big one would be Nevi, the
electric vehicle infrastructure
plan, right? So more funding
supported new programs, but at
the same time, we knew that a
lot of that funding was isolated
for competitive grants. We had
to go after grants and what BIL
did to add to the
competitiveness was they opened
those funding opportunities up
to local and tribal governments,
and that made it more
competitive, right? So even now
when we submit grants, we know
that we're submitting them
alongside local governments and
communities, and when they get
them instead of us, um, we
get really salty and bitter. um,
and, um, we are figuring out
ways to, um, you know, help them
have the, the capacity to manage
them at the same time. So,
Operation Bud Bud,
we get $556 million from the
state road fund.
All right, 556. All right?
We're gonna pop that in there.
And then just below that, we get
526 million.
From our federal apportionment,
every single year the money that
we get. And that right there is
our budget. It's simple. It's
half a page when we submit it to
DFA sometimes it's on a sticky
note, OK?
There it is, $1.2 billion.
But I don't want to worry about
the federal apportionment. I
really just want to focus in on
the state road fund. Why?
Because that's what you
legislate, OK? You legislate
that.
And so I want to call out 5.
Different revenue sources.
What color do I not have? Red?
OK.
Let's pull a little out of here
and a little bit more out of
here, a little bit more out of
here, and a little bit more out
of here.
And I'm gonna present you with
the state road fund.
my uh
Or text distributions, OK? And
so you see these 3 stacks of
chips, and they're in order.
Largestt to smallest, OK?
And the our tax distributions
are state road fund is comprised
primarily of for taxes.
The first of which is what we
refer to as special fuel tax.
Otherwise, diesel fuel, OK? And
what's important to point out
about diesel fuel is that
It's used predominantly by
Semi trucks, OK, semi trucks,
industry, business, OK? And, and
crazies like me who still need
to towt stuff from time to time,
right, but we use it, OK? And I
point that out because in your
mind, hopefully afterwards
you're thinking.
Where are opportunities to build
tax distribution, right?
$131 million a year from diesel
fuel.
The next largest is $112 million
and this is what you and all and
I contribute at 13 cents a
gallon, it is gasoline tax, fuel
tax generates $112 million a
year.
OK? And I was probably
Then, when it was increased,
when it was changed a lot, OK?
The Next, we generate from
issuing permits.
To those vehicles, they're
called weight distance tax fees,
and so that money generates
about 110 million for us.
And it comes primarily again
from industry, all right?
And then the last one, something
we also contribute to. Anybody
know the last one?
Vehicle registration piece, OK?
$87.8 million in vehicle
registration fees, all right?
And then what I'm gonna parcel
out over here.
Right.
And I'm gonna put it in this
container. It's called Motor
Vehicle Excise tax, and I'm just
gonna leave it right there, OK?
So, what we have here is the sum
of tax distributions that you
can see in that handout if you
get a magnifying glass, OK?
And if you were to look at the 4
that I gave you, you'll see that
none of that money ultimately
makes its way to the general
fund. It comes to us and it
comes to municipalities and
counties.
But if you look at the 5th,
OK, Distribution, photo excise
tax, you'll see that it's an
exception, and it
It's split between us, the
general fund,
Well, I should, I should qualify
that. It gets split between the
state road fund, between the
transportation project fund
between um municipalities and
the general fund.
So, when we talk about what we
have to do with revenue, right?
We really have a couple
different things that we can do,
OK?
Sitting over here, right?
It's what we all have fun with
when times are good, general
fun, right? It's important to
know that DOT doesn't get any of
that, at least not recurring. We
get no recurring general fund,
OK? But we do get one time
appropriations, OK?
But the one thing that we've
talked about doing is there's
two ways to increase this jar,
OK? It is to find money.
That we don't already generate
and I'll give you a simple
example.
EV surcharge.
What if we create a surcharge
for electric vehicles so that
when you register it you pay an
extra sum of money, and now that
money would go right in there.
That's good.
So creating a new tax is one
way. The other way is, well, we
already have those taxes that go
in there.
What if we
Increase how much they generate.
And now we're talking about a
tax increase, right? There's
more there and more here and
more here, and now we go right
into the bucket, OK?
And one thing that we've tried
to do is a hybrid of those two
things.
In the past couple of years,
we've essentially gone to this
motor excise tax.
Dar
That was eventually going into
the general fund, OK? And we
took it out of the general fund
and we said, why don't you give
it all to us?
OK? And that's a hybrid solution
because it doesn't increase
taxes, OK? It doesn't create a
new tax, but it costs the
general fund money to send it
over here.
And at the end of the day, I
can't tell you what it's used
for. Nobody probably can, but
it's used for something, right?
And so it's a hybrid solution.
And there have been a lot of
hybrid solutions talked about
lately, for example, somebody's
using grocery tax money that's
generated from transportation
projects. What do we pull it out
of there? What if we do other
things, right, that don't come
to us. Well, those are basically
subsidies because you take it
from one, you put it in the
other, and you got to figure out
how to backfill.
And so what we've been trying to
figure out over time is, one,
we're spending money that you
give us one time appropriation.
2 is
This jar is becoming, all right,
slowly becoming not enough money
to do the work we need to do.
That's the problem.
And the revenue distributions
going into it, OK? Not only are
they not keeping up with
Cost index adjustments right for
inflation.
They're definitely not keeping
up with the cost of doing
business. OK?
And so we come to you today to
really discuss that because
maybe besides the new taxes, the
increasing taxes, and those
hybrid solutions, right? shifts
in funding. There's other things
that we can do and we've got to
figure them out because we know,
like you know, um, one time
revenue surges aren't gonna last
forever, and when that time
comes, all right?
If that time we're here today,
Because the cost escalation for
doing road construction has gone
up by more than 20% in the last
five years, when we get to that
time, we can anticipate 20+%
less road work being done in New
Mexico.
It's just simple math, right?
And so if it's costing 20% more,
and we haven't figured out a way
to generate at least that much
in recurring revenue.
When the one time appropriations
stop, we'll just do 20% less
work, OK? And so let me give you
a sense of what that escalation
looks like.
The cost for pavement, all
right, for reconstruction from
2008 has gone up from $3 million
a mile to $3.8 million a month.
Or rehabilitation or pavement
maintenance, it's gone up.
10 a mile to just over $1.7
million right? And so we're
looking at that, it's
significant increase we're
nearing 30%, right? So on page
6.
I'm giving you a visualization
of what you just saw with the
jar.
4 major state road front revenue
sources, right? Starting with
the largest, your special fuel,
you'll see that brown line
that's creeped up to the top
there. Your gasoline tax, your
weight distance tax, and then
your vehicle registration fees.
If that legislation had passed
to move this motor excise tax
from general fund to us.
It would have fundamentally
taken over with an additional
$160 million into the state
road.
OK.
And so those are some of the big
swinging types of funding
decisions that we've already
debated for um at least for a
couple of years. On the next
page, we show you what I showed
you in the first jar,
fundamentally the sum of our two
large revenue sources. The state
road fund and our federal
apportionment.
On slide 8.
What we're showing you here, the
table here, right, just kind of
breaks out the percentage of
chips that I have in this jar
right over here.
Basically, you'll see here the
gasoline tax and special fuel
tax are making up the, the, the
bulk, we distance coming in.
These other that Motor excise
tax at $61 million that's where
I say if we were to move that
money like we have here, that
would be at over $200 million it
would take over as our largest
revenue.
On page 9, you may be wondering,
well, how about, how does this
fare, you know, with what's
happening nationally and this
past Monday, um, a gentleman,
um,
Do you remember his name?
Yeah.
He came by to um hers and did a
presentation on what's happening
with uh transportation revenue
across the nation. And there was
something equally settling and
disturbing about his
presentation. What was settling
was
We're not doing anything
different than anybody else.
And what was disturbing is
there's nothing out there that
we could say, man, we should
give that a try. Like, we should
try that with the exception of
tolls, right, and other road
user fees that fundamentally
shift the cost anyway to to road
users.
But just to take a look at the
tax that comes directly from
gas. This is the sum of diesel
and, and fuel. New Mexico is
like in the middle of the pack
there. You look at some of our
neighbors, you know, someone as
low as Arizona 31.2%. Colorado
and Utah, um, I, uh, Colorado
and Nevada, um, higher than us
and then Utah a little bit
lower. And then you go to those
states and you ask, all right,
what are they doing differently
to make up the difference,
right? And you see registration
fees excess of $200 a car, you
know, electric vehicles.
surcharges and excess of $80 a
car, and so everybody's
essentially using the same uh
strategies just at different
rates.
This slide right over here takes
into consideration.
What's gonna happen over a
period of time as uh the state
road fund adjusts to more fuel
efficient vehicles and to
electric vehicles, and they may
be one and the same, but we know
that one thing that's happening
more quickly than the other is
the increase in total MPG in non
plug-in vehicles, right? And so
the threat to us necessarily
isn't that, uh, well, I won't
say to us and we're not
internalizing it, but the threat
to the road fund isn't
necessarily at this point
electric vehicles at less than
3% total registered vehicles.
It's actually
Cars that get 45 miles a gallon,
um, that are just using, you
know, 20 to 30% less fuel. And
so you'll see the decline what's
going to happen between now and
2050 without any, uh, without
any changes, but you see very
quickly on the next slide what
goes uh uh the inverse
relationship is the increasing
cost of road construction,
right? And so what we're seeing
here is essentially, if you put
those things on the same slide,
you'll see what essentially
represents the decrease.
Roadway construction if, if we
don't do anything to um
increasing revenues.
So on um slide 12, just to kind
of summarize uh some of the
challenges, right? I, um, we
know from where right now, um,
the bulk of this glass gets
filled and it's uh it's fuel
taxes.
Um, you look here again.
New Mexico fuel tax rates, fuel
tax rates haven't been revised,
um going back to '96, I was 16
when it happened. Last on
special fuel tax in 2004. I
think it's been about 20 years
since we adjusted registration
fees, and then we adjusted them.
Downward, um, and again, there,
it's not that that's the
primary, you know, goal of what
we're trying to achieve as much
as I think kind of like a call
to action, right? We, we
obviously haven't revisited, we
haven't visited these for some
time. You'll see where we fare
with these tax rates, um, uh,
nationally, 10th lowest in the
nation for special fuel, 5th in
the nation for gasoline tax.
Um, the same with our vehicle
registration fees relative to
our counterparts significantly
lower, and then, you know, um,
we're, we're keeping an eye on
what essentially the shift to
more fuel efficient vehicles and
electric vehicles will
ultimately do to road revenues,
um, and, you know, how we don't,
you know, pull a bait and hook
with people to say we're
encouraging the reduction of
carbon emissions by clean fuel
with clean fuel and cleaner
energy use. By the way, it's
gonna cost you now $400 a year
to renew that car, but we
need to find a balance, right,
because it all really does fall
within the term, you know, road
user fees. So, Mr. Chairman,
that's um
That's it in a nutshell, um,
we'll, uh,
Answer any questions you all may
have.
Secretary Serna, thank you for
coming out this afternoon. Thank
you for the visual, a quick
thing real quick is that uh you
should get either less chips or
bigger jars because it makes it
seem like you're overflowing
with cash in that one jar, like
you have too much money
and I know what processions mean
relative to the truth too. I
should have known better, yeah.
Let's go to the questions and
comments first on the list we
have Senator Spanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you secretary. Um, have you,
let's talk tires.
Is there any way you can make
money off of tires? Is there any
way we could start recycling
tires for our roadway paving.
Um,
etc.
Great question, uh, Mr. Chair.
Senator, what we have in, in
this table here to kind of pull
it down a little bit is there is
a tire recycling fee that's
passed on to individuals. Oh,
great. Somebody's doing a great
job there. Uh, it's just a
little further up.
Right there, you'll see the
square to the right, higher
recycling fee. So there is a fee
that's passed on when
individuals replace their tires
that you're assessed by the um
By the shop, uh, essentially,
and you'll see that there is a
distribution to a highway
infrastructure fund or recycling
fund, all these others, and so
you'll you can it's there, uh
senators, what we're saying, I
mean, so the, the, the tool is
there, ranching, you know.
Yeah, tightening it up,
increasing other options.
Mr. Chair.
We have so many.
Maybe not as many tires as other
states with.
A larger population.
But there is um
Money to be had with recycling
tires that could come back to
the department and there is uh
technology to put tires into our
roadways.
So have you investigated or had
conversations about this?
Mr. Chair, Senator, we have, we
have it and, and we, it would be
our pleasure to look at uh the
extent to which um the recycling
of tires generates revenue
whether or not any other states
are doing that to get estimates
on whether they feel it's been
worthwhile and and we can report
back.
So, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that response. At NCSL just
recently there was a very large
um display in the exhibit hall
on recycling, and there was a
whole um.
Business in our uh country on
recycling tires.
And the reuse of tires. Now,
years and years ago,
There was a company who was
trying to get a permit from the
Department of Environment.
To set up a recycling tire
company right at the um I-40 and
Tihiri Interchange by that big
cement plant.
And it went through years of
Trial and never could get their
permit.
But the whole purpose was
To reuse the tires in some of
the roadways.
And maybe not necessarily the
state roadways, but some of the
other roadways.
So the technology has been
around for years and I'm just
wondering why we
Haven't grabbed on to something
like this. Is there a problem?
With the technology, does it
create more?
Pollution, then it's worth, you
know, etc. etc. So I just think
It might be another venue to
explore. Sure, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator, that's a great idea.
And if, if, if even not to
create material for roadway use.
To create it for alternative
uses. I know it's been used in
the past for Astroturf, um, for
playgrounds and other things.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Representative Harper.
Thank you, Chairman and
Secretary, it's great to see
you. Um.
I
I I've had the privilege of
sitting on the transportation
committee in the house for, for
10 years and
And I and many of my colleagues
here have thought about what can
we do to help.
And, and I appreciate the
display you brought and, and
trying to help us digest, you
know, you know, maybe a table
that's not so easy to digest.
I just wanna maybe share a
couple thoughts and maybe
One thing that I think we
haven't talked about yet, which
I think could really be a game
changer. So,
Um,
So first we talked about the
gasoline tax, right? And
And we are an outlier on the low
end, um, our gas tax should be
about 5 or 6 cents higher.
Um, I've said that I would
support that publicly, um, for
years, not just now that I'm not
expecting to be, uh, you know,
facing the voters here in
November. Um, we, we, that is a
great way to help improve uh
money to roads.
Um, uh,
That will probably help us for a
good 20 years.
But as more EVs and such become,
um, you know, a thing, um, we'll
see those taxes decline. I think
it's gonna take a little time
though. So in the short term, I,
I, I support.
Looking seriously at raising the
gas tax as long as we ensure
that it's going to
The road fund
Um, I've seen many proposals
where some of it goes to the
general fund that I would not
support something like that.
Um, you mentioned, um, providing
uh a surcharge for EVs when they
register because they're not
paying the gasoline tax.
Um, that's something that I
support and not as a mean evil
Republican. I'm actually getting
a Tesla in a couple months, and
I, it makes sense to me that I'm
using the roads. I should be
contributing, you know, not just
through my registration fee, but
also a use fee, like the
gasoline taxes, and I think
something like 80 100 $120 is
not a slap in the face for
trying to, you know, save the
environment. It, it is a
reasonable request for someone
to pay for the roads that we
are.
using
I think that's another thing
that um I think we even passed
something like that, um, last
year or the year before and I
think it was vetoed so I, I
think we have the
We've looked at that and we can
support something like that like
we have in the past.
Um,
Something that we haven't talked
about a little bit here that
could help, um.
I remember um when we took the
Um,
Our ports of entry.
And there were some in the south
and we increased the
It was almost a surprise. I'm
not sure if we did it on
purpose, but we increased the
length that they stayed open.
And wouldn't you know it, those
extra 2 hours, there were
Thousands of trucks that were
trying to run the gate and we
collected a ton of extra money.
Right? So, looking at how we can
better enforce our weight
distance tax.
Um, you know, do we make it all
just digital and those things
that are on the road that, you
know,
RF Reed trucks that go by, you
know, making sure that we don't
have people, you know, sneaking
through these places when
they're not manned and not
paying their way distance tax.
So using some technology to help
us there.
Um,
And then like we we've talked
about the motor vehicle excise
tax distribution, the 60% that
goes to the general fund is
about $167 million.
I mean when you look at how much
you have from the state road
fund, roughly 50 million. That's
huge, right? That's like a
20-25% increase. So that's
something we can look at, we've
talked about.
The Last idea I want to bring it
up.
And and I know I
Probably many of you have
thought of this as well, but
Uh
Chairman and secretary, your
department is an enterprise
funded department.
Which means, and correct me if
I'm wrong, which means
Your department does not receive
general fund money for your
staff or all of that.
Um,
Unlike virtually every other
department in the state of
Mexico, I think do it, you know,
is also enterprise, but
You take all of your departments
operating expenses out of the
state road fund Chairman and
secretary, is that correct?
Um, um, yes, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, absolutely we
don't receive any recurring
general fund.
Um, and then on top of that,
because I like to harp on it,
um, capital outlay either. Yeah.
So, so Chairman and secretary,
about how much
Um, does it cost out of the
state road fund to manage your
department.
Great question. Um,
To pull the number, well, so
The state roadfront essentially
is used for operations and it's
getting difficult. The rising
cost of doing business, and
here's the balance.
Um, we cannot use our federal
funds for maintenance. So when
we operate our districts for
roadway maintenance, that's
everything from pushing snow to
litter, uh pick up uh weeds
management, etc. etc. All of
that is maintenance that comes
from the state road fund.
And so we know that the lion's
share of the state road fund is
going to maintenance and
operations and then uh to
salaries, uh, fundamentally, um,
and I can get you those that
exact breakdown in our, it's in
our op but.
But um I mean if you just take
for example, um what we
presented um during the interim
last year was in the last 3
years, just the pay increases,
the legislative appropriate,
the, the appropriated pay
increases, those alone were $26
million just the pay increases,
right, an average of 5% multiply
that by 20 and you're looking
at, you know, um, you know,
millions in salaries. So what
we're looking at doing is trying
to isolate our staff, those that
are used for construction
predominantly.
And charging them to our federal
apportionment, which is
allowable to free up the state
road fund to do things like fix
our buildings to purchase
equipment.
And um to pay our employees
well. And so what we're doing
now is we're gonna dip into our
construction resources to
essentially subsidize what we're
paying for with state.
Yeah, so, so General Secretary,
thank you for that. So, so I
guess what I'm suggesting is
Um, like virtually every other
department, you know, the tax
revenue department, you know,
we, we pay for salaries and and
all of that out of general fund
money. I think it would be
helpful to this committee to
the, the appropriations and
finances, you know, um, LFC
committees to see maybe a little
bit of a breakdown.
So how much would it cost for us
to put in the general fund, the
salaries of NMDOT staff.
And how much would it cost to
put in their benefits and how
much would it cost to take care
of some of their infrastructure,
then how much would it cost to
start covering like maintenance
activities, and then we, they
kind of have a, a menu of
options they can look at and
say, OK, you know, maybe raising
the gasoline tax is gonna be.
Too painful politically to do.
But could we take
45, 50 million general fund
money and and stop treating you
like an enterprise and treating
you like a a a regular arm of
New Mexico state government.
Um, so I, I think that
potentially could be a game
changer and I just ask you to
maybe work and put that together
and share that with, with the
committees, um.
We
We have plenty of money right
now. It, it doesn't make sense
to me that when I'm paying the
gasoline tax, when I'm paying to
register my car.
All that money should be going
to roads, not to be paying for
the salaries and benefits of
your staff.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you representative. Anyone
else? questions or comments from
the committee.
Vice Chairman, thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much for the presentation,
Mr. Secretary, as we go forward,
we're always talking about ideas
and ways to, to finance uh the
the different needs that we
have. Couple of things that we
see first of all, roads and
water seem to be two of the uh
highest priority levels that we
need to, to address here in the
state and we're looking at ways
to address the water issues, but
as we, we get into roads and
points well taken a couple of
Things, uh, and not in any way
to go ahead and make the
comparison, but with public
school capital outlay. We set up
a system. Uh, we do have
resources going in and we're
replacing, if you will, our
aging school buildings.
Along with that, every other
year we start talking about
bonding and how we're gonna take
care of our, uh, our seniors are
getting our higher education
facilities and so forth. So, so
within that maybe part of what
we look at.
I, uh, to maybe set up something
that would definitely be not
only when I say recurring,
something that we have to uh
take to the voters, but
something that would be out
there for people cause they
travelers continue to indicate
there is a growing need, uh, but
those could be just a couple of
examples of uh how we can become
very innovative with uh our
state spending and, and what the
future can look like.
Um,
Going back to your, your
discussion and if you will, Mr.
Secretary, uh think a little bit
outside of the box and then you
already have when it comes to
this.
What would be, if you will, a,
a, a uh funding stream, a
permanent stream that you've
looked at, and again, not to go
to the property tax payer, but
to find ways that maybe we're
able to go ahead and uh
establish if you will, uh, a
bond a bonding stream that would
definitely assist you year after
year. So you can better plan and
of course there's a lot of other
issues that are tied to it and
maybe you can elaborate a little
bit on what you're thinking.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
We're working right now with um
Rebecca Rs, the governor's
infrastructure advisor and, you
know, the state engineer like
you said, water infrastructure
is major and in other areas like
environment and.
We're having that discussion
and, and, and it does start with
well from where does the money
come, right? Let's just track it
back to the revenue sources
identify what's already being
put into permanent funds and
other types of funds, you know,
what's fueling, you know, the
general fund and you know how
from there we go into these
buckets of capital and
non-recurring, etc. And so we're
having those conversations and
they include ideas like, you
know, ease of transportation
fund, uh, something worth doing?
What are those distributions
look like annually?
And how long could, you know, we
sustain a really good yield for
having conversations like, well,
you know, what if we, what if we
essentially look at
authorization for bonding and
then we legislate the debt
service, you know, instead and
so right now we're just tossing
a number of things, you know,
around in a, in a jar and trying
to see, you know, what, what
makes sense, understanding that
infrastructure is one of the
many priorities that we've got
to go into the 60 day trying to
resource.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary, as we go forward,
part of what we continue to see,
if you will, is the backlog of
work that definitely needs to be
done when we're talking about
our roads, highways,
interstates, and again, even the
uh the matching programs for our
local municipalities. So within
that, has there been the
discussion by taking this uh
around the state to some of your
meetings, possibly even some of
the, the districts as you uh.
As you seek out some thoughts
and ideas of how our communities
can continue to work closely
with you because I remember the
years when we were dealing with
our county roads and the state
decided, well, we're not going
to take on any additional county
roads and vice versa. The county
is indicating we, we just
Have so many roads to develop,
uh, I'm trying to engage to to
see if part of that revenue
stream that you're seeking has
already been identified and if
it hasn't, then of course that
we go back, we look at it, and
then again, uh, if you will,
the, the sharing or the moving
of resources that we've used
over the years and maybe uh in
some of these areas we've
already caught up.
And it's time to move those
resources to taking care of the
problems that, that you deal
with on a daily basis.
Mr. Chair, Senator, we, we
haven't kind of pinpointed
anything particular, but to your
point about supporting local
governments and what we have
proposed in this shift of motor
excise tax is that when it all
came over, a portion of it would
move into the fund to support
local infrastructure projects
through our transportation
project fund, right?
But not only do we need to put
more resources into a fund that
supports locals.
We have to put more capacity
into those locals, right?
Because we all could sit here
and name, you know, the 10 or 12
cities that can say, I'll take
it and spend it overnight and
the 80 or 90 cities that we all
would say they need it just as
bad, but you know, the local
librarian and local clerk can't
manage transportation projects.
How do we help them, you know,
do things at larger counties and
municipalities and tribal
governments can do. And so,
Uh, when, when we do sit down,
we're, we're being mindful that
the state, locals, tribal
counties, come to us.
And ask for help on local
infrastructure, and we can't,
uh, and we've even gone to our
partners at Federal Highway and
have said, hey, listen, you all
are giving millions of dollars
to local governments through
direct grants, and then those
local governments come to us and
say, can you help us manage
this? And we've asked them to
consider allowing them to
include an indirect cost rate on
their grant proposals so that
when they come to us, we say,
yeah, because you baked in that
10% of this $400 million award.
For us to help you, otherwise it
takes from our capacity. So
we're being mindful that as we
need to ramp up in, in
researches for DOT that there's
a component of local support
that we have to fund also. So,
Mr. Chairman, if I may, and, and
as we move forward, uh, Mr.
Secretary, you bring up another
very valid point. How are we
going to better cooperate with
each other at all levels.
In order to use, let's say for
example, those resources you're
talking about as an
administrative fee as part of
doing business and at the same
time, uh, the, the cost share
and, and I believe if we're able
to do some of those things and
then find the permanent revenue
stream, uh, definitely then we
can, we can help to resolve the
issue, which brings up the other
issue of the workforce
development, and I know that's a
big issue that you've always uh
addressed.
So, so how do we get to that
point so that as we receive
resources,
We have the work that can be
done instead of having to wait
sometimes years before we're
able to let a project out.
Have these companies come in
from other places to go ahead
and do the work. How do we grow
our own, and I know that's been
another issue, so you may
elaborate a little bit in terms
of that because it all
triangulates. It all comes
together and uh these, these
kind of what I would use the
term leggistat meetings where we
have a conversation, definitely
generate, if you will, some
additional thoughts and ideas
that are different than to help
us in this area.
Mr. Chairman Senator, yeah,
there's really a couple of
things because, you know, $100.
Today for a project that doesn't
get started until next year is
about $5 short of being done,
right? And you all know that
from Capital Olay. If you fund a
project for 100,000 today
construction.
And they don't, every year that
that project isn't under
construction, you can add 5-7%
to what it's gonna cost. So,
alternative methods to
construction is one of the
solutions that we're looking at.
And we decided to dive deep into
the pool because we, we just let
our largest single project.
A DOT as a design built an
alternative method, and the goal
there is to get, you know, a
$268 million project at
Montgomery Comanche done quickly
because we know that the faster
we do it, instead of spending a
year to design another year to
build that project and lose 10
or 15% on project cost doing
design, build and bringing those
teams together all at once is
gonna save us money, time, and
probably a lot of changes to the
project. That's one thing. The
other is the workforce piece
and, and one
One of the things that's been,
you know, um,
Really expected of us is that
team ball across agencies and
we've been really locked in not
just with workforce solutions,
but even with the associated
contractors in Mexico about how
do we essentially present in
this industry as an option for
all communities, right? Because
when you think a lot about
apprenticeship programs, you
think about where those programs
located in the state and does
everybody need to be there now
in Albuquerque to do that and
then travel all over the state.
So we're working now with uh
we've identified three
institutions that work.
Working with to develop a
pipeline program that
essentially starts with
Here are the industry trades or
industry professions that we
know of post-secondary
institution isn't preparing
anyone for. OK, we have to worry
about engineer grads. There's no
question about that, but when
you start talking about
construction project managers,
engineer technicians, material
lab technicians, and even bridge
inspectors, you don't have to be
a licensed engineer to do these
things. So they're hard to find.
And so we're working with those
institutions of higher ed to
say.
Build that credential for us.
We'll pay to help you build that
credential. You already invested
you all in higher education to
build those credentials. Let's
all sit together and figure out
a way to build them from the
ground up. And what we hope to
bring back to you is not just
success stories about building
the pipeline for the industry,
but some models that you all can
look at to say, OK, maybe
funding just certificates and
associates, bachelors, and so
on, isn't the only thing we have
to worry about now. How do we
continuously fund the industry
credential.
that way. So we're, we're
working on that and, and uh with
workforce and hire and hopefully
we can have some things for you
as early as January. So thank
you very much, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary, uh, you have my
commitment and I'm sure the, the
committee's commitment to help
find revenue streams in order to
fully support the kind of work
that needs to be done. Thanks
again, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Vice Chairman. Let's go to
Senator Tollman.
Oh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you. uh.
Secretary for being here.
And uh presenting your ideas on
how to fill your gaps in
finance.
So, uh, you're gonna be
receiving $3.8 billion from the
Biden.
2021 infrastructure bill, I
assume.
You've taken that into
consideration.
And uh
Does that help your situation at
all, is it still a pretty dire
situation.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tollman, the and
The
Funding that we're receiving
from the bipartisan
infrastructure laws essentially
coming by way of our federal
apportionment. That first jar,
right? Half of it is coming
from.
Beds and half of it is coming
from state road fund, right? And
so it doesn't come by way of an
additional surge of resources,
as much as it comes by way of
our formulaic funding. And so
when you look back historically,
it was BIL before it was BIL. It
was something else before that
it was something else, right?
And so it's essentially the new
acronym for funding
transportation infrastructure in
the nation.
And so, for the first time it
has provided year over year
increases to the tune of 3% or
$12 million which you can
imagine isn't covering the cost
of inflation, or it's coming
with new programs that we have
to implement with that new
funding. And then as I mentioned
earlier, it's also coming now
with competitive grants that
didn't exist before, and so
there's no assurances that the
funding comes to the Department
of Transportation or the state
for that end to that end. We've
got to go after a lot of that
funding.
Competitively
Thank you.
Yeah, so what you're saying is,
you know, 3.8 billion sounds
like a lot of money, but.
In the big picture it's not
gonna.
Make, make that much difference?
Mr. Chair, um, we're, we're
appreciative of the Biden
administration has done, of
course, what we're saying is
that we've got to do our best to
remain on the top of the list
for getting that money spent.
Another way of saying the same
thing is that without that 3.8
billion be even worse you you be
painting a worse picture. That's
correct.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Another, uh,
we've been talking about ideas
that different ideas to.
Generate revenue, uh,
Please don't think I'm crazy,
but when I lived in Connecticut,
they had a property tax on
automobiles.
Based on the value.
So here we only pay what $60 of
registration fee?
I remember one year in
Connecticut I paid $600.
To register my
So in most of their money, you
know, when in in in for roads.
Something to think about, but
I don't imagine people will give
more than a few seconds thinking
about that idea.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I don't
know, did they charge you that
cause you were living in the
car? Is that why you got a
property tax for it.
Yeah, I will.
Yeah, I, I won't tell you what I
was driving.
So, and, and number 3 and last
comment.
But you and I were in a meeting
on Monday of the transportation.
Subcommittee where they
extensively about
Rooks R you see road usage
charges.
Which is something that we're
ultimately going to uh
Have to enact
but person.
Is it replace the
Yes, Celine tax.
But we only have, we have one of
the lowest percentage of
TV sales in the country.
But that might not be a bad
idea.
Even if it wasn't.
For the fact that
Um,
The gasoline tax is gonna be
drastically reduced. So as you
remember, there are some states.
have made that mandatory and
some states that haven't, but
you get, you get a lot of
pushback from the public because
They put a device on your car to
tell you.
And to record how many miles
you're driving.
A lot of people don't like that.
Firstly, I couldn't care less.
But the government knows how
many miles I'm driving.
So
Even though
We have
It's a low
Number of cells that EVs.
You think it's too early to
start thinking about this is a
replacement.
Or the gas tax even though our
sales are.
Mm
Um, dismal.
Because it's something we're
probably gonna have to
eventually uh
An act to implement.
Mr. Chair sent a couple of
points. One is, given where we
are with the total number of
electric vehicles registered in
the state of New Mexico. We kind
of have like this sit back and
watch opportunity that's in
front of us to see, you know,
other steaks wing and miss, if
that's what's gonna happen and
then learn from them. And so
organizations like AO which
provide us, you know, that
networking ability to say, you
know, how did it go, Utah, how
did it go? Hawaii and then look
at those states and say, well,
Hawaii with, you know, a
fraction of the roads that we
have and.
And you heard on Monday's
presentation, they also have a
solution to the idea of, what do
you do for people driving into
the state when you're in Hawaii,
you don't have to worry about
people driving into your state.
And so I think where we are now
is giving us an opportunity to
really look to see what's
happening in the lab and, and
find some things that work for
us.
At the same time, I think um we
have to get to the, to the
bottom of why is the adoption
rate so low here in New Mexico,
and there's, I think, a general
sense DOT, the more EV chargers
you put up, the faster people
will buy these vehicles. I
disagree. I think that's a
component of adoption rate, but
there's also a lot of, you know,
misconceptions we need to
address in a public campaign
type of forum, right? When you
have someone that drives from
Laguna to Albuquerque to work
every day and they're thinking
that's too far, I'll never make
it on one trip.
Charge, right?
You have communities that
struggle with good electricity.
You have people who believe,
I'll plug it in tonight, my bill
will go from $80 to $300
overnight, right? And so we have
an opportunity while we sit back
and look to see what other
states are doing from the road
user charge perspective and work
on the adoption uh uh component
of growing in that vein because.
I don't believe that we just
need to build it and they will
come. We're gonna need to
address the misconceptions that
come with having a, a very
Rural, state, and how we address
the notions that these vehicles
are for a certain group of
individuals that make a certain
amount of money, um, to the
notion that, um, they're far
more expensive, the gasoline
vehicles and so on and so forth.
OK, again, thank you for being
here and thank you for that
answer. It's all I have, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Tollman.
Let's go to Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just uh
briefly, I wanna
Bank secretary Cerna and his
predecessors, uh, the 14 years
I've been in the Senate, uh, one
of the departments that has
always been very responsive and
quickly responding to requests
that I've had and other senators
that I know of have had of the
department, especially in uh
District 2, where I live, which
by the way, has about 1000 miles
more of highway than
All the other districts of
state. I always like to throw
that in a little bit. But, but
I, I do appreciate very much
your response to those requests
and, and that makes our lives a
whole lot better as well as
allowing us to, to help you move
things along. Uh, I wanna thank
you for finishing up Highway 54,
uh, which is, uh, been kind of
on my back a little bit uh over
the years and that's gonna be a
very nice, not only is it gonna
be nice, but it's gonna be much
safer uh finishing up that.
That that patch rubbed. Um, I, I
wanna thank you also for and,
and, and
The district 2 guys again for
Allowing their schedule to
adjust to repair that road up to
The Mescalero ski resort, which
was, I think, not set up until
November, December, which would
almost
Immediately lose a whole season
up there. Uh, by the time it got
fixed and, and whether that we
have to deal with in the winter
time, moving that up will allow
them hopefully to be in the game
and uh already lost horse racing
but maybe we won't lose the ski
season this next year. So thank
you very much for that. It just
Goes again, Mr. Chair, to, to
How quickly
The highway department can
respond to these things and uh.
And so I'm, I'm hoping that we,
uh, as, as we go down the road,
we'll look again at looking at
Assisting him in funding
sources, and I'm not always a
big fan of taxes, but
We always have very low taxes
on, on gasoline and things like
that, and we always are behind
the curve on maintaining uh as
well as expanding our highway
system in the state, and we need
to look at seriously looking at
some funding sources, uh, to, to
catch up a little bit, uh, even
if it takes us years, we, you,
you can't catch up if you don't
have the finances to do
something like that. Uh, and,
and finally, Mr. Char I have one
last request from you'll know
who it's from once I ask and uh
Uh how soon is the tunnel gonna
get painted uh down there up to
Cloudcroft to uh I had to wait
till the last thing to kind of
throw that bomb out there, but
you know, where that's coming
from because they asked me to
ask again, uh, today.
Mr. Chairman and Senator on, on
behalf of Senator Woods,
um.
Uh, we actually were hoping to
start that I believe last month,
but there was a quick pivot, um,
to some of the bridge work and
some of the other things in in
Riodosa that we needed to get
done. So we're gonna get that
done this season. We, we got
the, and it is the reflecting
paint to help with the tunnels
and we do that as a safety
measure ahead of doing lighting.
So we'll get that done before
the summer's over.
Well, and thank you very much
for that. I know that the woods
and, and Mary Kate Aman of uh,
you still probably get calls
from her as well. I don't know,
but uh.
Uh, anyway, I appreciate that
again, response to, to an issue
up there that is not disastrous,
but it is a safety issue in
there and they're responding
again to that very quickly on
the, the tum elliptic cloud
craft. So thank you very much
for that and uh thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for the time.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else,
questions or comments?
Now, secretary, thank you for
your time. Thank you for the
department. We appreciate you
and what you do for the state.
And with that, folks, before we
do a journey, we do still have
the minutes to approve from uh
last, uh, actually May's
meeting. So if they're in your
folder. Any questions, comments,
or not, motion motion made.
I can, uh, any opposition thing,
no minutes have been approved
and that being said, we finished
the business for the day. We'll
see you again September 23rd and
24th again here in Santa Fe.
Thank you all and we are
adjourned.
So.
