This is
the radioactive in house or just
materials committee will come to
order
this is our second meeting and
will approve the minutes from
our first one in may
once we have when we're person
for corum
um
i'm
going to answer committee to
introduce themselves and will
start but senator pinto good
morning good morning madame
chairman of the committee and
senators and impend to represent
the strict three and I think I
am about.
One block will decide the
hospitals my district I don't
think I have you and them when
it's great to be here and think
you offer coming out to to deal
thank you madame chair.
Thank you manager I mount wanted
to deal open as I represent
district sixteen in albuquerque
which is the area around the
university of new mexico it
could see an em and also part of
the base
so I am really happy to be here
as a guest this isn't my regular
committee but i'm very
interested in in these topics
and happy to be here.
The.
Thank you a madame chair good
morning everybody I am
represented develop sale
yeah
I represent this executive
despite the sibling we can
account
in my district they have a nine
chapters to hope we're zootie
and
milan in grants but I don't have
any other city a gallup thank
you hidden here.
The.
Representative madam chair bill
hall I represent uh district
three which is astech bloom
filled in all of eastern same
one county it's good to be here
thank you member and welcome to
the committee
okay good morning everybody
agreed to be with you i'm
senator jeff steinborne from
last crucial's representative
welcome to the legislature and
yeah happened helping us for any
questions about this crazy world
we live in here but i'm such a
pleasure to be in gallop many of
us up here have been working
line he issues to remediate
abandon iranian minds several of
us sponsored legislation couple
years for going out funding to
create uranium mind remediation
coordinators so we could start
to finally move the ball forward
on these about an iranian mind
sights around this region
in addition to fighting other
contamination issues and the
state so look forward to a
presentation about that madame
chair and and what we can do to
help clean up the land of
enchantment but otherwise your
communities incredibly beautiful
and one of the most special
places in the mexican so it's
great to be here apologize I
represent last cruises the most
year and hatch valley my
district goes from downtown last
cruces all the way to the search
county line and includes hatch
new mexico home of the best
green surely on the planet as we
know
thank you very much.
Thank you mister
I am doing ferrari and i'm also
from done yen a county
my district is mostly on the
northeast side of los crucials
and i.
Uh.
Very appreciative of
you are being here and i'm
helping us to support you know
the protections that we need for
a senator signborn was
mentioning for the clean up and
different things that need to
happen to be also proactive in
preventing any types of further
spills and things in our
community surround the state.
Are with that um i'd like to
introduce doctors sabrina is
your chancellor of you and them
in the gallop.
Um.
Out of brit branch campus branch
yes
not a hard word just i'm not a
week yet thank you thank you
madame chair members of the
committee good morning and
welcome to you and in gallop i'm
so bringing is I am the
chancellor here at the branch
and I just had the pleasure of
hosting another committee
I think it was senator pento and
representative alcohol and were
here so they got to hear my link
the presentation years will be
much shorter
i'll give you nice summary here
on the colleges on track for
another good year our fall
registration is up again
compared to same time last year
we are in the thick of
registration because a lot of
folks wait till the last minute
we have several capital projects
on campus that will improve
learning environments increased
student services and expand
existing academic programs.
This has been a busy week for us
of course the week before
classes start back onto your
busy preparing for classes new
faculty are going to
orientation.
Division meetings were monday
complication was tuesday.
Our student services stephane
been busy with admissions
registration and financial aid
so I class the start monday and
were excited to kick off our
faster.
Thank you for being here today
we appreciate the important work
of this committee there's a
light of things that I know
you're working to are you
helping to work on that directly
affect the
local community in the
surrounding region and where is
an honor to host this committee
so thank you very much if you
have any questions i'm happy to
answer those for you if I can.
Thank you it's a pleasure to
meet you and thank you so much
for hosting it's just curious
how many students do you host
and put it in the most popular
areas of concentration within
the well
the the largest number of
students who declare degree when
unadmission declare nursing
it is a very popular program and
between around so right now we
have around two thousand
students and five hundred
thousand students have declared
nursing wow and then the next
degree is business right behind
that
that's really important to
provide that service to the
community and that's a lot of
people's lives are changing so
thank you thank you for your
work
anywhere else
thank you doctors I just was
wondering how many students are
able to i'm take advantage of
the free and.
Card opportunity
scores we had over five hundred
students last academic year who
took advantage of the
scholarships through the state
out of two thousand students so
just twenty so those were an
incoming
oh I see so do most of them get
to continue that in
they have that for the for the
based on the guidelines of those
scholarships they do continue
them
is it really improved
registration
good glad to hear that
anyone else ok well thank you
again we really appreciate in
your providing lunch for us to
reside on the nice breakfast and
it's a pleasure and we're happy
to have you here and let us know
if we can help in any way thank
you I think we have tina's
number good and I think uh laura
has richers number two okay so
we've got to covered
thank you very much thanks for
having us.
Okay first of thank you
on the agenda
we have the sand wine generating
station cleaner and mr jestine
bar.
In sir you are the bureau chief
on the ground water quality
bureau department of environment
that correct yes it is
great thank you for being here
you probably want to call that
michael closer to
house has that high
I have a tendency the
low so thank you for the
end of the webcast can pick it
up too
much because hanging on your
every word
i've i've been waiting for this
moment
and perhaps it would be
appropriate time for me to wish
my wife a happy birthday so.
Um
yeah happy but if they din.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak to
you today I am going to speak a
little bit about the same one
generating station clean up and
the res- the activities the
environment department is doing
in res- in
respect to that
on the first slide looks like
it's like I have a when we
talked a little bit about the
old review of the site um we
talked about nm's plan for fi
twenty five or talk to very
shortly about the current status
and the timeline for the
activities
little classroom
like down
how about that
that
a privacy of not read the slides
so
next light is the
general location for the looks
they're listening online and up
familiar with the same one
generating station so call our
power call fired power plant
there was an operation for many
decades outside of the farming
ten area
and it has been shut down by pn
next late is
no review
in the course of my target using
some infographics to to
correlate to activities and time
at the same time so step one
that we are going to do as a
phase one in a esa which is an
environmental site assessment
and that's
a report that we will generate
that will look at all of the
available documents
for the site and the site has
been in existence for many many
years um and so our contractor
is going to review all of those
documents
do.
A review interview folks that
worked at the facility try to
identify recognized
environmental concerns places or
a locations that we assume or
there may have been a release
and that's a very typical for a
face one
and we've estimated that this
will be a large one and so the
budget amount for that we've we
put to twenty five thousand
dollars towards that activity
when I go back to the top of
this the screen
we were allocated eight hundred
and sixty thousand dollars to
conduct this activity
and we have put a five hundred
sixty thousand in the
contracting and our contracting
spend will begin at later this
month when we engage our
contractors
the second step which will based
on the results of the face one
we will come up with a scope for
a face to the phase two is where
we will go out and collect
samples to
see if there are
if the activities in a
particular area caused to
release of a contaminant
the environment department
currently has a discharge
permits associated with the sand
one generating station and the
phase one will look at those
that information but it will
actually look at the entirety of
the site including you know the
the operations within the power
plan itself which was not
something that was under our
regulation through the discharge
permanent other than the you
know the evaporative against the
so wants the
phase one is completed and we do
the scoping for the face to
then we will conduct that
investigation the amount that we
are going to budget for that is
is unknown because it's
necessary to.
How the fees done in figure out
the next steps and that's why
this is step two and then
finally step through will be
after
uh most of the information is
collected for the face one while
they're finishing up the other
face to report
we will contract clean up plan
and it's going to be considered
more about an office activity
and
with that information that they
had at that point they'll be
able to develop a plan for
appropriate clean up at the site
and we expect a budget fifty
thousand dollars for that.
Next slide is the the current
price as of what's happening um
p and m is currently
decommissioning its
infrastructure.
Um and in the process of moving
the remainder of the on site fly
ash and call combustion
residuals to the sand one mine
the sand on mine is also
including it in each part one
forty two the
remediation and restoration of
the mine is under the
jurisdiction of emerge and they
will we are coordinating with
them to make sure there were
instant step
but that is there their area as
far as the environment
department were
you know reviewing the
groundwater data that we have
associated with the discharge
permits we're trying to package
up the information understand it
so that when we hand it off to
the contractor that will be
a smooth process
and we're working on the work
plans
for our contractors.
The next slide is looking ahead
and and putting some time frames
associated with the steps that I
mentioned before so for the face
one um we're going to begin one
of the steps is to actually go
to the site both the enemy and
contractor staff will do so we
will look for concerns and
identify those during a site
recounted visits anticipate that
in august or september and then
the completion of the phase one
in october november um stage two
would be the face to
environmental side assessment we
expected go out and collect
samples in the december in
january time frame and do
collect amples get that data
back analyze it
and complete the final report in
the april to may time frame
concurrently as they said before
we'll work on the the scoping of
and setting up the work
work orders for the cleanup plan
and expect that that will be
completed by the deadline a
chile first
twenty twenty five
can currently with those ideas
we'll have a
some public outreach so during
the fees one the step step one
that will have an initial public
meeting
to talk to the community about
the
facility and getting inputs from
them
we will in step two we will
share the testing plans and
involve the community and
understanding the scope of
what's happening
and then
in step through you when we
create the final clean plan we
will present the goals and
actions and gather public input.
Uhm
next liber tucks a little.
Um pn is going to have
responsibility for
significant issues at the site
are going forward
would like to point out that
they are they do have a
discharge permits with us with
the ground what a quality bureau
and the closure requirements for
those are in place and
if they do not complete the
closure requirements within the
discharge permit
they do have shirty balance with
the environment department and
we will hold them to uh
completing their activities
one of the particular important
ones that is the dp eighteen
forty three which is currently
application is in we are working
on that we will complete that in
f twenty five and set
uh financial assurance
responsibilities for that as
well.
Expect that there will be
we will find some some at this
moment unknown contamination and
associated with the operations
in the facility
the regulatory options for us
as the environment department
will be to require a clean up
under a bakement if necessary or
we can
depending on the issue it may be
associated with the discharge
permanent
but I just want to stress that p
and m is the operator is the is
financially responsible for the
clean up um
as a
I want that obligation to be
fulfilled
and with that many committee
members I believe i'm available
for questions.
We'll start with center you're
steinbly
thank you ma'am chair and thank
you for coming to the meeting
today and thank you for
testifying about this give an
update
is there any chance I mean based
on the level of contamination
that this can end up being a
super fund site
so the super fun site
in order for it to be listed on
the national priorities list in
aston has the score there's a
hazard ranking score
i'm only generally familiar with
that idea but one of the things
that is is a paramount for that
is just the total population
that is impacted right so you
get over
the you could have the same
distribution of contaminants in
a very rural area it would never
score because there's not enough
population if that's same
contamination seemed
distribution was located in a
urban area
uhm
so this being a particularly
rural area I don't expect that
it would I but.
I can I can look into that and
see but I kind of doubt it
manager i'm sure sure that
that's you know you're in your
site recard fairs right now just
getting your hands under the
heart so I mean once you get
into and i'm sure you'll be
looking at the level of
contamination and if it meets
that requirement then
it might be beneficial to have
it be designated in terms of
federal phones but them sure
that comes with other
ramifications just just asking
there been a lot of ongoing tax
since this plan since this
planet closed down in the
community up there about trying
to keep it open with carping
capture different technologies
and
have those are there still
ongoing or those kind of gone
away I realize that's not the
law and that's not a pn
committed to do but that's what
the committee is trying to do to
protect jobs and I can
understand that are are there
any conversations that you're
aware of to try to keep this
facility open some
I can only speak to
specific
excuse me manager committee
thank you for the question
we have been approached by one
entity that was interested in
potentially purchasing the
property and redeveloping it I
believe it was for if that the
company's name was target
at a meeting with them in mid
july and in the course of the
conversation I discussed the the
environmental liabilities that
were present at the site and but
mostly it was to walk them
through the the possibility of
using the voluntary mediation
program which is one of the
programs in the ground what are
quality bureau
yet allows for an entity that is
interested in a particular
property identifies that there
is contamination that needs to
be cleaned up.
They would agree to do that work
under this program and the end
result of that is is that we
would issue a cover that not sue
so that because they didn't cast
the contamination we were not
hold them ultimately responsible
for it provided that they clean
up the site
and so we talked a little bit
about the.
Father that they were a
potentially and in negotiations
on p and m i'd I don't have a
lot of details associated with
that but they were
you're talking and generalities
and I explained that you know
like for dp eighteen forty three
that is for a groundwater
contamination issue it's a
remediation system that is
designed is designed to clean up
groundwater
and I pointed out that ground
wanted clean up serve very
expensive in very long term the
vote program really works well
for a very discrete issue like
their soil contamination there's
maybe some vapority issues we
can can hit that hard clean it
up and then transfer the site
right those that's what works
well in this particular case
there's ground a contamination
and I fully expect that p and m
will be responsible for that for
decades yeah thank you so is
talk as many chairs this are
they have
what kind of company you're
there what what product do they
want in a south on the
my understanding is that they
are a excuse me manager
committee members of my
understandings as that company
say uh a pipeline company uhm
that is interested in in
hydrogen.
Very interesting okay thank you
and then then lastly does pns
shirty bind
if there is just hypothetically
extensive contamination I mean
today are there limits to what
their bond covers pose
that could exceed what they
financially are on the hook for
clean it up
um
madam chair committee members
the shirty bond that they have
is related or is a for the
closure requirements associated
with the discharge permit and
there are associated with the
infrastructure of
a solid ways per
and a and the
lagoons in which they use
process water and allow to
evaporate so it's the it's
literally the closure of those
particular items
there is a possibility with the
stage two activities that we
identify other areas of
contamination those would not be
covered under the shirty bonds
and the shirty bonds would only
be done in case pm doesn't
follow their closure
requirements
a sufficiently so those are
related I suspect that with the
the dp that is currently under
review although we will include
financial assurance and that
what if the same discharge
permit excuse me
with the discharge period
associate with the groundwater
pump and treat uh the show your
royal a discharge permit maybe
we need to look at that one
really closely and uhm
incorporate the long term
activities that that represents
in issuing our permit for that
um but to go back to that other
idea if
we identify the contamination
from the property during the
phase two.
Then it's within our
abilities to require a payment
and there is a potential to you
to require a financial assurance
under the abatement regulations
as well
thank you well hopefully you do
to the full extent needed to
remediate this side and new
mexicans don't get left holding
the bag of a contaminated side
of a site that we have to
subsidize to clean up so thank
you for your work on this push
thank you
I just have it is anyone okay so
printer thank you madame
chairman i'm thinking of members
of the committee and thank you
for your presentation.
The
mine understanding is that this
can be demolitioned
the smack
the site
I I am unaware of the sign uh
chair and committee members
I don't have any information
about the ongoing activities
on a day to day basis
so I assume that you're right.
Still madam chairman members of
the committee
so you're seeing and fees when
that there's an evaluation of
the plan but yet if there's any
kind of could termination
from whatever the plan is then
we're gonna have require
bakemail and unstand high we
can't already see with some of
this in sampling saying well
there has to be a batement
already
in place if we're doing a
diligent
mountain to committee members
so I
the
so presents or absence of the
building itself um at that point
if it's if it's gone then we all
have to rely on historical
documents and the interviews
with staff and
air photos and and things like
that.
With that without analysis then
we will then there will be a
determination of a recognized
environmental concern and that
is a in the phase one fees to
rubric that that's that
specifically defined and that is
also very conservative alright
so you are recognized
environmental concern doesn't
have to be a non release it can
be the potential of a release so
the easy idea would like is
there an underground storage
tank at that location yes there
is that a wreck we're gonna
investigate it and so
what we have the scope for the
from that we will create the
scope of the face to from that
we all go and collect samples to
the confirm room
confirm or show that there has
not been a release
and if there has been a release
then when we we would require
payment
mr madame chairman members of
the community so it sounds like
nobody is actually there's not
really boots on the ground grain
out there collecting any
sampling you're just saying that
we'll keep this as the plan they
want to do it and then there's a
do whatever and if it goes into
the air because there is a
concern to them believe this
facility to has a settling pine
will but they actually use it
for it with the process but the
big pipeline that's coming down
that there's consideration to
use that part as a settlement
settling.
Area so my ok if we're going
through this process and you
don't know or there's potential
contamination then it seems like
the whole
area is just practically going
to be useless after
um in the sense of that we
expect pm to be responsible for
the cleanup but there's not
really any things in they will
be as that may
is that that where we're sitting
manager committee member seven.
There's this is a I i'm not
really sure how to answer your
question
because
either you use the word
perception right and and then
you also brought up the idea of
future like what is going to
happen
the discharge permits that we
have and and the settlement or
the settling or the evaporative
legal and so they have for the
process water for below down of
uh of their operation of their
plan
those are covered under the
under the discharge permanent
and there close your
requirements associated with
that.
It is possible for us to adjust
the closure plans if the next
purchaser of the facility has a
beneficial use for those
activities for for that
infrastructure that's possible
i'm not really sure if that's
appropriate in this case.
But I guess the
to answer your question or
respond to your statement at
this moment no we do not have
boots on the ground our boots on
the ground interspeedy during
the face two section where we
make a plan go and sample the
rate locations for the right
constituents
to determine if there has been
releases and the magnitude
extent of those those impacts.
So madame chair members of the
committee so there's not any
kind of error collection that is
set up currently in those areas
around the mind to collect any
samples
of there
were just going to go out and we
tell something falls out of the
air to the ground and take a
sample from the ground
manager of committee members.
And so are I think you're you're
asking about a part particular
associated the air quality from
thus being read because we know
or I know that with I been with
our redpond community here close
to gallop that that disturbance
is also a very is a concern of
the the surrounding community
members.
I got I made sure committee
member side I think I understand
you can so now.
That i'd suspect that in the
process of the phase one that
may be considered iraq a
recognized environmental concern
and we would do samplings
associated with that in the fees
too.
Madam chairman
I am just concerned that if the
if if what I heard because I
know I had a lot of background
most of my phone call was that
this demolition was actually
going to happen before the end
of this month
and got an email to you know
about the from economic
development department seeing
while we want to talk to
community members about future
plans for the strategic plan for
the area and it seems like we'll
what kind of putting things
before we even know if there's
gonna be contamination
continue contamination and
continue clean up that.
You know asking me it's
community members to come in and
maybe not I don't know how much
they've been notified.
About
the this construction are
demonstrated deconstruction
is my concern because
we'll recently with the
navonation being right there
that
it did it is a big concern at
maintaining our nation
to the quality of land of that
we would like to
to not do any further damage to
it
but thank you very presentation
thank you.
Parents choose to be senator
steel opers
thank you I want it emphasis and
I have my call income said that
there seems problematic
are you working with a because
when you look at the
presentation what you said on
page five it sounded to me like
you were working with pn
but it sounds like you're not
working with pm if you're not
aware that they're planning of
to take it down later this month
manager committee members
from the perspective of the
activities that we discuss the
phase one in the first two
there's.
I'm
I am done well in order to do
those activities that face one
that face to
we will react to the
activities that are on that the
situation on the ground at the
time in which we conduct those
so I I guess i'm saying that
there's a
uh
maybe there's a disconnect
between
the demolition
I
from the environmental.
If there was a release rate
associated with the demolition
of the facility then they would
they are required to notify us
of that release and that's where
we would be involved
specifically with that activity
mediterranean prior to the
release or after they've
released it.
Um
after it at any point when any
entity has a release of a water
contaminant than they are
required to notify the
environment department
madame chair what about air
content minutes because these
particulars and we've seen
what's been happening with the
particular from fires this isn't
explosion of a facility that has
called all kinds of minerals
owned not to mention the cement
and everything else the
contaminants within the facility
I don't know how these
demolition is going doesn't
sound like like you know either
but this could be a major air
event as well.
Manager members of the committee
I I think I need to to.
I don't have
experience with air permits
and I do know that there are
I assume that there are
requirements for
air permits for demolition
so
I
believe in our I suspect that p
and m is going through their
process
to obtain the appropriate
permits for construction and and
demolition.
Okay
this whole plan is not limited
to the entire environmental
impact just to the potential
impact on the water.
Just to clarify mention
its.
Manager committee members are as
a
the the focus has member of the
long term impacts relative to
the the uh
the operation the facility over
the period of years we want
look for and potentially fine
that was contaminations.
Like I said I think the
demolition of the
facilities would be covered by
other environmental
requirements.
And a madam chair so within the
environmental department there
is no conversations between the
air people over water people the
land people that
to look at the holistically with
this facility what the
demolition of this facility is
how this demolition is going to
impact not only the area but
when it goes into the air
depending on where the wind
blows it's also surrounding
communities
and I guess my question is there
is no collaboration of
communication within the
department.
Manager and committee members
out I can't say that we've at
we've spoken with the air bureau
about the the issue
I will chair I would encourage
you to I would increase the
department to look at this more
holistically
as cause this keep it it kept
guess it would through me it
kept saying environmental impact
so I assumed we're talking about
the brighter picture of
environmental impact and not
just the impact on water so I
would encourage the department
to look at this
demolition holistically with a
strong consideration of what
this means for the communities
water the communities air the
communities land but also a
consideration of what it means
for surrounding communities when
these particulars um join the
airstreams
madam shared out that's on here
committee thank you
yes representative
management character just for
point of clarification I
contacted my sister friend
representative
and there is some sort of
demolition set for august twenty
fourth and zero seven thirty
hours
not sure what type.
So I just for a point of
clarification sir.
And that's all man thank you
think part of the confusion
we have tried to include
emerged environmental resource
department and
they're the disconnect between
environmental
nmed and mm erd
is
who is responsible for what and
I think we need to get that
clarified
because you know we appreciate
you being heard it you know help
us with understand
what's going on.
Especially with the water
contamination in the ponds in as
a dry up and and then but.
That's something that we need
the executive office to
we should ask them
how these two agencies are not
working together or should be
taking different
responsibilities of the
monitoring
I don't know if you have
anything you would go ahead and
send you
the needs like well they have
the permit as my understanding
to do this construction the
contract is there to do the
demolition of the smoke stacks
which aren't probably the
largest the highest structure
that's there and i'm how
would they be able to get this
permit without involving some of
these without loving your
department which I think should
they should be but you should be
able to input your concerns just
from looking at a map of the
water puts around there
surrounding that
manager committee members
I will state that are
staff members are having
conversations staff to staff
with the folks on the node side
that are working on this this
year
and I will
just have a rederate maybe what
I said which is that you know
peanuts activities are regulated
at the site whether there's
associated with his particular
issue or just existing
activities and existing permits
that they have to have I can't
speak for your air quality
because my money familiar with
their their regulations and
their staff
I would be in my career i've
talked them like three or four
times so
i'm confident that they are the
well I would be very surprised
if pm as night gone through the
proper steps to get a permit to
do the demolition that they are.
Um but
I will I will check with my
counterparts and get back to you
what mental company and military
think the other we thought the
part of my concern is with the
nation ben with navigation
probably a little bit with ute
two with the ute nation because
they're surrounding sovereign
nations in that area in they
take for
let's get in a situation where
they're is back class that they
were not notified
still thank you matter.
Yeah.
Think voucher there is because I
can may I speak for a second
time and the air permitting
process is within your
department the air quality
permitting process
and my understanding is that
requires consultation with the
community in the surrounding
community so
I I would be very interested to
see
what was done in order to get
that permitted III know you're
confident that pn probably
applied but I think it's it's a
portant for the legislature to
know.
What was done what was applied
for hour how were the nations
and
the sovereign nations um
involved in the process and you
know what is the expected impact
in particular matter because
it's all related you know
the particulars are going to
fall at some point and they are
going to possibly contaminate
water plans whatever depending
on what's in them and so it's
it's kind of good for for
collaboration and cooperation on
this just so people can be aware
because it permit me not have
taken into account some of the
things you're looking at in vice
versa.
Manager this again just a
suggestion
because it's just or is our
status so fragile and
contaminating any piece of water
or contaminating the air just
has such a defect devastating
effect in our beautiful but
environmentally fragile state
thank you madame chair
thank you anyone else on the
committee
okay
I was also concerned about um
you know the mention of the
water quality in
the epa
guidelines um did you say that
you weren't that familiar with
them or
managed her committee members
that that was in reference to
the the the necessary scoring
for a site to be listed on the
superfound oversight sort of the
super fundless the national
priorities list those
particularly details i'm not the
on the ranking
the hazard ranking scoring
system i'm I know of it but I
have not done that and so i'm
not sure how I could I would be
hesitant to speak off the cuff
on whether the site with score.
Um I know it was insinuated that
are population wouldn't
qualify the app but i'm
wondering if the contamination
itself
would be so high that are smart
population with qualify is that
something you could look into
manchester yes I can okay we
appreciate that also if you've
only spent four thousand of the
three hundred thousand for
personnel is that a problem for
you know doing the evaluation I
know you've only budgeted twenty
five thousand that's not even a
fourth of an fte
uhm
is there a reason that that so
low
manager committee members we've
budgeted three hundred thousand
of the eight hundred and
sixty thousand that's on the the
top of that list there are the
four thousand are about four
thousand spent on that at this
point in the two hundred
directly related with the the
staffing staffing up for this
project
we unfortunately haven't filled
the we didn't fill the position
until um me end of may and if he
only does me we have another
position that is a currently
going to be advertised in a rap
and higher on august twenty
fourth so if there is anyone
that is a uh within the sound of
my voice and is interested in
working for the department we're
having a rapid higher enough in
the album turkey um
and we would like to fill that
position as well um but it's
that it's the timing of the of
the hiring okay
so it is you
plan to get those positions
filled and use that funding
but it sounds like a lot of it's
going to be the five hundred and
sixty k.
For contracting and.
And that's contracting for
further testing and things like
that.
Manager yes that's correct.
Okay any further did you have.
Yes go ahead
well to be a little redundant
out of chair I think speaking
for a number of us that just
want to thank you for your work
but also urge that we really do
a good job making sure that this
site is fully remediated in that
pms.
In a fully held to be
responsible to meet their
obligations seen her unseen well
not the obligation the
contamination to remediate this
and a dare you probably don't
need a letter from us saying
that we could do something like
that but we're just basically
encouraging you to to do that as
we found a course in other
places in the state what happens
is contamination is sometimes
not for the address and it
becomes a legacy issue for the
state and your p and m
definitely has a resources to
address it and they operated a
site for many many years and
so we encourage you to basically
do a first class job and really
clean up their site for the
community that you're not with
standing what happens with
target which it sounds like
that's kind of a mutually
exclusive discussion being
cleaner passed to happen
regardless and
that's a bottom line yeah so
good luck it will
be attic wishing you out thank
you
thank you and mister chair
i'd also like to add that pn was
invited to be here on this panel
in the decline to have any when
present.
Not a good sign so thank you
very much madame share committee
thank you for the opportunity
and I I whole heartly agree with
what she said and have heard
per which you said thank you.
Next are you hit a schedule just
a little bit
see very speakers or here
so.
Okay great
next panel is um chris showing
and to a sira
to receipt i'm sorry
kiana
and if you're looking at the
agenda susing gordon could not
make it
so you would come forward in
percent.
Yeah.
So i'm sorry i'd probably
mispronounced your names if you
would introduce yourselves again
thank you.
I don't know
well my name is terrcita kiana
and I come from the red water
upon road community and I also
sit on the executive committee
board.
Yeah.
Okay then
members of the committee my name
is chris shoe she e y I direct
the urine impact assessment
program at southwest research
and information center in
albuquerque where I then
employed since nineteen eighty
one and
uh am also part of the unmetal
support research center so i'll
be discussing our work on your
medium remediation and health
studies.
And.
Uh terror seater did you want to
go no i'm sorry chris you wanted
to go first I think if you don't
mind how we go first.
The.
Yeah
again good morning madam chair
and members of the committee um
again my name is krish youi
I
have been before this committee
before with my colleague doctor
johnny lewis
direct former director of the
UNM uh community environmental
health program and doctor lewis
says successfully to retired in
the last couple years
we last presented on our health
studies in
september two thousand twenty
two and doctor lewis focused
mostly on some of the work and a
result of the
nabo birth cohert steady that I
am a co investigator for and she
was the director of
i'd in preparing for today's
testimony I want to introduce
two of our newest staff members
at southwest research uh went
the at city stand up and uh
shasidy society these folks will
be taking organization
into the next decade we've been
around since nineteen seventy
one um and you can tell i'm
getting to be of retirement age
and so we have we have a new
generation of indigenous women
that are gonna
curious forward this job of
dealing with the abandoned urine
in my problem
which has been with us for
eighty years it's a multi
generational problem it will
continue to be a multi
generational problem and so my
test money today it's oriented
toward.
Uh urging action that we haven't
taken or that we're taking it a
very slow pace
i'd like to recognize that
there's a lot of people that go
into presentations like that
including the mini folks in
front line communities that are
living with uranium mind waste
and their impacts on health in
the environment you can see some
of their names are up there
mister larry king from church
rock and a member of the eastern
uphold didn't get sharing your
minding is here
so
we have a linkages to
communities from lagona
west of alba kirky all the way
to cameron chapter north of
flagstaff on nab home
and we have um
at last count approximately a
twenty two to twenty three denie
are women who work on the birth
cohort steady
as part of the staffs of union
the navalhood department of
health and southwest research
and information center
we also have five full time
community relations from
indigenous communities impacted
by a uranium mining
so we have a lot of experience
and it's at the grateful level
so are my approach is a to
talk about the human health
impacts of these exposures and
what we need to do to take
action next line.
Do you guys do the slides or do
i.
The.
Out there you okay thank you
just a couple things from this
side uh to acknowledge that our
funding comes from various
federal sources
and those federal sources don't
have an approved in anything
that we say so this is we're
solely responsible for the
content
I do want to recognize that
the the university of new mexico
both in alba kurki well you know
the kirkin particular sites on
the traditional homelands of the
publo sandia these are the
original peoples of our region
and we recognize an honor their
contributions are to the land
base that we all sit on and
proudly talk about as our home
homely and too next like.
Can I control the slides from up
here.
Right okay I wanted to
a summarize what i'm going to
recommend that this committee in
the legislature do uh as as
shortly as possible
um this uh we we need to get
moving on the net notion of
protecting public health and the
environment because it's going
to take per potentially and
other fifty to a hundred years
to solve this problem and we
have it's time to start acting
now there have been a numerous
attempts over the last twenty
years to get this project this
program of remediation going
it's taking a very long time
we need to have a regional
approach to any of mine
remediation and we need to to
end the notion that somehow uh
waste that are disposed on the
not right now in the nob honest
are somehow not
appropriate for disposal in the
state of new mexico which sits
right next door and I can go out
and stand on the boundary at
casimary lake and chapter and
then the western region of
embrocial ache and I can tell
you the pollutions don't abide
by those boundaries we need a
regional solution and part of
the problem is it's that the
state has been resisting that uh
regional solution so i'd like to
see the legislature authorized
both the environment department
and the mining and minerals
division to start to explore a
regional dispulsive facility for
mine was in the m brush a lake
area with direct system
participation i'm gonna talk
more about that later in the
slides and I wanted to also let
you know that as you'll find out
this is a very complicated issue
with lots of technical
scientific
medical and policy issues plus
on top of that we have the
benefit of infusing these policy
initiatives with intention as
knowledge that comes from these
communities from people of lib.
With this material for the last
three to now going on for
generations and while we focus
on the uranium legacy we are not
oblivious to the notion that
there are companies out there
that want to mind your animal
again here in our region and
we we see this about every
fifteen to twenty years as the
price of uranium on the spot
market spikes and then goes back
down but we take those threats
very seriously and we don't
think that it's wise policy to
start new uranium mining when
the problems of the past have
not been rectified next life.
And this is the outline of the
presentation
there was
in the affairs committee meeting
if it she strings on august one
in which a couple of the
legislators asked will how did
we get here how to laws happen
so i'm going to review that uh
i'm going to talk about what we
have discovered as the health
health impact of these exposures
from living close to mines on
what are the policy majors and
what you can do to address this
problem in this math shows the
burden of abandoned uranium
minds throughout the western
united states more than ten
thousand uranium minds in
fifteen western states more than
fifty abandoned uranium bills
most of which are under some
sort of reclamation remediation
and that's out of the hundred
and sixty thousand hard rock
minds drugs scattered throughout
the west next life.
And this map on the
left side is from a paper that
doctor lewis and my colleague
said johauver and deborah
mckenzie did back in two
thousand seventeen which shows
the burden of hard rock mining
and specifically uranium and
vanation mining on addition its
peoples of the west
more than six hundred thousand
we estimate native americans
live with five kilometers have
been abandoned mine your raining
in minding began in the region
and the monument valley area at
the air arizona you talk border
in nineteen forty two and in the
grants mineral belt nineteen
fifty and we are still dealing
with those decisions to extract
fissile material from the ground
for the purposes of the nuclear
weapons program uh the iranian
legacy represents a
technological disaster when you
look at it across these eighty
years of impact
we we know about natural
disasters we know about acute
disasters to happen whether it's
trained arrailments like we had
out here in april toward the new
mexico's on a border uhm
major chemical leaks and things
like that but when you look at
the history of uranium
development in the southwest it
in all the impacts that have
taken place to the public health
to the working groups of
especially native minors
to the health of the communities
to the land base
this is a this is a big disaster
that we have not done a good job
of responding to and I want to
note that the vast majority of
these abandoned iranian minds in
the west are defense related
that means they were
they were created to
develop uranium that was sold to
the united states government for
the purposes of turning that
material into weapons grade
material for new nuclear weapons
nuclear bombs.
Next life
and this is just a a map that
shows the wide
area of the nab honation in the
american southwest a burden by
uranium minds over in the smart
in the uh lower left court red
corner is the embrocial leak
district on the new mexico side
in the public lagoon
and i've labeled uh some of
these areas that are part of our
health studies
because so we have worked with
the communities and developed
questions about health the kim
from the communities are and so
we go from the eastern agency
all in the denet project all the
way through
the entire nomination for the
naval birth cohort study and our
metal support from research
center
deals with many these ways from
the going to all the way to
camera next slight.
And this is just some of the
maps and places where we've
conducted these studies and
again all the questions that we
address on research comes from
the community themselves we
don't necessarily look at
bencale laboratory work at the
university and then say well
this is something that the
community needs we listen to the
community first and we adapt
what are challenged and
expertise is to those questions
madam chair do you need a copy
of the
slides to I hate to see you
turned turn around okay
okay
so sorry for the small type of
bigger copies next time.
And so in the delay project in
the eastern agency the central
cushion was well if uranium is
in our water and in the waste
how does it suffect all the high
rates of kidney disease that
we've already
observed in this community and
we did community based trainings
to
develop a health study that was
ah later able to enroll thirteen
hundred and four people in a
cross section of study there
still ranks as the largest such
study ever done on the nab
honestly the birth coherent
study is still going on began in
two thousand ten we have a
funding and authorization from
an I h to continue through at
least the next
four to five years in our metal
superfound research center looks
at both the environmental and
the biomedical effects of
abandoned minds in four
communities going to public west
of albert kirky the red water
pon road community were uh
terrorist from the blue gap
touchy community west of china
and the champ the
camera and community north of
flagstaff next slide.
The.
Okay so i'm not going to go
through all of these bullets
i'll take too long your hand out
though says that I change the
headline a little bit
or to summarize all this work
that is gone on over the last
twenty to twenty five years and
those references are all to
publish peer reviewed papers and
I have copies of them here
is that we have seen
that exposure to uranium and
other metals significantly
increases the risk of cartie of
escular disease including
hypertension and auto immunity
during what we call the legacy
period after the minds closed
are included disease are during
the active mining period we also
discovered that there's a
significant linkage between a
combination exposure and
combination of metabolic
diseases that includes diabetes
but so far diabetes has not
turned up as a health outcome of
any of the exposure in deceased
that we found generally speaking
we're looking at
cried disease we don't ignore
things like cancer which uhm
uh burden these communities and
you have um numerous anecdotal
and personal statements of
people who have been affecting
their families affected and we
are trying to appeal to e p a as
it goes through these
remediations to take this
information and apply to
remediation decisions because it
doesn't do that right now
so next like please.
I wanted one of the the the
leading factors that we find in
as an exposure in disease is
proximity to mind sites and
these are pictures and graphics
the show what proximity means I
want to emphasize that people
around these areas still live
next to these minds in these
mind waste
while there have been people
that have moved out moved away
they're most of them are still
there and in many cases you
would remove the ways from the
people
in many other places in the
united states they remove people
from the waste of the exposure
and uh indigenous community sass
always not possible in our dent
project and sure being those
thirteen hundred and four people
we found that
about
the the median a duration of
residency was thirty three years
meaning people are essentially
tied to the land tied to their
home and tied to the chronic
exposures that they receive you
can see the northeast the
caberator truck mine in the red
water pon road community in the
upper left and terry will be
speaking about that that picture
that in sept picture is of a
young man who was four years old
at the time and that that was
taken in two thousand nine when
waste were being removed from
around his home that your man's
in high school now so this
represents the ongoing
multi generational impact of
these waste and the upper right
you see homes right next to the
claim twenty eight minute blue
gap that's a hundred and fifty
foot a scartment of mine wasted
sit because above where people
live in the lower right you see
a map of the camera and irison a
district thirty five abandoned
uranium minds are around that
area near where people have next
to people who are.
For people live and if you've
ever been out there as a tourist
and you've gone to say the
camera and trading post and you
eaten dinner in the in the nice
restaurant there you're looking
out across the canyon to an
abandoned uranium
at leguna the the main pits
twenty eight hundred acres of
disturb land used to be the
largest open pit uranium mine in
the world uh sits dex to the
village of pawading and impacts
uh the people downstream and all
the gonna and mescede villages
and it is still undergoing a
superfound assessment we are
years away from understanding
the
methods it could be used to
remediate that site and then
just down the road here about
twenty miles away and mary on a
lake we've had numerous families
living next to the what used to
call the gulf mary on lake mine
which operated between like
seventy two in it in seventy six
and that mine waste his remains
their hits been there epa has a
proposal to dig it up and move
it a mile away but these are
people people that have lived
with these exposure so this is
what proximity means and this is
why we see some of the effects
that we
do in our birth cohert study of
baby's born with uh uh
detectable levels of uranium in
their earn on the day they are
born and increasing in their
first four years of life and now
we can follow these children
until they're in their teens so
we'll know more as time goes on
about these chronic exposures in
their effects next like.
So the implications about this
is that if it's not safe to live
next to these abandoned minds
then we need to prioritize for
mediation to remove them from
the areas where people live that
would require some notion of a
taking precautions uh it seems
to me as a public health
professional that
eh that a smaller number of
regional disposal facilities
highly engineered to contain
these ways forever is far
preferable to turning abandoned
mines and there's on on the new
mexico side two hundred on the
novel side of their five hundred
into permanent waste disposal
sites that puts the burden on
the communities to monitor these
sites going forward across the
the future generations and
assault talk about in a while
we're not sure that the
techniques for in place are
state control of these mind
waste is a better outcome than
than picking them up and taking
them to a highly monitored uh
centralized disposal facility
and as I mentioned earlier we
really need to pay to think
about reforming the way it
understands in evaluates public
health impacts from these
from these minds er and under
the super fund process they
write what is are called in
engineering evaluation cost
analysis ecos we live in a world
of acronyms sorry
but in those echoes to decide
whether a site or a preferred
remedy is protective of public
health is all about computer
based risk assessment and
there's very little if any data
on the existing health
conditions in these communities
nor how these studies that the
government has funded actually
can be used in environmental
decision making to clean up
these sites next like.
The.
Um and so uh thinking about
policies that are needed as this
quote from in the in the lower
right corner from the letter
that governors lou hungrish am
in hob sent to the council of
environmental quality back in
april abandoned uranium minds
are directly with the eighteen
united states it's defense
separates and the cost of their
clean up is beyond the ability
and responsibility of impact
that states and tribal nations
to find that's why we need a
commitment of responsibility
from the federal government
nobody made a decision to mind
your radium for the nuclear
weapons program other than the
federal government and those
decisions were opposed upon uh
the tribes the states the local
jurisdictions people went to
work but they were poisoned in
the process um and we still to
this day eighty years later are
trying to figure out what to do
about this um but I find that
while the the governor's
sentiments are well placed I
can't understand how that's
consistent with this notion that
has been
advanced by officials of the
state that we're not going to
allow naval uranium was in on
the new mexico side first of all
these are not nobody raining
which they are uranium waste
left on the naval honestly by
companies doing contracts with
the federal government to
a develop uranium or
we share as I mentioned early
cross boundaries of this huge
problem and i'll talk a little
bit about how we can begin to
look at and brochure lake as a
place for regional disposal
facilities should there be a
federal working group the people
have advocated for it's got to
have the front line people
sitting at the table we have
been frustrated over the last
four to five years with the
various federal and state and
tribal agencies holding meetings
on remediation.
Uh technologies and policy
without people like terry kiana
sitting at the table it makes no
sense for decision makers who
don't live next to mine's to be
making decisions on behalf of
people who do live next to minds
so we need a change in the way
that we perceive the public's
interest
and i've noticed that there's
discrepancies across
jurisdictions and clean up
standards so we've talked about
radiation and clean up what does
that mean talk a little bit
about that more later next life
epa is pretty much looking at a
cap in place alternative for
most remediation both mind
sights that means leave the way
there these diagrams show what
are the typical designs of
placing two and a half feet of
dirt on top of mine waste
planning some vegetation
hopeless grows and it's backed
up by the theory of a bapo
transparation which says that in
an area climate any rainfall or
snow melt that comes on top of
the mind jump will evaporate or
desicate prior to the fluids
reaching the mind waste
themselves and creating a
toxically check that it could
affect the subsurface we don't
find that this is protective
this is not a methods that are
recommended by any more in any
sense of modern reclamation
standards that i'm aware of
places the burden on the
communities to monitor these
sites
and it's not in my view
protective public health and the
environment but it is what
appears to be
the vast majority of remedies
for most of the minds on david
and I believe looking at the
environment departments uranium
reclamation strategy document
from blast november it appears
that some of the minds that are
being reclaimed on the new
mexico side are also in place
stabilizations.
Uhm if these things fail we will
be back to the drawing board
again another twenty thirty
years I would remind everybody
that ah least we regulate
reclamation of uranium mill
tailings and I can explain the
difference have been light but
mill tailings have a special
category in federal law and
already the covers that were
placed on them in the eighties
and nineties are failing so we
need a better way of managing
and remediating all the uranium
was next slight.
This is what a regional
uranium waste dump looks like
it's on the uh it's a christian
junction colorado it uses a
below grade reclaim as you go
method it takes the molab the
tailings that molab utah thirty
miles on a train and disposes
them at that site problem is is
that when congress wrote the
bill back in eighty nine ninety
that authorized this it declared
that the only way still could go
to that site are the milk mob
mill tailings in moab utah
that completely ignored all the
other waste burdens throughout
the the the west including owner
tribally answered and new mexico
in arizona
and the lack of having a dis-
regional disposal facility kind
of leads toward reliance on less
expensive methoding of captain
place next slight
now cherry's going to talk about
why the community supports the
moving of the cavermine waste
and there's a passenger lake
section thirty two thirty three
mine a waste to the red rock
landfill east of the root not in
through six miles easter through
it's a sight that we visited
numerous times it has advantages
many advantages for the
permanent and safe disposal of
mine wasters plenty of room to
develop an engineer disposal
facility
and of course we not acknowledge
it the only way that you get
mine waste from a site saying
your church rock or a sight and
cassette merrill lake is by
trucking the waste
we
and and so you might as I think
that
are our choices for remediation
are very limited leave it on the
site and deal with potential
future problems or take it away
from the site
halling that may
impact communities in a in a
negative fashion in that way.
But this is the best site that's
been talked about but it is only
being proposed for
two
count maybe three minute mind
waste disposal operations at
this point next line.
And this is the situation and
brush like all those stocks are
abandoned minds um
it would chat about ten years to
find and construct a dispulse of
sight there but we could get
started now and again it seems
that
in this so called policy which
we heard enunciated by the
regional e p a administrator
in march at a meeting in red
water pond road was she had
spoken with high ranking state
officials who said we still
don't we're still not interested
in naval rear anyways because we
have our own to deal with that's
got to change we need a uh
a regional solution and I wish
and I would also ah a pine that
I the state land office
lamp state land is affected by
at least seven abandoned minds
that means that those lands
cannot ever generate ah revenues
for the the the the school funds
so they are liabilities and
other adversity comes
opportunity and maybe that
opportunity is for those lands
owned by the state land
department which has the you
know the liability for them
maybe those would be appropriate
spots for regional disposal
facility but anyway all this
needs to be discussed in an open
and transparent fashion that in
in involves the people on the
front lines next like.
I did the let the legislature
can do a number of different
things we think that there ought
to be some federal congressional
review of this problem
we are particularly frustrated
that the department of the
interior in the bureau of land
management seems to be resistant
to identifying federal lance it
could be used for disposal
facilities um
we have just seen recently a
senate bill passed the wood once
again a create another inventory
abandoned minds we have a bunch
of those we don't need to
reinvent the wheel anymore we
know where they are and what
their impacts are around your
end we would know it that while
you're the the build it set up
the uh uranium of re-
recommendation coordinators for
the state and about the
environment department and the
mining and minerals division had
a uranium mind reclamation
revolving phone well has nothing
in it
I I think we should be realistic
fell what money could be put in
that it would be barely enough
to create a an organization
to do assessments perhaps
the cost of cleaning up is going
to be in the billions not the
hundred thousand not the
millions billions
but we have to start somewhere
and one of the places we can
start as to identify the places
in embrocially that might be
suitable for a regional disposal
facility
and as i've said before we need
to figure out a way to recognize
and incorporate
these health study findings in
our remediation decisions next
life and my last comment is is
that this problem has been
around for a long time this is a
map from a bureau of minds and
mineral resources publication
from nineteen eighty
the situation hasn't changed we
know all these minds we know
where they are they've been
sitting there unattended for all
this time so action is needed
now to address the.
The it's long overdue to just a
long term impact I appreciate
your attention and i'd be happy
to answer questions later on.
Thank you go ahead.
Thinking madame chair and the
committee.
Thank you for allowing me this
time to talk about my community
our community is the red wire
pine road and also the pipeline
community as well.
And so we live between two of
the largest
iranian minds on their honation.
And the mill site is only half
of a mile away
are community is right near the
site where the nineteen seventy
nine tailing spill happened.
Yeah
that better
there
okay
okay better
okay
okay and so
between our two communities we
have at least fifty homes that
are in our community and so it's
were basically surrounded by
these minds and these
communities have been here for
over one hundred years and we've
actually had to produce
paperwork in order to prove that
because usapa and ge actually
tried to say that we moved into
the community so that we can get
reparations I guess from the
minds but we were there far
before the mining industry began
and so decades of a communities
have been impacted that some
generations of people they have
already been impacted by leave
the area your iranian exposure
and so
i'm
we really are in support of the
us epa's decision or option I
should say to move the minutes
from the cover a mind site which
is
million cubic yards of was to
the red rock landfill
so we'll speak to the next slide
please.
Uhm and the advantages of the
landfill is that it's not near
homes I believe there's I think
when we visited the site there
is only one house that we
actually saw near
on our way into the actual
landfill.
And
it's on private lan so that's
something that we don't have to
worry about the jurisdiction of.
Everything that's been happening
with our community we we deal
with different types of land we
deal with the check reward area
and because of that we deal with
two regions with epa so that
gets very confusing and really
hard because they don't
communicate with each other and
so sometimes we're talking about
one mind say an
are different region and then we
have to talk about another mind
sigh with a different another
region and get its or in the
same community and it gets
really um confusing and hard.
And so one of the
one of the what the option of
the landfill is that it's pretty
sound there's no when we visit
it it's pretty flat there is not
much erosion issues that can
occur
it's.
It's large enough in the mind
waste will not be
put together with the minister
per waste it's going to be set
aside on a different part of
their property and so.
We
we we are not worried too much
about how the repository is
going to go and where it's going
to go
it seems like
um they've done a lot of their
homework in.
Um.
Produce something that srill are
feasible because.
With the cover of mind say where
it sits currently there's a big
erosion problem and it's quite
possible that we if we don't
address it we argue in that was
another disaster because of the
erosion issue that we actually
have to deal with every every
summer basically during the
month soon seasons.
And so we have you know more
than a hundred about minds in
the eastern agency and we need
to find a solution and a lot of
times we always get pushed back
from other organizations other
people and.
Umm they never come back with a
solution they always want to
start everything but they never
come back with a solution and I
remember representative al con
asking you and we've been
dealing with this issue for
decades and this is actually our
opportunity in your opportunity.
To help us achieve that and
actually get clean up and start
moving in the forward um for
progression so I I just want to
mention that because I remember
how passionate el conwas but
about um this issue and so
we just want to.
Remember it have everybody
understand the actual minority
so can we go to the next slide
please.
The.
The.
And so the community concern and
what is the mine was and it's
it's low level was it's not
going to be something that's
high level if firm anything is
considered high level it's
actually going to go to a
license repository and so there
are those things that will be
addressed the mind waste that
were we want to get into the red
rock landfill is just basically
dried dirt and rocks that have
been exposed to near the uranium
actual uranium or and so it's
not high level waste and um it's
basically what the miners and
the min industry just consider
trash.
Because they couldn't produce
any money from it and so we end
up with trash basically.
Umm and so the ways that were
were proposing to move is just
it's not uranium tailings waste.
And it's it's
it's just not I don't know how
else we can put it it's not.
Mill tailings ways it's not
reactive or explosive and there
is
it's not hazard this way we have
been living with it.
For a very long time and we we
deserve a chance to have a safe
home in a safe place to live in.
Are my kids deserve that my
grandkids deserve that
and so um
let's go to the next slide
and this just tells you
the different grades of
the radiation and what actually
been moved
the background is just worth
naturally occurs um the minutes
is elevated because it's been
exposed to the actual uranium
or.
But is not uranium or and then
there's the actual iranian or
and so we're based on the levels
were not talking about high
level was and so we want to
have our mind waste from
corporate remind to be moved
because.
Even though it's not high level
it's still something that our
community has been living with
for generations and has impacted
generations on things there
health studies have not been
done to help prove.
I have my son here who was born
with a hole in his home
and that was something
completely new to us
I have a daughter who
gets skin legions
and we have to send them to
pathology to make sure it's not
cancerous
these are my two youngest
children
and they deserve to
have a home
where they don't have to worry
about things like this
and so I had just some.
Really want to um request the.
Um.
We asked for your systems to
help with them getting permits
and supporting.
The red rock landfill option
it needs it needs to happen
my.
I just went to japan
last week
and I got to witness what
happens in my community at the
beginning of the field change
and now I got taughtness what
happens at the end of that field
chain when it comes to the
military and
it's I opening
an it's not a fair to either of
our communities and i'm visited
for sumer.
I visited her official
in the people just want the same
thing we do
are people worth asking me
questions of but it do you think
about the united states the
barmin and everything and I
don't even care they just want
to have a community were they
can go back to i've seen them
seen their homes a band in
a completely abandoned they
still have their family photos
up
kids toys just sitting there in
in a week we've gone through the
same things and it's unfortunate
and I really asked that
as the state to just
help us move forward in get this
voice moved away developer at
pository.
For the state I guess because
it's only option we have in we
need to do this for the for
horrible never nation and
mckinley county.
Since on a majority and so it's
it needs to happen and I think
you guys think you madam chair
and committee for listening to
me
thank you.
Did you have anything else you'd
like to.
Um no man but if you want
further explanation of that
graphic I can I can provide it
we we did that because
over the last couple years there
has been some concerns about the
potential transportation of
spent fuel high level nuclear
waste by train
from places western eastern
north of new mexico to the whole
tech uh minor
spent fuel repository down by
hubs and unis
and I think that in discussing
discussing the
the extreme deadly radiation
levels in spent fuel and
transgerantic waste that are
going to whip that we somehow
got that confused with the
radiation intensities of mind
waste and they are completely
different
and one is the the high level
waste or cutely hazardous and
have to be remote handled mine
wastes and have that I don't
want to minimize though that
mine was do have a coxic and
realicable component that needs
to be contained and controlled
permanently over long periods of
time
thank you
thank you will go to the
committee
did you want to go first
senator
thank you madame chair thank you
all for your really excellent
presentation and test testimony
and arm tell us the time so
sorry for what you've endured
and what you're dealing with
with your children and hopefully
they're okay
and that's that's really scary
i'm sure and.
Up setting but well hoped it all
will be okay you know this is
really an up setting kind of a
manning issue that just kind of
really pisses you off
for those that have been around
the legislature a long time will
we been here in the same
presentation for the fifteen
years i've been here and the
ball hasn't moved forward one
inch we know there's a problem
we say yes somebody should be
doing something about it but
we're still in the talking face
there is a great quote I looked
up which has a goal without a
plan is just a wish
some we have a wish that this
problem would magically go away
where is the plan
and honestly I think we have a
fairly stunning lack of
leadership at various levels on
the plan phase of this what are
we going to do I mean don't get
me wrong there's isolated plans.
To deal with some of those waste
I know on the nab who nation
there was of the billion dollar
settlement to deal with some of
their waste
but largely as you say scott I
mean this is a billion dollar
problem here in the state of new
mexico thousand abandoned
iranian mindsights a billion
dollar problem and
yeah now the most we have in
washington right now is a hard
rock mining bill that maybe has
forty or fifty million dollars
in it for you know hate western
states you know the department
of interior that's what we got
we don't have a billion dollar
program to deal with defense
error waste me made the really
important point here which was
that this was waste created at
the behalf of the federal
government for the country's
national security
and we had it and then we were
laughed high and dry with the
contamination that still hasn't
been addressed so this is really
in its own category from my
feeling this was I mean this is
this is the federal government's
moral responsibility to take
care of and we need a plan and
sell you know I don't think a
lot of people are aware that the
legislature has taken a few
steps
the money is the most important
step by far but we did I was a
sponsor and represents saraniana
and i'll come a number of us
deal well perhaps sent the
center we are put in funding we
created a band in iranian minor
mediation coordinator positions
at both the media and the amner
to be able to get their arms
around and really document start
to work with all the partners so
it's kind of in the
organizational tool to get arms
around it but we said at the
time the co component without
would have to be a large amount
of federal money and almost
immediately I start having
conversations with the federal
delegation and the secretary of
environment about we had a
conversation with that okay what
are we going to do federally
does it mean a piece of federal
legislation.
Some have mentioned it was a
represent about common terminate
committee mean like this is just
past off and he goes we need to
sue their **** I think is the
exact words the department of
fence he's exactly right
so one thing at the end of this
I may proposes a letter from the
committee to
the governor to the ag to a few
others urging such action but
but it really is time for action
it's time to level up we need a
big solution it is way past time
and and by the way I just want
to ask him in even the lower
level uranium mind was that
we're talking about terraced
it is still dangerous
and in it's a persistent thing
that's out there if you inhale
it if you drink it while life
are that of course is less
dangerous than you know standing
next to a spend nuclear fuel
road but nonetheless it's not an
acceptable level of exposure I
would thank is that fair
statement
yes sir and so you know I think
I would probably even though
your educating us I think we we
don't want to send the message
that is not hazardous and it's
not horrible continue to focus
on the fact that it is harmful
they may not be as harmful as
dying standing next to an
exposed you know spent your ride
but absolutely it's
poison is to the land and how
often a threat to drinking water
supplies and everything else at
its time way past time for us to
do some about it so let's talk
about the action part of it real
quick I want to just ask a
question from first of all on
the regional landful idea the
you were mentioning
cresp sorry called scatterlier
do you view a brochure lake as
an alternative to
to the forgive there
rebrother reponted my popular
scope.
The drug do you view it as an
alternative to that area in
addition to that in addition to
that madam chair members of the
committee
and terrific to how does your
community feel about and browser
like proposal
madame chair
mr steinborn
we we we
we really want to go with this
option because
the red rock landfill because it
seems very very sound oh I have
gotten to witness where the area
will be and i've seen it and
geologically I feel like it's a
lot more sound considering that
there's all the rocks that are
nearby you know it's underneath
the ground as well.
It feels like it's more stable
yeah i'm in case that's kind of
an immediate solution of some of
the ways that you are you're
dealing with and so that's your
priority I can understand that
you want to say some
manager senator yeah it would be
the second step the first step
is red rock landfill property
because it will take care of two
large mind waste dumps and
sitting now where people there
next to where people that
are and there is a willing
private host that makes a big
bit of difference and that
entity were provided apply for a
permit from the state
environment department through
the solid waste act
and we
and that would be subject to
public comment and involvement
of the concern public they had
concerns about the site but my
point earlier was that we need
to start planning now
be the decided advantage of and
brochure like is that nobody
lives there anymore no of
animals grays there anymore
unfortunately it's populated by
the remnants of hundred
different abandoned minds and
two huge uranium melting links
facilities it's largely
uninhabitable
there's the town village of same
material that's right next to
this mountain or mine at the
east end of ambrosia lake beware
potential lands could be
identified is more to the west
and again
well away from from human
receptors and therefore the the
pathways have exposure
and it seems like
that's the kind of planning that
you you recommend that we need
is look let's look forward ten
years what do we need to do to
take the next step in the step
after that I understand.
And I agree totally this takes a
long time to build and and this
is again one of those action
steps like what are we doing and
under does a state of new mexico
mancher state in the mexico I
mean I hear what you're saying
they apparently have some
position that you feel is being
communicated that we don't want
now the whole waste in the state
in a mexico maybe that is their
position I don't know but
has there been any movement
towards an emprocial account
filler is this just your idea
not that that's around i'm just
met in
senator
it's been talked about it's been
advocated for by various folks
from the eastern available land
commission
on down to look at our brother
lake as a possible site it makes
it makes perfect sense really
yeah because it's all you know
depending on where you are it's
only a few miles from the naval
nation border so let me ask this
question
has you know with the billion
dollars for a folks knowledge
that they tell me if i'm wrong
here but basically there was a
settlement of an old company
called try and axer
trial tronic okay and there was
a billion dollar settlement of
clean app on now the whole lands
and what i'm wondering is is
could some of that money be used
to help find work for a landfill
has that money been appropriate
or could some of it be used in
this way and is in mexico have
any involvement in the use of
those phones do we know madam
chair senator I think that
that's on large part of legal
question
that the part of the electronics
are subtleness to it affected
naval about a billion dollars
nine hundred and fifty million
is really only four or fifty
three fifty five former minds of
the curmigue corporation.
And so that represent so that
represents actually a pretty
small percentage of all the
minds on naba hole epa will if
you look at the pa website they
have a fact sheet on their
funding they had as they say
they have one point seven
billion dollars available of
that there's there what roughly
one billion dollars for the the
tronics settlement and then
various settlements with current
responsible parties for
some of the minds but that
amounts to two hundred and forty
of the five hundred and twenty
three minutes on november so we
still have you know sixty
percent of the problem to deal
with so thank you so follow up
question are the current sites
with the appropriate for a
disposal in ambrosia lake or
they've got like a capping cover
solution for them and there
really it's an apple orange
issue there
are madam chair senator
I i've been looking through the
strategy document i've been
trying to figure out what are
all chromic minds or minds that
are now under the corporate
responsibility of the real
alcohol mining company
it's hard to kind of figure out
what
proportion of the problem that
they could solve
if somebody thought well let's
put mine waste on top of the two
big tailings piles in and
brochure like you need a federal
change in law to allow that to
happen
earns in i'm
that would require a substantial
investment in time and
legislation in congress so it's
if you don't mind I would like
to defer and get back to you on
that
because I think it's reason i've
raised the state land office
issue is we need we need to
figure out if there's
opportunities out there for
space and you know existing
contaminated sites we don't want
to put the sign uncontaminated
land.
Well you know you're not allowed
to retire until you solve this
problem and we just give you a
heads up so let's get going so
we'd connect that cut update
you'd be killing a little
knowledge that we need and
passion
you know the the governor did
issue and I know the secretary
is a real warrior fighting as me
in this contamination battle
since he can the secretary of of
the environment which I just
sell appreciate
but this is one where yeah he's
been better busy battling p fast
and chromium but this is one
that that now is it I want says
a new friend probably the oldest
frontier but it's time to go on
the front foot.
Um you know they they wrote a
letter as you know you
referenced it about trying to
get the federal government to
former working group of states
to begin to work in partnership
causes you mention this is
really across your estational
problem it's a multi state
problem we need high level
presidential level leadership to
like enough take a regional
approach and put the resources
towards it so that was a good
step the governor did what that
letter didn't mention I don't
think was the money parked and
that's
that's the nine and a pound
guerrilla this is about the
money and you know um so I
think that covers that and
mountain will go to other
questions and stuff but I do
want to propose that we send a
letter to the state I think we
can do it all on one letter to
the state and the federal
government with various **** of
them an issue strong hopefully
by participant statement
but always maybe income to be
last that's okay
thank you.
Representative lord
thank you
just being by angle that far
really good
okay so going back to yes it's
tronics um and that was to clean
up forty nine my minds it was
tronics and then there's also
another patrol and.
Current that was involved tools
to one billion and again we keep
coming back here and it's the
same discussion every single
time it's kind of like
comparing it to like see wife ds
feel like I keep coming back and
it's a same damn issue every
single time.
So i'm gonna ask you a question
on this first so tronics got hit
with this big settlement they're
supposed to do a lot of clean up
at different areas henderson
nobody they had to do a clean up
of one point eight billion
dollars and rally self dakotas
you only want to say that had
uranium so how do we compare
with how they're doing on are
they doing any better on the
raining clean up over there as
opposed to us or do you know
anything about those two
different situations
madam chair representative lord
i'm familiar with with the riley
minds in south dakota
that's a smaller number of
places but i'm not familiar with
what progress they've made or
how much money they need
the total
bill that came out of the bank
repsy for the fortronics was
five point something billion and
that included kirmige sites in
chicago you know all over the
united states so the southwest
uranium is about a fifth of that
award
or bankruptcy decision it's
still only addresses forty
percent of the problem here
if i'd be happy to look into
what's happening in these other
places and familiar vaguely with
the henderson nevada situation
the story behind how tronics got
to bankruptcy and how in a darko
covered up currently he's
environmental liabilities and
put them all in detroit knocks
and then claim backrepsy
there was an enterprising lawyer
for the nabonation department of
justice who put in a claim to
the bankruptcy court in new york
on the last day you could make a
claim this was back in.
Two thousand
twelve thirteen somewhere near.
If he hadn't done that naba who
would have no
portion of that
of that
fun
the state didn't put in a claim
but e p a region six has
identified the curriculum minds
that could use and benefit from
troducts uh money through epa's
efforts and I believe that the
money that's dedicated to the
naval sites under that
settlement is in an account
somewhere with epa in san
francisco
the the reason I was asking that
questions cause I always try to
see if there's something similar
if they're doing something a
little better than we are to see
if we can do the same exact
thing okay they accelerate the
process but it goes back to you.
The money issue I was just in
courts and criminal justice and
center savanti was pretty angry
because it seems like we're
always throwing money at stuff
at the chrome issue and all
these other issues and then
there's nothing gets done so
great we're gonna always try to
throw more money at staff and in
court criminals as exact same
thing or throw money at the
chrome issues and behavior
health are not seen any result
and I see the same thing and
it's I think the most
frustrating thing politics i've
ever seen in my life as that
okay we we come in with I want
to fix it great ten years what's
being done so I there's my
frustration with with this whole
situation so going to the
moving.
I am looking at
how incredibly complex it is to
move these mel tailings cause
i'm looking at what utah has
been doing and they decided not
to use trucks used trains
because they were worried about
crash as an accident so what not
so
i'm gonna start with that have
you gone to the
sea he began to the nuclear
regulation committee since they
have to be involved in that and
the DO e and what are the their
feelings on moving at hand have
they even started do they
disagree and is your big
problems going to be any time
you move stuff in a work we
might solve that so we have
whipped in and want so accession
to water and if there's water
underneath you're going to look
at a huge study so tell me where
you're out of this is still at
just the that process or have
you reached out to how an
assessment done on the actual
making this project move forward
the manchester
representative lord so those are
several questions and we see if
I can remember all of them um
and have you reached out to the
inner cia or dear anything to
see because they have to be
involved in all this
so usca region nine is the
proposal of the alternative to
send the cabiro waste in the
section thirty two thirty three
waste of customer leak to the
red rock property that's the
those are the only two or three
minutes depending on how you
count them that will go there
there's no other place to take
them and there's no other
proposal for any kind of
regional disposal facility
since nineteen sixty and that it
was the automatic energy
commission has never regulated
your renewal if round that your
radium or in the and the mining
operation was below a regulatory
concern so the only
federal agencies that we have
to depend upon for this issue is
the pa under the super fund law
deal does not have authority to
remediate uranium might even
though they kind of inherit the
defense department's liability.
Right so there's there so really
in the case of the red rock
landfill
epa is the only federal agency
that is proposing proposing the
action and the other federal
agencies and the other state
agencies are kind of watching
what goes on eventually the
state would be the permit a
permit her of of that facility
um
in the transportation though i'm
reading very specifically that
their heavily involved because
once you move something from
here to hear they are now
heavily involved in that
transportation.
Nrc is not weighed in on the
transportation aspects of the
epa plan for the caver and
section thirty two thirty three
might to my knowledge they are
aware of it but they have not
weed in escaping a role in the
transportation i've talked with
books at the state of department
of transportation
about you know these issues of
well the roads need to be
improved can they were stand
thousands of truck loads
we have talked about the
potential impacts of running
down I forty for forty miles
you know as all of us know who
travel I forty that you can be
stuck in traffic for a long time
under weather construction and
accidents
I don't think are my observation
is I don't think that there's
really kind of a comprehensive
view of these risks and benefits
are waying them
I you know I I have sympathy for
people in through who say we
don't want trucks coming through
the the town I also
i'm i'm kind of part of this
community and
it it's painful to see what's
happened in this community that
they've lived next to this crowd
for four generations.
They were there when the minds
first came in nineteen sixty
eight.
And stuff the mindset are moving
at some of them.
Mention if I understand your
frustration but what i'm trying
to see is you see this vision of
this and I see all the
bureaucracy that's going to be
involved because you're going to
have there was a huge issue and
I would recommend you guys reach
out to you
there was a huge issue where
they said no we're not going to
let the trucks run up and down
you're going that they put in
they ship in it by train because
now you have an issue with the
trucks now you have issue with
the roads you have the r and c
it's gonna want to be involved
in this transportation and the
deal either is kind of want to
be involved in this
transportation and I understand
your frustration because i've
actually been out we went out
took a tour that we've seen in
the middle talent right there
and the houses right there so
when they don't want it to do is
put the horse before the card
because this is a very
comprehensive thing this is
going to be simple I asked being
involved this is now the federal
government and that's
you know how that goes so what I
want you to make sure if it was
me I would reach out to how they
did it in new town say how did
you start this process how did
you get there what role the
hoops of fire that you had a
jump through so when you come
and make your presentation we're
like oh we see where you're at
and then as far as the money
being i'm sure it's already
marked as something else and not
to this and then that becomes a
whole different issue of now the
money the transcript so if it
was me I would go to uter I
would recharge to them and say
tell me exactly stuff by
steppers that you did this how
was the state how are we
involved in the state what
federal agencies they need to be
involved because now you're
looking at these big casks that
you have to have the made
specifically for the
transportation and the movie and
the ceiling about and them
traveling on the road and you
tell them decided they don't
want the trucks on the road
because it accents in the wear
and tear so they did train
instead so that is just my
suggestion that you talk to you
tor and find out exactly how
they did it so you're not going
this is what we want to do and
then there's twenty booby traps
and surprises before you get
there
that's my suggestion.
Senator pinto and some madame
chair members at the committee I
don't know exactly whim their
words meetings that were
conducted I believe there was
three plans that were put
forward one the this was picked
kind of with the nable nation
about moving it because what
other things now nation is that
it be moved off the nab honestly
the other two plants were
keeping it in place in covering
it or doing something the chance
writation was it was that cost
it seemed like the cost of
transporting it they had no idea
and they did it seem like in a
way that they didn't want to
spend the money to transport it
to that area when the community
that it was being moved to fell
doubt about where they were
going to move it there was a lot
of push back because they were
not aware about the low level
the level of the the waste that
was being moved so that
education process had to be put
forward these regions of the epa
to mind this do not coordinate
so when they like it will go to
you to unfound out what it seems
like they don't work together
because we have this region down
here and then we have up in the
cover area but they're in two
different regions even though
they're located up the nap how
nation you would think that they
would they would work together
with the nation and i'm put put
these plans together and tackle
both because of the location.
So there pushed back came back
and do you think they they went
back and you know this is still
something there they're still
trying to move for it because in
our eyes in their eyes it was
the best plan to meet never
conditions though
they are still do priority of
having it moved off the nations
area so it has been talked about
um education about the level of
the waste and I think the route
was the other issue that they
still needed to work out i'm not
sure who was all that that
meaning but I know the community
members were I know nab hog
nationwide I don't know who from
the federal government which
department was there but it
seemed like they didn't want to
put a dollar value on how much
it was good costs for this
particular plan to be moved for
think you manager i'm thinking
man turned senator and and
that's also going to be this and
that's what only reasons
suggesting even if it's
completely different in utah
still going to be the same
government entities that are
gonna stick their nose in this
they all that's great but we
didn't you didn't come see us
and you didn't come see us and
you didn't come see us and union
comes and i'll try to read this
to see what the cost is and then
that's a next step to and center
where where where is that money
going to come from and i'm
interested to see how much
involvement
directly had in this versus just
been an entire federal agency
taken or anyways that's all
account thank you
thank you representative lord
then we have i'm senator
internet to deal with
thank you thank you for your
presentation and done and i'm so
sorry that this you know that
the government has done this and
taken so long to do anything
about this um I I put in money
for uranium cleaner clean up
because was said
and I knew it was just a tiny
little drop in the bucket of
what is necessary but my
understanding is.
They they're epa does have a ten
year plan they've had two five
year plans in a ten year plan or
whatever would impress me the
most about your presentation
with that you have a proposal
and love it when people come to
us and instead of just saying
these are these of the problems
that will dropping him when
people have a proposal so my
question is how feasible is it
to work with the apa to make
your proposal part of it ten
year plan cause I I mean not
that i've read in detail but I
just was looking at the at the
executive summary and then the
blurbs and I didn't see it has
in the epa's proposal so
how can we facilitate it and get
getting your proposal as part of
the epa's ten year plan because
it seems like any funding they
do get is prioritised to buy
that plan
madam chair senators to do a
lopers
thank you for the question it's
the first order of business is
that
community members ngos academics
need to be at the table we're
not at the table so we don't get
to tell epa or b l m or do e to
their faces
what needs to be done
a an option for a disposal
facility and brucially would
require the collaboration of US
e p a region nine and US c p a
region six and as senator pinto
just said they're still issues
there right
at the and I don't want to leave
the impression they're never
talked to each other don't
collaborate they do of course
but um they have their own
jurisdictions and this is a
problem people get waited to
their jurisdictions
we have a dress this with epa e
p a comes to the red water pon
road meetings virtually every
month
we've had that.
Dialog with them but they are
limited under the super fund law
and your circler
of what they can do
the super fund law surface was
developed around sights around
small manufacturing facilities
you remember the love canal
story and upper new york
it was never intended to address
contamination from these huge
large volume mind waste dumps
throughout the west but it's
hard to be it's the only law on
the but to epa can use to deal
with uranium
mind which uh in so the way that
the law set up each side sight
gets its own process can you
imagine how long it's going to
take to get through five hundred
to seven hundred mins
you know if each warrant takes
years to do and we've seen a
under the ten year plan that e p
a doctored in january of twenty
one which is now obviously into
its third and fourth year's are
there
there are milestones like for
instance in the caversite and
red water pond road the looking
at two thousand twenty nine to
have that done.
Don't better
it takes a wong won time and so
I think
you know I hate to keep
recommending things at the
federal congressional level
because we're not there we go we
have a problem with that but
anyway
that's this this kind of
revaluation in reform of how we
do this is really I think
important epa doesn't have
authority to say look at cameron
thirty five my minds in a smart
small area they all should be
assessed and considered as one
big site
not thirty five different sites
because now what we've seen out
there is you've got nine
different responsible
corporations and one gets the
site here another one gets the
site next to it and there's one
in the middle that doesn't have
a responsible party and so it
gets left alone it makes no
sense
we have so and this goes back to
to to represent it as lord's
questions and concerns and
frustrations is is that we don't
see kind of the big picture on
how to and how to try to tackle
this the fight the ten year plan
sets up milestones but it
doesn't really
think outside of the circle of
mark which is not works and and
that's what's going to be needed
I think and
you know I the cross and
junction and the mob healings is
almost a special case in the
sense that there was an act of
congress that provided the money
that was nearly a billion
dollars to move the defined
bankrupt atlas corporation
militantly off the bank of the
colorado river to this site by
rail thirty miles away because
the congressional delegation of
utah so we support this because
we'll get the jobs in the
congressional delegation.
Of southern california said
that's great we won't have mill
tailings in the water supply and
blate me
and that's how they came about
but that statute that was
written allows only the mobile
tealings to go to that site so
we you know and less that law is
changed we can't get any new
mexico nobody you talk colorado
arizona mind waste to that site
and those are mill tailings not
mine
it is madame chair very very
frustrating
when you have a problem that
needs such a complex solution
and you know we are also limited
where this where the state
agency we can throw a little bit
of money to try to to encourage
work but if and I am just going
to suggest I think you already
suggested this it was writing a
letter to the various agencies
asking them to look at the big
picture as you suggested because
a proposal that you put for it
makes a lot of sense you know
having a regional approach to
this instead of a mind by mind
approach and it seems like it
would be faster and so i'm
impressed with the proposal our
but it bothered me to see that
it's not when the milestones
it's not part of the
you know part of the plan and it
seems like it should be and so
if we can do something to
encourage the apa
to consider these kinds of
regional solutions I think
that's about all we can do cause
I don't think that we can
legislate in a way that would be
helpful
to to the cars and certainly we
don't want to create more
barriers to the cars and more
bureaucracy what we wanted to
solve the problem and again I
just want to commend you I
thought it was an excellent
presentation and particularly
the fact that you propose a
solution that that's golden and
I really hope we can move your
solution.
Along and facilitate the
movement to the extent we can
thank you minimum
thank you next we have a
representative outcome
thank you madame chair
britain and make sure that
everybody understand that
there's a different between mine
waste and billing way
there's a million waste of
courses a higher
higher level of contamination so
we're talking about two
different things when you're
doing that
what do you know I went out to
marianna lake
they had this mean it is big
tent
ebay was out there and all the
leaders were out there
and
edit that maybe send it with
good happen
and
just like
I said the how many years ago
is dual disabled some indents
nothing happens with that in
parking tar contact they said
over there almost three hours I
have made to be because it's a
rating I mean and they were
still darking
and
bad but they don't see anything
happening similar people aren't
the dirt to be moved
some don't want to be touched
everybody's got their own
opinion in everybody's got the
people that live there all of
them want something different I
mean nobody is thinking in the
same i've never did the same
boat on speak so it's hard to
deal with with
I don't know nobody knows which
direction to the go to because
nobody agrees that anything.
We got all this money from
really let's grab again they had
themselves understood when
you're different names that they
finally finally they they were
trying to just hide that they
would have to pay
a link a winter marriage real
normal to tron next to I know
what they are today
but
they finally if I really put a
money in there where's the money
we don't want it are we
everybody use it
so
I like it see some disappointed
you know I I was part of the
problem I was one of those
minors
I worked under round for ten
years is a good bay
really good paying nineteen
eighty three the last year I
worked underground they got us
on skilled labor but it is not
unscaled by anyway I would have
worked if they brand
as a good buddy in in in that
time that the in that period at
time period so
that's where my problem is I
keep on going around and I look
at the stages somebody question
on my mileage in my truck and
the
keep them following different
things and hoping for different
hopes.
In the i'm chasing a wild room
but anyway that in tear I didn't
give the
statement our rice checking
comma was a good letter
maybe we get a since the more
puppies out there to change the
problem and we find this some
kind of solution somewhere
that's what I can say thank you
very much
thank you next senator rodriguez
thank you madame chairman good
morning or a half minute I don't
know what it is anymore what
somebody before me
madame chairman
were someone on the list before
me.
I had sorry I don't get the best
thank you madame chairman um I
just want it to at first of all
i'm so sorry for being the
latest we talked this morning on
the phone I knew that it was
going to be crazy for me to be
able to get here today
but I am I was just thinking
about the sort of thing and
thank you to or vice chair
time board and also for
proposing a letter
there is one thing that crosses
my mind I was from this
financial perspective that
perhaps we can do and senator
that'll be up to you since
you're the proposal of this
great letter we're talking about
but one of the things I find is
that every time we request
funding for almost anything but
specially for these are venture
so big problems like this one
with the uranium
we were you hit a road block
because the fads tend to think
that we
that were asking for an enormous
amount of money and that's where
it gets hung up and I think and
we are we are because we need an
enormous amount of money for
this huge problem but how about
suggesting this for a senator
signboard of course do as you
feel but
i'm thinking that in the body of
the letter perhaps we can
request that we would like to
form a partnership for the
remediation of the aranium
clean ups and the reason is it
when I say partnership is
because it doesn't commit the
state to any specific amount but
it does show our you are
willingness to work together in
all these issues and also
perhaps the state can't come up
with some funding to show a good
will and good faith effort so we
can show the feds that we are
serious about this and that
we're not just waiting for them
to do something and and watch us
it's hung up there forever.
But we want to be a true partner
on this and
that's what I wanted to mention
senators time born in and then
in addition to that I just
wanted to to bring up a couple
of things and thank you for your
presentations and all your work
where it says what the
legislature can do question mark
I was reading these four points
in their they're actually simply
put in there but there is one
thing in there that I find
perhaps we need to truly focus
on and and the first one says of
course to take action now a long
time ago right it's something
long or reduced i've been here
twenty nine years and since then
I think i've been hearing about
it who knows how many others
prior to me so we do need to do
something and do it quickly has
it says here the next point is
to drop the policy of opposing
disposal of mine waste from
neighboring jurisdictions
and then after that here is from
my point after that it says
authorized
conversation department in and
so on to explore a developing
this regional facility waste of
spouse or facility and I guess
one of the things that cross my
mind immediately was this in
that if we are going to
authorize the
make a request here for the
new mexico environment
department to proceed to explore
this that we need to do more
with funding for the state for
these departments because what
happens is that we we tend to
have quite a few unfounded
mandates for these departments
and we expect him to use the
funds that we they currently
have for other line items in
their budget and you know what
happens since timeboard things
get hung up because it was never
a line item specifically
specifying its purpose and so
that's another thing I was going
to to bring about but another
point on that.
The again crossed my mind as we
were targeting and I was reading
this as that
they
proposal like this as we know
has to be very carefully
launched because it has to have
this adequate planning by
whereby we see the input very
very much comprehensive coming
in from the communities that are
being directly impacted what
happens many times is that we we
have
this these proposals in in
request from the department
sometimes even mandate it was
statute that they do certain
things but the main thing that
makes things happen is people
cohe in a cohesive manner
getting together and agreeing on
what's best for their
communities and we don't put
that in there of course in line
that way in so
I I just wanted to to make sure
one last thing meant madame
chairman and I promise to move
on as there
the question that came to my
mind as if we combine just say
we have this regional approach
that we're talking about and
were instead of having single
retarking single minds
everywhere and we're not doing
anything about it
I guess we need to make sure
that when we do this that we
have the
proper funding or so to ensure
that that we monitor and we well
none of the adequately adequate
funding but that we monitor and
measure what is going to be
coming in from this waste
because it's all going to be
coming in at once okay for
example into one areas what i'm
trying to say and who's going to
monitor to it who's going to
provide the the staffing to do
the what kind of infrastructure
we're going to have in place to
make sure that it's not just a
one time or a one or two year
monitoring thing.
There is going to be an ongoing
monitoring a system that we have
to ensure that we don't get
other as representative former
judge or conmentioned you know
we we just done want to make
sure that we don't have any any
tailings in there and and other
things come in in with the waste
this is going to be a very very
serious endeavor that we do to
make sure that we don't mix
things together with that
adequate
monitoring and someone
and so let's see what else I
have I think madam chairman
I think i'm done because I need
to defer to other members but
thank you etc
thank you
representative johnson sorry I
got you both at the same time.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair just one first thank you
for hosting this meeting here so
that we can hear from our
community members recording
iranian mining and yes chris you
are absolutely correct you are a
part of our community and you
are a family and also think you
terry for all of your work
little sister on behalf of our
family in our community
i.
Will probably
blever a little bit because some
of you know my story.
A I agree
and a live along the real poker
river
many of you not my child had
story
I was there they did the damn
broke.
I family was destroyed
we had a very very happy self
superficial ranching and farmly
farming life provided by my
grandparents
destroyed.
I was a pre team I lived it I
still live it today
it's this directive
in every manner the negative
impacts on health are
environment are livelihood
or live stop
and here we are today as
i'll of you my colleagues have
mentioned
your good questions your good
comments your excellent thoughts
and planning
it's all very true
so my concern is
I have several concerns
there continued interest and
work on active iranian mind
permits
have they been filed and where
are they
and how we as a state of new
mexico need to follow the
environmental laws pertaining to
those
continuing permits or interests.
And then also uhm
are environmental department the
state can we include in our
letter to them that we're
interested in a regional
approach
and then can we ask the
environmental department of the
state why
don't
or why are we not working to
accept this proposal and these
plans
because this is not now the hard
waste and we need to start
referring to this as now the
whole waste
so
those are my concerns and I
would definitely like to be
included in
a writing this letter signing
this letter
and is red rock landfill and a
broja leak or
places that
are not accepted or we're not
moving forward
you know what
what are other alternatives that
the state of new mexico can help
us
look for or plan or think of
thank you madam
chair and vice chair.
When after that um
this is something that we live
with on a day to day basis it's
it's like continuously swatting
flies and mosquitoes
every day ladies and gentlemen
thank you
thank you representative
but senator pent out did you
want next little i'm sorry you
went to be last
okay
okay
thank you madam charles I looked
it up and it is very extensive
how they did a new time it would
be monitored because you can't
just put things will be nilly in
there and it has to be very
specific nrc and and do we do
have to be involved and the
total cost was seven hundred and
twenty million and ended up
they're almost done there at
eighty percent completion and it
ended up being about sixty seven
million per year to pay for that
it's been a long process over
years to get it done but that
gives you at least some time
room decide if you look at it in
the things it's a grand sand
thank you.
And
senator steinborne will need to
say a few more words and then
i'll let you go
do you want.
Yeah
thank you our madam chairman
members of the committee so that
indian affairs committee we have
the environment and we did take
some action as far as drafting a
letter but it was more in the
form of how much to put in the
revolving phone so we wanted in
estimate from them then think
you represent a blood tend to
give in a support park or what
you know this other
anything gets cheap sixty seven
million but real current funding
is very essential that we need
to make sure we're we're doing
that
and build it up
in an also I am thinking senator
rodriguez about the mandated
funding that that needs to occur
so you think that was something
that
took the motion on at the indian
affairs committee
so that we could to the lsc due
to commit some funding to that
fun
the land around the proposed
site because you mentioned state
lan
around the area is there any
statement around this that could
be combining
to that lentil site do you know
a man and chair sender to pinto
are you referring to the red
rock landfill property
there is as it's always the case
in the checker board there's
only an dispute.
The seller the northwest new
mexico
regional solid waste authority
very long acronym
asserts ownership of about six
hundred acres of the crosses two
sections of land
they
can produce
deeds that show that they
purchase the land however
the bear of landman are the
bearable indian affairs and
crown point says that the land
is incumbent by nava whole lot
so
are various organizations along
with the new mexico
environmental law center
requested documentation of this
this assertion
the original documents that they
produced weren't for that site
ficker somewhere else.
So no response and so the the
environmental loss center filed
a freedom of information
request.
That was six months ago zero
response.
This is really important to
learn and to come to a
conclusion about because we
don't wind a situation to
develop where the the solid
waste authority the owners of
that side prepare an application
for a uranium waste disposal
cell on their property only to
find out that there's some
jurisdictional land ownership
restriction we won't we need to
know that now it seems so that's
that's one year there is state
land
i'd have to look back at the
land ownership map to see how
close it is as a general matter
every section of of land were
state was given sections two
sixteen and thirty five thirty
six something like that mr king
knows because he has a grazing
least on a piece of state land
and
I mentioned state land office
as a possible linkage to areas
with an ambrose a lake which is
another thirty miles to the
northeast so the red rock
landfill is situated six miles
east of through town through and
about a two miles north of the
freeway if you know what you're
looking for you can see it from
I forty
but most people won't notice it
because it's hard to notice
any you know we can take a trip
out through him brochulate to
see the parcity of you know no
homes no p no no people know
live stock it's all kind of a
band.
And perhaps one of the
communications to the state
through the land office would be
to discuss
how lants the lands have been
affected impacted what are the
plans does the state or does the
epa have plans for remediation
of mindset are affecting the
state lands how much is the
state land department been
involved in that we don't know
and I suppose that you know we
could have asked some time ago
but
we haven't yet so
that it
I I would say
that those two things are not
mutually exclusive we talked
about this earlier moving
forward the red rock alternative
for the cavaria mind waste in
the castimaril mindless gets us
going because it's going to take
five years to get that site
permitted at least.
As in the reason and and and
guide senator rodriguez pointed
the south the reason that I made
that authorized and media and
mining a minerals to start now
to explore developing a regional
uranium waste disposal sight in
brucially is because I don't
think that the remediation
coordinators feel that they have
that authority I you know I read
you know I i'm the million with
the legislation that set those
offices up I have read as much
as I can their strategy document
that they publish november of
last year
it's something over a but
consolidation and rear
competition of things that are
that the state already can do
and some of their inventories on
some of the minds and that area
but there's no really no mention
of kind of solutions and I was
sitting there thinking well the
amount of money that the state
could put into this is going to
be limited I understand that we
all understand that but maybe
that's another start to this
this big puzzle of to give the
state some additional authority
to start doing what we think
that the coordinator should be
doing which is coordinating mine
clean up
i'd also remind you all that the
legislature through
representative johnson's
legislation for five years ago
authorized the bureau of the
business and and economic
research to do this big report
on the economic advantages of
cleaning up your animals and
that was published in november
twenty twenty there was a big to
do about it
it sits there and we referred to
it a lot.
As an as one of these bit of the
side benefits to do this kind of
regional approach this means
jobs it seems to me
we sad in hearings as the
um mr alkan in marianna they can
smithflick
in which we're trying to tell
you pa you need to look at
remediation again holistically
not site by site they say
because in the eastern agency
they have plans on the street
now to handle seven different
aums.
There are three documents to do
that each of those documents is
seven hundred pages long
we're all supposed to comment on
those things within sixty days
of the notice right it takes a
long time to get through seven
hundred pages believe me cause
you have to figure out how it's
laid out but what they don't do
is they don't seem to con make
the connections there is not a
hotel just twenty miles up the
street they are supposed to be
educating a
students in mind remediation
there are laboratories out there
to put students in the work
to put students to work doing
that
and so
that's
again when you craft this notion
of this bigger picture this are
those are the kinds of things
that should be can be added and
referred to I also might my
colleague when he had reported
that the indian affairs
committee was also talking about
writing a letter about this
subject as a result of their
meeting on august one and she
springs so you might want to
take notice of anything that
they may be doing and have my
more or less a a wider
legislative approach I don't I
don't know just making a
suggestion I know committees
have their own jurisdictions
and think you made him chair and
recently asked about this date
land because you know it's there
is an issue with the existing
plan with the red fill that if
we're able to develop a regional
unless the statement can be
utilized maybe that'll speed up
the process as far as making a
regional bill
and went to a lsc
presentation and they were
talked about the minerals and
you know would not old privy to
be able to go to all these
meetings but that the especially
with iranian um by twenty thirty
by twenty forty.
They expect it to you know
rights again because i've didn't
clear actors world right that
are still being built for energy
consumption and it's not a
that's consuming this energy
it's the world they're the the
the demand for energy it's going
to go up significantly
but here in the mexico we have
one of the largest yearning
reserves in the united states
so they will come for it
these plans it is our duty as
elected officials and for this
state to protect our
constituents that we should have
something in place prior to all
of this saying this is what they
have to follow and if we can
even do this little bit a clean
up and move things sorts of put
things into intuba
to assure that we are doing the
best of our ability to protect
our constituents
then we have no business um kind
of like being here too to do
anything especially even on the
congressional level but I
understand that all you know
legislature is not able to
attend not these meetings and
anything gets essential that
they be updated because when you
talk about economic development
in the economic consequences
it's not going to be oh we're
moving towards salt yeah we talk
about it we put money into it
and everything they're going to
come out for our resources
because we're not using them but
there's a reason why we're not
using them because we don't have
these processes in place to
protect our people
so I really conscience to that
we really have to do something
with the time is of the assets
as we move forth you mentioned
something about a change of long
congress please get back to a
sonian if there's something for
that we need to move on
something that do that also or
i'd be willing to to carry that.
For you as we move forward
especially with this regional
approach does with any economic
development there is going to be
a waste product any development
development we already see it
with them think the big
turborings you know what we can
do with them after their they're
just sitting out there in some
areas
in the big cities they do not
have the lad anymore to pick up
their trash
where are they going to put it
you know we have to be a
probactive in that sets what's
our plan not just for this type
of waste but even for our art I
really are trash that's going
out there what are we going to
do because nobody wants it next
to them
any been in our big cities
so thank you for your passion
thank you for moving this word I
think we still have a quite a
bit of work to do but anything
we also need to make sure that
our legislators are brought it
to speed on this issue and are
also our congressional members
about our concerns and think
this is just a small group here
we barely make quote even though
this is where it's happening
this is where what this is close
we can get to to being
at the site and then knowing
what what happened here but
thank you and I think you made
the chairman members of the
committee thank you senator
center to rodriguez one more.
Madame chairman thank you for
allowing me to speak for a
second time and is you can see
we've got some break warriors
here where their server pinto
and of course some
representative johnson and i'll
sell a percentage of calling in
the many others who represent
this area was fighting for you
but I was reading through this
as quickly as I could madame
chairman and to the paperwork
that is submitted in this
particular document and I I see
that the revolving fan has zero
dollars in it doesn't surprise
me let me just submit a proposal
for or maybe go to proposal a
comment statement for discussion
maybe to follow up on as we
proceed to do this latter okay
one is that when we have a
reform be rather being fund in
finance
with this which is where I serve
most of the time rebarbing funds
are just that the revolved their
intended to revolve and continue
to be self sustaining in other
words you therefore launch if I
can put it in a very simple that
shell okay they they provide low
income for example or low
interest i'm sorry loans very
low in interest loans and so
when the loans are paid off
where they're sold in the
secondary market
they continue to get rid of
planished that's the intent of a
revolving fund
I don't think that are involving
fund in this case is is doing
them the job they're zero
dollars that's pretty evident
secondly who's going to be who's
going to pay what into this fund
besides the legislature putting
funding into this fund
and we haven't done it and so
i'm going to suggest that
perhaps we can look into and I
went to speak briefly to ask
senator as time warned about the
idea the perhaps we can do a
trust front instead.
And the reason is that trust
funds are usually in perpetuity
and what we can do if we would
proceed in this direction would
be that we
we could do a trust band put
some funding into that at a
state level in possibly even
that a federal level if we can
get funding leveraged through
the federal government and
because it's a trustman we can
invest it in span off
the investment returns which
would be in perpetuating again a
specifically for this clear
purpose with the line item that
I mentioned that would be for no
other purpose than to do this
and so one thing that can be
done all so madame chairman and
vice chair is there a trust fine
doesn't always have to spend off
its investment returns and keep
the whole corpus of the fund we
would like to do that because
that's that where you'll have
funding for everyone perpent to
it because this is the forever
problem we have to see this as
something forever not just
something is going to be
remediated and corrected I don't
think it ever will be I mean
it's we want to do it but will
it ever be where we don't find a
single piece of contamination I
don't know that's our hope but
i'm having a hard time
visualizing that but we will
continue to work on that
obviously but because of that my
main point here it was going to
be that when the fund it can be
word it were when the the trust
fund reaches a certain amount in
the corpus of the fund then
at that point you can stipulate
what you want then a portion of
that corpus if it's not
sufficient with the investment
returns to do this work that
were that senator steinborn and
other star proposing than you
can take a portion of the corpus
but depending on where it's at
like I said you can work there.
The the information they the
provisions you can worry to make
sure that the corpus always
remains strong but depending on
what kind of investment returns
he has and builds up and so on
then you can always make a
decision to dig into the corpus
if you need it to just say you
know you needed some
infrastructure here you need
some monitoring system some
inspections are done for all
these waster coming into this
regional facility we're talking
about itself anyway I just
wanted to mention that perhaps
in in doing this as we direct
the staff to
to do this and look at this
regional approach and doing this
letter that we're talking about
that perhaps that letter can
serve to give the staff of the
authority it needs if this
commercials is showing a letter
and making emotion than that
that's pretty significant to me
if it especially if the motion
is is the unanimous which I
foresee it will be then I think
that's more than sufficient
authority for the staff to
proceed to work in and look at
this regional approach that
we're talking about with the
feds and and then look at the
information I just mentioned
with respect to a trust fund to
ensure that we have enough
funding for the future madame
chairman that's all I had thank
you thank you i'd like to
have senator steinboard
reiterate the motion for yeah if
I may mount your first of all
etc thank you for that and you
know you are on the lfc and so
you're in a really good position
out quarterback this money into
the badget and you know maybe
several of you represent a
chance and we can work to try to
get it scheduled with the LFC to
get a new mexico clean up find
on the agenda to where we can
really advance a big idea here
and a lot of money.
I have a few questions or just a
question real quick real brief
answer if I may matter chair is
just a little bit of clean up
here I don't know plan intended
to.
To
forget justin or john does the
seat in a mexican environment a
permanent habit position against
accepting another hurry waste in
the stay.
So I think you maybe need to
come on my exact thanks
thank you
manager my sure stand on
thanks for the question under
the previous administration my
understanding is that a letter
did go out taking that position
of our position to any
movement of waste from the
avonation or really outside of
the mexico just restriction into
new mexico
my understanding is also that in
that letter there was
or maybe a subsequent letter
there was an acception made for
equivorer and uh
section thirty two thirty three
that we're talking about today
that would be the waste that
would go to the proposed red
largest landfill
I I do want to take this
opportunity now sitting here to
just make the point that
enemy de generally is
very supportive of the regional
approach that's been discussed
here today not necessarily the
specifics of where that regional
site is but
recently we communicated to epa
that we aren't interested in
addressing things on a site by
sight incremental level
while we do want clean up to
happen we think they're focus
needs to be less on incremental
change and more on
transformation will change like
it regional site so we are an
agreement with everybody it
sounds like in the room on that
point
however to specific to red rocks
or any other site that might be
proposed it's difficult for us
to
take a position on something
that might come to us as a
regulator through a permanent
application rate and epa if if
they go forward with what
they've identified as their
preferred alternative they do
have to come to med for solid
waste permits and for groundware
quality permits at the very
least and it as a regulator puts
us in a weird position to.
Be asked
are you gonna prove that permit
before we get that application
you know that's pretty
deterministic and that's not
what we do
sold it just wanted to touch on
both of those points different
generally we are very supportive
of the need for a regional
solution a big picture solution
on all of this
but in terms of a specific site
we can't quite speak to that
although we did provide
technical comments on epa's
right rock's proposal okay thank
you thank you john says welcome
comments appreciate that
so I just want to say it's
interesting last time we were in
gallot madam chair we had kind
of a collective presentation
might have been in this room
although I think maybe we were
facing the other direction on
iron all the challenges we heard
about represent chances report
about the economic impact of
remediation we also heard about
all the challenges from an end
of different department so we
came up to say to have an i'm
the best kind of a bill
addressing it and that next
session we passed away
representative saranyan and I
and we funded it with our junior
money so hopefully we hit spark
something big today in.
And that's why it's important
that we keep talking about this
issue every year because until
we do we need to keep talking
about it and focus on actions
without manager i'd like to move
emotion that the committee
send a letter now I wrote this
out to help all time back there
but and i'll read it but we can
certainly condense it in the
minutes but this will be the
substance of what we're trying
to accomplish okay but i'll just
read it because it touches on me
the things we've heard here a
letter to the governor attorney
general and immediately emnerd
in all members of the
congressional delegation i'm
urging legal action against
federal government
two address national defense
related iranian waste into
mexico
and fund a comprehensive
remediation solution
with further urge the governor
and legislature to support the
creation are they now i've heard
the number hundred and fifty
million dollars but the creation
of
a
hundred and fifty million
dollars initial investment a
hundred and fifty million
dollars clean up phone or clean
up trust find
out to assess in the remediation
of these and other contaminated
and abandoned sites in the
mexican we urge her
congressional delegation the
introduced federal legislation
requiring the expedition clean
up of defense here are uranium
my insights in the mexico and
finally we urge the
establishment of a working group
of impact it stays tribes and
front line communities.
An appropriate federal agencies
to develop an actionable
comprehensive solution to
address
this serious solution
and we could if we wanted
incorporate into this you know
the including the evaluation of
regional you know disposal
facilities.
Can we work with that time.
Okay sure promotion in a second
discussion
because I wanted to make sure on
said pitch there are thank you
for this together with you been
a true installment up in doing
all of this for so many years we
appreciate you when you mention
at the end of the week serious
problem
wouldn't it be for this I mean
i'm sorry for the serious don't
grab the microphone senator just
cause i'm sorry to mention that
the the very last freeze for it
the serious for a serious
solution wouldn't be for a
serious prob for the serious
problem that we face
instead of the solution at the
end of you prefer to use the
word serious problem
can you read it to me maybe I do
help an actionable comprehensive
solution to address this serious
issue issue is fine that is
everyone I thought you said
somehow so no issue is good I
like it then yeah and then just
one more thing in the very
beginning when you read that we
are urging legal something I
lost you a little bit on the
senator legal legal action
against the federal government
to address national defense
related waste our national
defense related uranium waste.
And to find the comprehensive
remediation solution okay yes
think we can work smith this
more obviously when we get a
final letter this is just kind
of the attempt the outline of
what we're doing in here thank
you for that and if I may just
promise to pass the if we put
all this in the most should get
along this motion ever yes and
just food for a thought as well
as settling in with the wording
on the letters is
i'm not if we put urging legal
action
instead of
we talked about when I guess we
still can form a partnership as
I suggest that earlier just to
show them that we have a stake
at theirs that we have that we
want to join and be part of the
solution here and in on but you
know
if you if you think that putting
in there that urging legal
action but it's like going
straight to to that instead of
to the to the area of trying to
find a
common ground in the partnership
but we can proceed as you as you
indicate it yes and then
chairman
and madame chair members of the
committee especially when she
talks about i'm curious to both
this what happened in utah and
we we probably should take a
look about the root data to to
have that done and did it
require legal action
on their part two to get what
the accomplished
maybe or unhatch funded
center just a deal of best
just a question with that that
letter is going to the governor
and the delegation or because
the other thing I suggest is
that we because I don't want to
lose the these ideas and I would
like to see the most part of
that plan a brief letter or you
know to the epa
asking them to to take a serious
look at these plans and to
invite.
Um
these people to the table in
respinding it I just which is
different you know to move
forward to whatever the zpa does
with plans on because at least
it it is impressed me
and.
I I think it should impress them
as well
yeah
thank you for others suggestions
yeah you know for what it's
worth the governor did send the
letter urging the federal
working group i'm I don't know
if the was included on that
letter
the problem is your is that you
know i've talked to secretary
kenny about this we've had
conversations with the
delegation with you know our
senate officers you know we're
talking but I don't know
it is like a four alarm fire and
you know we're taking a little
water bottle and given it a few
spreadsheets of lip service now
offense threat it's time to
really come hard and
change the dynamic and and I
realize legal action is strong
yeah we've had to do that with
pass and our military basis and
you know cause asking nice
hasn't really gotten as many
places and frankly we haven't
done enough asking in the first
place I think or we do our
memorials right every few years
and we send it to the delegate
so this is you know whether you
know whether or not we would win
and the merits of the legal
argument but the fact is we need
to change the dynamic I believe
and that you know it doesn't
necessarily just have to be
legal action that could be
word smith so that it's you know
legal action and meaning for
collaboration you know i'm
saying so it will talk to we
won't just see well talk in
addition to that but anyway
anyway that's and my experience
working on this issue is.
Is we need to change the day
namic and compare
that's just but that that mean
that's right
thank you I i've worked with the
epa on different on different
issues and if you can get
somebody there to champion your
idea and to bring you to the
table it makes a huge difference
and I should have asked this
earlier they have an
environmental justice uhm
division or project or something
and this seems very right for an
environmental justice lines on
it in prioritising it
I don't know if if you've done
that or have they environmental
justice division
i'm happy to connect you with
folks there
just briefly might have all
thanks like please just since
the we have always talked about
environmental justice since the
executive order of nineteen
ninety four
it's a really important policy
but I care is no legal way
and
federal agencies
kinda give lips service to it in
l they'll put it in their
documents in everybody feels
good and seeing school by around
the camper
but i'm not sure what it gets
us.
I just will if you've already
done it you've already done it
but it just seems.
Very very appropriate for what
the concept is so thank you
included in your letter what i'm
not even seeing concluded your
letter I just if you need to
connect with folks here I am
thinking and maybe this is a
picturing of getting your idea
it to the ten year plan that's
what I think which is different
from from the letter which is
sort of a bigger thing uhm
but that's that's all I was
thinking about even if you want
to talk about more well the
other thing I want to say.
So I just wanted to say the
other thing you have to be aware
of that's happening washington
is you have multiple western
states competing for money to
clean up hard mining sites aside
from uranium there is a very
small program I want it say it's
like fifty or sixty million
dollars of which aren't you know
and were one say we have a
billion dollar issue here so
it's really
you know it's like we do in the
legislature drinking from a
firehows on all the competing
needs and I think the point here
is this is x mutually this is an
exclusively big issue where
these defense are sites that's
hugely expensive seem to be
treated separate from the other
so
you know we need a whole of
government approach high level
staff and.
You know and then I would say
senator city all up has work all
the parts too you know build
build average from the bottom up
everywhere we can find that so
that we we create some critical
mass of thought here in action
so it's all they're all good
answers you know they're all
good interest and member cliff
via whose is a unam law
professor is on leave from you
and working I can't remember
what you know how bpa's all
these titles but basically the
concept is adviser on
environmental justice to
so you know he might have a
better clue
than your average person kinda
deviated from sorry
discussion
we have emotion on the table is
there
second ways
no it was seconded by a
representative wanted johnson.
Okay are there any objections to
the letter
which will be
developed
developed and sent around
everybody
for their final appr.
It will include him in in there
we send the letter to them
if I may just mention something
briefly here is that is that in
doing this you know second parts
urging the legal action as you
had mentioned senator madame
chairman it you know it may be
the precursor to getting all
these other things that we want
done included in the plan
sometimes it does take a serious
approach like this because it's
a serious matter and we've done
through we've been through this
for so many years as we said so
sometimes using words like
urging legal action os is what
was needed to say okay so let's
look at the big picture this is
where it's going to go but in
the discussions about this whole
thing maybe we can come to a
solution and he doesn't have to
get to this legal action time
that we're talking about so a
senator thank you for that at
the saw here
yeah ma'am chair
sell parent a suggestion which
is.
You know asking the attorney
january to do a legal opinion on
um
doing a taking legal action I
would just why don't we just
reframe it as we're including
them a letter action asking them
to
research and consider legal
action against the federal
government how about that about
we measure it a little bit so
that way we're not going to
straight to hey for the last
year but we're saying research
and move towards that and that
way we're asking for that does
that work for folks in the
report to the committee yeah so
and ask on a report to the
committee one more thing time
thomas night smile and a love me
right
the longest motion in the
history
so I think we don't
mend the motion
and second it again are there
any objections.
But to the remembered yes okay
I don't have an objection I
bought for it too thank you but
I just want to have to say this
because it hit my mind here is
that in that request perhaps it
doesn't fits already we have
voted yet right so can still be
that somehow indicated into the
attractive general office that
will request this to be an
opinion to be done as soon as
possible because what happens
many times it's as treated as a
general request for any opinion
a month and months a month and
it never don't get one back for
a long time this is so crucial
and it's of the absence we do
things now as has been indicated
here.
So I just wanted to see it in
that later we can stress somehow
that this is very much of the
essence that needs to be done as
soon as possible now sat.
It's interesting
I don't want to
get I don't want to arm.
You know I don't want a
predecaction on on on that
opinion that that is the end of
the r so I think we've got a
couch just right we're asking
the research and move towards
that and
it may be the right thing to do
even if there is questionable
legal basis or it's kind of
precedent setting type of things
sometimes you're kind of at the
edge of the law a little bit
so I think the age's opinion is
important but I don't want to
predicate our action or our
statement as the state is upon
that action it was getting
involved but you know in a
measured way has sound center as
my thought
thanks
we will leave it as it is a has
been amended and um
yes
is there any opposition.
Okay others in favor I guess
they are just to verify thank
you
we have a motion that has been
passed as amended thank you and
thank you
both our panelists for being
here and presenting this great
information that we've needed to
help motivate us and I
appreciate the discussion of our
committee members and.
Thank you and we will do our
best to move this forward as
quickly as possible and knowing
that it does tick a long time to
thank you so much and you meant
thank you
okay we do have core one so and
and
I think everyone's sort of
introduced themselves as they
came in
senator
thank you I don't remember if I
did but i'll do it again i'm
nancy senator nancy rodriguez
santa fe district twenty four
thank you manager
in
represent jansen
thank you I am representative
wanted johnson I represent house
district five which includes a
scale up in fifteen hundred
chapters and thank you again for
a bringing this committee here
addition
thank you um and I think we have
everyone else represent lords
out of the minutes
from are may twenty nine
everyone's had a chance to look
at them to article motion madame
chick
okay to be moved in seconded to
accept the minutes from our may
twenty ninth needing any
objections
okay
accepted and we now have um if
we can get since we're running
behind
will break
for a few minutes get your lunch
which has been provided by a unm
and appreciate that and then
come back and we'll start with
our
twelve car presentation.
With a down windows thank you.
