Thank you
and I will come to order for the
radioactive in hazardous
materials committee um
the october fifteenth and we're
the t's event center
I heard new mexico state
university and almugardo and
um
i'd like to have the uh
committee introduced themselves.
Senator gaigos
thank you madame chair thank you
for having us here a beautiful
campus on a beautiful day david
gages i'm district forty one
automation eddie county just on
the other side of the great
problems
thank you
good morning madame chairman
john blackhouse district fifty
one right here where we're
sitting in beautiful alamo
gordon great to be here in my
home town it took about two
minutes to drive here
not to brag anything uh but
thank you all for being here and
I can't wait to talk about all
the good things that are going
on in town and I hope you all
get your postations and your
wine and all the cool things
that we have here in town to
offer go see white sense
national park go check out all
the cool stuff that we have
around town including new york
avenue we have a lot of cool
little shops down there so
please come down and check it
out after this committee and
let's go thanks matter thank you
and also just like dimension
that we appreciate you being
able to
made a voting member for the
days
agenda thank you.
Okay
good morning madam chair good
morning everyone uh i'm state
center ron bricks on from
almogordo as well I represent
the southern part of the shady
the southern part of a terrible
county the western part of eddie
county in often on it seems like
a small bit of done any county
but I if if I do it really in
there anymore by them
this is it's a pleasure for me
to see all of you here I wish
that it is you know turned out a
little differently whether we
could add more membership here
because alan gore has so many
things for
you to see we offer so much
stuff around here not not only
even just in town but to the
east of here you get the village
cloud craft you have all sorts
of of things that
make new mexico special and uh
this district senate district
thirty four
houses.
New mexico's two national parks.
White shanned and called bad
cabinet and so it's it's a
special place for me obviously
but uh but that's what we do
here and it's a it's great for
get people down especially
center rod riggers because we
got to bring her all the way
from from santa fe so we're glad
that she showed up down here
today so thank you madame chair
and in membership.
Thank you good morning helps her
get this a little closer good
morning to everyone thank you
for your hospitality for having
us here today and yes I come
from beautiful santa fe the the
county seat santa fe is my
district and i'm very fortunate
to be able to represent the
state capital of new mexico and
I think you so much for having
this meeting here it's
absolutely beautiful and I very
much enjoyed driving yesterday
through this north
highway road and looking at not
only I I came here early so I
could find it not where it was
but I saw this huge medical
center uh christopher st vincent
I didn't realize you had a
medical center like that so
thank you for that in den medium
chairman that's all I have thank
you
good morning everybody good to
see good to see you all here I
am state senator jeff steinborne
from just over the mountain and
lost process and it was that
beautiful seen a drive coming
through our national monument on
the way across the missile range
and white sands to come here and
it's been a while actually I was
in cloud craft not that long ago
but um.
You know it's very was cool
driving through all the court of
this morning it's just kind of
seeing the new hotels new things
happening and and you're right
this is a really special unique
town and corner of new mexico so
it's great to be here today and
talk about local issues that
actually about it impact on this
region which I know we're going
to talk about today so.
Thanks for having a meeting here
madame chair
thank you all for being here I
am representative joan ferrari
from also just on the other side
of the um
sound augustine pass and lost
cruises um and my favorite
memories of almost gordo besides
coming here to go to different
events was ah ballooning here
and we had friends from carls
bad who would come up and we
would go to the white sands
bloom festival and we were even
go off from the white sounds
itself and then alternate to
from in town and one of the
times we landed up at the ball
fields that are real close to
here and that was quoted a trip
landing down where all the big
light stations were but anyway
elmagodo is a great host for the
baloon fiestas and um and a lot
of other things so thank you for
welcoming us and thanks everyone
for being patient is we got set
up this morning and tom would
you introduce yourself in staff
good morning madame chair
members of the committee my
name's tom krishka and from
legislative council service and
with me is uh paul stark sir
we'd buyer and bob javas.
The.
Okay thank you and this morning
we have mister salinus his vice
president for business and
finance at new mexico state
university here at all mcordo
and thank you for hosting us.
The.
Madam chair representative
drawing ferrari members of the
board knowledge
viti
welcome to and mission almotto.
Uh first of all I want to
apologize that are marcalla uh
campus director could not be
here he had a prior obligation.
So
sometimes you get the quarter
back in sometimes you get the
person that serving the peanut
said in the nose bleeds that the
stadium.
And i'm the latter.
The cap is this situated like
as
mister brig said that we're
situated on five hundred acres
here at enemes you are we have
over two hundred square feet of
building space here so we are
quite large of a smaller
community campus but of a larger
community to campus or in
romento is about thirteen
hundred
students for this far so we're
actually seen an increase than
goodness
after the pandemic we're
starting to see a letter better
and increase going up.
Uh I want to thank
sender gregza representative
block and.
Uh ultra other senator mister
birth for all the money that
they give us the allocations for
our nursing program where
programs are infrastructure.
Uhm we actually got five million
dollars this year in ah b r one
time funding uh we have ten
months to spend it so we're
really pushing we're going to
read that we stuck a lot of our
buildings here we're going to
replace a lot of the windows and
doors.
We're doing a lot with this
money we're going to redo some
repaving of our parking lots and
so thank you very very much and
all the representatives are
thank you as well because
without your your help and
support a lot of your higher
education in programs who would
not survive so thank you thank
you thank you
so again all I want to say is
thank you for come return with
young corner if we have any
questions
please give me a call
email me and well i'll try and
give you as much support as I
can as well.
Any questions.
The.
Thank you mission by sharing and
tony a course don't see himself
a disservice when he talks about
selling peanuts I mean he is
he's an internal part of this
university and the management of
the of the facility so he's he's
he's a bigger dog then he makes
out but I won't you guys when
you walk out this door when she
look across the street and
you'll see the campus primarily.
I want you to look back and once
you look at that and want you to
think of one building right
there one.
Because in nineteen seventy when
I first went to school there
there was one building there now
you have the buildings that are
that are all across the campers
as well as this facility here so
it's grown substantially but I I
guess when I say that that's
pretty much fifty years of
growth shell maybe it hasn't
grown as much as I like to thank
but it's it's
it's been a remarkable part of
this community and it's one of
the things that the legislature
when they look at.
Uh when those review involved in
setting budgets and you're
involved in those things as we
go forward.
These small campuses in places
at art large cruises that aren't
all the kirky
needs of the cards and the
people that they serve in these
communities.
Don't overlook that.
Because it's too important to
everybody here and just ask that
as we as we go forward if you go
forward senator rodriguez and I
will be watching from a far but
uh
we're counting when you guys to
do all those things it continue
and count on john over here a
lot but we're we're we're
counting on you guys because.
People that come to this school.
Will you come to a graduation
here you could a graduation in
in laws crucials it's a big
deal.
Will you come to a graduation
here.
This is life changing for the
people that graduate here.
Because they're they've done
something that has maybe been
far more difficult.
Then those reversing just walked
out of high school and went to
college.
These guys have had to shed
aside time from their family
from their jobs in order to.
Educate themselves in a way that
gives him greater opportunities
these sayings are too important
should please as you move
forward uh remember how
important they are so thank you
and tony you're you're far more
important in you say show thank
you for what you center.
Are just to pick it back off of
I send a griggs as I talking
point there that building across
the street will be demolished in
the coming year.
Uh it's called the classroom
building we don't have a name
for that building yet it's
called the classroom building so
hant hint if we can get some
dollars into that building maybe
we can name it after one are you
guys.
But out it will be built back up
it's at nineteen thousand square
for building right now will be a
fifteen thousand dollars fifty
thousand square for building
once it's a rent of air replaced
in the next coming years so.
Thank you very much.
Thank you tony and let's
remember people do like peanuts
more than like politicians
don't understand the payment but
kids have today appreciate it
and thanks for those words
senator griggs all right so
we're going to move on to the
first panel unless we have
anyone else here to greet us
from the city chat I think we do
we'll move on to the first.
Okay so we have I know
the natural resource trustee who
was here so many chassis if you
have a seat in then we've got a
couple people who were virtually
remoting in secretary canny and
allen fernandez.
So are the two remote folks are
we going to see them online at
this point.
Yeah.
Okay they're on the top of the
screen.
Yeah.
Scope okay so.
Why don't.
We go in the order of the those
listed and start with secretary
canny.
If that's okay with you
secretary.
Yes
you all hear me it it's
indicating that I can't for my
camera on that the host needs to
give me that permission.
The.
Are the secretary of the
permission to turn the camera
we're working on that sector.
And i'm i'm happy to get started
and then if possible I can apply
amazon.
Okay
well I guess.
And get started we're working on
it or
is it user it's working on.
Oh really
okay
okay so secretary go ahead and
start your presentation we might
would be able to work it out but
otherwise feel free to go ahead
and start your presentation.
Okay.
So.
Madame and
representative it's going to be
here with you virtually sorry I
can't be there that i'm
traveling this afternoon and
can't to the.
From element back up to
albert you to get a captain
white however wanted to just
ignore that it is a special part
of the end and spent a lot of
time down there in the home
and the other part is in general
I can agree more of the opening
comments.
Manager can you tea might slide
their do you have them in front
of you.
Yes we should
all excellent
going to move through the
flights just a little bit
quicker in the interest of time
as I as I know there's there's a
lot of present each probably
discussion to be had around the
topic of people
with that let me get started
with just on flight one title
flied i'm gonna pass through
that and move to you for those
who are following online like me
the exit they're available on
the eleventh on the radioactive
and houses materials website it
was the environment department
comments and has money's
webpage.
The second flight here just
highlights the equity of people
and where they're found leave
chemicals are found in condition
or good and that'll be a part of
my discussing the porning as
well and
accc ever fire biting bonds that
are around our military basis
and they're in all my gordo as
well.
So just knowing that they're
found in all these different
brain gimmer products if drives
you a concern that we recently
identify to continue to see what
starts on flight dream.
And I just wanted to level
except that they didn't photos
that I truck visiting a big back
to retailer here in albert key
but they're all throughout the
state nor drop the country.
As you can tea they're telling a
favorite protection and it's
fabric project and have claimed
on the bottle of the that it is
non talk again not hazardous did
you see in the third plied the
blue box.
When you look at the ingredient
you'll see that those
ingredients contain terrified
water area here we go start
there into your.
On the bottom of that flight
three
ingredients contained by water
ticket for a polymer cat iron
had in her back him i'm gonna
talk a little bit more about the
chemistry but not in that but
nonetheless I was just wanted to
point out the death product that
being called out there out the
next united states
more than we would call people's
it's being labeled and told and
market as non non have gonna
come back to the story here in
just a moment but I will i'll
leave you with a little bit of a
clip hanger that I call the
company and ask them for
material the dedication if I
could get a better understanding
of what's in the in the total
and it turns out that they're
response me words we don't have
the detailed feed available
because of a computer crash will
get back to you.
So i'll pick up on that story in
just a moment but let's go to
the other place that you mexican
counter
he passed and that's around our
military beaches but what I
wanted to just highlight here
for you if you look at that part
left box where there's three
arrows.
The darrows are basically
highlighting that if you have
water and area but he passed a
gold you'll get a phone that
form if you go down to the
bottom left by the judge you did
the phone in twelve
the press is.
Or engine duals
and and put them out there a
theories of pulling it bothering
it and and causing up down to
go over there fire.
Just a little bit about those
you
just a little bit more there
that consumer product as well as
firefighting bombs or where new
mexicans will really encounter
it boss in the environment.
It's next auto highlight what
happened when you have.
The.
When you have.
Firefighting forms that go into
a interpret in parliament like
we have an alamo court what you
see here is that.
The people get into like column
in lake hollowing and then area
with new mexico winds and that
form that you do on the there is
people a small firefighting
bombs that have blown out of the
lake parliament and come accord
we example this and found that
it it contains extremely high
level the feedback because it is
prepared.
The next light here highlight I
was just down it late column in
over the summer and a couple
more photos one is the time here
and actually the palm is an
older time it's over
but it did
at least hollowing you to be
that about breaking on on polar
ball and not used for recreation
or anything else but those
phones you blow out of the
column in
especially during our windy
so madame chairman members of
the committee just pair with me
as we go to the next slide i'm
going to basically give you
I notice that I show more
there's a it's it kept a little
bit more intent but I I trust
that this trust me that this is
not going to be a camera to
discussion what I really want to
point out to you is that people
are just of about nineteen
thousand chemicals they have a
carbon back phone and then they
have the add on functional group
they tend to make them
to everything from creating
flick third because creating
great features of some packeting
things like that.
The mortar card you have thought
the more
ten could be more toxic than
compounded and the compound on
the left be up away.
In the box it was based out of
production and two thousand and
few and again i'm going to come
back to that point as I talk
about that that are direct
protecting the you can buy all
over new mexico.
Moving to slide again.
For showing you now on the left
and played the larger and
people's chemical dicks are more
carbon adams can be the more
tactic the replacement through
the daughter came on from the
right thing sir let's carbon
molituals and the less talking
but still have a city seated
with them.
And that's all we are after you
want to I just wanted to break
them into those category to
remove its like nine.
These are the third of the help
impacts that have been purity to
be studies they're indicate what
and look for your two one king
pick somewhere carbon adam creep
asking in the old versus the
pain one picture lacks harven
items
alleged read through that on
your own but the everything from
high college raw reproductive
used certain type to cancel and
then organ functional used
although arise on both side long
and short pain are chemicals.
We are back to slight and and I
wanted to finish my story for
you on the consumer product
that's available to protect
fabric things like help just
run.
I did your back brown the
manufacturer of the chemical and
they called me just last week to
chair with me that.
Here's some of the information
we have as to what is in the
camera within that favorite
protection.
Yep explained a couple of light
to go with spades out in two
thousand and two it's ended at
the longer team some of the more
severe help as well as a
consideration of a jordan p f b
AP bus that was actually based
out of product earlier in
nineteen ninety eight might ask
yourself just because something
was phased out of chemical
production doesn't mean it's not
still being introduced in the
commerce they're so based
amounts of beats came above that
are getting into commerce and
therefore into people's houses
and
being used all throughout the
thing.
The interesting note that in the
red box there I wanted to
highlight for you that the pfo
concentration in the product is
fifty kind tired then the uth
drink water candor.
So not did anybody would drink
this fabric protective that's
not what i'm feeding with blever
as the spabric protection is
used in harm their news at
burning for warehouses and added
to things that you're bringing
your house.
Those chemicals you get in few
our wage water systems.
Which caused significant amount
of money in our quantity that
for you correctly for the
removal of these chemicals from
our our way it's water our wage
water then goes into dreams and
occupiers and becomes our
drinking water so again I wanted
to sort of that that that
turkular nature of the company
would be bust in our economy.
They moved to slide eleven what
i'm really going to do here is
not getting that the details of
all the role of standards that
are coming into third many
and and many other long overdue
but I will highlight a couple of
them the moving that's like
twelve.
What do see here is a
the the chief drinking water act
as now come in to play
in about five years in a
capabilities will have to comply
with the drinking water standard
they're very low and
in addition to those drinking
water standards coming in to
play there's about eighteen
point nine million
money that the federal
government has provided to be
mexico and we expect the more
money coming into the saved
under the inflation.
There's also a clean
acknowledges available I want to
demitch the by the treatment
technologies are not there.
When you work at the
concentration the car rise to
the cows that had to be you know
around can an airport paid the
concentration of the f o s which
again under the tape and water
act will be about
it with two thousand eight
hundred and fifty times higher
than those calls were drinking
in the agricultural water they
don't sit under the resident and
around an airport speeds.
As we are going to move to the
next slide and pick it up it's a
little bit want to give my
fellow presentation time and you
all at a time for questions.
We have ground water standard in
the state any mexico
and an airport speeds violated
those by those ground water
standards are state standards.
Moving applied for
in
the phone new jersey and north
carolina static the US tpa
collective chemicals are added
airport.
I'll let you know that in north
carolina and new jersey what
they're dealing is that the
manual factor needs come up both
are it's not just a matter of it
getting into the landing around
water but it also mattered air
depositing were ding people up
gradient of where the water
flows and in people's private
drinking water world
about sixty miles away from
where these the stack that you
well where these lines are being
aramed in air deposit as well.
The.
Moving applied fifteen.
Sir which is known as the
cheaper bandwide is is the
subject of a couple slides here
and i'll let my colleague first
you heard seven explain a little
bit more of the authority that
she has understand but once the
true went into it back living
through different parts chemical
to add required to be monitored
and cleaned up you mix fill
environment department along
with the
was the birthday in the country
to file an amended complaint
against the department of the
bank told them accountable for
what I think will be in the
hundreds millions of dollars for
damages caused not only to
property in communities but you
public health as well.
Moving slight sixteen continues
that percussion on turkla.
And flight seventeen finalizes
that discussion on the
interesting to note here that i.
Jerk has a.
The.
Won't under federal executive
order
there is some economy given to
the department of defense due
clean up he bought it.
The epa does not have it as much
authority to under the federal
line.
On tried eighteen are not sure
if you'll be able to see it
slightly in coming up if you are
clicking through it is it
learning photos on to the slide.
Not there if you can see that
but essentially slightly has a
little thing of all the
headlines related to
new mexico and the department it
depends on around trying to
airport.
Um.
Five nineteen highlights the
governor and the us cpa have
committed to regulating people
as a hazardous since under
federal and deep adjustments
log.
We expect those rules to be
coming in to play one of them by
the end of the year calendar
year and one of them by july of
next year which will clarify the
authority that the environment
department has the implement
federal and adjustment slaughter
which I know the department of
defense to my now is the only
entity in the head three abuse
federal laws that has challenged
that the party then epact and
regulate and sneeds and
regulate.
Flag twenty highlights that the
airport works eighteen months
after doing the same new mexico
for asking them to clean up
under federal and and state
hazardous ways like.
After they sued the date of new
mexico eighteen months later
they voluntarily started
cleaning that up at retail board
speeds under the same authority
that they're litigating against
the maximum.
So the next couple sides would
be just the end of my
presentation for highlight what
next.
And fly twenty one day what we
need to do with the state and
continue to do as a country and
it's disrupted the pathways
you're consumer education
industrial precapitor ground
which exists for other
pollutants
at water minutes to palities and
adding people to that it's not a
thread.
And then prevent the media
gifting to that is we'd start
cleaning up p boston our
groundwater that we don't call
the near debt where
in in a community.
By twenty two I told you to get
back to the did you look at the
left hand side and you can see
that it costs about fifty to
eight thousand dollars for pound
to make a bee bus product.
And yet that seemed one pound of
people as putting going into a
minute for water and what cost
about two point seven or
eighteen million dollars to
remediate it.
It's over fifty dollars
and point seven million and
clean up you can do why it don't
important for my job and my
department you educate and
prevent the bus from getting
into our water system.
In addition certain aids are
adopting and not none of them to
people span which we plan to
bring to the legislature in the
sixty days a new mexico burgeon
of it I think we would probably
generally agree that east makers
may need keep us and they do
but but might weigh popular
containers may not be box.
The.
And then I can't drink billing
the new mexico has waged
it it allows with what federal
law and better regulations
require as well.
And my last side is just a
highlight that while i'm vocal
and people asset and hollow me
there and other beats is around
the day like white and
there are other end he's like
the department of energy medical
government the private day that
you use the box both attempts or
uses another thing
and we could talk more about
that with the idea of
legislating around
here and as we get the exceeding
part with that thank you.
I appreciate.
I appreciate the time.
Thank you secretary canny we
really appreciate that if you
can stay on for a questions
after penalty that would be
great thank you
yes next we have trustee maggie
hearts thank you
good morning madam chair
mister waster members of the
committee my name is maggie
heart stevens and I I was
appointed in december of two
thousand nineteen to be new
mexico's natural resources
trustee
I want to first thank you for
inviting me here today it's a
it's just a pleasure to come to
alamo it's a place that I
visited frequently when my
children were a little because
of course white sounds is a
favorite destination
both when they were little and
now as their ado it is wonderful
to be here
and thank you for the
opportunity to talk about what
we do at the office of the
nounter resources trustee
so
I would like to just start with
slide number two I think it's
always important when we to
explain what we do relative what
the new mexico environment
department does i'm really
pleased to follow secretary
canny and his presentation on p
fos
but slight number two really
lays out what I respect of
responsibility
so following the release of
hazardous substance we share
responsibility for the response
with the environment department
the environment department is
responsible for remediation the
goal of which is to is clean up
to minimise exposure and risk to
humans and the environment
the goal of our we are focused
on restoring any rest natural
resources has been injured by
release to priest bill
conditions and when that's not
possible to.
Um to replace or replace the
resource or up acquired the
equivalent we are we also have
the authority and the
responsibility under circle are
to compensate communities that
have been effected by releases
of hazardous substances for the
boss of us of use for the boss
of services that natural
resources provide so
remediation and restoration are
complementary but very distinct
responsibilities
and risk I want to point out
that the work that the
environment department does and
what my office are when our tea
does
our responses can happen come
currently and in fact that is
incouraged under federal law
that as the remediation is under
way that we look for
opportunities to restore
interest natural resources
during that process
when I talk about now to
resources under circle out there
the federal
superfind act
we have authority and
responsibility for pursuing
injuries to water soils wildlife
habitat at terresterial happened
at a quite a cabitet in fish
wildlife by owner
so
as secretary can he point it out
in his presentation the
environment department is
responsible for the health past
impacts of releases of
contamination we have the
authority to pursue claims for
injury to natural resources
themselves
so side number three as
secretary can you mentioned
when p fast and phone work
listed by the epa as has reduced
substances we were then able to
pursue claims for releases of p
fast in the state of new mexico.
I think he mentioned this but
i'm in this year again upon the
listing of pass as the hazardous
substances we were added to the
states claim against the
department of defense for
naturally for the interior
denature resources cars by
releases at new mexico's
military installations slide
number three
yes
just am a quick slide shows the
as secretary kenny put it that
ubiquity of phosp releases
around the state of new mexico
am and today because we out on
megordo i'm in a focus on home
and leak and because it's a good
example of what
the officer the now to resources
trustee
is charged to deal so slide
number four um
hold of and lake so home and
leak is a and i'm send it a
gregs i'm sure you are well
familiar with the so apologized
for the repetition but home and
latest part of a system of was
water catchment parts holding
water from activities at home
and therefore space and those
activities included the use of
the firefighting phone accc
secretary can you mentioned and
use of accc started in the
nineteen seventies
several studies over the last
decade have showed extremely
high concentrations of p fast
npo were in the bake water at
home and lake and this year a
study was released by the unm
museum of southwestern biology
that showed extraordinarily high
levels of pefason p four in
birds and mammals that are
exposed to home and lake and in
the tissue samples the title
samples aren't showed tens of
thousands of parts per billion
of p fast.
Um in mammals and waterfowl and
that is um and they were among
the higher scene anywhere in the
world and there was
detections of PS and people in
animal tissues are well above
the threshold that constitutes
injury to a natural resource I e
water fell when mammos
so that constitutes an injury
that we are and then charge to
pursue a claim for sight number
five
excuse me
just list some of the studies
are of past detections in blake
water it hobblement leak
and you couldn't I won't read
through them but
I I believe it was this year the
epa and advisory for drinking
water standards for
people are some people are point
zero zero four parts per
trillion for people performance
point two parts per twelve and
so you can see that these
detections are well above
the standards that are
considered safe
and as I mentioned exposed to
these um
these higher levels of
p forest and power and have
effected the wildlife that visit
holland and like um
slide number six
I won't read through this better
I you know our responsibility at
their office of the nature
resources trustee is to pursue
claims when there is injury to
announce or resource and
and
side number six just list what
are the criteria for an injury
to a natural resource when we're
talking about buyer logical
injury so that can be
reduced reproduction.
Adverse effects to other biodes
via their diet and um
a loss of use of the resource so
in this case and the edible
issues are the wild life that
are exposed to home and like are
no longer see for consumption so
that means hunters
are not should not be consuming
any
animals and the organization
organisms that have been exposed
to home and lake side number
seven
just gives you an idea of how
significantly
the tissue samples show an
exceedences of what is
considered to be a safe level
that read data line on the
forecast
side of this graph shows what is
considered to be a safe level of
p fast in tissue per deliver
tissue and you can see that in
all of these species that were
sampled um they far exceed that
was threatened um
inside number eight again this
is a slide that shows what say
for these organisms to consume
and that red data line on the
fart left shows what's
considered safe and um each of
those bargains that are
moving to the rate
show again significant
exceedences of what is
considered safe side number nine
I won't go into it but this site
just demonstrates that
these these
labor in muscle m
concentrations in the birds at
home and lake
it should not be consumed.
And there is no save consumption
level for organisms that have
been exposed to holland and so
again one of the claims that we
can bring is for a boss of use
of a now to resource and clearly
um hunters in new mexico have a
are being should not be
consuming these and therefore
didn't like that **** of use
so slide number ten
years a question where is next
what are next steps so as
secretary can you mention we are
now part of the multimulti
district litigation
we are part of the states claim
against the department of
defense for injuries related to
the releases of p foss for
military installations harm and
is one of those sites and so our
next step is to begin collecting
the data or continue collecting
the data that we need that we
will need to do a natural
resource damage assessment in
accordance with federal rules
promigated under circle
so we are working with the
environment apartment in the us
fish and wildlife service to
understand what the next round
of testing should look like and
how that's going to be funded
our goal that on our tea is
always to get to restoration as
quickly as possible
that benefits both the resource
that benefits the people who
live here in this community and
it also is better for the
taxpayer the sooner we can begin
addressing these issues that
they'll less expensive ideas
from those of us who are for us
taxpayers so
it is arrangable to begin
working with the department of
defense if they are open to that
to identify early restoration
opportunities that we could
begin right away and again
beginning begin
addressing these natural
resource injuries.
I'm slides eleven and twelve I
was just two examples of what
tapes of restoration projects we
could consider and bonita bake
is familiar to people who live
in this area this is a
restoration project that has
been completed but it services
an example of the types of
things that we
if we were to reach an agreement
with the department of defense
the type of priority that we
would like to pursue
spide number twelve is an
example of a a restoration
project that we have undertaken
in the past which is a player
conservation which is a
restoring the the piolakes that
exist here in the state that
sort of to recharge the aquifer
and serve also as a great
waterfell habitat
so.
That's the home and week and
presentation at sort of part of
my presentation and just finally
I want to touch on canada air
for space up I think people are
most familiar with the p fast
contamination that has happened
there
the p fast contamination is
gotten into the oggle up aquifer
which is the primary source of
water for that entire eastern
community
and
much of that area around canada
for a space is
you know one of the one of that
wealthy highest use of the other
is firming in ranch uhm
side number fourteen just a
graph depicting what that can
and ground pefas plume looks
like
and then a side number fifteen
again we are now like what are
the next steps for us in that
can it at that count and sight
you know in again earlier this
year we join the multi just
rejoin the states and claim
against the department of
defense
but it's really arrogant I said
before it to get to early
restoration particularly in that
part of this date where a ground
water with the okay aquifer is
is quickly being depleted
we want to we're hoping that we
will be able to work with the
department of defense to
identify early best ration
projects that can be implemented
quickly and
um
get to work on that right away
as you have probably been
briefed
you know the predictions for the
for the long jeverity of the lot
what I quite short so we really
believe that the options are
fewer in fewer and to protect
that occur for the longer we
wait.
So paid to number sixteen we
have actually had the
opportunity to spend some time
with people who are live and
work in on the easier to the
state in the clove of seria and
identify what what those
communities believe are high
priorities for early restoration
opportunities
one of them is a project that is
**** currently under way with
the oak allowance land in water
conservancy
when they are working with can
an air for space and apartment
of defense the city of clothes
that sits great partnership in
which
there is a plan to
reduce pumping from the the
awkward for the ogala aquifer um
we see that as it as an
excellent opportunity for early
restoration side number
seventeen again quietly
restoration that is an
opportunity to protect
um in recharge the oggle of a
aquifer and thrill restoring
lakes in the area
and again we believe that there
are some really excellent
opportunities to work with the
department of defense to begin
implementing some of these early
restoration
opportunities these early
restoration projects
if they're willing to work with
us so at this point in time we
are hoping that the outreach to
the department of a defense will
be effective so that ends my
presentation happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you and we will have our
next
presenter a lana fernanders
she's she's a project specialist
with the miguest bravos and she
is going to
join us by zoom.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes
thank you thank you again good
morning madam chair members of
the committee secretary kenny
trusty stubborns esteemed
colleagues and thank you to tom
krisk on your staff and thank
you respectfully to the members
of the public for your time and
attention to day regarding p
my name is a lena phenomenons
and I apologize for not being
able to attend in person i'm
currently up and tell since you
can see the telstra mountains
behind me and they work multiple
jobs made a position is with the
epa region six environmental
justice south central thriving
communities technical assistant
center housed at animals you
also known as the ticktech I am
a project specialist with
america's brothers and some of
you may know me as a former
member in chair of the northern
new mexico citizens advisory
board I also want to say that I
received my bachelor's degree
from animals you and worked for
many years in the department of
physics the engineering physics
program and other projects in
the college of engineering so
thank you to and am as you
almost gordow for hosting this
meeting and go against so
secretary kenny and trusty
stubborns have provided much of
the information you will see in
my slides.
And my role here is to provide
additional information as well
as provide an update on those
industrial type and long chain
pifas that were found in several
private water wills in the
community of last year again new
mexico.
And.
Begin to share my screen in a
moment well there are many
slides submitted to you in this
presentation they are mostly
free of reference and as a
resource based on the most
current and best available
science
so give me just a moment to see
if my screen
will share let's.
All right.
You see my screen.
Yes
great thank you.
Ah
and let's see if I can.
Roll through yes I can perfect.
Okay so yes thank you again to
secretary canny free information
on legislation and regulation of
people
nationally and for new mexico
this is something that the new
mexican talks
working group has been working
toward and i'm a member of that
as well as the members of the
ground water already bureau
director john roderick and the
healer resources information
project and the public so.
Again
okay this is our piefast
primary.
Per per and poly flural floral
alcohol substances collectively
known as p fas.
They were developed in the early
nineteen forties actually about
nineteen thirty eight for
industrial and consumer use the
court carbon flooring bond is
one of the straw is the
strongest single.
And in nature and that is why
people have so effective and
also so difficult to destroy and
sometimes remove I am your
reference I am not a
toxicologist organic chemist
thankfully I have some
colleagues in the room or online
who can correct me if I happen
to make a mistake
while there are millions of
types of people we are looking
at two mean categories and
secretary kenny mentioned them
the long chain pifas which is
greater than eight seven.
Carbon florida bonds it actually
depends on our typically
interest real types it depends
on the type he fast that term
where the cut off is about eight
to seven or seven to six the
carbon bonds that.
Add categorize them as long as
short chain.
And of course a short change he
fells as less than seven or six
carbon flooring bonds those are
typically consumer type p fast
the stuff that's on your
clothes.
The
fabric protector are textiles
roadings on your pots and pans
of corn bags especially well and
some compostable bags so these
type are typically persistent
and you because they are
everyday items and the long
chain of course are typically
utilized and specialized
settings
such as verified informs which
have been mentioned the accc.
So this is this get hearing
technical again these are
freedom for your information for
you can refer back to you this
is from brennant renan and all.
This is the pifas family tree I
like this one because it breaks
it down into the two subgroups
long chain and short chain and
you can see how there are some
long chains with six to or more
carbon boring bonds.
Ah well also six or less could
also be a short chain.
Okay according to pubcim which I
am sorry I don't have that
resource on here there are over
seven million different types of
people's pub cameras and
excellent resources that
provides the physical
description structure origin use
and associated hazards with the
various types of people as
another chemicals if you want to
look that up
I can send that link or an
update version of my slides with
that pub camry's resource.
To this image from bringing it
all shows the preference family
tree how they break down into
the two major types that were
concerned about today.
So where people have found as
secretary.
Kenny and trustee stubborns are
mentioned they are everywhere
what a proof products oil
through products nonstick to
styles included including
carpets and clothing melts and
beauty products such as dental
floss shampoos lotions
medications and medical devices.
So this one's kind of a
interesting point because.
One carbon flooring bond would
technically does constitute APS
and well many medications may
have a carbon floor involved and
are technically concerned
pipe of pefice it is a personal
risk and cost benefit analysis
for yourself does the benefit of
the medication outweigh the risk
this is something that you can
discuss with your personal
physician and there is also some
push back from the medical
industry on classifying
medications as pufas again does
the benefit outweigh the risk.
Proton pump inhibitors those
sort of things.
Some entered presence so it
don't just pick I won't tell you
not to take and what to take
again that's up to you.
Let's see food wrappers
and postable bags be very
careful with anything that is
marked and possible it could be
a bag it could be better than
wear flat where.
That's sposable because that may
contain p thousand and if it is
composted it could.
The could affect your it'll will
contaminate your compost pile.
Fresh waterfish.
Do exceed a lot of the peafests
regulations soak again as a
trusty stevens mentioned the
animals when you're hunting.
That have been contaminated the
same holes true for a fresh
waterfish
there are also significant
repercussions for the recreation
industry given the prevalence of
p fast and their near and their
toxic loading into the
environment
i'm also a member of the new
mexico department of tourism
clean and beautiful advisory
committee
we have discussions about p vs
and the dangers of two thousand
how the effect are work and
keeping the mexico clean and
beautiful.
And a concerns for.
For that loading to our
environment.
So professor nearly everywhere
we have firefighting phones and
fire and protective dear.
This is an issue because a
several.
Many clarifieders have
belt cancer.
And.
I want to see that my cousin is
the fire chief here in thousand
here and I have had this
discussion
when those firefighters do
develop cancer is at a result of
the contaminance that they may
be breathing entering the fires
or is it actually the personal
protected gear that they're
wearing that has caused it.
So some countries are trying to
face out protective gear that
has people asking them.
But it's very difficult because
if as is so effective in
protecting our firefighters.
But it is it's difficult to
replace.
Of course professor and
electronics that's what.
It makes them so hard.
I will see effective again.
They've industrial applications
because they are.
Very useful and extreme
conditions such as space.
And in agriculture the machinery
may be the clothing of our
farmers and then of course the
biodashuptake into our plants
and animals.
So this graph shows that when
people are an over ninety
percent of the human population
if we are to take lead sample.
Evods or p fos p four p f h s s
and pfna
have been phased out over the
years.
And this is the graph it shows
that the numbers are decreasing
nationally as these peoples are
being phased out.
But as as secretary can you
mention just because they're
being phased out doesn't mean
that they still don't exist
these numbers are encouraging so
the more we can face out the
bitter.
The better will will be a health
wise but will take years.
Here simple five graph
richard of AP fast environmental
cycle transport
the physical and chemical
properties appear first along
with biogeo chemical conditions
of soil operator systems control
fate and transport of these
substances and surface and
subsurface environments fate and
transport preferences complex
due to their suffective nature
so if we look at this uh the
graphic we see that the.
They share
shares with soil soil shares of
water water shares with air and
back.
Back and forth so it is it goes
through the the cycle the error.
Soil and water cycle.
And thank you to doctor patrick
long myer for this.
Again this is more chemistry
based this is from doctor long
myer.
This is just for your reference.
Slide here's.
This one is a this graphic is
another example of.
More the detail the partitioning
and transformation of preference
and the environmental cycle this
is provided by the interstate
technology and regulatory
council of which I am a member
and this graphic is courtesy of
the adamson of the itrc.
This is.
A little bit more in depth of
the the simplified graphic here.
You can see the breakdown the
particular the transformation of
air air salts that goes into you
land application or deposition
and there can be uptaken by oda
leaching into the ground water
and of course when you have of
apparation and then.
Transforms.
Back into settlements which then
can be parisalized back into the
air and it repeats the cycle
again.
So exposure pathways.
Congestion immense horrition
from our water food air
particles are arisalized soils
and dust and industrial
emissions.
The.
You're the graphic is from a
government accountability office
this is
more detailed about the common
pathways piefas we enter the
environment.
So we can see slurge by products
biosolid from wastewater
treatment plants are spread on
agricultural land as fertilizer
and can contain people and lead
to water contamination as
secretary can you point it out
and trust you stevens could
product such as melt can become
contaminated if live start
consumer fastened food or water
so we can see the cycle here.
And the out it also infiltrates
into the ground water.
Again thank you to secretary of
kenny or
there was federal and state
regulations here just to some of
them.
We have especially any mexico we
have the new mexican
administrative code and mac
twenty point six point two
ground and surface water
protection regulations this is a
one of the projects I work on
and the new mexico talks at
pollution working group is
focused on
changing hopefully this this
administrative code
um so people are regulated under
several new mexico state and
federal laws.
New mexico talks and working
group of which i'm the coach
hair is providing information
during public meetings on those
pollutants including people as
that may be harmful to human
health especially in ground and
surface water we hope through
the talks of political more
concrete
create more protective
regulations for surface and
ground water any mexico with an
eye on the council risk and
including few fast by extending
the list of he founds that we
have so far under twenty point
six point two.
He.
I'm right now what is considered
a compliant number in new
mexico.
Channel four quickly out of
single with the regulations
outside of drinking water.
On as provided by federal
regulations so that's something
that we need to work on.
Enhancing for our safety.
These are the twenty twenty four
epa safewater drinking act
regulations as you can see the
all the exist now.
And we have the public and
environmental health concerns of
course blood testing thank you
to secretary kenny for the
testing in canon.
Um we do the blood testing to
understand the types and levels
and eh of people in a blood
sample.
And to establish a baseline
within a community um.
Clinical guidance is a good
resource you won't want allowed
something to look up as a
national academies of sciences
engineering in medicine their
guidance on people as exposure
testing and clinical follow up.
And there is not currently a one
to one cars in effect of the
types of people's.
And its effect as they can cause
a host of health issues that
secretary kenny did I lighten
his slides those studies are
ongoing and will take more time
and attention to those exposure
and those outcomes so it's very
difficult to pin point but on
there are.
More
there's more prelent either to
say that yes this is going to
cause liver cancer this is going
to cause.
A different type of cancer or at
and a cream disruptor.
They're all very harmful
while so it is not guaranteed a
body will develop a disease
caused by p vas but the chances
are greatly increased due to
exposure and chronic exposure.
Well the body may be able to
eventually shared some peak
first the time to do so is not
certain and and again we are
chronically exposed so there's a
chronic uptake.
Again over ninety percent of the
public will test positive for
people when taking blood samples
when we know it is an acute
exposure such as from long term
exposure to industrial types of
pifas
and firefighters in the
protective gear contaminated
ground water wells as the
primary water source those will
show up
the we want to focus on types
and levels again some peafest
may be more acutely toxic
including some industrial or
long train p first over some
short chains.
The.
The.
So again here are some resources
that aid and understanding the
testing toxicity of pifas and
always keep in mind that hypes
and the levels.
So we're going to look at last
year big discount community
outside of santa fe
industrial peafans has been
found in private groundwater
wells used for drinking and
cooking agriculture and other
household use the new mexico
environment department is
conducting an investigation near
the santa fe national guard and
the santa fe aviation support
for a facility.
Well.
There seems to be a prevalence
of cancer and last year again
and it is a very small
community.
And especially in one
neighborhood where some wells
have tested positive rep fast
as such I have reached out to
the new mexico department of
health in the union tumor
registry together they were
doing a cancer study for the
senses tracked that last year
the gear is placed in.
One thing to certainly note is
that cancer is not rare this was
from the works good department
of health.
And so that study can not draw
closer into the neighborhood
of last year negative and must
begin at the sense of track
level.
However if a cluster of a
certain type of cancer has been
traced to the area then that
will aid the department of
health and performing a more
acute research study in that
area the issue with p fast is
that it can cause a host of
different health effects and so
it may not be that he found wood
would be seen as the cause
or that it could close the same
type of disease in every every
person it would just be
different diseases.
Again this type of research is
in its early stages and of
course it would be unethical to
test on individuals
so blood has done the very
important to help us inform who
has been affected and with which
types and those levels of that
perfect.
I found in their blood.
Um.
And twenty twenty three testing
for industrial peafest in the
ground water last year by the
environment department took
place in november of that year
became public knowledge that
some of the private water wells
were contaminated with
industrial type perfect.
The new mexico environment
department with the cooperation
of the new mexico national guard
is currently performing an
investigation in that area and
near the sanity was what a
treatment plant and the aviation
support facility
president of las anniger has
come
and has publicly come forward to
reveal that their blood samples
for prefers have come back
positive then are similar to the
types found in his family's
drinking water will.
Given the ongoing and that's
private groundwater which is not
regulated by the state.
The.
Um given the ongoing
investigation by the environment
and the unknown and the up
novembers in the community of
las in a gear
let me go brothers has been
granted funding from senator
community foundation to add the
investigation where those funds
are to be applied directly and
solely in those untested wells
in the community of last year
gear.
This was by was money was
provided by some private donors
who wanted to know more about
loans possible plumb.
Within the that neighborhood
within that community.
This funding will aid the public
and enemy deal and understanding
more about where the p fast plum
is within the ground water
and these funds will only cover
about twenty wells.
Again as I said
and there has been a prevalence
of
bonus and disease and last year
negative.
It's a small community and there
has been quite a bit of.
Quite a bit of cancer
but seems like quite a bit of
cancer for such a small
community.
So.
The.
The community can petition the
agency for toxic substances and
disease registry also the cdc to
do a public health survey the
public has been petitioning
since twenty twenty three but so
far it hasn't been successful.
Um
we're hoping that we can get
more a to this community.
One one thing that would really
help them would be more blood
testing through the state
somewhere to that of a clovis
community that way we can
understand the types and levels
of peofus and then we can help
establish a baseline and that we
can help to inform the community
and develop the next steps.
So to move on our pieces remove
or destroyed.
It is it's kind of difficult
still would there are some home
filtration systems they can be
expensive to install and filters
are expensive to replace however
the environmental working group
in consumer reports does have a
list of infiltration systems
whether they're at the facity or
for your private water well at a
whole house will traction
system.
Some.
Some monthly successful.
Filtration systems are granular
activate a carbon treatment and
full tradition while they are
more effective with launching
pifas however a short champion
first can escape the capture
system some high pressure
systems um.
Oops
we need to upgrade our waste
water treatment systems with
filtration for both long and
short chain peafence you will
see peofish short chains coming
from wastewater treatment plants
and also through the spirit of
solidarity secretary can he
mentioned.
The.
Now
there are multiple ways to up he
fast destruction methods this
information was compiled by my
colleague gordon freezer and
these are some of the current
ways peoples are destroyed not
every destruction method is
appropriate for every type of
peofus and most can only be
replaced i'm be replicated in a
close laboratory system.
So while some of these have been
successful they are not
accessible for every type of
peoples and they may not be
applicable to.
To the general public.
Or pefes that's just out in in
now that it's a nature.
So there's no silver bullet so
that there's another growth also
created by gordon frasier and
depicts the stage of development
vs the range of practicality
boards one hundred percent p
fast destruction there are no
silver bullets as you can see
here
um he's classified them in two
non thermal and then there all
types of destruction which are
non viable and then.
Which are feasible and which are
of more mature stages that
development.
So these are a pathways to
regulation in new mexico as
secretary can be mentioned the
intoxic pollution working group
things working with the surface
and water quality regulations
we would like to see that
they're regulations are more or
protective would like to
petition the water quality
control commission to change the
cancer risk from ten of the
minus five to ten to the minus
six.
So right now we have narrative
sedandards those are more
protective than numerical
standards
the narrative standards instead
of an american standards allow
new mexico regulations to be
more flexible and consideration
of new scientific evidence and
primes new mexico to live it in
the face of those changes.
And I developed resources here
and they seem to be mixed up
there they are thank you there
we go there they are again well
there is pub came at the bottom
excellent.
And here my references to and I
wish to extend a personal thank
you during the mexico industry
dream commission deputy director
michelle hunter locked a patrick
long wire diane homeo two from
the center community foundation
ordinary freezer new mexico
center national guard chaplain
joseph
my colleagues in the enemy d's
water protection division
director roderick groundwater
quality bureau just and
ball in jason herman and the
yokems who speaking later today
the drink and water bureau and
resource protection director
shian and my colleagues in the
hazardous waste bureau neiling
to one category stone martinez
and say on a really thank you.
Thank you very much.
Go to the committee for
questions uhm
sender rodriguez thank you
madame chairman in good morning
to everyone thank you for your
presentations matter chairman
are we
to go back to us like for
example from a secretary canny
is this a proper time ok thank
you high secretary county thank
you for being weathers even
though it's on zoom sometimes we
understand we can't be there in
person so i'm I do have just a
quick question I had written
some notes here
and it happened here we go yeah
it had to do i'll get a little
closer here okay it just has to
do with them
first of all the comment that I
think resonates in all our mind
minds here is that seems like
peoples are almost everywhere if
not everywhere and in a bad
situation
so I didn't never realize that
they could even be in
medications until today so they
guess the more we think about it
the more we think of more things
that it's likely and but anyhow
let me just ask a quick question
here on the the p fast that you
spoke about i'm i'm on page
seven specifically secretary
kenny of your presentation and
you mention the two common
characteristics and someone and
you mention that the longer the
carbon chain the stronger the p
person that has been explained
here as other spoke also but I
guess one of the questions that
came to my mind is that
i'm wondering if this is somehow
correlated or
being looked at studied with the
situation were face seen having
to do with micro plastics
because I did read and and here
also in the news quite a bit on
the dangerous of.
The microplastics that were
actually injesting in almost
everything too it's not only in
plastic I thought from water
sitting there and water bottles
or just water and general
anywhere you were a plastic
tumbler whatever we we drink
with
their microplastics and they're
very damaging and they're
partful to our health and so do
can you comment on that
I I try to put him together here
with people as and they're both
hugely bad but I I just couldn't
grasp as to whether this has
been studied together with
people or what you know about it
thank you madame chair.
Yeah.
Senator into that question if
the
great question about the
converging of the box and
microphones that does exist it
is a found or you are correct to
relate boost you items together
which goes back to you
so so without getting two deep
into which plastics would
contain people and why they
would be in them I think the
practical and simple solution
that we can take on as a state
is to address the p pas issues
and microplastics all together
and
that it's something that we can
do in a legislative session and
focus in the king short
we are
banning non essential uses of
people especially those that are
in disposable plastic spring but
go for the low hanging fruit and
address that as quickly as we
can and then continue to move
upstream as to what's an
essential use of both people's
and plastic and relegate those
to the to the right for place in
our medical devices or
you know those types of
application song
I I your your spot on yes thank
you thank you.
Information I guess when I heard
that
overall it's terrible to her
health on this microplastic
stuff we're talking about but
the brain apparently is is being
very much affected
they're noticing even more
changes there and could possibly
even be
somehow responsible for again
it's possible because they're
still working on the studies but
they have conducted quite a few
already that it could be very
serious for the brank and
alzheimer's dimension and all of
that also so anyhow madame
chairman that's all I have and I
want to thank you secretary
county for our your great work
you you've been very very
efficient and very helpful every
time and always when I need to
call you a talk to you thanks
again.
Thank you
so much cheer steinborn
good morning everybody thanks
for the great presentations very
informative a lot of information
there
so I just want to ask some kind
of high level questions
for the secretary in the trustee
so right now with cannon and
hollow and air for a space where
we know we have contamination we
know we have some serious issues
what is the status are we
engaged in negotiation over a
settlement is that where things
are out with them right now.
And and senator I know a lane
had our hand up and let me ask
you also our let me answer your
question and maybe we can cut
back to her
she put it up should
we are we've had been in case
and
remember it and in I should say
the department of defense and
the trump administration should
need mexico the current
administration has continued
that last year against us we are
in the ten circuit we were in
mediation
mediation after two years was
not successful the environment
department would be a g broke
off that mediation
are now the department of the
task to file their opening breed
in the law super they found
again as the man
so
we are not in the women talked
with the department of
developing department and
justice anymore it's it's not
worth it.
Okay
Thank you very much
so
so that that is that regarding
both canon and holland the
sector.
So that is regarding the hazardt
waves permit at an an airport
the one in which they're
contesting that they have you
clean up under that permit yet
they've cleaned up under the
thing authority at reserve for
space the other litigation we
have is the one we filed against
the department of bands that
started with counting and
holliman
in which holliman indicated that
they would close our lake
holliman which I drove up to
over the summer and many others
are driving right up there so
they're not living up to the
word the dave indicated that
they would do
and then we modified our
complaint this summer on july to
include all other defense paces
and demands installation in the
state in new mexico because the
circle of regulations came into
a pat so we are in a multi
district little gene in south
carolina as a belt whether case
which means we are moving
forward early quickly
there's over four hundred close
to five hundred k house under
that multi distribution
and and madame karen and senator
you know I just looking back at
some of the numbers i'm asking
for a twenty four million
dollars special appropriate to
continue to fight the department
of defense in the litigation
both tenth circuit in the multi
district litigate him and the
day we're expending about
million dollars in year or about
twelve million dollars that's
far as not on cleaner but in
litigation and and signed a big
discovery
with this
it I can't express my
breakthrough
any more than to say that the
department of defenses on the
wrong time of history here yeah
so now.
Air secretary so it sounds like
there is no resolution I mean or
putting us on a path to
resolution a restoration there's
not even an acknowledgment of up
maybe there's acknowledgment of
a problem but not
a settlement with the state on
how to move forward with
restoration sounds like we're
still on the fighting
litigation phase.
Which is a real concern of mine
because
we've got human threats to him
and how often that exist right
now in both conditions we've got
a ground polluted we've got
wildlife polluted in holland and
now that is just a stunning
piece of information I think one
of the key reasons why I wanted
to have this hearing here in
alama gordo
that you know this pollution
here is caused wildlife around
and in my colliment to be
polluted and then I guess a
question for you madame trustee
is you know these wildlife
micro
so if you have
a bird this contaminated with p
fast may be moving on to banito
like moving on to a lake the
actually is a source of human
water supply I mean there's a go
the batch was degree in
government per talk to me about
science is that not a threat of
moving that pollution to another
crucial
resource
madam chair mister vice chair
absolutely you have it the now
on the head in harvem and leak
is a major spot on the highway
for a bird's migrating from
canada to south america and so
there absolutely is the risk and
likely heard that
these
waterfell are carrying the p
fuss
thousands of miles and that's
part of the challenge in
doing it injury assessment is
figuring out a study that's
going to
specify exactly what that how
far they're traveling
but the risk is so that that is
thank you that is such a serious
serious threat I mean
it's really really upsetting you
know just contemplating.
The impact of that to others.
And and like holliman is it uses
a drinking water source for
potable water for anybody right
now do you know
i'm chair secretary trustee
madame
knowledge no
matter mr
no it is not used as a drink and
water source
manager
that are.
What are we going right now
then
hello.
This makes can be funky
sometimes like that what are we
doing as the state I know
realize madame trusty mountain
chair that part of what you do
is you know remediate
rehabilitate etcetera etc.
But are we able to notify the
public right now about these
threats is the military
notifying these people about
these threats what are we doing
right now about that.
Secretary kenny may want to
respond to that directly but
in other circumstances where
there are consumption
advisories those have been
issued by the department of
health so in some parts of the
state there are
fish consumption advisories
based on particular pollutions
or contaminants and the
department of the mexico health
department has issued those as
far as home and leak and we been
researching
whether or not those advice
rates exist at this point and we
have found nothing um that is
currently an existence but
that's part of what we are
looking at whether there should
be
madam chair.
He
based on public meetings that
we've had around canadian
airport space the residents
there are saying that they were
promised beltration systems for
their drinking water wells they
are incurring that because
they're incurring the cost of
testing they're incurring the
cost of buying water
in other words the department of
defense has failed the residents
around canada for a space
completely and around holland
and airport space while the
drinking water is too brackage
to be used as a drinking water
soars it meets the dependants of
a water that could be a future
drink and water source because
the concentration of salt in it
is not high enough to say that
we would write it off in other
words the water under al magoro
is viewed by law as an silence
as a drinking water source of
the future wait but how to say
that the department of defense
has no plan on cleaning up lake
holliman at all i'm very late
comment or the water under or
around alaba gordon which again
why we are engaged in a losses
because no water new mexico can
be three hundred and twenty
three thousand times the
drinking water standard for
people to not exactly what is
around you right now on how
much.
Terry I agree I agree and it is
really outrageous that the
federal government is arm was
actually suing us for you know
trying to get readress of these
of these issues question going
down the rabbit whole little bit
further but with that when it
comes to the wildlife has there
been any communication with the
new mexico department and game
in fash i'm considering maybe
testing a wildlife around the
state just to see
who have AP fast issue with
wildlife in the state
i'm check
madame chair mr vice chair yes
I can't speak for the
environment department but the
office of the natural resources
trust
we have had conversations with a
director slown and his staff
about um how the
how the department of game in
fish and could be engaged in
this testing I think that is the
type of thing that they do with
some regularity to ask hunters
to collect samples that
then
get tested as part of an overall
sampling program so we have
started those conversations
nothing conclusive at this point
there is I said you know part of
what when our tears is doing on
home and lake is to
understand and promote the type
of testing that we are going to
need to establish injury and
defend a claim
yeah thank you and I would think
that you know the type of
wildlife that at a minimum
starting with the type of
wildlife that are at lay column
in that are migrating those
kinds of species and particular
should be kind of have a be put
on a watch less for at risk
species but we should be testing
for I mean.
This is just some
this is just the golden rule
rate the proverbial golden role
and
you know we know these species
are a risk we know they're
leaving like column in what are
we doing to protect others that
might consume them so and the
bodies are water where they
reside where they may die
decomposed etcetera itself
anyway I just I know it's a lot
but I I definitely want to
encourage everybody testifying
today to go up stream on these
issues I don't think we we can
wait until there's resolution
legally speaking with the
department in a fance to
recognize that we have a a
properly a wiver
a threat to new mexicans and
others non chestnut mexicans
said anyway that's one thing
moving on madam chair.
Um the map manner trustee that
you had in your presentation I
think it was page two
that showed potential water
resource impacts from pefas it
looked to me like most of these
diamonds.
Were from oil and gas activity
as far as threats to ground
water
or water resources am I looking
at that chart correctly
manager mr yes
okay
although I have to see it's a
little bit hard to distinguish
the pins codings plastics in
residence from the or I think
gas in the slide so
oil and gas are the the black
ones that are clustered in the
oil producing parts of our state
so so I guess big picture this
is the question for you and the
secretary when you look at p
fast we recognize that it's
ebaquit as it's an everything or
seemingly in many many things is
is the biggest threat found
in oil and gas is that a fair
statement
at least to water.
Mr m madam chair mr chairman
it's hard for me to answer that
and I think secretary canny may
have a a clearer response in the
reason why it is difficult for
me is because
surplus does not have an
exemption for now to resource
injury claims related to oil and
gas and so we do we cannot bring
a claim for a natural resource
injury that is related to or or
gas production in the oil
pollution act the federal or
application act i'm only
pertains two waters of the
united states and and ground
water is not considered a water
of the united states so that is
not
a place where we have invested
our resources knowing that
we cannot bring claims for
for any of those releases
when it answer that as well.
Is your question related to p
fires used in oil and gas repeat
vast
i'm trying to look at the map
into refresh your question just.
Get amount that says pefas in
new mexico water resources
potential sources and it just
has a lot of data on in a lot of
little diamonds all over the map
but most of them are in south
eastern in northwestern a mexico
black diamonds which are from
the oil and gas industry.
So that's hence my question do
we feel like
maybe those are known
contamination
or perceived or a case it says
potential sources so i'm not.
Jennis for the man.
Based from the us geological
survey twenty twenty two
so
anyway was from the natural
resource trustee presentation
but anyway i'm just curious I
mean I know that that there is a
big concern over what and
fracking fluids and things like
that which have been proprietary
and they have namoga has said we
don't use people we don't use p
fos anymore in our fracking
fluids but at some point they
did I guess in their persistent
chemicals and we allow them to
keep that information second so
i'm just kind of getting i'm i'm
really just crying trying to
quantify the level of problem
that we have in that sector
because on this map it seems to
be that that is a bigger issue
in the whole state of issues is
oil and gas and p fast
yeah.
And senator how I would answer
your question is that you know I
have people reaching out to me
and close this in santa fe
you know where the water that
they are consuming baiting
or concerned about is
has some degree of people in a
lot if you're in clovis
different levels of people
throughout the state
I think the risk that we need to
be focused on immediately in a
cutely is the rest caused by the
us air force to new mexicans
right now
the
use of oil the use of people in
oil and gas
and any going down hall and into
the
formation
provided there's no connectivity
between the oil and gas well and
drinking water sources which
there shouldn't be
or else we have an issue well
beyond people's there shouldn't
be connectivity there to
people's drinking water supplies
but we have connectivity
between
the fire fighting farm use and
the
residents drinking water wells
at least in clovers and and
that's of the greatest risk at
the moment for us to book a time
understand.
Although sometimes you know with
spills and stuff like that and
you know you you can run off you
can certainly cross contaminate
water supplies that weren't
initially connected but point
taken i'll leave it with that
madam chair thank you all for
your work on this i'll just ask
for one thing and thank you to
the other presenter as well miss
fernandez very interest you know
for us as legislators volunteer
legislators I think it's really
important that you'll a complex
subject like this
that ultimately you know we can
simplify these things as much as
possible and say here's how
we're getting our arms around
this sheer of the five policy
solutions here is what we're
doing
so that hopefully had a minimum
you all are consolidating
congenting these problems into
certain action points and it
sounds like you are but
certainly as you present him to
ask an astra our support that
would be helpful too cause it
can be a little bit
overwhelming slot of information
but thank you for your work on
their step I really appreciate
thank you matcher.
Before we go to.
Great
I need to
see it if missed fernandez if
you had a comment I think it was
way back that you raised your
hand with senator rodriguez.
Thank you but yes I did want to
support secretary kenney's
comments on microplastics
as an microplastic case the
canada adsorb so that is at the
fake transport where the
microplastics can move the p
fast
one resource that you may want
to to look at and I believe I
put them in my slides and the
resources slide was the
interstate technology and
regulatory council that's the
itrc i'm a member of the itric
and we do have a state
representative and I believe
it's paul chamberland with grown
water quality bureau who also
attends those meetings and is
also on the p first team them
i'm also on the microplastics
team we've spent the last two
years developing in
microplastics outreach tool kit
which is for the public for
legislators for
romakers
so I I did put the link in the
chatter but I highly highly
recommend that you go to the
itrc website and look at the
guidance documents that we
produce there and also I did
want to follow up with madam
chair senator steinborne's
comments about
um
he fastened support center canny
what is a cute
so yes before is persistent it
is you because it's again it's
an art everyday items there is a
exposure from those black
diamonds that you see on trustee
stubborn's map which is very
helpful and just because they're
may not be people in some of
those fracking fluids again we
don't know because of the
criteria
there would be fast on the
equipment that's being used and
that would be an industrial type
of piece as.
So there is that source and
again
which where will the where will
the
recontamination come from that
acute in termination it depends
on where you are
within the mexico and what you
are uses of pass are in what
your exposure is so if you're
near the national good our
facility and fay it looks like
there there could be some
an acute exposure there if you
are just in the city of santa fe
more likely it's from everything
around you if i'm wrong please
tell me
so there's there's my comments
thank you manager.
Out here at harlom and
it's basically the the low spot
in the basic it show the
the contamination of the water
from bracket sources
are are any of the the p fast
any of those naturally occurring
at all that could also be part
of
a brackish solution.
A manager and.
They can talk with you
he fast would not be naturally
occurring as they're the
nineteen thousand the millions
of chemicals are all man made
chemicals
of understanding your question
correctly there wouldn't be any
naturally occurring there may be
other sources of people as we
know from consumer products from
the land fill there there could
be contributing to the people in
the water but largely the
fingerprint is that of the US
air force putting it into the
water anciple app
from addition.
The naturally current naturally
occurring compounds in brackets
water
would have p fash in down.
Active if it wasn't forward to
three m and dupont making these
camera goals and no one else
made them they would not be in
the the water around like
bouncing around how many airport
space
manager.
Terry because I
you know the the issues around
water in new mexico there's a
lot of water that's not all that
good and your its use ability
is.
We just can't use it at least
yet without significant cart
so I wanted to be want to be
sure out there that the
naturally occurring part was
which night something that was
involved that it's all
occurring from an artificial
stores which would be the
firefighting plan or whatever it
might might be out it added
halloween
but one of the things I guess
which secretary and a madam
chair across new mexico
more and more communities are
utilising
re claimed water
for eargation of parks of school
playgrounds and and the like
are we
are we taking care of
a requirements and the treatment
of
reclaim wastewater to make sure
that it is a
shape enough for for all of the
the communities across the state
that use it.
Mancher and senator the great
question it's one that we are
working toward
joe
as of now
we're just getting federal
standards that would be
protective of public health for
the secondary uses of water
we have water reused roles
before the w c c right now there
were waiting for their decision
they would give us the framework
for us to be more projective of
water reuse applications
but look at in for example it's
a perfect example of your
question once the air force
contaminated
the aqua for their the passive
receivers as as our father you
know highland dairy the dairy
industry
they became the custodians of
this contaminated water by no
thought of their own so we don't
want to panel lies or go after
those who are embarking on water
reuse
as it will or even using the
water that that they're
allocated we want to go after
the polluters
in this case the department of
bands per causing that
contamination
and our water reuse rules are
catching up to be protective but
they're not there yet I will not
mit trepresent or not area
and imagine.
When we look at your
presentation and we look at
issues in using the mexico that
long chain and and short chain a
lot of a lot of that staff is in
water that the community usage
when they dispose of
materials that have been
utilized by individuals within a
community
when you when you look it at
these things and and I I just
want to quickly interject that
one of the things that i've
always found troubling when we
we see presentations and that
you know we we talk about in
this insurance with secretary we
talk about thy roy dish
functions and we say still
associated with disruptions but
generally to a letter degree I
don't know exactly what that
means but then liver effects may
cause liver toxic taxicity
typically less severe I mean I I
think you probably know and I
think there may be people that
that understand that but when
when those are the things that
were say and I think we need to
somehow be more precise in in in
how we address out but
you know if all of us are i'm
looking at everybody in the room
pretty much everybody's old
enough to remember the movie
called the the graduate
happened years ago
but the main character in the
graduate graduates from college
and he's trying to find a job
rewards find it whatever but a
reason right down but he has one
guy come up to a minute says you
might want you to remember one
thing.
You guys remember what the one
thing watch
the one thing was plastics.
That happened so we're back in
were back in nineteen sixty
eight nineteen sixty nine and
we're talking about plastics
coming into
to staff
and
all the good things it player
six did all the plastics is all
related to what we have here and
and the compounds in plastic in
the compounds in arastalls and
and all of those things show
restrictor you've got a heck of
a job trying to figure this all
out uh i'm hopeful that we can
get hollow and especially canon
because the impact it can and
currently is greater than the
impact at parliament but to get
this figured out because the
federal government
owes the state of new mexico
positive responses to address
the issues that they have
brought to new mexico and i'm
hopeful their day as we move
forward will find the right
solution so thank you madam
chaired and thank you mister.
Thank you.
My questions
a lot were already discussed and
I really appreciate that
but along the same line of how
do we help me uh the federal
government
responsive to the needs of
remediation and then restoration
secretary kenny you mentioned
twenty four million dollars um
is that what is needed in one
year that you've asked for in
your budget.
Yes we've asked for twenty four
million dollars special
appropriations
we're not sure exactly
between outside council with the
ages officer the dear new mexico
DO j and then are expert
witnesses and putting on a
follow court crash trial which
were we we want to do I think
that's the past just way to make
the mexicans hall and tackle
this passes you because the
federal government is not going
to stop trying to continue to
make the mexico sacrifice on I
think that's what we need to
move forward whether we spend
that all in one year or over a
couple years remains to be seen
but we want to want fast
litigation and of all child to
happen as soon as possible
i.
All heartedly that I think if we
can do this with the bigger
impact instead of just you know
a million a year
that
we need it to be faster and
better
and I know that it takes a lot
of funds to do that and
trustee
do you
also have that same need for you
know making your case
mounted area thank you for the
question
in each of these situations
where we are in engaged with the
federal government on
this contaminated sites we
continued to hope that the
federal government will take a
collaborative approach with us
we do the research we work with
communities to identify
restoration projects that will
be number one effective in
addressing the injuries and
number two represent the will of
the people who have been
affected so in this situation
with canon we have put together
a package of restoration options
restriction projects I discussed
two of them in my presentation
and we have
we know what they would cost we
are hope that when the
department the united states
department of justice does
engage with the state of new
mexico that they will consider
those early restoration options
as kind of a down payment on
their ultimate liability to the
state and making the community
**** that in the case of cannon
again the the predictions that
estimates of the ogawkrefer to
please are dire and so they're
you know the walker we wait at
the fewer the options and at
some point we will be out of
options for restoring that
occupier and so again we try to
take a clabbative approach or we
hope.
That we can enter into
collaborative discussions with
the department of defense about
that you know in the same
situation with home and like we
are looking at what are
potential early restoration
options that pick it that can
begin
restoring the resource
addressing the injury that we
know has has taken place
so that's always our hope that
the federal government will and
other cases they're you've asked
for him to discuss before this
committee you know there you
know there are solutions and it
own our t we try to be solution
oriented
we have a
small staff relatively small
budget and so we try to focus on
the things that are imminent and
dire
but we're hoping at some point
too again because addressing
sort of longer term bigger
picture items such as those that
senator steinborne has mentioned
thank you and do you rely on
funding from just the state or
is part of
the
restoration cost for your agency
madame chair so to do our work
we reply on general fund
appropriations so the
legislature in the governor's
office have provided general
phone dollars that fund
salaries
and sort of expenses to bike
rent are operating expenses and
over the bit since I have been
in this office of the
legislature has also provided
three point five million dollars
in special appropriations that
allow us that phone are or
assessment find the assessment
finders what we use to do the
research
to prepare our claims and so for
example in the work we've been
doing on cannon we have used
that assessment.
Those assessment five dollars to
do the work to put together a
package for that we can present
to do these are um this is a
solution or a partial solution
so those are special
appropriations are essential to
the work that we do many of
these assessments should we and
they can last song is five seven
years there can be as much they
can cost as much as a million
dollars and so we will also have
a proposal to the legislature
this year to shore up the
assessment fund gent that is
what allows us to
carry on our work when it comes
so that's the assessment fund
when it comes to restoration
the trust you fund has a
restoration sub account that is
funded with dollars that we
receive from settlements or
litigation those dollars by both
federal art state market only be
used prostration projects so
gold king mine for example
thirteen million dollars that we
receive through various
settlements we are that's
that went into the trusty fan
betressed the restoration fund
and we are trying to spend that
down as quickly as possible as
projects come online
online so
yes we could not do our without
the with the support of the
general fund
great thank you and just a real
quickly
have there been any new dairies
or wells that have been affected
in the can
close area.
I think madam trustee
madam chair I think secretary
can should answer that because
it's actually the environment
department that does the data
collection
and so
he will have the most current
information on that
secretary.
Yeah madame chair
we are doing a hundred instead
the we offered the residence a
hundred and fifty private well
water tests will be able we're
doing that work next week and
we'll be able to quantify if
there have been any more private
water wells affected
a number of residents are
complaining about cancer
clusters in the area
so
little nervous to see what these
results will show and in terms
of the dairy industry we have no
additional data that the bloom
has affected in the way art
scott art scopes cowswert
affected largely because of
filtering systems that have been
put on the watering the act
water we are working with
secretary witty on that to make
sure that they're not
anymore cows in fact the dairy
industries and further affected
that's been on challenge
browsers estate trying to deal
with toxic cow carcus is once
you denies and what to do with
those
and frankly like i'm told
frustrated with the department
of defense they think we have
any calculator exist in the
pentagon
because it it is it is a facting
are economy are environment
people told and and just the way
of life and close
thank you.
Nanders
um
how many more wells and you
mention that you're able to test
twenty with the funding you have
how many more wells do you think
need to be tested and how much
more funding are you
could you use.
Chair
thank you
that's a good question I don't
know we could use more funding
and if depending on the data
that we receive from these
twenty wells um
we could possibly we're hoping
that more funding would be made
available to so that we can we
can continue to have to help
support the media there but we
really want to focus on last
year negative since they are
private citizens we're relying
on private citizens to come to
to me two minutes brothers
so that we can know other other
than that we don't really know
how many more wells need to be
tested it's it's very tricky
because because of the wells we
don't want those wills don't
want to be advertised that
property doesn't want to be
advertised because it could
affect their property value and
that's why and also people's
privacy so that's it's kind of
it's kind of a tricky thing to
do so our commissioner santa fe
county commissioner camilla was
to monte and jelly muller of the
who's the p fast coordinator for
santa fe county they're working
with those private citizens and
i've had private citizens
approach me so that where I can
ask request that these world be
tested so it really is the
citizens coming forward and
are working directly with those
communities so I don't have a
good answer for even apologize
for that.
And a ball for their own
protection of their interests as
well as with the wells
thank you so much
thank you secretary canny
don't I think you're
you're not a presenting any
further so thank you for being
with us this morning and
uh madam trustee I guess you'll
be joining us and
in another presentation so thank
you and thank you miss fernandez
also for joining us by zoom and
in your work
thank you.
Thank you.
And next and we're just about an
hour later I apologize thank you
we have a curtain air for space
fuel spilled cleanup
mr
announce
or jdnants and kelsey vicnail
and ryan wartman.
And mr wartman is by zoom.
And mr nance um you're the chief
hazardous waste bureau in
resource protection's division
with nmed correct and um and
kelsey bick now my pronouncing
that right okay you are
environmental manager of the
albuquerque bernalio county
water utility authority and mr
ryan worthman is the fiscal
scientist installation support
section air for civil engineers
center of curtailing near four
space so welcome and thank you
for being patient
do you want to go ahead in order
mr
thing
madam chair committee members
thank you very much for having
us
like I said my name is john
david
recent new achieve your
achievement that has respiral
of starter soft rule quick
think everybody should have the
slides in front of you i'll be
doing just a quick or review
going through the background and
some history of the site just
touched on some high levels of
that and then get into
some current
updates for the buckfills
facility spell
so that second slide just quick
background the contamination
source at the location there was
a spill on leak when over for
several years from their
offloading rack
over period of time consisted of
the aviation gas jeopard
pelansgy before in gp eight and
the the mean driving contaminant
within that is etheling dibro
might and i'll be referring to
it as edb throughout the
presentation
so slide three
this is just
a simplified graphic car just
showing what I was going on the.
The still itself
to the south on the right hand
side you have curtain air for
space there was a release from
their offloading rack it did
migrate through the subsurface
got to the ground water and has
migrated to the north
alright are slight for
just covering some regulatory
history of the site and november
nineteen ninety nine or four
space discovered they had a fuel
leak at their offloading rack
with that moving for two
thousand and two thousand ten
under the perview a groundwater
quality bureau there are several
preliminary investigations and
entering measures where put in
place to try and contain the non
contamination at that time
moving forward in two thousand
ten the regulatory oversight was
moved from the groundwater
quality bureau over the
hazardous ways bureau and that
has been under hazard's west
bureau
from two thousand ten decrease
like five.
So the sites being overseen
through the resource
conservation recovery act under
ricker is also being regulated
under the new mexico hazardous
waste act and regulations within
the new mexico administration
code all of those are outlined
with the
issued record permit to the two
curtain air for space and that
permit is what is governing the
correct of corrective action
process for this this site also
with other sites but um you know
focusing on book fields for
this.
Next life the site six
real quick just kind of or
review of the ricker corrective
action process it starts with an
investigation fees where
nature and extent is identified
understanding what sources are
what contamination were dealing
with where and how it is once
that has been defined it moves
into a correct of measures the
valuation that evaluation goes
through and tests and determines
different technologies different
ways of means of how to correct
the issue that was identified in
an investigation.
That
uh evaluation that moves into
correct a measured selection
where
the appropriate
response is been selected it is
a reviewed and if approved by
everyone then it moves into an
implementation and then the
process for final cleaner clean
up is initiated.
Moving the slight seven
just a randoms we are at the
till end of the investigation
fees of this process
for this site there's been a lot
of work there's been ongoing
sense july two thousand almost a
hundred and eighty ground water
monitoring wells have been
installed in the area
sixty seven saw the per
monitoring wells and all of
these wells and these data
points and
sampling events has been about
eighty five sampling offense
since july four two thousand to
current all of those data or
has generated work plans and
reports communications and a lot
of documents are to be
developed a written and reviewed
that's a problem approximately
about a hundred and sixty
documents has been produced for
this effort since two thousand
next slide
so slide eight current progress
we what we're serving here is
the etb plume in two thousand
and fifteen to two thousand and
twenty three so that there is an
interim measures that was into
implemented
starting in two thousand and
fifteen has been ongoing and
running which is a groundwater
extraction system it extracts
groundwater from the leading
edge him from within the plane
brings it to the surface treats
it and then has re injection and
also a land surface applications
of clean water upgradient of the
of the plom area that systems
been are ongoing and has a shown
progress for reducing the
overall edb footprint and this
is the footprint of
exceedences above the screening
levels so home it is greatly
reduced at that footprint down
there are some leading well
extraction wells that are
actually been pumping clean
water.
It's been not detected for
eighty b.
Next lied on side nine
there are also other containers
that we are monitoring are being
seen as a
is a one specific one that we
are looking at
bending is not as mobile in the
subserve for sending ground
water as it be years etb is
party mobile and is the leading
constituent for downgredient
bindings a little bit more
locked up so it's not migrating
as fast however we are
monitoring it on making sure
that
it it's not migrating in any
locations that it would be what
don't want it to be keeping an
eye on it make insurer that it
is included in our evaluations
and also moving towards our
correct measures in the future.
The circle in here's is not
actually the bloom boundary but
just circling the
cluster of monitoring wealth
that have exceedences for bids.
Moving on
slide ten
you've had a lot of progress on
site throughout the history
throughout the history of the
site are there spent non sight
source
source area characterization on
the first entering measures that
was put in
a
started two thousand five two
thousand fifteen it was the sort
of a per extraction
there were
column ice units internal
combustion indians which were
basically running off of fuel
that was being extracted from
the
from the sort of beneath so
pulling up
gas papers and extracting it
that way
there's been multiple pallet
studies testing the environment
of the subsurface making sure
you know trying to gather
information see what works in
that doesn't for inputs into the
corrective measures and there is
ongoing monitoring of small
vapor and of groundwater graph
grandmother concentration in
condemning.
Are that monitoring is ongoing
they currently are actually in
the field right now conducting
saw the per android monitoring
next live
so the current status
approved a revised oil they
permonitoring work plan that was
approved in january twenty
twenty four this year
this new plan
has brought forward more
accepted process for so we'll be
persampling are primarily with
the amount of pergent of the
soil gas
with prior to collecting those
samples
that method is like that more
accepted process and is
providing a more confident
dataset that we can utilise for
determining our.
Our concentrations within the
area so we can have inputs for
determining nature and ex.
Along with that we have received
a revised ground water and
monitoring or planned up was
received in september of this
year
that planned is actually just
combining multiple other plans
and procedures that have been
previously approved that air
force is following for
groundwater monitoring but this
revised plan combines those into
one document which
makes it more efficient to
implement and also to review and
to regulate to so it is it's a
and improvement to the process
and i'm helping for a better
implementation
along with that we have reviewed
four documents are related to
installing additional saw gas
and ground water monitoring
wells are these are additional
wills or to aid and
data gaps that we've had and
that we've been identified in
our conceptual site model so we
have those are in the works and
and moving forward with them
are flight well.
Getting with her continuing with
the current status airports that
did propose adjustments to the
the current interim measures the
ground water extraction and
treatment system are these
adjustments were proposed to
change the dynamics of the extra
action to try and paul
additional contaminance
with the with the plume boundary
that plan exceeding boundary
shrinking
the idea was to change up the
pump rates to try and pull in
additional contamination for a
treatment
although immediate data prove
that initial adjustment there
were
multiple changes that we wanted
to have happened with additional
monitoring additional
groundwater water level testing
and recording of that
information
which was needed to just a keep
at handle on how the groundwater
system is a whole would be
changing during that
pumping rates in the different
locations for extra action the
growth is very dynamic in that
area and we want to make sure
that any changes would not be
have an adverse effect and cause
a loss of capture of the plan
after multiple discussions with
the air force and also
discussions with stake holders
we air force ultimately term and
not making changes at this
moment
going to revisit it further down
the line once we closer to
corrected measures.
So the system currently is is
operating as it has been over
the course of um since two.
Next slides like thirteen
can a balance and back to the
the news to will gas data
they are sampling underneath the
new revised so a gas monitoring
workplan
those data are
consider or has more competence
in the data set because of our
the more robust
sampling procedures that are
outlined in it that data said
will be utilised to help bill
data gaps from the initial fees
one rfy and also help to have
billion and finalize or
conceptual site model those data
also are going to be utilized
for statistical analysis of the
older data set that was
collected under your old
workplan
those data there are some
questions with
how representative of those data
are
from the gold work plan this new
dataset will allow us to check
trend analysis checked a
statistical and um variations
between the two sets and
determined if the older said is
representative of
sight conditions or if there are
more of a qualitative data set
but the new data in this
analysis will drive what data is
included in the phase to rfy to
fill those data gaps and move
forward.
Slide fourteen
so that phase two rfy arm
because there will be filling in
data gaps and once we have our
nature to content nature and
extent fully defined I will be
moving the program forward into
a corrective measures evaluation
of formally the valuation the
different technologies knowing
what the breadth of our
contamination and
the conditions are.
With that we are currently in
media is currently working with
a third party contractor we've
been doing this for a little
while now and just to make sure
we have enough resources and
technical assistance in
providing the reviews and if
isn't for the program itself
just do keep it moving and then
there's no hold ups on our end
when air forces submitting their
own proposals and there their
reports so we are working with
that we are actively hiring as
well trying to build back up our
internal resources for the
future but we do have this third
party contractor that is.
To add us with our.
Slide fifteen.
Well another thing that we're
working on is we are frequently
communicating with the air force
are keeping communications very
high to
identify any data gaps if we see
something were communicating
with the air force air forces
communicating with us with data
that the receiving and will keep
in that discussion open so we
can quickly resolve any issues
that might come up identify
additional data gaps so they can
be addressed quickly and in in
the effort to keep the program
moving forward instead of having
long periods of time where you
know there's
a paper discussion back and
forth we can keep that
communication moving make a
negative determination decision
and then move it forward
along with that I am new to the
bureau I do have a commitment
myself to keep communications
open and dialogues going with
not only the air forced also
stakeholders for the base
themselves there is a lot of
people that have great input and
having that extra perspective as
we're moving through the process
will allow the group as a whole
identify anything that might be
missed so we can
have some confidence with the
public and with day colders so
we can you know solve the solve
the problem and get the
corrective measures than
actually start fixing the issue
that is that hand.
So that is where we are right
now from the enemy d side
and that's all I have with my
presentation thank you very
much.
Thank you and we'll take
questions after everyone the
panel gets a chance to speak
respect now
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee I
really appreciate the
opportunity to come here to
speak to you all today
about de bulk fuels facility up
your leak from their perspective
of the water thirty as a major
site stay holder
it's briefly i'm the
environmental manager for the
water thirty in my role with you
to leave to oversee an
implements hours for a smarter
protection program so I rather
than focusing it on the quality
of the water after it's internet
distribution system my job is to
insure and promote practices
that keep the water that we
intend to use for drinking water
safe so we can access it easily
when what's needed
go to the second side
I just want to provide a quick
review of who the stakeholders
are at the site this is a really
simple stakeholder model where
the center circle is really the
problem that we're dealing with
in this case of soil and
groundwater impacted by the jet
few week are and then the state
holders that are around the dark
circle or
overlap and very ingress
undependent on how impacted they
are by the problem so the water
authority the va hospital it's
right next to base we are the
statements that are most
adversely impacted by both the
problem and decisions that are
made around the problem and
we're really with conventionally
defined as a stay holder
another stay called if it's
still important but it has a
little bit less to overlap with
the problem our regulators who
are ultimately responsible for
preventing a minimising on the
risk that is posed by the
problem at hand artists of
course the owner and the creator
of the problem which in this
case is the united states air
force and then not always
considered a stakeholder but
still has importance in this
picture are contractors are
because they can be february
affected by decisions made
around the site particularly
through economic game all three
of our agencies use contractors
to support us and are analysis
with the site.
If we go to the next slide I
wanted to give you a little bit
more of an introduction to the
water authority I know everyone
on this panels from different
parts of the state this map on
the slide is showing our service
area are we serve over suddenly
seventy thousand residents are
in albuquerque and the
surrounding burning or county
and we do so by i'm providing
over thirty billion gallons of
clean drinking water to this
service area which we meet that
the man using a combination of
groundwater and service water
resources
what I want to highlight that I
think is unique about a system
that I often don't see in other
systems that we operate a fully
blended distribution system so
water that is pumped from wells
for instance on the west side of
the river ultimately will be
served to residents all over all
the kirky it's not just
localised to one area so
whenever we are faced with a
known ground water contamination
sites are just the current air
for a space site which is the
largest one in our service
area we are naturally are very
concerned about it being cleaned
up so that we can insure that we
have access to a resource to
provide our drinking water to
our customers
we go to slide forward
you're going to hear a lot of
site background from everyone on
the span i'm going to be very
brief
this is the twenty five year old
project since it was discovered
I leak itself as occurring for a
decades water three I include I
included a hand out in your
slides that kind of gives a
human view of what's on the
slide but basically this is just
the three d rendering conceptual
model of what the site looks
like underground and what the
issues are that we're feasing
and so in orange this is the
field that's impacting both soil
and water
the blue in this figure is a
groundwater interaction for and
then brown is solving and cut it
off to the right hand corner of
this block diagram you can see
very long dark gray line that
represents a water supply well
in a depth that we operate them
at ah just kind of given a
visual picture of what we're
looking at here.
Um as has been mentioned
then there are many fuel
components that are of concern
and are currently contamined in
grown water and soil but are the
one that is most reserve is I
think I promise b for shorts as
dd mentioned it is a highly
mobile field component and I
actually might agree to see
without a half mile of our
drinking water supply well
within the area so national the
water produce very concerned
about i'm making sure that that
migration is completely stopping
as never allowed to progress
further so we engaged with
understand the site to and
should about to explain
again you'll hear about the
record correct of action process
a lot I really like to break it
down into three steps i'm the
first which is still worry
mister mentioned I might see
investigation fees are
information collect problems and
we can figure out how to clean
it up that's what a cruise and
the second fees are bricker were
myth methods are evaluated to
see what would be best for clean
up and then finally on final
clean up occurs I want to method
as selected but I want to
highlight
about the ricker correct of
action processes that it allows
for a thing called inner a
measures which are really
unproactive actions that
responsible parties like the air
force contage to prevents the
migration of contamination and
ultimately minimise the risk I
had that back in termination
poses and these are always
available to the responsible
party to implement a while the
record currently have action
processes curing out and
ultimately an ideally they would
be rolled in to final clean up
so that kind of saves a little
bit of time while the regulatory
process is taking place to
address the problem kind of in
real time before it entering
into final clean up
a figure to the next slide on
side five this is sort of
assumed inverse
slice of the intermeasures that
have been implemented at the
site
mr nants mentioned the solving
retraction system this was a
very effective system that
actually targets the fuel in the
ground i'm above the water table
which is the red line on this
graph.
That was operated for almost ten
years and was turned off for
twenty fifteen and then are
currently operating was the
groundwater pumped treat system
under specifically targets the
effling diabete and why that edp
that's migrated far away from
the week source so this doesn't
actually target any other fuel
components at only
manages this disabled db that's
moved far away from the
initially current and I wanted
to take a moment to highlight an
area of collaboration in the
past on this project between the
water thirty in the air force
the
when the ground and property
system was required to be put in
place around twenty fourteen
twenty fifteen there was an
active stakeholder group that
met with the airforce regularly
and we all coordinated on
developing the ground what a
model that was ultimately used
to
design and in place the first
extraction on the water pretty
expended investigate
considerable resources to
developing that model on that
was used in the first situation
all and the subsequent three
that were that followed
the gall and ideally with these
turn our measures that they
would be operating together
concurrently because one is
targeting the actual fuel that
ultimately disaster the
groundwater and the other ones
really just target in the disold
fuel let's move very far away
from the initial leak site but
because there is no fuel
treatment through active um
sorry streaming like swell paper
extraction ground water
contamination is able to persist
essentially the few old disolves
and interact with groundwater it
passes that red line and enters
the groundwater system and in in
as eventually university for
the water pretty want to have a
better understanding of really
what this impact looked like for
us and how long are water
supplier could be impacted and
by the site and we just wanted
to give framework and
conceptualize really that life
of time that we're talking about
here and so if nothing were to
be done and we were to sort this
the problem sit there and the
fuel sit there in the ground we
were looking at about eight
hundred years for the problem to
go away and that's assuming a
lot of different things.
I'm even with only the
extraction system operating at
four capacity the clean of
timeline was still a hundred
years and so any any effort to
treat that fuel the source of
the contimination dramatically
reduces the amount of time it
takes to clean up the site which
in turn are allows us to have
sure access to the three source
that we currently are able to
access because it's contaminated
with jeff your
we go to the next slide on slide
six
thousand three as the one of the
major six stakeholders at the
site and we're very proactive
and ensuring that our customer
is drinking water remains safe
to drink and is not impacted by
this fuel spill and so we have a
few different things that we do
to ensure that one of those is
that we voluntarily sample all
of the supply walls in the
immediate vicinity of this site
soon sure that there are no feel
components are in them and to
date we've never had a detection
of full components
we spend considerable resources
consolidating the data that the
air force collects in using it
to conduct technical site
analysis as that we can have a
better understanding of
what's going on the say and if
their actions at the side are
protective of the ground what a
resource and we also
spend what about a time when
we're reviewing the statute i'm
sharing with the air force and
ever we find any issues on the
particulars they can correct
that now for the future
through the generous
contribution of the state
legislators through the capital
outlay program we were also able
to install a monday well but the
water thirty ownes and we call
this data gap monday
it's installed on this black
diagram just to the left of that
supply well and what it really
does is allows us to monitor our
source water for any edp
migrating at deps and to date we
have nights had a detection of
which is great and what the
swell really does for us now is
it services and early detection
well if we ever were to take
its located in the place we have
a lot of time to engage with the
air force and any to you to
insure that actions have taken
to protect some.
And prevent any further spread
and then lastly a really
important component of or
engagement with the sales
coordinating with local state
and federal stakeholders i'm to
ensure that we have effective
cycling up miss hurts debins
mentioned this idea restoration
of versus mediation and what
we're really after four alground
what are source is restriction
that we want to see no fuel
components left in this ground
water so we can retain full
access
if you go to the next slide on
slight seven um through
engagement and over the years
that we've been involved with
this project the one i've
already had several concerns
still that we believe would
benefit the project if they were
addressed my parents have appear
essentially we would really like
to see
the source cleaner because
without it we will have got a
contimination persists
additionally there wise
meaningful engagement with the
water forty on site decisions on
but that has not happened in
some time and we would like to
see some are more meaningful
involvement with the water for
you as a key site to stay holder
both with technical discussions
and insight making decisions and
again this is because our goal
is to see our resource restored
where the most impacted state
sites recorder and are
ultimately when we're let that
decisions were the ones that are
impact of have the deal with the
aftermath of the decisions
and then what i'm gonna touch on
in the rest that's presentation
is
what we've found every year's
often um progressed towards
clean up can be overstated by a
incomplete data and analysis at
the site
so in slide e i'm just providing
an example of it mr nancy
mentioned at the air forest had
provided notice to them that
they wanted to modify the
operations of the public treat
system so and the summer they
had written a proletter of
intent to turn off to the four
extraction wells that are
operating to treat this edb out
the aucrifer are the idea as it
would have increased pumping at
the remaining too well as it
would be left on and then the
two thousand shut off would be
idled to turn on when needed.
Um we are very concerned about
this because naturally we don't
want to see migrate away from
where it currently is we found
that the air forced enough
provide I technical
justification for this change we
did not find a behind a robust
analysis of what the impact
could be on both short term and
long term and it was unclear
what would really trigger a turn
on these extraction wells once
after they were ticking online
these concerns are not unfounded
when the system was first
designed and implemented on
twenty fifteen i'm the name d
required a very robust and all
cease to be conducted by the air
force to ensure that the inner
measure wouldn't spread
contamination or create a
further under risk to the supply
wells and so what i'm showing
here on this figure it's just a
very simple um
blob diagram the cut the size
and the color represents the
number of eb detections at a
monday well on the left is
before the pumpetry system what
in place on the rate is after
and the key thing here is wow
etb has been pulled back and
that plumbers been contained to
some degree there was still a
little bit of breakthrough i'm
as highlighted by those stats
they're circled and read those
are new occurrences of that
happened after the public tree
system went online and was fully
operational with four structure
and wells in twenty eighteen so
it is an everyone's best
interest to ensure that all care
is taken to
make sure that there is no
risk of that being worse we know
it can happen and it's important
to mitigate those risks when
decisions are made to change
operations on the next slide and
slide nine just gone into a
little bit more detail on the
public treat system and how what
it does for migration therefore
succeeded goal for the system is
to provide protection of water
supply wells by how don't
capture a result fees
are utilizing well pumping and
so.
Their proposal to turn off to
the extraction wells it was
unclear if it was really
supported in and meeting that
objective of not allowing eb to
spread and so we engaged with
both any median air force to be
asked for some more technical
justification we asked for a
conversation to occur so we
could better understand what the
decisions or what the
justification was behind this
decision to determine if it was
I have a main sense that it was
an acceptable risk for the water
authority and what we found was
that therefore analysis left out
some important information on
the first and foremost as that
it is exists in the area outside
of that county yellow box on the
slide exists in the source area
and the in the air force did not
model what could happen to that
etb if they were to turn off to
extractuals and increase popular
the romanian two and that's a
big concern because we don't
want to see believe that area
and yellow and enter into new
parts of the awkward for the
other thing that is also
concerned into the water thirty
is
force appeared to do their
modeling in their analysis and
have accumulated did not
consider the impact of the
regional supply wells and their
impact of the pumping of them on
the dynamics of this ploman and
how to be moved to the apple for
and this is these two issues are
property through many analysis
of the airforce does on a semi
basis and unfortunately lead to
the conclusion that there would
be no eta breakthrough if you
attraction was were turned off
and so as they mentioned because
we are responsible providing
clean drinking water to a large
number of people there's a
pretty small margin of error in
the situation we don't want to
see the cd further impacts a
resource it's already strange by
climate change and you know
demands on the occupier etc so
i'm the next slide i'm just
providing some details on a very
simple analysis of the water it
already did we engage with one
of our contractors to just
conduct a simple modeling
exercise to determine and
understand what the
possibilities could be from this
proposed change.
This is a no way defender of its
conservative i'm look at the at
the
population outcomes what I want
to highlight that we did that
was different from the air
forces analysis is one we
considered the full extensive
including it in the source area
where the were the leak
initially current and we also
incorporated pumping from our
supply well I very simply on the
left hand side this is a across
section of what the system looks
like if all foreign structure
will be to remain on essentially
to be as contained and we don't
see it a my reading beyond the
extent of those for extraction
wells
but when two attraction walls
are turned off and even with the
increased pumping of the
remaining to what we found is
that there could be breakthrough
of a b towards our supply wells
i'm an impact in new portions of
the opportunity between twenty
thirty five years and this is a
situation of the water three
wants to avoid and and ensure
that our occupier is not further
impacted by some in the
situation like this on the rate
so this is just an example
I I want to highlight that the
one or three points two provide
indedicate resources to
understanding this project in a
ultimately we do a best maintain
up to date on information and in
remain flexible their ability to
analyze things on the fly to
determine what the risks are
from the site to our source
water and we're willing to bring
that information to the table
i'm in discussions and that's
one of things that we ask for on
her next slide this is my final
slide is summarising with a few
asks that the water three blues
would be have benefit to this
project the first is to
resume act of clean up of the
remaining fuel again this can be
achieved now through
intermeasure while the record
correct of action process
curious out even though we're
about to close out the
investigation fees the next week
of the project you can be fast
can be slow it just can it
depends on on the what happens
with it and so.
The longer than this problem
sits in the ground the worst it
gets the heart of just to clean
up and we'd like to see some
proactive measures taken again
to address this fuel about the
water table and we're not asking
for anything complicated there
are tried and true technologies
that are used to buy mom and pop
gas stations across the country
to deal with your on the ground
just a matter of skill and the
instance
as echoed in other presentations
we're also really looking for
some clab
and engagement with us as a stay
holder at the site we would like
to be involved in a more
meaningful way in technical
discussions and decision making
again where the most impacted
stay colder at this site and
ultimately this is
drinking what this is drinking
water that we really can't touch
because it has jeffue on it and
so
we would like to come to the
table and have doubtful
discussions with the air force
and about our concerns and where
to come from and understand each
other and technical level so we
can make decisions together and
support action of the site
moving forward what happens now
is airforce proposes something
we I hear about it then we write
a letter tending me with them to
raise it to the air for us but
it's a very long argument's
process and could be
sped up if we could just i'll be
in the same room talk to each
other
and a new ask for this project
that I think would be a huge
benefit to it is having
dedicated regulatory staff to
the jetfield projects
specifically and this is a model
that
uses for lost alamos national
labs regulation and it's a model
that I believe would be really
effective at this facility as
well it's a very large site
there is a lot of stakeholders
the latter data impacts a lot of
water and a having dedicated
regulatory stuff would be a
benefit to both anybody in the
air force and us because there's
increased review time there's
better communication we have a
knowledge attention within the
within the department and
ultimately I think it would eat
this site moving for it so are
without I will send the
questions one time allows after
the last presentation and I
appreciate your time.
Thank you very much mr worthman
are you on to.
Yes I am can you all hear me of
my cameras on to her yes.
Okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee so as we've already
gotten presentations on the site
here I will go through my slides
as quickly as possible for you
all.
So starting.
From the top here again waiting
our intermeasures progress from
twenty fifteen to twenty twenty
three this is a key intermeasure
that's installed to ensure
protectiveness of the drinking
water supply well of the water
authority as well as the
currently wells and the veterans
are fair hospital wells which
are even more approximate to the
site contaminate.
So this is what we're looking at
here is what we call it a brown
water contaminate ploom so this
is where fuel has dissolved into
the ground water and has moved
with the ground water.
To the northeast here and what
we're mapping here is all the
exceedences of ethering dot
bromid in what it's exceeding is
the maximum contaminant limit
and that's the in epa standard
that is our are gold post for
remediation and restration
projects because that's the
level they've said at which
water is protective or not
protective for drinking
consumptions of these are
drinking water standards there
implemented by the new mexico
environment department under our
resource conservation recovery
experiment the ricker permit so
that is our goal of where we're
using the make risk based
decision making for this project
again to see this excess of our
interest measure in a different
format if you go to my slide for
here it just shows the
that.
A removal of I brought mine that
we see in our monitoring wells
which is this orange line and
that's getting closer to zero
this is just looking at that
northern portion that we're
targeting with the intermeasure
and then we're looking at the
actual athleting dibro my
considerations were observing
coming in to our treatment
system and that's ultimately
removed through brand newer
activated carpet and then that
water is discharged for either
irrigation purposes are actually
recycled into the apple for for
reuse.
So rick recreative action
process going to slight five
year quickly we've already
talked on the overall major
milestones but I do want to
highlight here.
What an intermediaries and what
a goal of an interest measure is
and these are specifically
geared short term remedial
strategies to cut off vibration
and prevent any environment to
all our human exposures of these
are done before and during the
cricket of measures evaluation
and they're done leading up to a
more robust remediation system
which is part of the corrected
measures implementation phase
which is the primary goal it's
to get to that fame so we can
implement the most robust system
possible to restore the site.
The.
And again a conceptual site
model this is that the third one
you all have seen so very
similar to the ones we've seen
before this site is dynamic it's
been impacted by a low lowering
and rising water table which is
created what we call the smears
owned at the side which is the
source areas impacted by that so
this is all part of this
conceptual site model the
investigation phase
understanding which will be
utilized in the correct of
measures evaluation to gear what
remedial strategies will work.
One thing here to highlight is
there was another interest
measure that was in presented in
the other presentations and that
was a soil removal activity
where three thousand cupic yards
are soil was removed and that
was to protect our airmen as
well as contractors that operate
the fuel yard so they couldn't
come into direct contact with
contaminated soils so that's
been restored as an intro
measure as well and then another
thing to highlight is in our
recent data gap activities we've
collected are many cores in this
source stereo did understand
what the fuel the that migrated
down to the water table is and
what we've observed there is we
haven't seen that continue with
a few conversation it's more
absorbed to soils and dispersed
across the source area but we
don't see a gigantic few
it's been it's been absorbed to
soils or spread out and that's
partially due to this
fluctuating water table and you
can see there is still a few or
that will need to be addressed
as part of the price of measures
evaluation but it is dispersed
and spread out through the
tourist area.
And then again another
conceptual side model here well
this is the actual site data
presented in a a vertical format
just to show some of the scale
that we're talking about to this
fuel traveled about four hundred
and fifty feet before contacted
groundwater and you can see
we've put the albuquerque plaza.
How we're here to show you the
vertical
they can depth there to the
ground water and were also
highlighting our monitoring
wells I think mister nanced it a
great job explaining the
importance of our monitoring
data and their monitoring
networks because that ultimately
is telling us where contaminate
is where they expose your
pathways are you know how this
women is moving and making the
necessary responses to that
information as we continue to
collect monitoring data we have
additionally the united states
geologic service has installed
sent no wells for this site
where they strategically placed
him in between
water supply wells and this
contaminate blue to be that
early warning detection system
where we can course correct
before any potential impact the
water supply happened we do
monthly sampling of these of the
approximal at drinking water
wells which include them the
veterans affairs hospital as
well as currently an air for
space wells and no drinking
water well has been impacted to
date from this contaminated
blue.
And again going down to my slide
eight here
re iterating some of the key
aspects of this project and both
and immediate and the air force
are focused on getting to the
corrective measures phases of
this project is that is where a
more room bus remediation system
can be rolled out and
implemented again this the next
hurdle is concluding the
investigation phase which we are
at the tail and our hope is to
submit a face to rfy ricker
facility investigation report
that will be allowed to conclude
investigation face based on the
media's review and approval of
that document and this will be
compiling data gap
investigations done since twenty
sixteen as well as all
monitoring data collected since
twenty sixteen and again we're
making risk based data drive a
decision so along with this or
if I once we understand the
entire nature and extent of the
contamination we would also like
to submit an updated risk
assessment we have one approved
from twenty seventeen that
utilized data then but we
continue to cook more data and
the update will just be
utilizing the newer data to
again update the risk assessment
to make sure that we're taking
all the precautions necessary to
eliminate risk at the same.
And
you know where we're continuing
to work with enemy day moving
forward with the cme I would
like to point out if we say
concluded in investigation phase
that does not mean a stop on
collecting it monitoring data
again that is the most critical
piece of information we have at
this site it doesn't mean we're
going to stop installing
additional more monitoring
points if say conditions change
or there's an expansion in the
plom that is unanticipated we
will be collecting data.
As we move throughout the
correct measures of value wait
and it's more just a regulatory
stop to wear we do we have
enough information to design a
remedial approach that will be
robust and satisfactory and
won't be you know that we can
implement it in the correct
measures that implementation
phase after the cmeas reviewed
and approved by the new mexico
environmental department.
And i'll just end with this site
i'm wine slide again there's a
lot of information and here this
is investigation has been going
on for a long time on the site a
lot of different activities and
all of this informs us as we
move forward into the correct of
measures evaluation we've done
small scale pilot coast to help
inform one blood technology so
actually work when we implement
them at this site specifically
and there's a lot of information
and that'll be utilized as we
continue to move forward on this
project and a lot of activity
that has been done.
And.
With that that's my presentation
so we can.
Opened up for questions thank
you.
Yeah.
Thank you for us we have senator
st.
Anyone else they came out chair
thank you all for your
presentation.
Have a few questions for each of
you
so jd could ask you a question
first of all is the environment
department happy with the pace
of this project to the
techniques the approach
of your characterize
the feeling about this project
made on chair mrperiod vast year
arm
outside coming in to the
position I am in and looking at
progress over the years
is not
very happy with how much
progress has been made over
twenty five years at disaster
site has been known to have this
leak
I have a commitment from my my
perspective in from my
opposition to
help move that process along
expeditiously and to try and get
the communication up and going
to listen to stakeholders as
well and so we can move as a
group instead of having
differences that take years to
resolve we're able to actually
resolve those in before to get
an actual clean up effort until
going
I do feel that the people in
involved with the air force and
with other stakeholders involved
especially water utility
authority and their expertise
and their ex their
outside perspective in your
protecting their resource I
believe that is all good
information that can
contribute to that process to
make sure that we are actually
scientifically and technically
working towards a good
defensible corrective action
thank you in madam chair gitty
how much it seems like the one
point in time the federal
government that there were maybe
there was a settlement I don't
know why the number hundred
million dollars out my head that
there was some sort of
settlement.
With the state of new mexico and
they had to write a big check to
us
in addition obviously the
project is on my misremembering
that or was funds given that the
state or was it more just an
admission of gilter
something big happen a few years
ago
unfortunate i'm not up exactly
on that piece but I can
definitely i'll get you then
information k maybe calcium as
the answer now okay I might have
just dreamed that one night the
big headline I don't million
dollars but seemed like there
was some sort of breakthrough of
a mission of
capability from the us therefore
something happened but was a
while back again
there is a reason I was asking
that question which is you know
the amount the amount of funds
that have come to the state and
kind of getting to a missignals
suggestion that we have a
regulatory point person be put
on this project but.
Yeah you know we
been on this committee you know
we deal with low salamus to and
this gives a lot of ptsd to the
chromiums plume there where we
spend decades saying we're still
trying to characterize the
problem in meanwhile while we're
doing that you have all these
threats out there saying the
funds of public others now in
this case we're saying we have
wells were monitoring we hope
you know it doesn't impact the
citizens of alba kirky or the
veterans hospital or these
different energies.
The.
And the longer we take to
remediate at the more exposure
we have that at some point
something's gonna go wrong and
someone will be impacted by but
I realize he seems to take a
long period of time so
I guess the question to
ryan
is at what point do you think
the rfi will be complete so that
you are will move on to final
clean up phase.
Yes we're basically right there
at the
sorry thank you for the question
the senator in manager but we're
we're right there at the edge of
the end of the investigation
phase the air forces positions
we have enough information
available to a value remedial
systems right now and roll into
that correct measures
implementation phase but again
this needs this information is
before we bettered by an
immediate and are there state
colder so we're committed right
now to getting the data quality
up to the standard they need to
get to that same conclusion and
once we have that data quality
and represent this iron doubt
then we'll be rolling out the
phase to rfi which like I said
during my presentation is the
document that should and
investigation phase and then
once we get to that cricket and
measures evaluation will only be
a handful of years away from
getting to
practice measures implementation
which will be you know where we
actually start getting the full
blown treatment systems in the
ground
and let me ask you.
So so kelsey heard you loud and
clear in your presentation where
you expressed it you would love
it if the water authority were
more involved in had more
opportunity to to contribute
have you been able to see any of
the data related to the day that
collection or contributing two
ideas for what kinds of data
need to be
collected etc
madam chair and mrperiod vice
chart yes so once the your force
completes their
their monitoring and once it is
better by their internal
processes it goes public and
we do get access to the data on
a quarterly basis we have an
internal database that we update
regularly but it was not an easy
prices to get to that point it's
in a good place now but it took
many years of
back and forth and it you need
to get the data arm and at the
frequency that we get it now but
we do have access to witness how
we do our house because it is
purely from there forces data on
if we supplement it it's using
our contractors and publicly
better middle east and models
that have been developed by the
usgs to supplements the date
about the air force provides
that we can you
look at it from different
english glad at madame chair mam
is there any more input that you
would like as a water authority
to the process
as we move forward
I appreciate that yes I mean
what was happening for many
years at this site excuse me
madam chair and survive what was
happened for many years of the
site as there was
some technical collaboration
where people would meet and
discuss
I will give the example of the
groundwater models that were
developed for the same because
it's a really good one about
time there were competing models
and there was a lot of argument
about whose model was best which
will be supposed to use and this
group taken came together and
had very independent
discussions.
To ultimately come to the
conclusion that you know this
model is means that the needs
the stake holders meets means of
the air force sat around we're
going to use that and moving
forward
that type of collaboration
hasn't happened in many years I
think the last really meaningful
engagement that we've had with
the air force to kind of try to
technically engage was
back in you know twenty eighteen
twenty nineteen era and since
then we just really haven't had
the opportunity to have these
discussions and often will have
to take the information compiled
put into a memo instant it's for
consideration
so do you feel like things are
in a better place now
message her madam chairman mr
rice chair I think that there is
potential for them to be in a
lot better place at the moment
we are not involved in technical
discussions we have to really
fight to have conversations with
the air force about their
proposal to turn off those two
extraction will which was
concerning to us because that is
an impact that could have
significant repercussions for
our source water so
I I don't feel like they're
where we'd like to see them yet
but I am hopeful that we can get
to that place.
Well sometimes we attempt to be
armed chair mediators here in in
this role that we're in so
clearly here you're really
important stay holder there and
you know so I would just
throw out a gratus comment here
to an media that the air force
that it seems like it would be
very good to invite
their water authority to the
table as you conclude these
enter and water measures that
these interim characterization.
So important to get the right
data so important as the right
question so important to look at
it with fresh eyes so that were
really comfortable with the data
set moving forward when then
when we make final
recommendations so.
Would encourage you to be
inclusive in that process and
invite them to the table in
those discussions but.
Is that something that feels
like a good idea to you
gentlemen.
Jd and write.
Madam chair mr vast year like I
said during my presentation a
recently started in the position
in may I commitment is to up
that communication level
during the initial
I just meant our proposal that
mean that information was
communicated back and forth we
were able to schedule
presentation by the air force
inviting water authority
there are several meetings that
occur I think monthly that they
are also pretty too for the
meeting I think it's a great
idea as we're moving forward
especially when we start looking
at
a corrective measures and in the
the different technologies in
the different procedures having
an additional data especially
the adjacent production well
field data and any changes that
might be proposed or how they're
pumping rates are going to
affect the localised area where
the plume is those data are
extremely important and yes I
definitely welcome that outside
information sounds good well I
appreciate that and
rain has that sound to you.
Clams madame chair and mister
revised her out just add that
this is always been a position
of bars is collaboration and
getting the best experts on
there to make the best decisions
possible and one of our
struggles in the past where we
start to hitting a roadblock in
some of that collaboration was
when we would have these
meetings and bring all our
technical experts we weren't
seeing that getting rolls over
into the regulatory framework
for the ricker process of that
something that i'd love to work
with mr nance as we start having
these more collaborated meetings
is getting it translated into a
work plan or deliverable
document because then that's
what we can actually implement
and roll out to to make sure
that you know these
collaborative efforts are are
for not you can actually go
straight into field work and you
know robust studies in decision
making
well thank you.
To that I appreciate it and down
I think it'll be beneficial so
hopefully that opens them to
worse and
whatever so many just one final
thing
this pick now pick up
your presentation you talk about
the
active treatment of the
remaining fuel in the ground
as a layman is there a reason
why we're not doing that mister
warmin.
Thank you for that question
chairman mister vice chair there
so under my presentation
identifying what an interest
measure is so in and twenty
seventeen we had an approved
risk assessment that showed that
there is a ground water risk
because we have those
exceedences in the ground water
which you all saw in the blue
maps so that is the risk of the
project for soil vapor there is
some sort of paper contamination
at depth that could likely
impact the ground water but we
already have ground water
determination and so an
intermediaries to cut off that
exposure badly and that is what
our current intro measure is
doing and with the sole vapor
extraction system temple met
right now it'll likely be part
of the correct measures
evaluation but it would be a
more a fiscal responsible
implementation of it to do it
can jointly with additional
source area ground water
mediation and that would all be
part of the correct and measures
evaluation but if there's ever
risk observed from sole vapor
than we will take the necessary
steps to cut off that expose
your best way under the
intermeasure provision of our
permit
okay.
There is an I wished you
good progress on this project
and expeditious project as we
try to protect new mexico
citizens and are water here
thank you very much thank you
representative block.
Thank you so much madame
chairman thank you off for your
presentation very unlightening
to see the progress and I think
that's good that it's happening
so one thing management chairman
this might just be an afterward
question I apologize you know in
other committees such as mfa
oversight we've heard from the
biotech firms that are
developing technologies to more
expeditiously
helped clean up this instances
and i'm wondering madame
chairman are we are you talking
to these authorities such as the
air force and asking them to
help prioritise new mexico's
investments in such as by your
fields and things like that to
help understand how we can clean
these up and then use new mexico
built resources to do it madame
chairman
and this could be for anybody
maybe dd maybe
maybe
kelsey may be somebody else
minimum chair.
Madam chair
representative lock.
Hmm so the one of the the things
that
has to be fully characterized
prior to
looking at different types of
buyer mediation and I types a
treatments is as a fully
understanding what
subservance environment actually
holds the types of conditions
that are there
I don't know if the air force
specifically has been consulting
with other
entities of firms looking at
those types of
remedial technologies
but to prior to getting into
that situation you always want
to understand fully what you're
what you're really dealing with
you know what card you have in
your hand
vice chair had mentioned
the coming implementation lost
allows using that as a as an
example there was a payout test
to inject malaccess which
usually creates an environment
where
like a better term bugs will eat
the contamination and reduce it
however because of the
subsurprise environment is
actually created more of a
sludge in that area so
using this cover at indirect
analogy
it would be a little premature
to really focus on certain
things I think it would be great
to see what out there and bring
that in to the correct of
measures of valuation but until
we can have our entire site
fully characterized
that that would be more just
more of a discussion level
thank you madame chairman thank
you for that and it's a good
it's just good to think about
because they always think about
new mexico built companies and
people who study at places like
new mexico tack and stay in
other places.
We know new mexico more than
some some guy who takes orders
from washington right manager
and that's in total total
respect to everybody who is
investing in our state but some
adam chair I just my next
question would be to either one
of you actually regarding your
your conversations with the air
force and other federal partners
because my my one concern is
madam chair if we pushed too far
I just don't want to lose
any resources or missions that
would otherwise be brought to
new mexico so how are we towing
that very fine line to ensure
that we continue to the
investments but we also get what
we want with the remediation
madame chairman
madam charity members of the
community I can tick a first
answer that as I mentioned in my
slides we do engage with our
federal delegation on this
matter the way that we are so
the way the way I total line as
you say specifically is that we
don't view this as a curtain air
for space issue review this is
an apartment ever air force
issue and so we're discussing
our concerns with our delegates
they are very aware of the
importance of the air force as a
weed to the economy in our
overstate but ultimately we are
asking for the right thing to be
done and and for concerns be met
a to clean up these issues and I
think that's true for for all of
the the sites around the state
but in this in this instance and
we at the water the review
currently offer spaces a major
partner we just completed a
really big sewer remediation
project within that required
very detailed collaboration with
staff accurately for space to
accomplish we have reused
products with them they're they
are partners with this but this
is a department of airforce
matter that we consider this to
be.
Okay thank you manager and thank
you for that answer and I think
that's great that you're working
hand in hand with them it's
important to have all
stakeholders at the table so I
appreciate it thank you for your
very inportant presentation a
lot of information and I will
definitely continue to to bring
that back to my constituents and
I appreciate it madame chairman
thank you uh mister weisser
thank you
thank you
center steinborn it covered very
well that in concerns I have
also about making sure that we
have as an efficient and
effective and fast
restoration of the
plum and concerned about you
know stopping too wells
and then the ploom growing or
becoming a little bit closer is
you know something I think that
as you work and med and the
water authority and the air
force
should be of
priority in great concern more
wells not less and to continue
the uh vapor soil.
Decontamination I guess
but especially if you know the
three of you are working
together with other state
holders
to make sure that this goes a
lot faster than the past twenty
five years and if there is
something we need to do as a
state to
four to five wet enemy d is
doing into
bring together everyone
we'd be glad to do that because
alba kirki depends on this water
and as water becomes more scars
we need to be able to
make sure that it's available
and
mr worthman I appreciate
what you are doing but in your
plans it doesn't sound like.
It's going as fast as possible
and if we have to wait a couple
years for this plan
to be where it's enacted that's
just more time last and
I think
are the information that we have
and getting that data and and
sharing it with everyone is
really going to be important for
the cooperation and the
remediation of all of this so
thank you for your information
the panel was great uhm and.
We will support whatever needs
to happen to get this done
quicker better faster so thank
you very much.
Now we will go to a quick break
we're going to try and catch up
and we welcome everyone who's
here to help yourself to I think
there are sandwiches available
and if you want to eat after
your presentation or after other
discussion you're welcome at any
time to
come up and committee let's grab
something really quick and then
will have our next
presenter
mary martinez white with the two
arrows of base in downwinders
in about five minutes
okay thank you.
