You.
Thank you all very much and then
moving forward, uh one of the
other issues, and of course we
all know that the um
Capital outlay uh portal has,
has opened and of course, uh,
starting, it started yesterday
and so uh to the individuals
that are out there that are
paying attention, of course, to
what we're doing here as well as
uh getting projects ready, uh,
please know that uh through the
legislature, uh, we do have a uh
well organized system and
there's going to be quite a few
I'm sure requests as we move
along, uh, but it all ties
together because we want to
continue to go ahead and
improve, uh, not only our
Processes, but the work and the
resources that we do have here
in New Mexico. So with all that
being said, uh, we're gonna
start uh the presentations.
Today we have the uh first
presentation, the liquor excise
tax, cigarette tax, and tobacco
products tax, and with that our
presenter is ready and if you
will introduce yourself and then
from there, please commence with
the presentation. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Mark Chaikin. I'm the
tax policy director at the
Taxation and Revenue Department.
Uh, in the interests of speed,
uh, I have some introductory
stuff in the slides. I'm just
gonna skim over that. I'm here
to talk to you today about
excise taxes, which are a
general form, uh, you can think
of it as sales taxes. Um, I'm
here to talk to you about 4
specific taxes which are the
liquor excise tax.
The tobacco products tax, the
cigarette tax, and the cannabis
excise tax. Uh, so if you would,
uh, kindly jump to slide 6.
Of uh the handouts that you
should have in front of you.
Um, I will talk about liquor
excise taxes briefly. Uh, it is
a tax on all forms of alcohol
for consumption.
It applies to beer, wine,
fortified wine, cider, and
spirits liquors. All those are
terms that are def defined in
the Liquor Excise Tax Act.
Different rates apply to those
different types of beverages
depending on the type of
beverage. Uh, the tax is
calculated on the basis of the
the volume of products sold. Uh,
some measures are per liter,
some are per gallon. Uh, that is
because of the way they are sold
at retail, as I understand it,
that, uh, hard alcohol, spirits,
liquors under this act,
generally sold 750 mL, for
example, whereas beer still sold
by the ounce. So that's why
there's uh that difference
there.
Uh, the tax applies only to
wholesalers.
Um, but retailers, uh, pay gross
receipts tax on their receipts
from the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
Uh, taxing wholesalers rather
than retailers greatly reduces
the number of taxpayers. And of
course, uh that's the, what we,
uh, in Tas world called the
legal incidents of the attacks
falls on the wholesalers,
economists will argue about
whether some of that cost gets
passed on and uh where the
actual instance of the tax
falls, so, um, that will often
get passed on to the wholesaler
and then ultimately on to the
consumer and the final price of
the product. Uh, but for liquor
excise tax is somewhat different
because it does apply to
wholesalers.
Um, liquor excise tax
distributions are made pursuant
to Section 7-1-6.40, uh 45% of
the revenues go to the local DWI
grant fund, $20,750 go to
certain municipalities as
defined, you'll see the
definition on the slide in uh
practical terms, it means
gallop.
Uh, since July 1st of 2019, 5%
of remedies go to the drug court
fund and the remainder of the
revenues go to the general fund.
So approximately just slightly
over 50% of the revenues are
designated for special funds and
just slightly under uh go to the
general fund.
Uh, on slide number 8, you can
see what the liquor excise tax
revenues and distributions have
been, uh, so, uh, sorry, it
doesn't actually tell you that
we could, um, you know,
approximately half of that
figure is going to the general
fund in each case, and the other
half is going to those special
funds, principally the DWI fund.
So, uh, you can see that those
revenues have been pretty stable
over the past 5 years.
Pardon me.
Uh, turning to the next slide,
uh, the cigarette tax. Uh, this
tax applies only to cigarettes
as defined in the Act as opposed
to other forms of tobacco
product, cigarettes are
generally defined as tobacco
wrapped in paper or wrapped in
something else that a consumer
would reasonably believe makes
him look like a cigarette. So
it's an interesting definition,
uh, but it sort of relies on
common sense, but we all know
what cigarettes are. Uh,
cigarettes are taxed at 10% per
cigarette. Uh, the taxes, uh,
Principally born, uh, or
ultimately going to be born by
distributors. Distributors have
to be licensed by the department
in order to distribute to other
distributors or to retailers for
sale at retail. Um, there are
exceptions, uh, the biggest
exception, uh, or two
exceptions, one would be for
sales to the United States
government. It's an
instrumentalities or the state
in its instrumentalities, they
are uh special provisions
relating to sales to Indian
tribes.
Um, I can get into that in more
detail if we have time and
anyone is interested.
Um, for purposes of gross
receipts tax, receipts of
retailers include amounts paid
to distributors for the
cigarette tax. So, um there is
some tax permitting in this
program, uh, because there's a
tax on top of the tax.
Um, distributions of cigarette
tax are governed by Section
71-6.11. Uh, there are
distributions to the Board of
Regents of the University of New
Mexico for the comprehensive
Cancer Center and uh to pay debt
service on the bonds when these
projects are funded, they can
either be cash funded or funded
by bonds that are often issued
through the Mexico Finance
Authority and the revenues can
either be used directly or
indirectly in that manner.
Um, so as you see, the next
distribution is to the New
Mexico Finance Authority to fund
certain DOH facilities are now
Healthcare authority facilities.
For credit enhancement of public
project revolving funds and
other bonds and to benefit the
rural county cancer treatment
fund. The remainder goes to the
general fund. Uh, the
percentages to each of those
beneficiaries have changed
through legislation from time to
time. Uh, so that's why I
haven't sent them out here.
They've they've actually been
quite a few changes over the
years to how those are
distributed.
Uh, on slide number 11, you will
see the cigarette tax total
revenues for recent years, as
you can see, uh, in especially
starting in fiscal year 2022.
There has been a significant
decline in cigarette tax
revenues. A part of that is
expected, uh, we expect
cigarette tax uh revenues to go
down because of anti-smoking
campaigns and other
health-related campaigns. Uh,
also, we do believe that some of
this represents revenue shifting
to cannabis export.
Those tax as people choose a
different product to consume.
So, uh, because there is what we
call elasticity in these markets
and across these markets, uh,
for various reasons, people may
be choosing now to smoke
cannabis rather than tobacco.
Um, but, uh, I don't have any,
uh, precise breakdown of, of
those consequences for you, but
as you can see that, you know,
since 2021 revenues are down $20
million.
Uh, on slide 12, uh, there's the
tobacco products tax. It applies
to all other tobacco products
and cigarettes, such as cigars
and little cigars, e-cigarettes,
including e-liquids and closed
system cartridges, which are of
course used for smoking and
inhaling, or vaping, uh,
e-liquids and other products
containing tobacco, which would
principally be chewing tobacco.
Uh, there are differing rates
depending on the product.
Um, uh, cigars, for example, are
taxed at different rate, uh, and
cigars and little cigars are,
are differentiated from each
other primarily in terms of
weight. So if it's more than uh
I think it's 4.5 pounds per 1000
and they're big cigars. It's
less than 4500 pounds per 1000
little cigars.
Um, there is some tribal
exemption again, but the
treatment is different than for
cigarettes. Uh, the taxes on,
uh, states that it's on the
manufacturer or acquisition of
the tobacco product. In fact,
the statute also really states
that it's on the purchaser, so
whoever is purchasing the, the
tobacco product is the one who's
going to pay the tax, who has
against the legal incident of
the tax, even if they have uh a
way of passing that on. A
receipts from sale of tobacco
products are also subject to the
gross receipts tax.
Uh, on slide 13, uh, we have
tobacco product tax revenues and
distributions are all there are
no special distributions from
this tax. All the revenues go to
the general fund, uh, and, uh,
again, looking at the chart, you
can see they've been very stable
over the past 5 years hovering
at around 12 million, uh, there
was less than 2021. I'm not sure
of the reason for that
divergence, but hovering around
12 million, uh, it's been a very
stable source of revenue.
Uh, finally, the cannabis excise
tax. Uh, this applies only to
retail sales of non-medical
cannabis products. So it does
not apply to sales of medical
cannabis.
Uh, the tax is based on the
price paid for the cannabis
product, and that would include
uh things like uh just the, the
The plant itself that is sold or
something like uh candies that
contain uh the product as well.
The tax is based again on the
price paid for the product. Uh
the tax is currently 12%, rising
in 1% increments starting next
July July 1, 2025, to a maximum
of 18% starting on July 1st,
2030. Uh, again, uh, as with
tobacco products, the grocery
seats and compensating tax also
applies to receipts from retail
sales of non-medical cannabis
products. So there's quite a bit
of tax. There's the GRT plus the
special cannabis excise tax.
Um, retail sales of non-medical
cannabis products commenced on
April 1, 2022. So given the
fiscal year ended on June 30th,
you can see that there was a 7.5
million collected for that
partial year, uh, but then, um,
there's been a very dramatic
increase of 36.4 million in
fiscal 23 up to 48.5 and fiscal
24. Um, I think that that's also
in the context of prices coming
down, uh, so
That is probably uh some
cannibalization of the tobacco
market going on here, uh, but,
uh, revenues are, have been
Uh, quite high. Uh, two-thirds
of those revenues go to the
state general fund and one third
go to local governments.
Um, that is my presentation, Mr.
Chairman, and I stand for any
questions. Uh, first of all, I
just really thank you for over
the years, not only the
information that you provide,
but the way that you do present
it, you're very knowledgeable in
the area and I'm sure with the
questions that are about to uh
to come forward that uh you're
gonna be able to help us as we
move.
Uh, in a positive direction with
this. It looks like uh people
are looking at me. Is there
anyone here that would like to
begin with questions. Well, I'll
tell you those presentations
really come along well, don't
they?
Um, any questions?
If not, uh, I just have a, a, a
few things that I would like to
start with, as we talk about tax
pyramidding and one of the
issues that maybe you can help
us to better understand.
In dealing directly with that
across the board, we're trying
to be as uh precise as possible
and to eliminate some of that
tax pyramid. And, and what you
see when it comes to, if you
will, uh, these particular
excise taxes.
I
What would it behoove us to work
a little bit more on trying to
eliminate some of the tax
pyramidding or in this process,
do you believe that people don't
mind paying that additional tax
for uh
If you will, the products that
they're using.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that is, uh, a
great question and um there,
there is a lot of question out
there, not only in New Mexico
but in other states that have
legalized the use of cannabis
products as to whether the
amount of tax is so great that
it drives people back to the
black market.
Or whether um taxes are at a
reasonable level and people
would rather avoid the potential
of criminal penalties by simply
paying the full price uh for the
legal product.
Um, I don't have an answer as to
where uh New Mexico's taxes fall
on that. I, I have seen uh some
information that indicates in
other states there is still a
thriving black market because of
the level of tax, um, but I'm
not aware of any study that's
been done in New Mexico to that
effect. Uh, I can certainly look
into that for you.
Uh, we appreciate that and
possibly in the future that
might be part of a uh your
presentation. The other issue as
we work with the uh New Mexico
Healthcare Authority and in
terms of not only the tax rates,
but the streamlining of where
our resources are going to be
going. Uh, are you anticipating
any problems that we have
currently with ensuring that
the, the resources that we do
collect are going to their
intended funds and intended
purposes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I don't
believe that there's any issue
I'm aware of with the funds
going to the appropriate funds,
if you will, the revenues going
to the appropriate place. Uh,
again, you see that under the
cigarette tax, uh,
There is uh the designation of
the revenues for a specific
purpose of funding certain
healthcare facilities, either
through the finance authority or
through the through the
Department of Health or through
UNMH, uh, whether some cannabis
tax revenue should also be
diverted to that end or other
revenues from uh these special
excise taxes should be diverted.
That's really a policy decision.
I, I don't feel I'm personally
qualified uh to make, um.
As a general policy matter, uh,
tax policy matter, I prefer to
see all monies go into the
general fund and then uh you as
legislators can decide the best
way to appropriate them from
year to year, uh.
That's just, that's one view of
tax policy. I, I wouldn't say
that there are uh people do
think that if a a tax is on a
particular product and that
product causes a particular
problem, such as a health
problem that it does make sense
to earmark those revenues for a
purpose related to that, the,
the problems of that tax, that
product causes. So, if you know
that, you know, smoking
cigarettes causes health
problems. You do, you can do
what uh this legislature and
previous legislatures have done.
Um,
But, uh, from a tax policy point
of view, I would say, uh, again,
my personal opinion that you
should give yourselves as much
flexibility as you can by having
things go into the general fund
and then year to year you can
appropriate as necessary. I
really appreciate that over the
years, what we've done is we
have uh worked very closely, if
you will, to, to de remark, but
at the same time as we move
along because we do want that
discretion, uh, to be able to
shift resources to take care of
the priorities that we do have
in this state, but one of the
other things.
that ties into directly what
you're talking about is the
decrease in taxes that are
coming, if you will, from uh the
sale of these particular
products. In, in that realm
of, do you foresee that there's
gonna be the need, if you will,
to uh
Use additional general fund
resources to help in the near
future or with a decrease, if
you will, in taxes from the
sales that we're talking about,
uh, do you see something else
that, uh, maybe we need to look
at as as legislators. Um, Mr.
Chairman, I think the New Mexico
Finance Authority might be the
body that is best placed to
opine on that as they are the
issuers of the cigarette tax
bonds. Um, I, I'm former
assistant general counsel at the
finance author.
So I do know that when they bond
against cigarette tax revenues
they build into the debt service
payments, the idea that the
revenues are going to decline,
that, you know, the incentives
to quit smoking are going to be
effective and therefore revenues
are going to go down. Uh,
whether the declines that we've
seen in the cigarette tax
revenues over the past few years
represent any kind of danger to
those bonds. I do not know. Um,
but I, I do think the finance
authority might be able to speak
to that.
Along with the work that you're
doing, do you also deal with
trends?
In these taxes or are you
dealing specifically with uh the
information that is right before
you and, and the reason I bring
that up because as we deal with
this, if we're going to continue
to uh work for recovery for
rehabilitation, for
improvements, for for better
health.
Um, some of these taxes possibly
would need to be shifted, if you
will, to some of the other
alternative ways of how we're
gonna take care of people. So
are you, are you dealing also
with trends or or not
necessarily so, uh, Mr.
Chairman, yes, we have
economists, uh, in, in the tax
department who do look at trends
in these various tax revenues,
and so, uh, that forms part of
the comprehensive uh revenue
estimate and uh I do believe
that you will be given a
presentation.
In early December by our chief
economist and by economists from
the LFC and other departments,
uh, that will talk about those
trends that they see in revenues
both over like the more near
term, perhaps the five-year term
and over the longer term as
well. Great. I really appreciate
that. Thank you. We're going to
questions. I'm going to
Representative Harper.
Representative Harper, please.
Thank you, Chairman.
And
Jenkins, it's good to see you
this morning. Thank you for the
great presentation. I just, I
just have a couple of questions,
um.
Um, I think you did a great job,
by the way.
Um,
So when you
Look at
Our excise taxes and um
And compare them with other
states.
You know, kind of where do we
fall in the mix? Are we on the
high end? Are we on the low end
or are we in the middle with
regards to these particular
excise taxes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Harper, I'm afraid I don't have
that information on hand, but I
can certainly look into that and
get you that information unless
Morning, Mr. Chair.
Representative Harper, um,
I'm bringing back up in my mind
the
Kind of tax code overview you
make sure that there you go we
gave a tax code overview
presentation, I think one month
ago, although it's a blur
sometime this summer, and we, we
actually did provide in that
slide deck comparisons of these
taxes to where we are
nationally.
I remember uh having the sense
that our cigarette tax rates
were on the lower to moderate
to, to low side. I think our
liquor tax was again moderate to
low.
Um, gas tax was low, although
that's not in the slide deck.
I don't think we had a detail on
cannabis taxes compared to other
states though, though, although
from the time that we enacted
the cannabis excise tax, I, you
know, I think the 12%.
Uh, plus, say a 7% statewide
GRT, you know, so call it 19% if
you add the two together, it's
probably moderate, although
taking it up to 18% plus 7 to
25% by uh fiscal year 30, I
believe. It probably puts us on
the high end of that one.
Thank you. Yes, the, the tax
foundation was the source we
used for those slides last month
too.
We are, yeah, thank you. We're,
we're not we're on the low end.
We're essentially, you know,
giving up revenue. We're not
wearing the high high end.
You know, that's gonna cause
some major distortions.
Um, lead to some changing
behavior that we might not want.
Um, but I, I thought it was also
interesting, um.
Uh
The the tax foundation also does
a kind of analysis of um
smuggling activities.
Um, and they, they do this in,
in partnership with the
McKinnick Center for Public
Policy. Obviously, it's a little
challenging to
Um,
No, people don't report their
smuggling activities, right? So,
so, uh, it's a little
challenging to to get these,
these numbers, but I, I just
found it interesting, um.
You know, the number one state
is New York. They estimate.
54.5% of cigarettes consumed are
from smuggling.
And uh
California's next at 44%.
And New Mexico is next to 38%.
So, they estimate we're #3 for
smuggling.
And they estimate that we lose
about 120.
Um, 12.8 million in revenue
because of smuggling. I, I say
that's
Probably not so much because of
our tax rate being so high, but
maybe because of our.
Geography and and uh
No.
that
The different um government
entities that we are uh
Very close to, so I'm, I'm, I'm
just, I just found that that
curious, um, but, uh, Chairman
and uh secretary, I think the
other question I have that goes
off of um your question.
Generally we try to de-earmark
revenue
and I really thank the members
of the committee, uh, for, uh,
uh, your indulgence in this.
The, the other issue that may
surface is that we have the
closed caption that's available,
but if that goes off and if it's
off uh for at least 5 minutes,
uh, we're gonna have to stop the
presentation, uh, because we do
want to make sure that people
that are paying attention
online, you also have that
opportunity to uh participate in
uh and pay attention.
If you will, to the information
that's being provided and I'm
asking staff as we go along if
we see that within a minute.
Uh, that, uh, that that's not
up, that we stop because
otherwise, uh, I'll need to
regurgitate 5 minutes' worth of
the presentation myself and I,
uh, I'm trying to recall as much
Anyway, so we're moving along
then, going to the next
presentation of the modernizing
New Mexico's approach in tax
alcohol. Do we have the uh
OK. OK. So with that, um, just
juggling some of these issues
and again, my apologies, we're
going to go instead of item
number 8.
Uh, we're gonna move down to
item number 10. Madam Secretary,
I don't know how you do this,
but when whenever you're in the
room, you just move to the top
of the presentation. So if you
will, please uh come, come to
the table so that we can go
ahead and start with that
presentation.
So, so members, what we're going
to be doing is going to item
number 10 on the uh the agenda.
Right
It's
We're, we're doing really good.
I'm gonna slow everyone down for
a moment. Take a deep breath.
Um, so we're moving down to item
number 10, which is the
proposals for cleanup.
The tax code.
And I'm gonna go into a little
bit of the slow motion right
And take care of this. So if
everyone will please uh go to
item number 10, the handouts are
being presented and uh Madam
Secretary, if you will, please,
please begin, introduce
yourself, and then let's start
with the presentation.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, and
thank you to the staff for the
arm workout they're about to do
getting all these handouts to
you. I wanna also thank Mark and
uh the team that worked together
with us to basically go through
every single word of section 7
or chapter chapter 7, and uh and
make every single change,
whether it's super important or
just vaguely important, uh, you
know, having a tax code that
reads well, doesn't have a lot
of.
Extraneous information that
doesn't mean anymore is part of
uh I don't know, it's just part
of having sort of pride in what
we do and so I know that this is
a very long bill, and I'm going
to try to make it as easy and,
and painless as possible to to
walk you through it.
So, um, rather than go through
the entire big stack of bill,
I'm gonna be working through
this, but I believe staff is
passing it out for your
reference.
Um, and with that, I'll get
started. Um.
A little background, um.
Taxin Rev brings together tax
code cleanup for
I'll wait for just a second.
OK.
Don't be afraid.
Yeah
Don't be afraid. It's gonna be
OK.
OK, so.
on our tax code cleanup efforts
every 60 day session when, when
this kind of items are germane,
we try to bring forward every
single thing that we've noted in
the last two years, the things
in the tax code that could could
be clearer could make the
department able to work smarter,
not harder, could be able to
reduce taxpayer burden and could
be able to reduce litigation
because all of that is good, not
just for the department but
taxpayers as well. And so we
split each proposal up in
To one of two bills. The main
bill is the very large one that
you have before you. Um, I'll
just call that the main tax code
cleanup bill. That's almost
everything.
And then we peel out a smaller
list of things that we believe
would require a judiciary
Committee referral so that they
take a different path and uh
for, for example, don't get
bogged down there potentially.
So I'll start with uh the main
tax code cleanup bill, which is
again the, the, the very large
one, and I'm just gonna walk you
through some of the highlights
and there, uh, I've got color
coding in this sort of Excel
spreadsheet, um, I think we'll
probably use something sort of
like this for our bill analysis
rather than a traditional FIR
that makes the reader jump.
You know,
back and forth all throughout
all the traditional sections.
All right, so with with that
sort of overview.
Um, the bill starts, and, and
I'll kind of cover by topic
though, not section by section.
Um, the sections that are
colored in this kind of light
green starting with section one,
are reducing tax and rev
administrative burden by
eliminating one of two
semiannual GRT rate change dates
that um can be requested by
counties, municipalities,
special districts. Every time we
have to reprogram the GRT rates,
um, depending on how many rate
changes there are, we
hundreds of hours doing the IT
programming and there might be
very little revenue impact
associated. Like, for example,
this January 1st, we're
currently working on a rate
change for a particular county
that didn't have to no, not, not
yours. There's a county that um
misinterpreted the de earmarking
statute and thought that they
were required to move all of
their tax rates to the 100th
decimal, and, and they don't,
but they thought they did. So
they sent us.
Uh, a new ordinance that changes
every one of their rates for no
revenue impact, and we're
probably going to spend about
150 hours coding that.
So
Um, anytime the state rate
changes, we'll implement that on
July 1st because that's our
fiscal year start. And with a
little bit of planning, we think
local governments can do the
same. So, um, we'll save a lot
of time and energy if we
eliminate the uh January 1st
rate changes. Everything that
you see coded in light green is
related to that.
Um, next topic is the light
blue. Um, these are tax
increment development Act
changes that are necessary to
kind of conform with the new
regime of destination sourcing.
And if any of you um were part
of the discussion around
amending the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Act last session.
That'll be a good memory. So
basically when we moved from
origin to destination based
sourcing, we dramatically
increased the number of returns
that come in in a particular
geographic location. And so in
the past
It could be maybe a tit is
developed and it's some kind of,
you know, whatever geographical
area it is. A and Red would have
to go backwards and figure out
parse out which returns.
Happen
Within a geographical area that
didn't exist yet, so that we
could set the baseline, and we
could kind of
Figure our way through that, but
with the number of returns going
up so much through out of state
sales we can just no longer
feasibly do that, uh, and, and
weed out what the baseline was
in a TI or an MRA before it was
geographically existing being on
tax returns. So the TI Act
changes just like we did to the
MRA um last session would make
it possible for us to basically
create the location and then set
the baseline using actual tax
returns that were
in that location. I hope that
makes sense.
Um,
Next, I'm, I'm gonna skip over
the ones that are in kind of
like light gray, they're the
minor, the minorest of the minor
cleanup. It's things like uh
changing commissioner to
secretary changing bureau to
department. It's it's little
stuff like that. So if it's
light gray, I'll kind of skip
over it.
Um, OK, next in kind of this
rust color section 14, um,
there's, there's a section
already that you're probably,
you've heard something about it,
71615. This is the section that
lets TRD uh adjust distributions
if there were changes to past
periods. So, for example, if a
taxpayer files amended returns
that increase or decrease
distributions. This is sort of a
catch-all system where we, where
we threw it up, or if there's
audit adjustments.
As a result of the department's
activities. So we're doing
technical clean up there
basically to make clear which
tax programs we can adjust on.
Some of them it's very clear and
spelled out. GRT Cotax, and a
couple others, but there are
some tax programs that really
should be included in that same
system that aren't listed. So we
want to list them specifically
so that it can all be handled
the same way.
Um, next in red, like sections
2021, 23, 25. Um, this is again
some cleanup related to
destination sourcing, like, for
example, we have language
currently in statute that talks
about distributing or or doing
things with revenue when it's
when it's from.
Something in the location.
Really, it should be sourced to
the location. So just some
technical cleanup. It doesn't
change the way that we're
administering, but it uh
properly reflects what happens.
Um,
See.
Next, um, slide, uh, section 26,
uh, this is one where it's, it's
just sort of outdated. We have
these buckets of revenue where
basically says if
You have more than $25,000 owed
in in a certain group of types
of taxes, you have to e-file,
and we're just kind of making
adjustments to that to um to
encourage more e-filing, get
away from paper returns and to
reflect too that we've sort of
separated out what used to be
called the combined revenue
system. We, we redesigned the
way business taxes are filed and
so these amendments will help
with that.
Um, section 27 is something that
I think is really taxpayer
friendly for very small
businesses.
Right now, it says that the
secretary can allow someone who
owes less than $200 to file
semiannually.
Let's take that up to $500 so
that more tiny tiny businesses
don't have to file monthly
anymore. It's just an inflation
adjustment, um, it hasn't been
made since 1991.
All right. Section 28, um, and,
and a couple more down on the
next page or sort of um related.
There's, there are 3 sections in
the tax code that require
attorney General approval on
certain things that Taxin Rev
does, and it doesn't go well.
Uh, not because what we're doing
is, is wrong or it's
contentious, but because of
resources. So we think that
these three sections date to a
time when most state agencies
didn't have their own in-house
counsel. And so the AG was
approving to make sure that any
lawyer approved these things.
And the the three things that
they approve are refunds over
$20,000 abatements of tax due
over $20,000 in closing
agreements. That's where the
department has a good faith
doubt that tax is actually owed,
and we settle the protest with
the.
And so each of those things has
to be approved currently by the
Attorney General, although more
often than not, the Attorney
general, through lack of
resources, doesn't have the time
or somebody who's knowledgeable
about tax law.
And in fact, what has happened
unfortunately for many of the
the last several years is that
the AG's office doesn't have
someone to do this work.
And so to keep the work flowing,
they commission one of our own
attorneys.
As an assistant attorney
general, and we've approve it
ourselves. So now we have not
one but 2. That's not the intent
and it's also not really adding
any value, so, and we, you know,
we, we've uh struggled with that
too because we don't, we also
don't want to be part of
something that's not the intent
of the law.
Um, but the alternative was that
these refunds and abatements
would sit unapproved potentially
forever.
We weren't willing to put
customers through that either.
So, uh, I think we're at a point
where, you know, Taxin Rev
definitely has a legal presence
and a legal basis to our own
legal is already reviewing these
things and can continue without
that extra step.
All right. So that's the uh
light pink sections on, on 1 and
2.
OK. Next, um, section 29.
Um, OK, this is a something
that'll basically streamline
taxpayers requesting a refund.
Um, so if you find that you've
overpaid in any tax program, you
amend your return, right, to
show that you've overpaid, but
then in some of the tax
programs, we can allow your
return to count as your refund
request and other tax programs,
the statute doesn't allow us to
do that.
Um, and there's really no extra
reason why the, the taxpayer
should have to amend their
return and then file a separate
form requesting the refund
because it's very clear that's
what they would like. And so
this amendment will just allow
us to treat any amended return
that results in showing you have
an overpayment to allow us to
process your refund. Right now,
a lot of taxpayers call us
saying I amended my return,
where is my refund? And we have
to tell them, well, you didn't
also file a refund request. So
uh it's not a good experience
and it's not adding any value.
OK. Sections 30 and 31 again are
about the Attorney General
approval that I already talked
about.
Um, the blue sections 32 through
34 have to do with allowing
Taxin Rev to file tax liens
electronically. Right now, um,
lean on uh for delinquent tax
have to be uh filed in county
clerk's offices in all 33
counties in person, in paper,
and we would like to be able to
file them electronically and
have the option to file them
with the Secretary of State's
office, and then we'll, we, we
make sure that there's um a
closed circuit there that if
Wherever we file the lien, we
still have to release or
extinguish the lien with the
same place, so there's a
tracking of that. But this is
really just modernizing our
processes.
Um, 35 is, is an interesting
one, and again, it's, it's very
taxpayer friendly.
Right now we must impose
interest on any tax due, no
matter what the cause. This
amendment, if accepted, would
allow us to not impose interest
if we can find that the taxpayer
was not negligent and was not
acting in total disregard of our
rules, and that negligence is
already defined in the tax code
and in our rules. So this would
save basically in situations
where a taxpayer made a very
honest mistake. They're not a
chronic uh delinquent taxpayer.
We can look at it and say this
is a one off, you made a
A good faith error, we can't
forgive or not impose the
interest and prevent a protest.
So, um, that would be good for
the taxpayer as well as the
department. We can get that
through.
Section 37, um, if any of you
heard in the last several months
about a snafu that the
department had with Intuit, with
TurboTax, uh.
This is, this is related to
that, and we want to prevent
that problem going forward.
About 20 or 22 years ago, we put
into the tax code.
This is it at a time 20 years
ago when we were really trying
to incentivize e-filing and
e-paying, and now it's basically
what people do. Um, so they had
put in at that time that if you
e file and e-pay your pit
return, you can have an extra 15
days instead of it being due on
April 15th. It's due on April
30th.
We are only one of two states
that have something anomalous
like that in our deadline, and
now 2 years in a row, the
biggest.
Big tax filler into it has
messed up the date. They file,
they and they've sent in about
10,000 returns per year, about 2
days late, and the statute
required us then to impose
penalty and interest, and we did
a lot of IT work and into it
paid the bill. It was, it, it's
a huge thing that's not really
adding any value, but it is
creating a liability for our
taxpayers and and
Mm.
No, let's see, 51 is an
inflation adjustment to Section
7-2-31.1.
Right now, OK, this, this is
getting into sort of a new area.
A lot of the sections, um, if
you're familiar with on the pit
return, um, there are all these
places that a taxpayer can
choose to donate their refund.
It's called a voluntary
contribution. There's like, I
think 16 or 20 of them. And so
we're making some changes
throughout to kind of.
repeal most of those sections
and add them all in one place,
uh, so they're easier to
navigate and easier for the
department's forms. Um, this one
is, is related to those
voluntary contributions, but
there's a additional repeal
already in law that says
If um if the amount contributed
to one of these voluntary funds
is less than $5000 for three
years in a row, that it is
conditionally repealed and we
won't do it anymore. We won't
put it on the pit for him
anymore. So that hasn't been
From 5000 to 10,000, so it could
be that a couple more of those
voluntary refund contributions
might fall off the pit form over
the years.
All right. Um, again, purple is
just tax code credit
standardization and getting rid
of that individual reporting
requirement throughout. I
already talked about section 55,
that's removing the extra 15
days you can get if you e-file
sit.
Um, and there's been an e-file
mandate inst now for about 4
years, so it's, it's really not
relevant.
Um, let's see, down to section
64, that's an amendment. Now
we're talking about wage
withholding tax, so uh in
7-3-6 and on. Um, right now,
withholding tax is due monthly,
uh, but workers' comp fee, same
kind of thing, paid by the same
folks is due quarterly, so we're
thinking, why don't we just pay,
pay them both quarterly, reduce
the taxpayer burden a little
bit. All the money will still
fall in the same fiscal year.
There's just less taxpayer
returns coming in for them to
file and us to process. And
that's a similar idea with the
next couple sections, um, we
want the wage withholding,
annual withholding statement.
To be filed electronically by
the employers, um, even if
they're less than 25 employees,
that's what basically all of
them are doing anyway.
Um, section 7-3-13 also has to
do with withholding tax, um.
This one really we're just
taking out a a duplicative
penalty for some reason that
section was built in with its
own penalty when the penalty in
the entire tax administration
Act already applies. So just
cleaning that up.
Um,
Chapter section 68 is again just
minor cleanup about destination
sourcing of receipts.
I'm 70 is, is a little more
substantive than some. This is
an amendment to a GRT uh
deduction section.
There was recent uh New Mexico
Supreme Court decision. There
was in this, so this is public
record. There's a prison
operator named CCA and in the
case of there's about use of a
deduction that went all the way
to the New Mexico Supreme Court.
The case was sort of about.
If I if a taxpayer received an
NTTC from the department, but
which means you're, you know,
your receipts are not taxable.
If you received it, but you
received it by misleading the
department. Is it still valid?
Do you get the safe harbor of
that NTTC and the Supreme Court,
and we said no. Uh, if you
mislead the department and tell
us the wrong facts and issuing
it to you, then you don't get
the safe harbor. So we're
basically adding in here the
words good faith.
If you received the NTTC in good
faith, you get the safe harbor.
And that might prevent some more
litigation in the future.
Which would be great.
All right, next page, um, let's
see. A little bit of cleanup to
To think about section 72
borders on trade deduction.
Oh, OK. There are 3, OK, sort of
on on this page section 72, 80,
and 85 are in sort of a light.
Tan color
Um, the idea here is that if you
look at the tax expenditure
report that we uh publish and
present to you each November.
There are a couple deductions
where we put an asterisk. We
can't tell you.
How much was foregone in revenue
because less than few taxpayers
claimed it.
And if we told you the total,
arguably, you know, they
competitors would know.
Um,
Which might be the way you wanna
go, but there are a couple
deductions that you'll never,
will never be able to tell you
how much we're foregoing in, in
these three. There's a border
zone trade deduction. It's
probably relatively small, but
uh because fewer than 3
taxpayers claim it, we can't
tell you. Potentially more
important, the uranium
enrichment deduction is in
section 7-9-90. It's a policy
decision, but is it your right
as as the legislators here that
decide whether that deduction
stays or not, do you?
Do you, should you get to know.
So what we're saying here is
that if you claim that deduction
you just authorize the
department to reveal only what
we must to publish that report.
We wouldn't say the taxpayer's
name. We wouldn't say their
location, anything like that.
Just, this is how much was
claimed in the deduction, even
if there were fewer than 3.
So think about how you feel
about that.
It's in the interest of
transparency, but
I can, I can see other sides of
it too.
Um, section 83, um, that's an
amendment to the back to school
GRT holiday. School start dates
are much earlier than they used
to be, so we would like to
reschedule that one week earlier
instead of the first week of
August when APS and some other
school districts have already
started, make it the last.
We weekend of July. Um, there
was a bill last year that
considered also increasing the,
the thresholds of the items you
can buy in that deduction uh for
inflation. We haven't included
that here because we didn't want
to have a fiscal impact of 10 or
$2 million in our bill, but um
that's something that
legislators could also consider
doing.
Um, let's see, maybe next
section 95, there's this
incredibly complicated and
unnecessary thing going on right
now with the petroleum products
loading fee, and I think, um,
you know, maybe 15 or 20 years
ago, it was important, but we
can simplify things now. There
was a, there's a whole structure
in that section of law.
That
The Environment Department has
to annually certify to us the
balance in this, this fund, the
NMED corrective Action Fund, and
based on the fund balance, we
changed the rate of the
petroleum products loading fee
to, you know, some different
amount. The fee has been at $150
forever. The the fun balance is,
is not changing very much and
the fee is always the same. So
let's just set it at $150 and
and do what we've been doing
without a certification and a
whole process.
Yes.
OK, um, on to the next page, um,
we've got some more in blue or
I'm sorry, in light green
starting with section 102 and
105 and on. This again is what I
already talked about about the
local GRT rate change dates,
taking that just to July, not
January.
Um,
Section 112 and the others that
are in dark green are all
related. Um, we've realized in
the last several months in
working with Mnerd that there's
some
Lack of clarity in in oil and
gas related tax acts related to
how and if skim oil is taxed,
and I learned more about what
that is in the last couple of
months. I never even heard of it
before, but now I know.
So when you, when you frack a
well, you end up with produced
water and the water has some
chemicals and a little bit of
oil in it. That's called the
skim oil and some some other
stuff in it. So the oil producer
basically gives that produced
water to somebody that treats it
and, and deals with it, and they
end up with a little bit of oil.
And the tax on that oil wasn't
paid by the operator. It's worth
several million dollars a year.
And so, um, in 3 of, there's 4
different tax acts that this
applies to.
And they probably are paying.
For the most part, if not
entirely, they probably are
already paying, but there's some
lack of clarity in the law if we
were ever to have to enforce it.
It has to do with kind of
whether
Whether the sale of the oil is
from the producer and well
operator versus um the seller
who might be the the water
producer, so that's what this
does. It cleans up all that and
makes clear that whether you get
the well out of or you get the
oil out of the well, or you get
it from skimming it out of
produced water, one way or the
other, the tax is due on that
oil once and not multiple times
to P pyramid.
I hope that makes sense.
Um, OK, the next sections that
are also in kind of light
orange, like starting with 118
section 122, section 130, um,
we're making these very just
technical changes to the way
advance payments are worded and
um these same oil and gas tax
This where it starts looking
like a regular Excel sheet with
no coloring. These are the
specific repeals. I, I didn't
count them, but I think there's
about 40 or so sections that we
found we can just repeal
entirely. Um, I've described
what they all are and, and why,
and then just for your
reference, because they aren't
in the bill draft, I printed
here starting with the word doc
behind that the text of the
repeals themselves.
Um,
But really these are things that
either haven't been in practice
for many, many years, uh, you
know, like, for example, tax
rates that only applied to tax
year 2025 or distribution that
only you know, applied for one
year way back or uh the film
credit that hasn't, it's still
on the books, but it isn't in
place because it was for
productions before 2016, all,
all kinds of things like that
that you can just come out of
the code. Um, a lot of them have
to do with those voluntary
contributions. If you look
through this list of repeals and
Like, wait, no, I want people to
still be able to contribute
their pit return to this
purpose, they still will be.
We're just consolidating all of
those in one section instead of
20 dupli of long tedious ones.
So that's about it for the
repeals.
Um, and then,
What did we say, Mark, do you
want to walk through the
judiciary bill?
Thank you, secretary. Um,
yeah, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, uh, again, Mark
Shain tax policy director, if
you would kindly turn to the
very last page of the
secretary's presentation. Um,
these are matters that we need
to
Uh, refer to Judiciary Committee
because they affect penalties,
other things, uh, that properly
belong before those committees.
Uh, so much shorter list here.
I'll take you through it
quickly. Uh, number one,
increase the amount of
delinquent tax installment
agreements available, Republican
inspection from $1000 to $10,000
to just, uh, that hasn't been
adjusted since 1979. So that's
when we do enter into these
installment agreements. They
are, they do become public
record, $1000 seems pretty low
for that, so we're recommending
that that go up to 10,000, uh,
increase the minimum amount of
interest taxpayers will owe to
TRD from $1 to $10.
That hasn't been adjusted since
1982. So, again, this is
something that benefits both
taxpayers and the department
because, uh, you know, if we're
dealing with a dollar these
days, it just is, it isn't worth
it. It just isn't worth it. Uh,
same, uh, sort of idea in
numbers, build section 3,
increase the minimum amount of
interest that we'll pay to a
taxpayer from $1 to $10. So
that's sort of the mirror image
of the previous section.
Um, increased civil penalty for
failure to pay from a $5 minimum
to $15 minimum, uh, and when
there's a willful intent to
evade from $25 to $75. These
haven't been adjusted since
1970, so well over 50 years of
inflation, um, increasing the
maximum fine for willful failure
to collect and pay taxes from
5000 to 10,000, that has been
adjusted since has not been
adjusted since 2005.
Uh, so that seems, uh, again,
that's a penalty provision that
is designed to increase
compliance. So we think it's a
good idea to raise that in line.
Um, increased penalty on tax
preparers who prepare over 25
returns per year, but who do not
e-file the returns from $5 to
$10. Uh, it's a small penalty
again, just to encourage
e-filing.
Um,
Increased criminal tax fraud and
invasion fine from a range of
1000 to 10 instead to a range of
10,000 to $50,000 that one
hasn't been adjusted since 1965.
So almost 60 years, uh, and, uh,
you know, the penalties become
ineffective at a certain point.
Uh, unless they're adjusted. So,
uh, section 8 increased tax owed
thresholds for criminal tax for
sentencing and increase each
sentencing threshold for 100 by
100%, uh, since 2006, that
hasn't been done. Uh, so I think
that's just saying, you know,
making it clear that how serious
something has to be before it's
subject to criminal tax fraud.
Uh, increase the fine for
obstruction of tax laws against
same motivation, uh, that hasn't
been done since 1965, uh
increased the fine for assault
and battery on attacks and reven
employee, that hasn't been done
since 1965. Uh, so that is from,
uh, is currently $100 to $500
we're asking $1000 to $5000 you
know, our, our agents, uh, we do
need to protect them. They're
unfortunately, that's the world
we live in.
Uh, increase the fine for
Uh, the department, uh, takes
the disclosure of personal tax
information, federal tax
information, very, very
seriously. That is one of our
primary missions is to keep
confidential information
confidential, and so increasing
that penalty is in line with our
mission.
And you know, 11 other, um, if I
may message here, one other
thing on that very last um
section, uh, increasing the fine
for revealing confidential
taxpayer information. We're sort
of talking internally still
about what that that currently
is a misdemeanor and we haven't
changed that in the bill. Um,
the Internal Revenue Code has
this, the same sort of
provision, but it's a low level
felony. I would love to have any
feedback from the depart from
the the committee of whether
that would be something you'd be
interested in seeing as well
just to align with the internal
revenue code, but we haven't
include.
that in the bill thus far.
With that will stand for
questions. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Secretary. Thank you very much
for the presentation. We're
going to be going to questions
from the committee. First, we
have Representative Harper and
then we have Senator Serio
Lopez, uh representing Hartford.
Got it.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
Secretary, and Mr. Chankin, um,
I'm, I'm excited to, you know,
put this by the nightstand and,
and, and pore over it. Um, I, I
just want to say I really
appreciate the department doing
this, right? This is something
that we talked about.
Oh, maybe about 10 years ago,
having an annual cleanup bill.
Um, and I'm so happy to see you
and all the folks in the
department working to bring this
forward. I think we've gone to
maybe every other year, not
every year, but.
Um, this is really important,
and as I read through the tax
expenditure report and see all
these recommendations by the
department. I'm like, why don't
we?
Do some of these things and so I
just really appreciate you
putting this all together.
And uh I, I appreciate a lot of
the
Changes in here are focused on
making things better for the
taxpayer.
But also a lot of things in here
are focused on making things
better for the department.
Um, so I, I just
Really um.
Pleased with the vast majority
of things I, I see in here. So,
so thank you for that. Um, so
we're just a couple, a couple of
questions to help me and, and
understand kind of where some of
these things are coming from.
The very first one, section one,
Um, removing the, the
January opportunity to change
the GRT and comprate.
Um, so right now we have two
opportunities, one in July and
one in January. And, and I know
when I talk with Muis and
counties, you know, the
The thing that they always bring
up is, well, if, you know, the
sky falls, you know, and we're
going to have a major budget
crisis. We, we don't want to
have to wait a year to raise our
ERT rates, so that gives us
flexibility to have 2.
Um,
But uh uh Chairman and
secretary, how often is the
January 1 used, I'd assume.
I mean, what's the ratio of the,
the two being used?
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Harper, we'd have
to go back and we could work
with the local government
liaison to answer that for you.
Um, I think this January, you'll
mostly you see July um to answer
that question, and you know,
July 1st is also when we already
have to change rates because of
the whole harmless phase out. We
already have to do some of that
programming, so it makes sense
to to keep that one obviously,
but.
Um, you'd see mostly July 1st,
but with the exception of this
time when again that one county
changed all its rates to the
100th when they didn't need to,
um.
You'd see mostly July 1st, but
we'll get that to you. Yeah,
yeah, thank you, Chairman and
secretary. I just feel like that
might be one of the few things
in here where municipalities
come to oppose and
We just had some data that
showed, well, actually,
They're both used, and maybe we
should keep them or in reality,
Whenever there's a downturn.
All the communities and counties
don't rush to raise their gross
receipts tax rates.
Then we could argue that this is
a good move.
Um,
OK, um,
Looking at this.
I'll say maybe, maybe a quarter.
Of this bill is removing
reporting language.
Um, and this is something that,
you know, we started, uh,
Or maybe 8 years ago, 10 years
ago, McCamley and I, we wanted
to make sure every credit had a
sunset and a reporting
requirement.
Um, and so there's a lot of
stuff in here that we've decided
as a tax committee in the House,
and I believe in the Senate as
well adopted that policy to put
in there.
But I also see your argument now
that, well, we've actually got a
statute that requires us to
report.
So this is all redundant and
actually is not perfectly in
alignment all these different
reporting.
Requirement, um, sections.
So
I guess my question is,
If we're restricting this
reporting requirement language
from all these statutes and
relying on a single
Requirement to have a tax
expenditure report.
Do we need to strengthen or add
language to that tax expenditure
report that basically captures
What's in the reporting
requirements now for all these
credits.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Harper, I think that's a great
question and, and thank you for
thinking through that.
I think that we're probably OK,
um, because the tax expenditure
report we produce uh is
compliant with 7184, and we
wrote 7184 to sort of reflect
what we were doing previously
and, and a little bit more.
Um, and I, I will say too that
there are a couple sections
where another department had
reporting on a tax credit, maybe
EDD or Ener. We left those in
and unchanged. Um, it's really
just the tax and rev part. Um,
so we will look at that and see
if we need to make any changes
to 7184 to give everybody um
comfort around that, but we do
see them as basically redundant.
Yeah, so the chairman and
secretary, thank you. That
would, that would give me some
comfort, um.
I, I just don't recall. I think.
That requirement of the text
ment report actually being
Aston sign was a great thing. I
just don't remember if it said.
produce annual expenditure
report.
Whereas in these sections we, we
say,
And what we want to be reported.
So if we maybe look at aligning
those two, I'd be comfortable
striking on.
OK, thank you and Mr. Chair,
Representative Harper, it does,
it goes through quite a bit of
detail in 7184 about, thanks,
Mark, 7184, you know, talks
about
Um, the tax expenditure budget
shall include all the following
information for each tax
expenditure, um, statutory
basis, the year enacted,
amendment or repeal, brief
description, intended purpose.
Estimate of the amount of
foregone revenue.
Number of taxpayers that claimed
it.
Data source for the estimate
reliability of the estimate
valuation, recommendations.
That's basically what, what's in
there. It's all listed in
statute.
Chairman, thank you. That's,
that's perfect.
And, and sorry,
I represent, you know, maybe the
most important part to your
question is what is a definition
of a tax expenditure because,
you know, I think um one could
have arguments that
Some future administration could
say, oh well, this isn't one and
we're not including it, but a
tax expenditure means a
provision of law, administrative
administered by the department
to reflect state tax policy.
Including promoting the general
welfare citizens preferential
tax treatment to certain
industries reflecting specific
purpose.
Incentivizing consumer behavior,
economic development, or job
creation does not include laws
enacted to prevent violation of
state or federal law, prevent
federal preemption, things like
that. So it's pretty well
spelled out.
Thank you, Chairman Secretary.
Just, just a.
A couple more quick questions
then. Um, so going to
Uh
Section 64.
Um,
Help me
Understand this just a little
bit more. This is where
Proposing to change the
withholding tax from monthly to
quarterly to align with workers'
comp. Mhm.
Is this withholding tax?
The
Essentially the, the income tax
that I'm paying to the state of
New Mexico, uh, Mr. Chair. The
wage withholding tax, yes,
that's correct, Mr. Chair and
representative. Yeah, so, the
Chairman, I guess my
My question here revolves um
on cash flow.
Um, so, so essentially then
we're gonna be moving.
A large portion of the state's
income tax to be received
quarterly instead of monthly.
If I'm understanding this
correctly.
And, and is that a
Uh, I guess two parts to that
question is that a potential
cash flow issue to the state,
and 2, is that a potential issue
for our
Craig working group as they're
trying to understand trends in,
in, in taxes. Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I think that's a
great question, um, this, this
uh series of changes around the
withholding tax came up through
our audit and compliance
division and and our deputy
secretary Aya, um, get back
together with them, but you
raised good points. I think cash
flow would be fine, you know, we
book, we'll book all the revenue
to the same fiscal year, it
would have been anyway, but to
the point that
Wage withholding data would
come.
More gradually, that might be
important to the forecasters. So
we'll definitely look at that
and and see if they think it
would be material to their
ability to forecast pit with all
the latest data.
Um,
Thank you. Um,
And then going to the
The 2nd bill.
Um, just some clarity on, on
sections 2 and 3.
Um, chairman and secretary in
March, when you're saying we're
increasing the minimum amount.
Of interest taxpayers owe TRD
from $1 to $10 for that.
I paid to taxpayers.
You're not saying that we're
gonna start if you owe 30 cents,
we're rounding up to $10. You're
saying if it's under $10 we're
just not gonna worry about it.
Correct. And so Mr. Chair and
representative, it's 7167 and 68
are mirrors of each other, and
we would raise from $1 to $10
both.
If the taxpayer owes us less
than $10 we won't collect it
from you, but also if we owe you
less than $10. We won't send it
to you. So, equal treatment from
both.
Um,
Excellent and chairman and
secretary.
Um,
You maybe just speak for a
moment to the methodology of how
you.
Adjusted for inflation or
adjusted these penalty
increases.
Um, just, just for my
understanding, you know, are we,
are we doing a 1 to 1 inflation
adjustment or are we looking at
what other states are doing or
do we just say this looks good,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
basically, we went back and
looked at when each current
penalty or fee, and I guess
they're all penalties. When,
when, uh, which
Year of law, each penalty was
set at its current rate, and
then we just ran an inflation
calculator from then until 2024.
And rounded to the closest round
number.
Um,
Thank you, Chairman Secretary,
excellent. And then my, my last
question and maybe comment is I
Really appreciated how on
Section 11, you mentioned how
important is to safeguard.
Revealing off initial taxpayer
information, right? And
And I know some of us would be
like, I don't care if you reveal
my income tax return, right, you
know, in the, you know, trying
to be transparent and such, but
there are legitimate reasons
why.
That should be kept
confidential.
Um, and
Um, and I think this might run
in conflict with
And the prior bill, your section
72 and 80, which you saw me
cringe on.
Um, because what those
essentially do is reveal.
Confidential taxpayer
information.
Um,
And, and so I
Of of all this bill so far, I'm
very
grateful and excited to see it
except for maybe those two
sections. We should maybe really
Rethink that.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Harper, we really appreciate
that. That's exactly what we
wanted.
Obtain, you know, for future
drafting from this committee,
that kind of feedback.
Thank you, Chairman.
Uh, thank you very much
Representing Harper. Next we
have uh Senator Cedillo Lopez,
and then after that.
Underrepresentative Scott Cia
Lopez, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. This, I really wanna
commend you. This is just an
incredible, incredible job. I
know a lot of work went into it,
and you see this in other
statutes, just cause we, they're
so piecemeal and the language
that the drafter and one was
different. So this is, this is
tremendous. I have a few
questions, um.
Probably more curiosity than
anything, um.
But sometimes substantive, um.
This this fine, increasing the
fine when you talked about 11
and the second part, I'm
starting actually where uh
Representative Harper ended.
Um, are there other consequences
to a staff disclosure of
confidential information and
A misdemeanor is not enough. I,
I think so. I, I, I would
support uh having, but that
would be in the criminal code it
would be a whole different
thing.
But I would definitely having uh
see that consequence is more
significant. Are there any other
consequences like are they
fired, you know, what, what
happens when somebody discloses.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator Seria Lopez. It's a
great question and thank you
also for the feedback about
potentially including it as
making it a felony. Um, so the
most likely person to
Disclose this information? is it
is an employee. I'm not, it's
not 100% of the time, but it's
probably a tax and rev employee,
uh, if, if they're finding
themselves on the wrong side of
this section. And so if an
employee is found to uh reveal
confidential taxpayer
information they'll be
disciplined and then just
depending on the nature of it,
that could be anywhere from a
written reprimand to a
termination. We've, we've seen
various versions of that.
Um, just, yeah, again, just
depending on if it was an honest
mistake and nothing actually
happened or versus if it was
deliberate and willful and
selling information. We haven't
seen anyone selling information.
Um, what would be more
You know, a couple examples of
things I can think of off the
top of my head in the last 5
years, you might have an
employee.
Who discloses
Family members, ex-spousees
something for purposes of of tax
returns or child support. That's
not the proper way to get that
information, or you might have
an employee who uh use goes in
and uses our system to file
someone's return for them. They
can't, it's, it's not work
assigned to you, you can't use
our system to do it. Um, but,
you know, there maybe somebody
accidentally left a folder in a
restroom for 15 minutes, and
then went and got it, and there
could have been a disclosure,
but there probably wasn't, we're
not gonna terminate. Um, you
know.
Each time this happens to
considering the severity of what
happened, we'll also look at
referring the misdemeanor for
prosecution, but
It never, never would be
prosecuted, because it's a
misdemeanor. That's why I think
it should, it should go up and,
and kind of um
Related to that, is that because
of the state Personnel Act, or
is it because of internal policy
within the department.
00, and Mark is also reminding
me, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and there's also a provision
that you cannot work for the
state again if let's see what is
if you're, if you're in 7176 if
you're
You, you can, if you're found
guilty of this, convicted of
this misdemeanor, which won't be
prosecuted. You could be fined
$1000 imprisoned for up to a
year.
And you cannot be employed by
the state for 5 years after your
conviction.
But again, that requires
convictions. That's the
misdemeanor. It's of interest to
me because the confidentiality
provisions about uh state work
are all over the place from this
little misdemeanor to real
significant penalties and
others. So there's, there's not
consistency across, but I, I
think you're, you're bringing it
to our attention is really
great.
um, then going um
Going through, and these are um
just kind of questions.
Adding the good faith language.
Um,
Shoot, I put it on the, on the
corner, so I didn't put it
exactly where it was. I'm not
finding it, but when you
Um. That's um section 70,
Senator. OK, good, great. Thank
you. Yeah, I was in the corner
of that page. So, um,
Clean up reflecting New Mexico
court decision.
This is my question is, I wonder
how clear that decision was
because good faith doesn't, if
the purpose is to reduce
litigation, um, good faith is
not like a real clear standard.
I haven't read the Supreme Court
opinion. I don't think, um.
So I'm just, I don't know, you
just might want to think about
that language, and if that's
what the Supreme Court said,
that's the Supreme Court.
said and I'll leave it alone,
but if they had something more
specific, it might be more
helpful than just a general good
faith thing because
in my view, that doesn't
discourage litigation. It, it's
so easy to say I did it in good
faith.
Thank you uh for that as well,
Senator, and Mr. Chair, um, we
can send you that, uh, we will
send you that, but we'll also
just look at it internally.
We'll look up through, you know,
the record would include the
decision and order from the
hearing office, the court of
appeals, and, and the Supreme
Court orders.
So yeah, I mean, if you had
lawyers look at it, they
probably thought it through, but
it just struck me like good
faith isn't much of a
Much of a clarification, but if
that's what they said, that's
what they said.
Um, and then, um,
On peach
Well, you know, this complicated
tiered rate of petrol petroleum
products, uh, loading fee.
What is the purpose of a loading
fee anyway.
Moss fascinated by the policy
stuff in a tax code, um.
Mr. Chair and Senator Cio Lopez,
I don't know much about the
petroleum products loading fee
other than that, every year I
get a certification from the
same staff person at at
Environment department who's
very nice, saying it's still
$150 and um but beyond that,
I'll have to, it must have to do
with something maybe like wear
and tear on transportation or
I'm really not sure, but we can
follow up with you on what the
purpose of that is. I, I,
because it's tied to something
that the Environment Department
certified and it would just be
interesting to
No, what's the purpose? Um.
Because if it's just a random
tax for no reason, I wonder why
we're collecting it, but if it's
going to something.
Some harm that that's caused.
Maybe it should be higher, you
know what I mean? If, if it's,
if it's the road damage that
could be so just that it's a
substantive question. We, we
will um look into that chairman
people freak out because I said
it shouldn't be t OK. I don't
know. I, I, I didn't, I missed
that, but.
Um, you know, either one, either
way, we should figure out why. I
know that the, you know, the the
fee would be set based on the
fund balance and something NMED
is corrective action fund. So
you know, must be sent to
something having to do with
environmental cleanup, but I'll,
I'll find out a lot more details
on that. Just, yeah, because if
it is environmental clinic, this
loading fee is because they
spill so much when they're
loading, maybe it's not enough,
but if it's, if it's random and
for no reason, I don't know why
we're doing it.
Representative Scott looks like
he knows and I think Mark knows
I'm sure he's on the I'm sure
he's on the, on the list, but
anyway, it just struck me um
about what is the purpose and
then um
The, the skim oil issue or.
Um,
Maybe it does need
clarification, but if it comes,
if the oil comes and produces
water, it comes from the well,
so it should be taxed. I mean it
just.
If it needs clarification, needs
clarification, but to me,
The source is always the well,
whether it's coming out in the
in the that nasty water or
whether it's coming out.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, the
way it seems to work is that,
um,
It's not actually sold by the
well operator to the water
disposal company. Its simply
given, uh, and because it, it
needs to be purchased in order
to be taxed. That's how it's
slipping through. um, so, uh,
again, it's just a
clarification. We, I'm not aware
that we've audited anybody on
this, but, um, we do, we are
getting revenue from people
selling the skim oil, so you
know, at least some people are
complying, uh, but we would like
to make sure that we have
complete compliance, and I
think.
for, yeah. Yes, thank you. OK,
great. Um.
The um
And it's just another
clarification or, or
Uh, idle curiosity.
Um, you
You say that the gap plans are
not taxed, like the Medica or
whatever and again, why, why
not? Are we doing that for some
purpose? What's the reason?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, it's
uh specifically Megap plans that
are sold by nonprofits.
Uh, so, uh, I think it's because
they're being sold by nonprofits
that we want to treat them that
way, uh, because, uh, again,
because of the model and they're
providing a very valuable
service to seniors, uh, that,
um, we don't want to end up
increasing the price of the
insurance policy itself. So if
it's a process so if it's a
for-profit insurance company,
they do get taxed.
Uh, yes, that they should be
under the, under the current
law, yes, the purpose was to
facilitate
Nonprofits to do this and just
trying to understand the policy.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, I
think the, the policy idea is to
keep uh the plans affordable.
OK.
All right, that makes sense.
Thank you. I just, I was that,
that's helpful. Um, and then
this, these texts that there are
no taxes, tax credits, that
there are no claims for like uh
772829, the foster youth
Employment CIT credits never
been claimed.
And this corporate supported
child.
Is it an outreach? Well, what's
the purpose of the text? I
always ask that. And then B, is
there an outreach problem
because at least on face value,
it seems like a good thing to
get credit for employing a
foster youth, but maybe nobody
knows about it and maybe it's an
outreach problem and then this,
I don't know what corporate
supported childcare CIT credit
is.
So, what's the purpose and B is,
do we have problems with
outreach on them on the, um, Mr.
Chair and Senator, um, after
this, I'll follow up with you
with the page from our tax
expenditure report on those two
credits that sort of walk you
through.
Why they're not being claimed
potentially in more detail, but
as I recall, the foster youth
employment credit, again, yeah,
you're right, the purpose would
have been to, uh, you know,
enhance job opportunities for
foster youth, which is a great
thing, but the requirements that
the employer must go through to
claim it or kind of arduous for
a relatively small credit. So
one option that we're
recommending is repeal it
because it's cluttering of the
books and not being used.
Another option is do something
with it to make it usable, uh,
you know, and that that.
Simplify it, make it, yeah,
maybe it achieve its purpose,
right, and similar story with
the corporate childcare uh
credit.
Um, right now, this is listed in
our repeal bill, but I, I think
at least some folks are talking
about instead amending that
credit to make it um large
enough incentive to to happen so
that more corporations are
induced to spend money to offer
um
You know, offer childcare on
site to their workers, but right
now I think it's capped at.
30% of up to $100,000 and it
just does apparently it doesn't
induce enough corporations to.
Make that leap.
We offered childcare on site at
Elastic Communitario. Well, I
guess it's we're a nonprofit we
filed a different form, but
yeah, I, I that's what made me
think it might be an outreach.
Outreach thing. I mean, I had no
idea.
About that.
Um, thank you, thank you, and
again, I just want to commend it
an excellent job and um
Certainly, I support a lot that
support the idea of cleaning up
the code and making it
consistent and it's a lot of
work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate this opportunity. Uh,
thank you very much, Senator
Seria Lopez, and we're going
next to uh Representative Scott
and it
sounds like the two of you are
gonna become very good friends
there in the Senate.
Representative Scott, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, Mr. Jain.
Mm.
I can't speak to the skim oil.
Uh.
Technicalities, but the question
that I would have.
would be whether that oil will
be taxed as if it was produced.
It came out of a well. That is,
is it.
Is it going to be paying
severance at Vorm Emergency
School at the same rates as
Produced.
Mr. Chairman, representative,
yes, it's going to, uh,
currently that is what we
believe the statute says. And so
again, this is really just a
clarification, uh, of what's
going on and there are the 4
taxes, the uh adviorum, the
emergency school tax.
Reduction tax and I'm blanking
on the name of the 4th 1. You
probably don't conservation. I
Reduction tax and I'm blanking
on the name of the 4th 1. You
probably don't conservation.
Yes, I knew you'd know better
than I do. Uh, so, um, again,
it's just gonna be treated like
any kind of oil, but the
valuation is obviously lower
because that oil is sold for
different purposes. It's not,
uh, you know, light sweet crude
or anything that's gonna be put
in the car.
It's gonna be used for probably
different industrial purposes.
And just for the benefit of the
committee.
A tank battery.
will typically
Do a pretty credible job of
separating oil from produced
water.
However, when that produced
water is accumulated in a
Larger processing facility or
ultimate disposal.
Those operators absolutely want
none of those hydrocarbons going
back into the ground.
So they make
Because of the larger volumes,
even with very, very small
percentages of the hydrocarbon,
it makes it economically viable
to recover that additional oil,
and that's
I skim.
Come to pass.
Now,
Uh, with respect to your tax
liens, I've been
Involved in several
circumstances this last year.
With anguished thanks over what
turned out to be
Of relatively trivial
misunderstandings.
The wrong box check or
something.
But is it gone on long enough
toward the department had now.
was, was now sending
threatening.
Uh, letters with regard to
Attacksle or a wage garnishment
or.
Bank account or
And I would feel more
comfortable.
Making it easier to file these
tax liens, if you guys were
doing a bit better job answering
the phone.
And trying to resolve these
issues before they got to that.
Could, could you speak to
Efforts made in that direction,
I hope.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair and
Representative Scott, um,
I would say as as sort of an
aside, I was saying to someone
the other day, you know, who
brought up all your letters
sounds so threatening and rude,
and I said, well, it kind of
just quote the statute, and it,
I guess it does sound
threatening when it's directed
towards you, but we can't
really.
Say words that aren't, you know,
in complete alliance with, with
the statute in them. So we are
trying to look at ways that we
can.
For example, make our
correspondence easier to read
or, uh, you know, sound nicer,
but when we do that we get away
from the statute and that
creates a a gap in between,
which isn't good, so, um, so as
far as
Uh, the taxpayer concerns that
you're talking about, we do have
a problem with our call center.
It's not, it's not easy. We have
something like 30 FTE and they
answer a certain number of calls
per week whether we get 5000
calls incoming, which is a
really good week for those 30
people or 32,000, you know,
which is a really bad week
because, for example, uh,
rebates are in the mail or into
it, you know, paid all 10,000
people's returns late. So
they're, they're in a difficult
position. Some of the things we
do to try to.
Manage the call center. Um,
we're, we're getting a lot more
data dashboarding about the
reason, the root causes for
calls were, uh, we've put in
place tiered calling that kind
of routes calls better to the
best expert A. We've put people
in the revenue processing
division on the call center
basically with their own license
and headset, so that, you know,
calls that come in that have to
go to them rather than audit and
compliance actually do make it
to them without it's just a
simple transfer, um.
Uh, we, we're using IVR more
basically where like you call in
and we know, you know, this
week, most people are calling
about this one thing. We just
record a message and put that at
the very front so they can hang
up perhaps afterwards if that
answers the question. Um, all
these things we're trying to do,
there's no silver bullet, but
we're trying to do all these
things to make the call center
work better and, and more
responsive, and yet we have the
budget we have, we have the
system we have, and sometimes
the demand way outpaces other
other things to try to stem.
That we have a YouTube channel
for self-service. We've got
Speedy the Road Runner, our AI
bot on our, on our tap website
that can answer a lot of
questions. We're trying to offer
people all these different
It's, it's a tough situation,
especially some weeks, some
weeks like this week it's they
probably got about a 4 minute
wait time and everything's going
great, but when something hits
the fan, it doesn't always go
well, and we know that.
Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary, in every
circumstance.
A phone call from me.
And the issue was resolved in a
matter of.
A day or two. So it seems to me
like
The phone call got some live
person.
To take a look at the problem
and go, oh.
This is no big deal.
And I, I would like to see more
of that occur.
Rather, rather than less and
then
I guess last comment.
I heard you say that a change in
gross receipts tax.
Right
Required 150 hours.
Of manpower
To resolve with every change.
And in this day and age,
With databases and computer
systems and
And software availability.
It doesn't seem like.
That's reasonable.
Are there
Or their upgrade, have, have
y'all requested upgrades?
Oh.
Can you, can you address
What appears to me to be a
terrible inefficiency in that
process. Mr. Chair and
Representative Scott, thank you
for that question. Um, and 150
hours is, is rough estimate.
We're, we're, we just got this
uh request on September 30th to
do these rate changes, but
Couple different things I want
to say, um.
The system we have, our system
of record is gentax. It's
provided by the vendor that
provides the system of record
for more than half of the states
for tax. It it's a great system.
We shouldn't change from that
and doing so would cost us a
lot, way more, um, but that
said, the way that we use the
tax system, particularly the way
we do local distributions is
very difficult on that system.
New Mexico is an outlier in
that.
We have the state GRT and then
Every muni, every county
hospital districts, uh, now
Metropolitan redevelopment
Districts, TI, tribes and
pueblos. There's all these
different overlying rates in the
GRT and now the comp tax. And so
when one county changes.
One rate, let alone all their
different rates. Um, it affects
every single rate within that
that overlaps. So if you've got,
for example, Santa Fe County.
A change to their rates will
trigger changes in the city of
Santa Fe and Edgewood, all these
in in any tribe or pueblo, any
local area in there. And so
basically we're talking about
each line of code requiring and
and it is the IT system
developers doing this. We, this
is the software, this is the
system, the database that's
being worked on. You have to go
through each line of code and
reprogram it and test it, so
that we don't make errors in in
the distributions later. So
really the anomaly is that we
have
So many different types of
distributions and um in most
states do not. And
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
is there no
opportunity for gent, your, your
main vendor to take a look at
these issues and come up with
some.
Convenient solutions.
I think, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Scott, I think
we're constantly doing that
together with them and our own
IT staff, um, but really to
comply with the way our statutes
are written.
Which, you know, are, are sort
of set in stone because of
bonding, um, there isn't really
a good way around this to
automate it. We, we do, uh.
You know, find those
efficiencies where we can and
try to streamline the data
entry, but.
It's, it's just a beast.
Well, I've heard
Representative Harper Preach for
the last
10 years about.
It being a bad idea for New
Mexico to be an outlier. Mhm.
And I guess this is just one of
those.
Another instance of that being
the case.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you. Thank, thank you very
much, Representative Scott. We
really appreciate uh not only
that, but your expertise in uh
in some of these areas. Uh,
next, we're going to Represent
Borego, Represent Borego,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, um, to our
Secretary Gordon Clark. Mhm.
And um our director
taken.
Did I get that right?
Um,
So, I had a couple of questions
as I
Heard your presentation. I was
really glad to see that you all
are uh looking at amending the
tax code, and I was sort of
appalled to hear that.
You know, it's been that long
since the tax codes, some of
these tax codes have been
amended. Um, and my first
question, Mr. Chair, is um is
the state of New Mexico have a
company that
Publishes all of the tax codes.
So I asked the individual can go
in and look at all of these. Is
there a company that actually
manages that for the state.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Brego, yes, um, you know, the,
the tax code is, is just chapter
7 of of New Mexico statutes
annotated, so, uh, there I think
there's several different
sources like for example, I use
one source and that and that's
uh available, but there's
different sources. I think the
legislative council maybe has
something, a link to something
on their website, uh, and then
the rules that go along with it
are just important through the
New Mexico register and the
compilation commission uh
oversees all of that. So, are
you saying that every department
has a different
Um,
I mean,
Do they have a different
company, maybe, or is it
standardized for the state of
New Mexico. Mr. Chair and
Representative, it's just, it's
standardized, um, all these, you
know, changes that end up in
section 7 sorry, chap I keep
saying uh.
Chapter 7 is the tax code. They
all end up being compiled by the
compilation commission and
published by different sources.
And the reason that I asked that
question, Mr. Chair, is the city
of Albuquerque works with uh
American legal Publishing and
any individual can go in there
and pull up any, any resolution,
any, um, you know, bill that has
been adopted and so I, and I
haven't had the, I haven't gone
into the state system to see
that, but I would like to know
that it's standardized across
the board for all departments,
um,
So, um, my next question, Mr.
Chair, is and this is one of the
things that I um that concerns
me a little bit and I, and I
appreciate that you guys are
doing e-filing, um, because I do
file my own business taxes, um,
but my concern is with regard to
like disenfranchising a certain
group of people, especially
seniors who are not computer
literate, um,
What is your um sort of
recommendation for that.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Brego, yeah, that's something
that we're definitely sensitive
to and I, you know, I tend to
think it applies mostly to the
personal income tax, um, and
we're not making any changes,
uh, regarding any mandates or
requirements to e-file and Pit
even though we really want
people to e-file. It's not a
requirement. It wouldn't be
under this bill. Um,
For, for a business owner, um,
you know, given
You know, they may or may not
have to file monthly or
quarterly or semiannually
depending on how much receipts
they have, um, but yeah, we, we
certainly, uh, wouldn't want to
disenfranchise mechanism and if
you don't file there is
electronically. There is a
representative too in any in any
tax program that we do an e-file
mandate. Uh, there's also a
waiver request that you can
request a waiver from that, but
usually if there's a mandate
there might be, but I just
thought I'd better ask the
question, um, at what
I'm just curious at what age
does a person stop filing, or do
they?
I thought maybe 90 or something
like, oh wait, I believe we have
an exemption from Pitt for
anyone over 100/100, I think so,
yeah, right. I think that was on
the Super Bowl in the 90s, but
maybe is it 100? OK, so if you
live over 100, then you don't
file taxes. OK, thank you. And
that, that's just for knowledge
because I've talked to my mom
about that a little bit and it's
like it's not quite 100 yet, but
Um, and then, uh, Mr. Chair, my
last question, um, is with
regard to um
Let's see, oh yeah, this is a
question that I sort of ask all
the departments, um, because
And I'm gonna tell you some of
my history. I used to work for
tax and revenue as an intern in
college, and I used to clean up
PITs and microfish them. Oh wow.
Believe it or not, I mean, so
that was one of my intern, um,
internships, and then I had a
second internship, which I
actually was a bookkeeper.
By hand, for the tax revenue
departments, and I distinctly
remember those jobs and it was,
it was tough and, and the reason
that I asked that is because
Some departments are still
keeping paper files and
microfish, which is to me sort
of appalling, especially in this
age of technology and
fast-moving technology, um.
Do you, I, I hate to ask this
question, but are you guys still
keeping PITs and such on
microfish.
Mr. Chair and representative, to
my knowledge we don't have any
pit on microfish. Um, everything
gets imaged on the, on the tax
side, everything gets imaged
into the taxpayer's gen tax
account so that for any given
taxpayer you can look up their
account, look at each year filed
and, and everything. I think we,
we do still have some MVD
records on microfish that were
in the process of um imaging,
uh, they, there, there are
certain DWI and other related
records that have to be retained
for a really long amount of time
and some of them forever and
And um so we have a contractor
working little by little it's
gonna take about 4 years to work
through all that, but yeah,
we're finding that the, the
microish machines are.
You know, we're not gonna be
able to read those records if we
don't image them before too
long. Well, and, and the reason
that I asked that, Mr. Chair, is
because I just wanna know if the
state is really giving each
department sufficient amounts of
uh funding.
Um, Mr. Chair, to encourage
these, these changes that we
come up to speed in terms of our
technological.
Um,
Ability.
So I just, and I, I guess, are
we as a state, giving your
department what you need.
To make those changes, and I
know they're expensive. I know
buying new software is
expensive.
Um, Mr. Chair and
representative, you know,
particular to um the scanning of
microfiche imaging uh issue that
we just talked about it. I think
MBT is working through that
with, uh, you know, fun balance
a little by little, a couple
hundred,000 dollars worth each
year. That, that's OK. Um.
You know, so not particularly
related to record retention, but
um, and certainly the department
is very lean, um, we have about
the same number of employees
today and we're processing about
$23 billion a year as we had
when we were processing $8
billion a year. So we're, we're
very independent or we're, we're
very dependent on IT systems to
help us automate and, and do
everything without touching it,
you know, basically, um,
We just always need to be
looking for ways to streamline
our operations and we've been
successful in, in getting quite
a bit of C2 funding through the
appropriations process that's,
that's been great, um, in the
last 5-6 years, we've finished
every C2 project on time and
under budget. We're really proud
of that track record. I'll have
3 more C2 requests this make
session, so it's, it's a lot of
it is to automate and make
things electronic.
And Mr. Chair, um, I just wanted
to mention it's a very nice way
of saying we're, we're keeping
up but we're not doing, we're
not getting probably enough
funding to do it. Um, what I,
and, and I heard this when I
heard about corrections and
especially when um people are
asking, uh, you know, more
records.
In lawsuits and um public
information, um, a lot of times
we're having to
Xerox files, and so on, so I, I
think it's important that we
look at all of our departments
across the state
to ensure that they're getting
the funding that they need to to
convert and I, I heard this from
corrections, um, to convert from
paper files to a more technical
technologically advanced uh
situation. So that is something
that concerns me, Mr. Chair, and
I think that I, I'm
Just bringing that up because I
think we need to point that out.
So thank you for that and uh
thank you for answering my
questions. Thank you,
Representative. Next on our list
we have Representative Carena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary Mark for being here.
Um, I appreciated hearing from
one of my colleagues a question
about why we have some of these
tax credits or tax policies on
the books that are never used.
And
Um, I appreciate, Mr. Chair and
secret, your polite answer about
what it means to implement and
potentially the burden that we
set up in our statutes, but
overwhelmingly, I'd say the
accountability falls back to the
legislative body, um, and I've
seen in my three terms here that
sometimes our ideals don't match
what implementation looks like
for state government. So I
appreciate that you all carry
that big lift every day and uh
and also invite you as you have
secretary, to continue to be in
conversation with us as
We get into a 60 day session.
Um, while often I've heard these
tax ideas that sound good.
They may not land that way for
everyday New Mexicans, and I'm,
I'm pretty tired of passing
policies that get us a sound
bite.
And potentially have unintended
consequences for families every
day. So as my question, Mr.
Chair and secretary, um, it will
be, I imagine.
Your last 60 day session, uh, or
Who knows, maybe you want to
stick on for another
administration, but as the
political winds go, this is the
last 60 day session for the
administration that you work
for. I appreciate your cleanup
bills, the other times you've
come before us to committee.
What's your priority for the 60
day session?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's a really good question.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you, Representative
Karena, um,
You know, I, I don't know that I
can name just one on one hand,
um, these, these bills that
we're talking about this morning
are not the most exciting thing
that will happen around tax in
the session, but I, I think that
that is sort of like this
administration's love note to
the department. Like we're gonna
make things a lot smoother and
nicer before, before we leave
one day. Um, so it's these,
these are really important to
me, but beyond that, what's more
important to all of New Mexico
are some of the more um
substantive tax policy changes
that will come up.
Um,
you know, I, I don't have a good
sense yet before the budget
recommendations are released in
January, um, how much capacity
there will be for recurring tax
cuts. I know it'll be a smaller
number than some of the recent
years that we can remember, um.
I think there'll be interesting
debates about um potentially
some new tax incentives, you
know.
Incentivizing one type of
behavior or another, um, I, I'm
sure we'll have more robust
discussions about progressive
taxation that we can keep moving
the ball forward, perhaps that
we've we've moved a mountain in
that regard, together in the
last 5 years, but maybe there's
more we could be doing. Um, I
think we'll also have continued
discussions like we have in the
last years about distribution of
revenues, you know, for example,
the liquor tax, um, tobacco tax,
potentially cigarette tax, motor
vehicle excise tax, you know,
there's even any
where we don't have a lot of
capacity for recurring tax cuts.
Maybe we do have capacity to
move money within state funds,
so those are all really
important. I don't have one
single highest priority.
Any, any other questions?
No
Any other questions or comments
from the committee?
Seeing that secretary started
missing your entireation, but uh
thank you for being here this
morning.
Have a great day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Next on our agenda is item
number 7, effects of alcohol and
modifying behavior through tax
policy.
We haven't uh our agenda, David,
uh.
again, who is a professor,
Department of Health Law Policy
and Management at the Boston
University, as well as Brady
Horn, PhD associate professor,
Department of Economics at the
University of New Mexico.
Gentlemen, good morning.
And
we appreciate you being here
this morning, the both of you.
And uh I, I would like to just
to be preface this.
This morning's discussion on
this matter as saying that I, I
think that we can all agree upon
here on this body and this
legislature that we recognize
the effects alcohol has had in
New Mexico on our citizens. We
recognize that we have a problem
in some cases. We recognize that
some of our citizens are sick
from this, from these uh issues.
Um, so I'm hoping that today's
discussion doesn't continue to
harp on these are the issues.
Health wise in New Mexico, more,
more focused though on the tax
issues as it pertains to this
committee itself as a revenue
stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee.
With that gentleman, the floor
is yours.
Is your microphone on?
Now it is.
Thank you. Uh, thanks for having
me. Uh, I am a professor at
Boston University.
Uh, School of Public Health, and
I've worked on these issues.
Since 1986,
So that's about 38 years. I've
worked on them all over the
world.
Um, and I'm happy to be as much
of a resource to you as I can,
uh, in this conversation, um.
Can we go to the next slide?
Great. Uh, so I was asked to
just give a brief overview of
alcohol and health, so I am
going to run through a little
bit of that, um, but just, uh,
alcohol is related to over 200
disease and injury conditions in
the human body, globally
responsible for about 2.6
million deaths a year.
And uh important to remember as
we, a little bit later I'll talk
about alcohol and equity, um,
the effects of alcohol are there
a relationship between alcohol
harm is paradoxical in that it
is upper income people who do
most of the drinking, more of
the drinking, but if you're
poor, if you're in a
marginalized community in any
way, the consequences are going
to be much worse.
So this is uh next slide.
This is from the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, and it's just a
quick rundown of what some of
those 200 disease and injury
conditions are, whether it's
heart, liver, gastrointestinal,
uh, effects in the brain, the
lungs, muscle wasting, uh,
pancreas, um, reduced bone
density, uh, immune system
effects, which was particularly
a concern during the COVID
pandemic, and then, uh,
carcinogen.
Uh, with international agency
for research on cancer
terminning terming alcohol, a
group one carcinogen, uh,
responsible for cancers in 7, at
least 7 areas in the body. Next
slide.
These are the 100% attributable
to alcohol conditions. I'm not
going to run through them all.
Uh, I include them there because
sometimes this is what is
reported as alcohol's effects on
health, it is only a partial
picture, next line.
And uh then these are, I mean,
one of the reasons that alcohol
is such a big factor in human
health is because it's what I
call the great cofactor, uh, it
plays a role in many more
conditions than just the 100%
attributable ones. So in
epidemiology we use a technique
called alcohol attributable
fractions, where we use meta
meta-analysis of many, many
studies that enable us to
estimate what's the percentage
advantage of each of these
conditions that would not have
happened if alcohol had not been
in the picture, those are the
alcohol attributable fractions
or AAFs, and uh you can see
here, uh, a wide range of
chronic conditions and also uh a
wide range of acute conditions.
Next slide.
This is a little bit of what
this looks like in New Mexico,
as far as we can tell, uh, and
these are figures from CDC's
modeling, um, and I want to note
for you on that left hand
column, we've got mostly uh
chronic conditions.
Uh, and then the right hand of
the motor vehicle crashes in my
work, many people assume that
they're two bad things that
happened from alcohol. One is
addiction and the other is motor
vehicle crashes, and we care
deeply about motor vehicle
crashes, but they are 10% or
less of the adult deaths from
alcohol every year.
So in New Mexico, somewhere
above 2000 deaths a year. Next
slide.
And then this, I'm sure you've
seen over and over again. These
are again just for those 100%
alcohol attributable conditions,
but it's a major canary in the
coal mine and New Mexico leads
the nation.
In the number of those deaths
per 100,000 people.
Next slide.
Um, this is, um, from actually
your
own legislatures, work, uh,
slightly higher estimate of the
number of deaths, uh, and the
interesting thing or the deeply
concerning thing is how much
that has gone up from 2019 to
2021 of 31% increase.
slide.
The cost of this, I'm sure
you've seen this before, um, but
the last year we have cost
estimates for it is 2010. I've
spoken to my colleagues at CDC
they will do a new cost study in
2026. Um, but for the moment,
this is what we have as of 2010,
excessive alcohol consumption
was costing the state about $2.2
billion about $2.77 a drink or
over $1000 per person in the
state.
Right
And over 40% of those are paid
directly by government.
Next slide.
You hear a lot about the health
benefits of alcohol use and this
slide is slightly tongue in
cheek, um, but what it shows you
is all the different conditions
that studies have claimed to
find a health benefit of alcohol
use for and this ranges from
coronary heart disease, which
you've heard about a lot, but
the common cold, uh,
osteosorosis, osis, um,
gallstones, hearing loss, just a
very wide
range of conditions that these
studies, observational studies.
Claimed to find uh were
benefiting from
Usually light to moderate levels
of alcohol use.
Next slide.
There is a major set of problems
with this literature, as it
turns out and the last 5 to 8
years, the literature has really
turned a corner.
Um, the general finding was that
light and moderate drinkers were
more healthy than the abstainer
group, but turned out the
abstainer group was highly
problematic in many of these
studies, it included people who
had quit drinking because of
their health. The so-called sick
quitters.
It also was not particularly
comparable to the rest of the
population in that that light
moderate category tended to be
people who had a wide range of
other uh healthy habits, which
led to serious confiding when
researchers removed both that
misclassification of the mix
quitters and the confiding
errors, those apparent health
benefits just disappear.
There is a newer technique
called Mendelian randomization,
which I'm not going to try to
explain, but basically, it
allows us to mimic large
clinical trials in a way that's
impossible for alcohol
with literally hundreds of
thousands of cases in the mix.
When that technique has been
applied to this literature, um,
Again, no associations found
between any of these health
benefits.
So the bottom line is from the
literature at this point, there
are many reasons that people
will decide to drink your health
just should never be one of
them.
Next slide.
So moving on to alcohol taxes,
I'd like to start talking about
this by quoting Adam Smith.
Who wrote sugar, rum, and
tobacco are commodities which
are nowhere necessaries of life
which are become objects of
almost universal consumption,
and which are therefore
extremely proper subjects of
taxation.
If you'll click one more time,
there we go. I'm sorry, go back.
They've also been endorsed
recently by the Bloomberg uh
Task Force on fiscal Policy for
Health, the World Bank, and the
World Health Organization.
There's a strong global
consensus at this point that
alcohol taxes are a positive
health measure. Next slide.
And this is what's happened, uh,
in terms of federal tax
revenues. This is beer. We could
do this for any of the three
categories.
This only goes to the 2010s. It
just got worse with the 2017 tax
cuts, uh, and I'll talk about
those more in a minute. Next
slide.
And then these are state excise
taxes. Basically what's happened
at the state level.
is in about 1972 states stopped
raising their alcohol taxes.
Uh, and so we have a steady
chipping away by inflation, uh,
against state alcohol tax rates
effectiveness, worth, etc.
Excuse me.
Over time, uh, and keep this in
mind when I
Provide you with some statistics
about where I'm New Mexico
stands among the states because
it's a pretty low bar that we're
looking at in terms of the
current state levels of taxes on
alcohol, particularly compared
to what those taxes were, uh,
prior to 1972.
Next slide.
Just this is Texas data, it's
what I happen to have, but this
compared to uh
Beer excise taxes what we've
done with tobacco, and, and it
just a sea change in terms of
tobacco use and a wide range of
effective studies used to reduce
tobacco use in the population
and raising the excise tax on
tobacco, as you know here in New
Mexico, it's been a really
important part of that package
of measures.
Next slide.
So
Let's see, can we go on?
There we go. So,
The result of this is the price
of alcohol is wrong,
particularly if you look at it
from a young person's
perspective. I've done this
little exercise all over the
country, going to a convenience
store that's selling alcohol and
other beverages and looked for
the cheapest form of liquid.
And uh it is often not the
water, not the soda pop, not the
orange juice, not the milk, the
cheapest form of liquid is often
the beer, and very simple reason
for that is that the excise
taxes have not kept up with
inflation every year.
That there is inflation, which
is almost every year the alcohol
industry gets a tax cut.
On-premise alcohol is widely
discounted, uh, and that 2017
tax cut.
Included a cut worth uh for
alcohol, worth about $2 billion
a year. A report from the
Treasury Department a year and a
half ago, uh, found that more
than two-thirds of those
benefits went to the largest
producers even though that tax
cut was framed as being an
incentive for small craft
brewers. Next slide.
So this is where New Mexico
stands.
Among the states, you have the
14th highest beer tax, the 24th
highest distilled spirits tax
and the 5th highest wine tax,
and these are data from the Tax
Foundation. Uh, they're the
folks who track this kind of
thing.
Next slide.
So
What's the impact of these
taxes? Do they actually save
lives? I want to report to you
evaluations of some real world
experiences, uh, I was involved
in the effort in Maryland to
increase the tax on alcohol in
that state in 2010, uh, we ended
up with a 3% additional sales
tax on alcohol.
Because it's a sales tax, it
rises on inflation with that and
the excise taxes, it's currently
bringing in over $300 million a
year and I estimate that close
to 200 million of that is coming
from the sales tax.
And um
It paid for designated things
that the coalition in Maryland
wanted uh services for people
with developmental disabilities,
alcohol and other drug and
mental health services, long
term care for older adults, and
health enterprise zones to
address health equity.
Next slide.
We have several effects, uh, uh,
studies of what effect the tax
had on consumption and on
problems. I am on the
consumption side, this is
something I did with one of my
colleagues who's now the head of
the uh alcohol Research Unit at
CDC.
We found an immediate 3.5% drop
in alcohol consumption, uh,
compared to what it would have
been otherwise.
Um,
We, uh, separate study found a
6% decline in alcohol positive
drivers on Maryland roadways and
a 12% drop among that high risk
group, the 18 to 15 to 34 year
olds.
My colleagues at Hopson Hopkins
have also looked at these data.
Taking the story forward through
2016, found a 17% drop in binge
drinking by by Maryland adults,
26% drop in the number of
students drinking in the past 30
days, 28% drop in youth binge
drinking and a 31% drop in the
number of students.
riding with a drinking driver.
Next slide.
Others experiences, and these
are all peer reviewed published,
uh, studies, uh, Alaska passed
substantial tax increases in
1983 and 2002, and they were
associated with large and
immediate.
And sustained reductions in
alcohol-related disease
mortality, the effect signs
raised from 11% to 29%.
In Florida, there were modest
changes in the tax rates in
1977, 1983, 1988, and 1991,
looking at that experience in
total.
The researchers found a 10%
increase in the alcohol tax was
associated with about a 2.2%
decline in alcohol-related
mortality, very interesting
cause that's very similar to
something Brady's gonna show you
in terms of uh traffic crash
deaths uh here in New Mexico.
In Illinois, the governor passed
a big alcohol tax increase to
fund roads and bridges in 2009.
It was not designed as a health
measure. He just wanted money,
needed money, and uh it was
associated with a 26% drop in
fatal alcohol-related motor
vehicle crashes.
Next slide.
I want to say a little bit about
equity here.
And to understand the equity
issues, it's important to
understand patterns of drinking
in the population. Excuse me.
I don't have New Mexico specific
data. It would be ideal if
you're alcohol epidemiologist
would provide you with this kind
of data for New Mexico.
But I want to show you what's
happening, uh, nationally.
Uh, in terms of race, in terms
of income.
And just looking at race and
ethnicity, whites are least
likely um Alaska Indian, uh,
American Indian and Alaskan
native folks are most likely to
be abstainers.
Something that not everybody
actually knows. And yet, uh,
American Indian and Alaskan
Native are also least folks are
also least likely to report
light or moderate use and white
people are most likely to report
this.
Looking by income.
Drinking rises with income.
Alcohol is a luxury good. Uh,
and both non-excessive and
excessive drinking.
Our most common in the highest
income groups.
Next slide, I'm sorry, that was
that slide.
Pa, right, next slide.
Um, Alaska Indian, American
Indian and Alaska Native people
and white people are also most
likely to be heavy drinkers,
Hispanic or Latinx people are
slightly more likely to
self-report as binge drinkers.
But if you look at heavy
drinkers, those are the binge
drinkers who uh binge at least 4
times a month.
The um
Estimates of prevalence of both
binge and heavy drinker among
American Indian, Alaska native
folks, and among white people,
uh, differ by less than 1%
point.
So, pretty similar prevalence of
drinking, high levels of
abstention in some of those
populations.
Who's drinking the alcohol?
White people overwhelmingly.
11.3 million white adults are
the heavy drinkers, according to
the national survey on Drug Use
and Health, uh, then it's 1.8
million black or African
American, 2.3 billion Hispanic
or Latino Latino adults, and
then smaller numbers for the
rest of the populations on the
slide.
Next slide.
And these heavy drinkers.
alcohol consumption is heavily
skewed to the heaviest drinkers.
They to 0.5% of the drinkers
consume about 25% of the
alcohol. The top 5% drinks
roughly 40% of the alcohol. The
top 20% consumes 88% of the
alcohol.
And these people are mostly
white people, and they're mostly
higher income.
It's important to realize when
we start thinking about this in
terms of progressivity or
regressivity. Next slide.
Because the
Effects of alcohol again, are
heavily regressive.
And that low income populations,
marginalized populations are
much more likely to suffer
worse. While white people are
drinking more than African
Americans, at least in Hispanics
and Latinos, and just slightly
less than uh American Indian
Alaska Native people.
AIAN, African Americans and
Hispanic Latinos are much higher
risk of alcohol conscious than
white people, and I just
summarize here. I have a whole
other presentation where I go
deeper into the data. One study
found
Of all socioeconomic
inequalities with mortality in
general, not just
alcohol-related mortality,
alcohol explained for as much as
27% of those socioeconomic
differences in mortality.
Next slide.
So, the other question is, so
who's gonna pay for an increase
in alcohol taxes and that pie
chart shows you the distribution
of alcohol consumption in the
state of New Mexico. 49% of your
adults, 18 plus, don't drink.
They would pay nothing of a new
alcohol tax.
Fairly typical across the US. We
don't make these figures up.
Um, we are a relatively
abstemious nation compared to
wealthy other wealthy countries
in the in the world.
Um,
The additional cost among
non-excessive drinkers. Uh,
well, you can see from the graph
below, uh, for any of these tax
scena scenarios, the bulk of the
tax is going to be paid by the
people who drink the most.
And those are the excessive
drinkers and in this way alcohol
taxes are a much more targeted
intervention.
Then people often assume.
Next slide. So this is the
argument for that actually
alcohol taxes are progressive in
many ways, and that rich people
are drinking more than poor
people generally.
The tax increases are targeted
to the higher income people who
drink the bulk of the alcohol,
and are the bulk of the
excessive drinkers and for lower
income people, the alcohol taxes
are a win-win.
They will fund primarily
government services and lower
income people are more likely to
need and use those, then a
higher income people.
They will also influence lower
income people's drinking more.
There will be more benefit in
the family unit, uh, in that
reduction of drinking because
the drinking makes a bigger
difference to the family budget,
the family health status, and so
on.
I just pulled in Massachusetts
where we're also working on
alcohol taxes. I pulled a dime a
drink increase, uh, looking to
do similar things to what some
of the proposals here to earmark
those funds for a variety of
good causes, very interesting
findings and a little surprising
to me too, the group most in
favor.
Of increasing those alcohol
taxes were the lowest income
groups, 79% of that group was in
favor of that dime ari increase.
Next slide.
So among non-excessive drinkers,
this is who would pay and you
would see, you can see going
across the the row, uh, no
matter the scenario, these are
much less regressive than people
assume actually, according to
these charts among the
non-excessive drinkers, these
are not regressive taxes. The
people who pay who make more,
uh, would pay more.
Next slide.
You will also hear some about
the jobs impact of alcohol tax
increases and the alcohol
industry has consistently
reported that impact only on
their indu industry, so we did a
study working with economists at
University of Illinois at
Chicago, looking at the impact
across the entire economy, and
these are model figures uh that
I'm gonna show but specific to
the New Mexico economy.
If you look at the net impact
across the entire economy, what
you find is that alcohol taxes
actually lead to slight job
increases. Next slide.
Whether you put it in the
general fund, which is more
labor intensive, uh, in terms of
the jobs that funds them
healthcare, or you put it in a
healthcare. We get a net
increase in jobs for these
various scenarios of alcohol tax
increases in the state of New
Mexico.
Next slide,
So I was just asked to say a few
things about how to improve or
modernize your state's alcohol
taxes.
Um,
At a minimum, it seems like it
would make sense to increase
them to at least account for the
loss to inflation since they
were last raised in 1993. This
would require slightly more than
doubling those taxes.
But then, given the
severe situation.
The New Mexico faces in terms of
alcohol and health and safety
harms.
Seems like it would make sense
to increase them even more to
address those negative
externalities that Brady's gonna
talk about more.
To look at the rates and try to
adjust them across beverage
types, so that you are more
taxing based on the amount of
alcohol in the beverage than you
are the beverage category. In
practice, these tax rates have
grown up piecemeal. You heard
about that in the first
presentation today, how many
things come come into our
statutory codes piecemeal.
Uh, and across the country, the
Taxes are lowest generally for
the product that is most likely
to be produced in the state. So
New York and California.
Almost no tax on wine,
Tennessee.
Really low tax on spirits and so
on.
And then finally to going
forward regularly adjust those
rates for inflation.
Next slide.
That's what I've got for you
this morning. Uh, happy to
answer questions, and again, I
hope this is helpful.
Thank you, Doctor Jerrigan. So
we will hold off on questions
until the next presenter does
speak, but point of
clarification, the information
that you provided, you had made
mention that.
Our alcohol epidemiologists did
not share the information with
you or did not, you don't have
information, so they gave us,
Daddy you gave us that's those
are national figures that you
gave us is Bant specific to New
Mexico.
Except for the jobs data and the
analysis of who drinks what and
who would pay. That was New
Mexico specific. OK, but the
inequities alcohol, yeah the
inequities in consumption, those
are national figures. Thank you,
doctor. Let's go to Doctor Horn.
Good morning.
Morning, Mr. Chair, and uh
thanks for having me.
My name is Brady Horn. I'm a
full professor in the Department
of Economics and the Center for
Alcoholism and Substance Use,
addiction at UNM I'm also
appointed member of the
New Mexico Sentencing
Commission.
I've been in New Mexico for a
bit over 15 years now and I do
research at the intersection of
economics.
Substance use and crime. Uh, I
just want to note.
That I'm here, although I'm a
professor at UNM 15 years, I'm
here in my own capacity, so my
views don't necessarily reflect
the views of New Mexico and also
as a uh technical note, I have
progressive slides that you and
I are just gonna have to work
together um to kind of so I'll
just we'll just have to keep on
going because I just things show
up uh one at a time.
Um, really quick, the research
that I'm gonna talk to you about
today was a part of a UNM.
Oh yes, please.
Next slide, already messing this
up.
Um, the research I'm gonna
present to you today is a part
of a UNM economics research and
public service project.
Which is a
Program at UNM with UNM and help
from the legislature and the
goal of it is to take dedicated
resources to think about.
Contemporaneous policy issues in
New Mexico. Um, so the goal is
to produce research projects to
inform policymakers about issues
facing New Mexico with the goal
of improving lives of New
Mexicans. So why do I bring this
up? Um, we have this program and
we want to work on things that
helps because we're an
independent group that can help
and so I'm really pleased to be
here today to help uh present
these results cause that's
really what the money is
designed for. Also, as a plug,
if you have issues that you want
us to research, I don't have
control over who picks up what,
but the goal is to look at
Temer issues, so please let us
know you can email me directly
or um the chair of the um
program, a plug, we have New
Mexico Research every, every
year where we present these
results and this year will be
August 15th, um, 2025, so I look
forward to see you there, maybe.
Um.
In terms of alcohol, we've
written two reports on alcohol
policy, which you can find on
the UNM website. Some involve
alcohol taxes, other things
involve the um implementation of
the growth of the New Mexico
beer, craft beer industry, and
the impacts of that and other
things. So those are available
that website and I can send it
to you as well if you like.
OK, so I'm hope to talk to you
about.
Alcohol taxes from an economic
perspective. Thank you, David,
for a wonderful presentation,
um, using health things and also
covering on economics, but I'm
going to think about how would
an economist think about alcohol
taxes, um, and economists thinks
of different things such as
societal outcomes, and we think
about dollars and cents and
policies and things like that.
Just to reiterate, um, what
David said.
About alcohol, alcohol is a
complex good with both economic
benefits and considerable
economic costs. So,
People enjoy consuming alcohol.
I enjoy consuming alcohol, um,
it's had across the world for
culinary and intoxicating
effects, um.
Modern alcohol consumption may
have some positive health
impacts, although David did a
good job of talking about how
that research may be flawed, um,
and there may be some economic
development associated with
alcohol, but
There's also lots of negative
things associated with it, won't
cover the things David covered,
but um it's associated with
crime, domestic violence, of
course, um, alcohol, uh,
impaired alcohol, repaired
driving. Um, we, we reduce
workplace performance and I'm
not moving forward very well.
Thank you for
Um, helping me with that.
Um,
So, moving on because David did
a good job of presenting that
movie, the next slide, um, I
thought you might be interested
in this slide. So this shows
Traffic fatalities per 100,000
in the population and compares
New Mexico to the national
averages. So that's a good way
to think, have a reference point
on how we're doing in New Mexico
is to compare to the national
average. The red line is New
Mexico and the blue line is the
rest of the US and as you can
see in in early 90s.
There was a drastic difference
between alcohol related
fatalities in New Mexico and um
the United States have gone down
in the United States and New
Mexico, but good news, um,
perhaps in part due to alcohol
policies that we passed,
alcohol-related fatalities have
gone down in New Mexico. So
that's good news and we no
longer rank number one in the
nation like we um once did, um,
but he also noticed that we have
higher alcohol related
fatalities still than the rest
of the nation. OK, next slide.
So now I'm gonna talk to you
about the, the economic argument
for alcohol taxes, and one just
observing everyone in this room.
I know you are acutely aware of
this, so I'll try not to be um
too pedantic. I can't bring
myself. I've lectured about this
for um many years so I can't
take off my professor hat fully,
um, but I know that, you know,
this um very well after thinking
of all these different tax codes
that you have.
But economists believe that we
love markets. We think markets
are great. Um, people
participate in markets benefit,
so I just bought a breakfast
burrito at Blake's this morning
and uh I loved it after moving
to New Mexico, perhaps my
favorite food is.
Uh, breakfast burritos, but I
bought it for $7.
I get much more benefit from
that, and the producers make
profits of that. So economists
think all markets that we make
and we all benefit from markets
and we try to think about how do
we create the greatest amount of
good we can in market. So that's
really the goal of economics,
not necessarily a cold dismal
scientists thinking about how do
we do the greatest amount of
good within markets. And an
important word to economists and
I um
Again, I just to talk about
quickly is externalities. So
what this means is there's
secondary consequences besides
people participating in the
market.
So I like the breakfast burrito.
I get enjoyment out of that.
Blake's makes money, it's
wonderful, but in some markets,
there's extra things that happen
to people outside of the market.
That this market impacts, and
that's called an externality.
Now this is a big word market
failure. I know it sounds like
the market's like being
destroyed. We call it market
failure when markets don't
create the greatest amount of
good for people. And that's when
there are either positive
externalities or negative
externalities. So a classic
example of a positive
externality would be vaccine.
I take a vaccine, I'm less
likely to make someone else
sick, so someone else benefits
from my participation in the
market.
Negative externality would be,
for instance, pollution. If a
market is highly polluted, it
affects other people.
OK. So sorry for the, the
lecture on um economic markets,
but the point of this is that
alcohol has negative
externalities.
So people will participate in
the market, some people um
choose to drink alcohol and they
enjoy alcohol, but that will
impact other people. So, when
economists see a negative
actionality, we believe that
some form of market
intervention.
Could be used to make just
markets work better. So the
negative externality is things
like increased crime associated
with alcohol, domestic violence,
drinking and driving, and so on.
OK? So,
He arrows and things like that.
I don't want to make this like
too complicated, it's not.
The idea would be
You implement al alcohol tax or
increase in alcohol tax. What
will happen is that will make
the prices higher.
That will make people consume
less, and that will reduce the
negative consequences.
Of
Alcohol. So the goal is by using
market mechanisms we can reduce
bad things that happen
associated with alcohol.
That's logic from an economic
perspective of why we would
implement alcohol taxes.
Um, just to point to our
research really quick, and
again, this is national level,
so I won't spend too much time
about it, but I just wanted to
to uh
Say that um one of my grad
students, Anna Milan, is doing
her whole dissertation on
alcohol taxes.
And so she's done a lot of work
collecting data from across the
country on alcohol taxes to see
did it reduce alcohol-related
fatalities. So real quick, get
the results. I know there's lots
of numbers and things I'll, I'll
bypass that. But what she finds
is states that increased alcohol
taxes.
Reduce
Driving fatality. So it's clear
from the data that we have, and
this is using excise taxes, not
necessarily perjuring taxes and
things, but there is a direct
relationship between increasing
alcohol taxes and reducing
alcohol-related fatalities, and
this is work that's been done at
UNM in part due to this RPSP
project that we've had.
Um, so what does that mean for
us in New Mexico? Oops, thank
you, you're keeping up with me.
I have been forgetting to go
forward here. This is wonderful.
Um,
So what does this mean for New
Mexico?
Um, on average, she finds that
uh excise tax increase of 10
cents reduces fatalities by
about 2%. So based on those
national numbers, if we're
But that in New Mexico that
result in about 3.57 uh
reduction in fatalities per
year, bigger taxes would
Of course, mean a larger
reduction in alcohol related
fatalities next slide.
OK.
So now to get into alcohol
taxes. So here's a slide on what
the excise taxes in New Mexico
were for 2023.
What the excise, this number
here represents the excise tax
and that's in per gallon or per
liters depending on the alcohol.
So this is what we're currently
charging for these units and
this was as of 2023 when we
wrote the report.
So, what can you take from this
table, next slide, is that if
you're looking at we we've put
this down into taxes per drink.
So what that means is per 0.6.
ounces of ethanol. So it's just
standardizing this for how, how
much ethanol you're putting in
your body. And here is the
estimated tax per
Alcohol form of alcohol, what
you'll notice is these are very
different forms of alcohol. Now,
there's a lot of assumptions
that go into this, right, where
it's where it's per ethanol, so
different drinks are different
forms of alcohol, so this is
just relating it performance,
but beer and cider are much less
than wine, which are much, much
less than fortified wine. So if
you're looking at the amount of
ethanol, taxes vary
considerably.
Next slide, um, and I just wanna
be clear to caveat there's
different tax rates for
different things. So, for
instance, the craft craft beer
is taxed at a lower rate.
Then other beer coming from
outside of New Mexico, so it's
just important just to note that
this does affect this particular
table.
OK, next slide.
So what tax revenue will be
generated from an increase in
alcohol taxes.
Of course it depends on the type
of tax. So, so next slide, um,
A detailed analysis depends on
many, many different types of
factors. So, just so you know,
you can make different
assumptions about these
different things and come up
with different results, but the
punch line is gonna remain
relatively the same.
Um, so it depends on the type
and magnitude of tax that will
affect it pretty considerably.
Um, current levels of alcohol
consumption and alcohol prices.
That will depend on that. Ohho
elasticity is how much do
people's.
Consumption of alcohol change as
prices change and then alcohol
tax rates, which is how much
Um, alcohol tax is passed on to
consumers, so we base our
analysis on a 25 cents per drink
test.
We can provide you different tax
rates if you would like. I just
didn't want to bore you with
many different scenarios. Um,
other tax that's considered and
one drink is based on 0.6 ounces
of ethanol, next slide.
Here's what we come up with from
the tax revenue.
From a 25 cents per drink tax.
And by the way, when we were
doing this, the, uh, move
forward, please. Thank you.
Um,
When we were doing this work, it
was harder to get.
It was nice people we worked
with the um
New Mexico attacks liquor and
they gave us, they work, they
worked with us, but I just
noticed as I was, um, creating
these slides that now it's
publicly available and everyone
can see it, so that's great that
it's transparent and wide open
so we could have done this
analysis much easier today.
Uh, but this is data from New
Mexico Tax and revenue on how
much alcohol is sold, and then
What we think would happen with
a 25 cent tax. Next slide.
We, we estimate, and this
depends on numerous factors
including elasticity, that
there'll be a reduction. So
these the uh oh go back one
slide.
On our side.
Um, we estimate the first
column.
I
How much alcohol consumption,
how much we estimate alcohol
consumption will go down with
the 25% tax.
Next column is what the sales
will be, and then the next
column is the number of drinks.
So the number of drinks is just
so you can see, um, so we can do
our analysis on the perjuring
text.
So we estimate for beer that
Sales would go down by 968,000
units.
And um the total quantity that
will be consumed is 42 million
units or um 450 million drinks,
next slide.
You just go one more.
So
The next column over is the per
drink revenue that we would
make.
If we implement a 25 cent tax,
the next time over is what we
currently are taxing and then
that bottom number is the
increase in
Revenue we anticipate you would
get from and
25 cents per drink tax. Now,
note this is different than how
it was changed how we act
currently it's a excise tax,
which is just on gallons, and
this would be.
He drink
Which depends on ethanol.
But, um, 132 million.
is in the ballpark of what we
think would be gained next time.
So
In summary, alcohol is a complex
good, but it's associated with
many negative externalities.
Alcohol taxes will reduce
consumption.
Uh, which will lead to reduced
negative social outcomes such as
crime, alcohol related
fatalities, workplace
productivity, etc. We estimate
the tax revenue from a 25 cents
per drink alcohol tax would be
approximately 130 million. Um,
thank you and I look forward to
questions.
Doctors, thank you both for your
presentations this morning. We
do have a list going with
questions from committee
members. First on our list we
have Representative Harper.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
doctors, for being here. Um, so
I'm gonna
Limit my comments just being
cognizant of the time and not
wanting to uh.
Keep all of my, my colleagues
here for a long time, but
Um,
Just
A few, a few thoughts, and I
just want to preface this with
maybe a little bit about me, so
I, I don't like to brag about
myself, but I just want to show
life some credibility, right?
So, PHD chemical engineering.
Um, 30 Perve general articles, 5
patents, 5 invited book
chapters, you know, and I'm not
an academia, right? I work in a
national lab.
Um, some of those papers.
been
Publishing results that
contradict the general thought
of the scientific community, so
I know how to
Develop hypotheses and test
them, how to analyze data,
complex.
Phenomenon with multiple factors
and look at what factors are the
most significant.
So, Mr. Chairman and doctors,
I'm glad to have you here in
front of me cause I, I just want
to dig just a little bit into
some of the data that's been
presented to help make sure I
understand.
Um, so, uh, uh.
We go to the first presentation
slide.
Slides 19 and 20.
These are on page 1 of the
handout.
Um, there's some great, some
great data here.
Um, so on slide 19,
Um, you talk about, uh,
Chairman.
What, uh, what happened when
Marylyn raised their tax by 3%.
Um,
And you show uh immediate 3.5%
drop in alcohol consumption.
11% drop from 11, 2011, 2016.
6% decline in alcohol positive
drivers, 12% amongst 15 to 35
year olds.
Um, and then the bottom part
here, 17% drop in binge drinking
by adults and then roughly a
25% drop.
And students who drank.
Use binge drinking students with
uh riding with a drunk driver.
That's
That's awesome, right? That's
great.
Um,
I guess my question is though,
and you'll you'll probably see
where I'm going with this
immediately is that was a 3% tax
change.
So
Doing the mass.
If we wanted to end binge
drinking in Maryland adults.
We should just raise the tax by
another.
17.7%.
And binge drinking would go down
to 0% because
3% change in the tax gave us a
17% drop.
Uh, chairman and doctors is
Is that right?
No, and Brady can speak to this
too. It's because we're talking
about uh elasticity of demand.
Uh, so it's a curve, it's not a
line.
And the uh
Impact will tend to decrease as
we've seen with tobacco, we've
got uh at this point a hardcore
group of tobacco users, and
we've raised the taxes an
enormous amount. It's difficult,
more difficult now to get them
to change their behavior using
tobacco taxes, but we are way on
the other end of the curve when
it comes to alcohol.
Yeah, so
So, Chairman and doctor, thank
you for that, that's.
I think it's the kind of the
most important point I'm trying
to make here is that this isn't
a straight line. Yeah.
Right? And
And uh uh another just quick
example, um, going to the 2nd
presentation and I appreciate
hearing you have a graduate
student just dedicated to
For this work, but going to your
slide where she poses a 10 cent
increase.
would reduce fatalities by about
2%.
Um,
Uh, again, taking that example
of it being linear, then we
would just need to increase
taxes by $5 to have.
No more fatalities in New
Mexico.
Semester chair, representative,
uh, thanks for the question and
that is a wonderful point that
uh
I try to bring up lots of econ
seminars that I go to that I've
done some work on minimum wage
and so we've showed that minimum
wage has certain impacts, and
then people want to make grand
claims that if you drastically
increase minimum wage, you'll
have this linear effect which
you probably won't.
So, uh, point is well taken, um,
There's been numerous different
types of taxes that have been
implemented and there are the
reason we actually limited it to
10 cents in the sample is
because that's something
reasonable we can, we've seen
this enough that we have enough
sample size to make inference
about a 10 cent tax. So yes, I
would not uh make grand claims
about
Anything more than 10 cents,
which we haven't done here, um,
but
Just that's why I try to work
through the, the logic for why
taxes work that there is this
relationship between price
Alcohol consumption, and then,
and there's a chain that we
don't know all these things with
big taxes, but you could, I
think I could say, well, I
wouldn't just multiply it by 4,
I would say a larger tax would
have a larger effect to some
degree, I think is a fair thing
to say.
Yeah, so, so thank you, chairman
and doctors. So I think the
The point we're trying to make
here is it's, you know, you have
maximum taxes that doesn't.
Crash your consumption to 0.
And if you have no taxes,
taxes go to 0. I mean, that
doesn't mean you're consumption
blows up crazy either, right?
There are some people that just
abstain, it doesn't matter what
the tax is, right? So, so it's a
curve.
And where we are on that curve
can make a huge difference on
the outcome.
Of changing tax policy.
Right? And, and where we are in
that curve is something that's
really hard to figure out.
Um,
And one of the main reasons why
is because
You can't just isolate the
single factor of taxes.
To alcohol consumption.
There are many other factors.
Right? We've talked about some
of them today, racial,
socio-economic.
Yeah, there's all kinds of
factors, right? And, and looking
at this study from Maryland and
you know these numbers from
Florida and Alaska.
We do the best we can, but you
cannot isolate.
Just that one factor. You can't
tell everyone in the state, just
do what you were normally doing.
Don't change anything. No one
move, no, no, you know, and
we're gonna then get with
precision what the change is on
changing the tax rate on alcohol
consumption and, you know,
fatalities and domestic violence
and all these things we don't
like.
So
I guess my
I want to go with this, this
point is
I have done a lot of research on
the cigarette tax.
I was very fascinated by that.
And what I found was that
Yes, changing the tax rate does
reduce.
Purchasing of of cigarettes.
Statistically significantly.
But it is by far a smaller
factor.
Then having a campaign to make
smoking, not cool.
So when I look at the factors.
That, I mean, I think we all, we
all agree here.
Alcohol is a terrible thing.
Um, I've never had a drop.
Right?
What factors can we do to
actually make an impact.
And I don't, and I, and I don't
appreciate using tax code.
To try to influence behaviors. I
know some people here might
disagree with me, but even if I
did,
This would be a terrible way to
try to address
Or alcohol problem.
We should look at the other
factors that have a bigger
impact. We should be working on
making alcohol not cool.
Um, we should look at.
Significantly strikingly our DWI
laws, something like Germany, so
that the first time someone
was caught drinking and driving,
it's
It's game over, right? Now you
can be arrested 20 times and
it's not a big deal.
So these, I feel like these
things have
A much larger effect.
Then
Increasing the tax, which we
think will generate, you know,
Some money, which really the
state doesn't really need right
now. I do agree that all of the
revenue that we do generate
should go to
Address the issues, and we
brought that up there one of the
main tenants in the big tax
reform bill that we all work
together on 8 years ago. We've
made some progress there. It
used to be $0 went to the.
Adress these concerns and now
it's about 45-ish, 55%, so we're
making some progress there.
You know, I'd love to hear your
thoughts on the factors and, and
whether this is really gonna
make a major impact as opposed
to looking at other factors.
Thank you, Chairman.
He's doctor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, and forgive me
for not addressing you properly
in my previous comments. Live
and learn. Um
We could totally wonk out on
these studies together.
Yeah, uh, I can tell you the
most about the ones that I've
done myself so that Maryland
consumption study, we controlled
for many other things to try to
isolate the impact of the tax,
uh, income by county,
unemployment rates uh in
neighboring states to try to get
a sense of the sort of
macroeconomic uh influences on
it, you know.
You don't get into peer reviewed
literature these days without
putting the right controls in
place uh on your models. So, uh,
that's definitely true of our
study, uh, and it's also uh true
of the Floridan, the Alaska, I
mean, the guy who did let those
studies.
pioneered a lot of these
methodologies for us uh in the
alcohol policy field. It's just
an amazing researcher.
Um, your
Absolutely right and that there
is no single bullet.
That's gonna make the difference
in this that a multifaceted
approach is what we're always
talking about. Certainly 0.05.
would make a big difference than
0.08 had made and has made in
terms of drink driving
fatalities. Um, certainly, we
want.
A media campaign, we want
something and, you know, those
early tobacco tax increases. I
was in California when the big
1989 tax increase went in place
and it funded a
counter-advertising campaign at
the state level and that's a
great thing to do because right
now the alcohol industry creates
our normative environment around
alcohol and despite the best
efforts of parents, it's really
hard.
Come up against, you know,
conservatively $4 billion of
advertising a year. At the same
time, the National Academy of
Sciences looked at your very
question, what
How much difference could a
media campaign make on alcohol
versus other strategies. This
was in 2003, underage drinking,
a collective responsibility.
And they concluded that taxes
was actually one of the most
effective things that we could
do and that the evidence is
evidence is not there yet in
terms of media campaigns on
alcohol.
There would need to be a lot of
money behind it.
And some really clever marketing
like the counter ads were in
California, Florida, and
Massachusetts on tobacco because
there's such a huge weight uh on
the other side in that message
environment.
Yeah.
I, I want to respond to folks
real quick uh reminders that we
are scheduled to adjourn at 10
p.m. It's 12:15 and we have two
other items that we want to get
to, so let's make sure that we
limit our comments and questions
and welcome from the presenters.
Thank you.
Oh
Thank you, Chairman and
gentlemen. I, I agree with you,
you could probably wonk out for
a long time on this, so I will,
I will finish my comments here.
I'll just say thank you for
coming here. Thank you for the
information, um.
And uh
Uh, I just
I just hope that
As we look at how do we
Address this real serious issue
in New Mexico.
We understand that like you
said, there isn't one silver
bullet, there are actually many
other things that we should be
looking at.
And I'm just not sure how
effective
Raising taxes will be actually
addressing that perhaps
diverting some of the taxes you
already have to a media
campaign.
would be more effective.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Next
on our list we have Senator
Servio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, one of
the things I love about tax is
the tax policy that it's, what
are we trying to do, what
behaviors are we trying to
change? What, um, and you could
tell by by the last time that
that I don't like calculating
taxes, but I really like um
looking at the policies and um
that's one of the reasons I'm so
interested in an alcohol tax,
and I have to say, um, Doctor
Jernigan, I'm, I'm a huge fan of
your work and I'm thrilled, uh,
Doctor Hon children.
To learn about this resource for
the legislators. That's really
great. Um, but, you know, one
thing, and I'm trying to figure
out what slide it is, but it's,
it's not necessarily the tax,
it's the price, right?
And one of the things I don't
know if you both are aware of,
but
Alcohol in New Mexico is cheaper
than it is in Texas, Colorado,
Arizona.
It's hard, it's it's more
complicated with regard to Utah
because they have state sales
and so it's cheaper and more
expensive just depending on what
you're looking at. Um, and so
that means that it's, it's
marketed, it's, it's
The types of uh like miniatures
that that they sell here or
whatever, are really targeted to
low income people.
And that's uh
because that's who we are. It
has estate. I, I, I want to see
that change, uh, but it, but
it's who we are and it's
marketed toward us. So the only
way that we can do anything with
regard to changing behavior is
by raising the tax, because
otherwise,
Industry will continue to to
sell it at such low rates, and
people have asked me, how do I
know? Google is a great
resource. Just Google the price
of alcohol in each of these
states, and it will show you.
So, considering that, um, you
know, when you're thinking about
the
The curve that we're describing,
knowing that alcohol is cheaper
here.
Um, does that help you
understand where we are on the
curve in, in any way?
Not a lot.
And it's because alcohol is so
cheap across this country. So
even though it's relatively
cheaper here in New Mexico,
we're still talking pretty cheap
liquid.
And
It's Interesting, the tobacco
experience, you know, my
colleagues in tobacco control,
they're now studying the topic
of tax saturation. Hm.
We are so far from tax
saturation and alcohol.
There's just, there's a lot of
room still.
To use this as a public health
measure.
And this is, oh, go ahead.
I'm sorry, and I should have
addressed Mister Chair and
members of the committee.
So real briefly, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Dio Lopez.
This is actually an economic
term called elasticities. And so
when you have price changes, it
seems like
Big tax, but most prices are
relatively consistent.
Across different states,
although
There's very different prices
for different quality of
alcohol. So what you're probably
talking about is very cheap
alcohol that can be purchased
perhaps by targeting low income
populations, but 25 cent tax
sounds big because it's a big
change in tax, but it's really
not that big of a change in
price. So this idea that we're
we're in uncharted territory or
things is not quite true because
we'll we'll be around the band
of elasticities that we have a
good understanding.
Thank you. Um, I, I, that's
really helpful. And the other um
Comment about because we'll be
presenting on an increase in, in
the tax is one of the things
that we can do uh with the money
that we raised from this tax is
to address the other pieces of
this picture. Um, and it, you
know, yes, I think we should, we
should do all of the other
things that are um like a media
campaign.
We, we have no no counter media
campaign against alcohol. So it
would be really, really great to
To just take this head on and to
have the resources we need. Um,
again, Mr. Chair, I appreciate
the presentation was very, very
helpful. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
then to representative uh
Cadena.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Learning
committee.
Presenters, we've interacted
previously and
I might be able to say that I
appreciated your attempt at an
apology for behavior in the past
and interactions in the past
that certainly landed in a very
disrespectful way with me.
But yeah, I sat here trying to
listen to this presentation.
And I realized I don't think it
was with irony that you
Started off with an Adam Smith
endorsement.
quickly using Google, you can
see that Adam Smith.
all sorts of problematic tone
and narrative in his Wealth of
Nations and other writings.
Including
That
And talking about civilized
nations and certainly you graced
us all the way out here to give
a lecture to uncivilized people.
But in his writings about
civilized nations and then
describing savages, he talked
about North American indigenous
people as quote comprising the
lowest.
And Ruest state of society.
And when we continue.
This year
An hour's worth of conversation
like this.
It's hard to not hold that
personally.
Because the ways we've known and
held trauma.
And the ways we've known and
held and lost loved ones.
Navigating cycles of trauma and
substance use and dependency and
incarceration and poverty,
probably like you can imagine.
So when I think of that backdrop
and of course on our devices
that we carry with us
everywhere.
Laugh about how Adam Smith is
setting the tone of why we
should and can tax alcohol.
I got a response back from one
of my dear trusted people.
Doctor Gonzalez says, inspired
by Doctor Shannon Speed an
incredible anthropologist, like
many of his contemporaries,
Smith was a white supremacist,
and his writings clearly
influence how the logic of
settler capital is normalized in
the US today.
And taking us the slide.
28
Where you brought us back to
this debate about whether or not
alcohol taxes are progressive.
The last bullet here almost made
me laugh. The effects of alcohol
tax increases are clearly
progressive.
My teenagers would say, Mr.
Chair, when you have to say
something is clear, it's
probably not that clear.
And I would argue today as I
have over a couple of years now.
Alcohol taxes are paternalistic.
And it could be argued that what
we've attempted to do or might
like to do to save people harmed
by alcohol.
paternalistic, but that doesn't
make the fundamental task.
As a mechanism in an economic
capitalistic system progressive.
The way we tax alcohol in New
Mexico, like most states, is a
flat regressive. That means that
regardless of the price of the
alcohol purchased by the
consumer.
That tax is the same.
And certainly as we get into our
next presentations, we'll
discuss our commitment to
modernizing what New Mexico has
in the books.
Uh, but for today, Mr. Chair,
those are my comments.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. We
have no one else on the list,
Doctor who appreciate your
presentation this this morning,
this afternoon, and, and again,
I think a little bit about some
of the things that that I
The flag immediately was, when
you talk about using statistics
from from Maryland or it's a
national statistic generally,
you know, in, in my mind on this
committee anyway.
When I want to know something
about
revenue stream that we had
discussed yesterday. I want to
know about New Mexico, not about
any other state. I don't wanna
know, but, you know, I wanna
know how we're doing here. And
so, uh, I would be hopeful that
in the, in the future, and we,
as we talk about these things
and if it's a matter of a
state epidemiologists providing
numbers, and we should probably
get that uh so that we can
continue this conversation cause
it's very, very important, but,
you know, when we talk about
Maryland, if that's, if that's
Going to be our
For example, you know, Marilyn
is not the size of New Mexico.
Maryland has how many tribes,
pros, and nations in it.
Maryland has the demographics of
what compared to New Mexico. A
lot of differences and so I
would like to keep the
conversation related to this
matter.
Related, uh, specific tune in
Mexico, but doctors, thank you
for your time this morning.
We'll move on folks to agenda
item number 8, modernizing New
Mexico's approach to taxing
alcohol.
We have both representatives.
Mikaelara Cadena and
representative Christina
Parajon.
And the floor is yours,
represent us whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
and those listening over our
webcast.
Um, we originally had 20 minutes
on the agenda. I think we can
keep it a little bit tighter
than that. We look forward to
the conversation. Again, I'm
representative Mikaela
Laracadena, um, as I've shared
previously, I stumbled into this
debate about modernizing New
Mexico's approach to taxing
alcohol because many of you all
on this committee, um, and many
incredible advocates from across
our state.
Made certain that the
legislature was paying attention
to this issue.
Admittedly,
Prior to that, I wasn't.
I didn't know how our attacks
worked.
I didn't really understand, um.
What it meant to increase taxes
as others had proposed.
But as we got into this debate
over the last couple of years,
um, we certainly have done our
diligence to research.
What this looks like in New
Mexico and across the country
and come forward with you as we
have in the previous legislative
session with the proposal that
we think could take New Mexico
in a strong direction.
Next slide please.
Um, just to go over this one
more time, it still seems
surprising to me that somehow
we're not having an accurate
debate about how alcohol is
taxed in New Mexico, so we just
like to make this clear as day,
um.
Sometimes called an excise tax
or a wholesale tax in New
Mexico, we tax alcohol.
Um, at the point of sale between
the distributor and the
retailer. So there are people
that make alcohol, distributors
buy up that alcohol. They then
sell it to places like CVS or
Walgreens or your local bar or
your restaurant, and that, that
point of change from when the
alcohol moves to the distributor
to the retailer is where the tax
is levied.
In New Mexico, and again, these
rates are set in statute and
haven't been updated since the
1990s. We have a flat regressive
tax, like many other states. So
in New Mexico, for every leader
of spirit, the tax levita is
$1.60 for every bottle of wine,
that's 45 cents, and for every
gallon of beer, it's 41 cents.
So advocates have been
Really clear and accurate in
naming that these rapes did not
grow over time. They were not
adjusted over time, so they
become um out of date and and
need some kind of increase.
Um, the assumption here, of
course, and, and it gets a
little bit confusing when people
talk about a serving tax or they
do backwards math to to
calculate how many servings of
beer in a gallon.
But the assumption is that these
taxes are wrapped into the final
cost paid by the consumer when
they purchase alcohol.
They are not levied per serving
of alcohol again, they are sold
at those higher volumes.
What I've learned, um, Mr. Chair
and committee now being in this,
in this committee and also in
our House Tax Committee for 3
terms.
Is the strong alcohol strong tax
policy means that the tax we are
imposing reflects the price of
the good we are taxing. Again,
that's not what our current
alcohol law does, and that's
what we're trying to move
towards. So like House Bill 213
from the previous 30 day session
earlier this year, we are
proposing that we establish an
alcohol retail tax while
eliminating the existing
wholesale tax that's been in
place for decades.
The idea here is that the tax
ultimately would be paid by the
consumer on the price of the
alcohol they're purchasing.
The tax would be paid at the
point of final sale.
For instance, when someone is
buying alcohol at a bar,
restaurant, gas station,
pharmacy, etc.
Um, when we introduced this bill
in 2013, we use the same model
in our existing statute that
cheered the tax rate based on
alcohol type. So generally
speaking across the country,
spirits have the highest tax,
followed by wine, followed by
beer, based on the alcohol
content of those beverages. Um,
in talking to public health
experts in New Mexico, including
the county I represent, um, we
haven't heard of.
Of demonstrated public health
research that supports a tiered
structure. We also heard from
those representing independent
grocers, independent gas
stations, I kept thinking about
the small New Mexico restaurants
that may sell alcoholic beverage
and still take your order and
give you a tab on a piece of
paper and a pencil and a piece
of paper that they've they've
captured with the pencil. Um, so
as a means of simplifying this
tax, but also because there
wasn't demonstrated public
health evidence that pointed us
otherwise.
We are now proposing that there
be a single alcohol tax rate of
3%, so that would be imposed on
any kind of alcoholic beverage.
Uh, finally, as, as
What's pulled us to this
proposal and, and what really
garnered momentum throughout
this year, is that the alcohol
tax would be proportional to the
cost or value of the product
sold.
As such, the tax imposed will go
up with the price of alcohol
sold, making it responsive to
inflation and general increases.
In prices of alcohol over time.
Something y'all probably heard
me say, but it still sticks.
Right now in New Mexico, whether
we're here in our bougie capital
of Santa Fe, and someone's
buying $1000 bottle of wine.
Or someone's buying um a $2
bottle closer to home, that's
just gonna help them get through
their night as they navigate
addiction.
They were both through that um
supply chain.
Contributing to the same 45 cent
tax. So again, it was a 45 cent
tax on the $2 bottle, and it was
a 45 cent tax on the $1000
bottle.
By making this tax policy
reflects the cost of the product
sold, those that are buying top
shelf alcohol will pay top shelf
taxes, and those that I imagine
are potentially more likely to
be navigating dependency,
poverty, trauma.
And probably alcoholism is a
disease.
Would not be facing the massive
tax increases, but potentially
could be um positively impacted
by our new um ideas about
alcohol revenues.
And before I pass it over to my
uh colleague here. This is
another example, we have a sheet
up that demonstrates the effect,
what this would look like in
real life. So the effective tax
imposed.
So in the first row we have
potential price of alcohol. So,
looking at the $10 column, if we
want to start with that.
For many people, if you are
meeting friends for brunch and
are buying a mimosa, um.
Or potentially having a
cocktail, $10 is a reasonable
price you would pay for a
cocktail if you were out and
about in New Mexico these days.
3% of that $10 would be a 30
cents tax.
So it actually um lands above
what advocates have been
bringing forward for a couple of
years and where they'd like to
eventually get.
When using here, um, as you all
know, the GRT is a checkerboard
across the state, but just for
simplicity, we use the city of
Santa Fe, City of Santa Fest
current GRT rate of 8.1875. So
if we were in the city of Santa
Fe right here in the capital
where where we do our business,
the GRT because this is on top
of the GRT would be about 82
cents. So the final tax imposed
on that $10 drink would come out
to $1.12.
Built into our logic and you'll
probably heard me say I did this
flying back from a trip to DC.
So originally this was airplane
math on the back of an airplane
napkin.
But our, our idea is that when
people are out and drinking,
whether they're at a bar or
restaurant, they're buying
drinks per serving, and those
drinks cost more. So if you're
out, you are paying more taxes.
If someone is navigating
poverty, potentially drinking
more responsibly or moderately
or in a severe addiction,
they're likely buying a lower
cost alcohol at a place that
they're going to take that
alcohol with them. So yes, they
will not be paying um
proportionally a big
Your tax because they're buying
alcohol at a cheaper rate.
We know that and we built that
into this model. One, because we
grew up caring about equity and
poverty, grew up in public
health families with public
health backgrounds.
But also because there's a logic
to say, if you're at a bar or
restaurant, eventually you're
leaving.
I hope that you're calling an
Uber and Lyft. I hope there's
one available, but there may not
be. So it also says that for the
folks that are buying that
alcohol, hopefully getting
somewhere and then consuming
that that burden isn't on them.
Uh, so, Mr. Chen, with that, I
am so grateful here to have
besides me representative
Christina Padahon, who jumped
into this in her very first
session, um, and so proud that
together we get to learn and
push and throw some things
together for good of New Mexico
every day.
Thank you so much,
Representative Karena and uh Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, my mic is on. I'll
speak louder.
Um, I've been really lucky to
work with Vice Chairwoman Karena
to use my master's in management
sciences and do some financial
modeling around these different
taxes. Um I do like calculating
the taxes, Senator, um, and I'm
passionate about this issue
related to equity, uh,
especially because I worked for
for many years with people
experiencing homelessness in
Albuquerque and specifically in
this area, uh, help the city of
Albuquerque, um, build their
very first detox center and it's
the first detox center in the
whole
and one of less than 70 in the
country. And so I had firsthand
experience dealing with the
funding that involved building a
a system where we would be able
to treat addiction.
And um and so that is why in
this part of our bill.
If we can, oh, that is, we are
creating an alcohol harms
alleviation fund, um, and
eliminating the DWI grant fund
and the way that the funding
would be distributed is
currently what we saw earlier
today, an estimated annual
revenue of $4.8 million is
coming in from the tax. We, um,
as many of the advocates of uh
the other alcohol tax bill have
advocated for sweeping that $25
million from the general fund.
And um having that 48.5 million
that is coming in from alcohol
related harms, um, from alcohol
to treat alcohol related harms.
So the way that we would
distribute this fund is that 10%
would go to Indian nations or
counties, municipalities that
serve a significant number of
Native American populations. And
if you go to the Department of
Health website. You can see that
uh the people who are most
affected by a lot of um alcohol
related
That's are in these areas. So we
want to ensure that they have
the appropriate resources to,
for instance, build a detox
center if that is the right
approach for that community.
Um, 40% is then distributed to
all the counties, and if you are
unaware of how the current
formula works, it is, um,
distributed to the counties
based off of the retail trade
grocery seats in the county and
the denominator which is the
total retail trade grocery
receipts in the state.
It is also then multiplied by an
additional percentage that is
the number of alcohol related
injury crashes in the county.
Um, and the denominator of the
total alcohol related injury
crashes in the state. So this is
not the ideal, um.
Formula to distribute this this
funding because there are, this
doesn't take into account the
alcohol-related deaths in the
state. It doesn't take into
account your population, but
rather the retail trade gross
receipts. So we're working on
updating that formula um
alongside DFA.
And uh in addition, the way that
the DWI funds are distributed is
we want those funds to be
non-reverting and expanded to
include capital projects. So
currently DWI programming can't
build, for instance, in
Albuquerque are wonderful detox
center that should open soon
anytime, uh, they wouldn't be
able to to save capital over
time to build a project like
that.
You know, so many counties in
our state don't have services,
um.
looking at the data from 2001,
we drink, you know, per if you
were to average all our drinks
about 2.3 per person and the
average in the US is 2.5, but we
just have more alcohol related
deaths, and that's because we
don't have the services.
In addition to that,
That distribution, the 45% um
would go to the healthcare
authority to leverage for
Medicaid programs, um, 5% would
continue to go to the drug
courts which are the current
recipient, and then this last
element.
The $500,000 a year that we are
hoping to allocate for the next
5 years is for the research and
evaluation of the tax policy
here in New Mexico.
Over the past couple months,
I've really been able to engage
with a lot of scientists, um, on
behalf of the CDC and working in
lockstep with them, who are
really, really eager to see the
effects of this tax because it
is a creative way to address
this issue. Um, yes, it's not
increasing the excise, wholesale
tax, like many other states.
It's really tailoring uh what
the tax could be for our
population. So many of them are
really excited to
What will happen here in New
Mexico and um especially for our
populations that are so diverse
here in our state.
And Mr. Chara a rap, I want to
appreciate the New Mexico as
Association of Counties, um,
before we started the last
legislative session. We, of
course, reached out to the
counties.
As the administrators and
recipients of the DWI grant
fund. Um, many of them
overwhelmingly are doing work
day in and day out to reduce the
harms of alcohol in our state.
But what's real because of the
the language that was in statute
from the 90s, the list of what
they could spend on was pretty
limited, and they've had pretty
significant challenges on
receiving um their payments from
DFA and then being able to use
those to programs that might
have the best and biggest.
In part because they, by the
time they received their
payments, they had to turn
around and spend it quickly,
otherwise it would revert. Um,
so I'm so grateful that because
of the introduction of this
bill, because of the support
we've garnered with local DWI
grant leaders and the
Association of the Counties in
the last legislative session,
um, it's really impressive to
see Julie here, who's been
working the Julie Fernandez here
who's been working the DFA side
of this for decades, how
Um, how much we've been able to
move the needle. And just before
we wrap, I, I really wanted to
give Miss Fernandez a shout out.
After we brought these
conversations to light and
specifically um scared everybody
by first um thinking they were
going to lose all their money in
eliminating the local DW grant
fund. DFA was able to look
closer at those statutes and
realized that they had room
within language to actually
allow local funds to spend on
prevention. Previously, that was
Not part for decades, um, they
were holding a more restrictive
interpretation of what our
statutes were, and because we
brought this conversation
forward on the 30 day session.
DFA really moved mountains to
make sure that these local
leaders who best know their
communities and might best
imagine how to show up and, and
reduce alcohol harms now have um
more means and mechanism to do
so. So I want to appreciate the
Association of counties for
their thorough work every day on
this issue and the.
as well. Thank you.
Thank you both representatives.
We appreciate your presentation
this afternoon. First on our
list, we have Representative
Harper.
And, and Chairman, I promised to
be one minute, um, but, uh,
chairman representatives. OK,
um.
Fascinating.
You, you, I, I loved the tax
policy that you're trying to.
Express here in the legislation.
Which goes to your, I can kind
of summarize your three
principles you've built this on.
The first is to try to make this
More understandable and
transparent to the end consumer.
They know how much I'm paying.
Um, the second is to make this
more progressive or truly
progressive, right? So if
someone's gonna buy a $500
bottle of wine, they're gonna be
paying 3% of $500 as opposed to
someone buying.
You know, $1 beer somewhere,
right? So.
You've you've checked that box
and and your priorities, and
then the, the third is sending
all of that money to fund what
we hope will be meaningful
programs to address the
problems.
So I, I love all of that.
Um, I think one of the cons that
you're gonna hear.
Is that what that means is folks
that are buying lower dollar
alcohol are going to be paying
net.
Lower taxes than they are right
now.
And that that means there'll be
more of these bad things
happening.
But I actually completely
disagree with that.
Um, we talked about that curve.
I think that curve is actually
very personal.
Someone who is maybe wealthy
will decide to buy less
expensive alcohol.
But someone who is struggling
with addiction and
self-medicating.
I mean, I have not experienced
that myself personally, but I
have a dear friend.
Who suffers from real PTSD from
the service in the army and
self-medicated for a long time
with alcohol.
He is not gonna change his
habits based off of.
Whether he's paying less tax or
not.
Let's get to address that.
is having meaningful
Places that these dollars can go
to to help these people.
So, chairman and
representatives, I
I'm fascinated.
Um, by your proposal, I wish I
could be there next session to
learn more and and uh vote on
it, but uh I wish you all the
best. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Harper. Let's go to Senator Ca
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is really great. Um, you
have, I totally, um, I'm really,
um, I agree with the idea of
progressivity, you know, and,
and
People buying more expensive
liquor should pay more.
So that is a really good one.
You know, a good, and I would, I
would agree that the, the place
I disagree is if you look at
your chart on effective tax
imposed.
The tax imposed the GRT is
already imposed now.
So the increase is not um column
1 and or or line 1 and 2, the
increase is just line one, the
tax imposed, and it's very
minimal.
Um,
On a $5 on a $5
Miniature or beer or whatever it
is, it would only be 15 cents.
And, and so overall,
As you point out, it, it just
raises the same exact amount of
money that we're collecting now.
I also very much agree with your
directing all of it to to um
Um, to, to your chart of the
positive impact chart. Um, I
think, you know, the idea of uh
10% to Indian nations. I think
that that'll go a long way
toward addressing the
The health inequity, we see that
uh David Jergens described about
who was
Getting harmed more by the
alcohol consumption. So I, I
think that I'd really like to
work with you because we have in
our proposal, um,
Also talked to the counties and
as you know, the DWI and really
talk to a lot of, a lot of
folks, and I think that this
part of where it's gonna go is
really important. The only thing
I see missing or I shouldn't say
the only thing, but one thing
that I think is glaringly
missing is a prevention program.
You know, some kind of of
messaging that, that makes it,
that would make this uncool to
do, and health, you know, and
really educate about the health
impacts. So I, uh, you know,
excited to work with you um to
try to come up with something
that accomplishes the change, as
I said, I don't like
calculating, but I do like the
policy.
And what we're looking for in
ours is a change in behavior.
And that, unfortunately, I just
don't see that happening with
the rates that are here.
If the rates were higher, I
think it's a good idea to tax uh
based on what you pay. And then
we don't have to keep raising it
for the, for inflation.
But the rates here are just so
low that it doesn't increase, it
doesn't increase the funding and
I don't know we'd have to talk
to an expert, um, like Doctor
Doctor Hornner or Doctor
Jergens.
I just don't think that this
small amount would, would change
behavior. And I can see why
researchers would be interested
in studying us. They study us a
lot, it turns out, um, because
they want to see if this did
what this did. Um, I think
they'd be interested to see if
it uh raised.
Um, drinking. What digging into
the the
The research on changing
behavior is a increase in price.
And that elasticity, the
elasticity issue tends to affect
younger drinkers, uh, more than
it does and and of course
alcoholics, it's not going to
change their behavior at all,
but younger drinkers is a really
important place to, I mean,
I guess what I should say is
alcoholics will probably just
decrease, you know, the kind of
alcohol or just buy cheaper
alcohol, but I think it's really
important that we decrease sales
to younger drinkers. Um, I've
joked about this, but it's, you
know, I remember when I was in
high school and I wish I could
say when I was in college, we
did Strawberry Hill, which is
like maybe a step above
Kool-Aid. Now, younger drinkers
are starting with vodka.
And, and that's something that
we should, we should try to
think about changing, but I
really wanna thank you, um.
Thank you for this, um, I think
a lot of work went into it and,
you know, I think it's, it's
great. I really wish that we
could join forces um to, to come
up with something that's really
gonna move the needle in our
state and um while I think that
this is effective tax policy.
Um, I think it doesn't, it, it
to me it's two prongs. It's
It's getting the money we need
but also changing behavior.
And those are the two things
that I think are, are really
important and I'm happy to, to
hear you respond. Um, I, I
didn't really have a question. I
just wanted to say that before
we, we give our presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, um, I
appreciate you naming.
The alignment we have and shout
out to you all. We certainly,
um,
Took your name here for the
alcohol harms alleviation fund
because you all brought that
forward and it and it was an
important moment in our
legislature, um, but just for
those listening today, we did
not share in this presentation
with the time about where the
money is currently going, so I
think you all have gotten the
gist of it right now about how
this this revenue is
In almost a chilling way, very
consistent. It's about $50
million every year for decades.
There weren't big drops or big
increases in COVID like.
It, it's, it's been relatively
um consistent, but as it stands
today, about half of that, about
250, goes to the general fund,
just to be appropriated as any
other general fun dollar, um,
which we agree is a problem.
After that, the part that even
got us down this rabbit hole
about of the local DWI grant
fund was realizing that after
that.
Um,
There were
Some interesting distributions.
One of them is that for decades
the city of Farmington has been
receiving a monthly distribution
of $200,750. No other city or
municipality in New Mexico is
receiving a direct distribution
from this fund, and they receive
it every month for $20,000. When
you look at the language,
offensive to me and I imagine
others, it said that they are
receiving that money to How
Street inebriates.
Much uglier things have been
said to me about what they're
using that money for.
I do want to trust and I've
heard that the city of
Farmington is doing incredible
things.
That was actually the
inspiration of the 10% going to
sovereign nations in their
political relationships they
have with New Mexico, of course,
they can and should decide how
to best show up and offer
programming um for the citizens
and people of their nations. Um,
and then beyond that, should
there be municipalities or
counties like the city of
Farmington and Sibua County,
McKinley County, or others that
have these um numbers of
indigenous communities and and
sovereign nations within their
State boundaries and and local
boundaries, and they also would
be eligible to to pull down
money like this. So Farmington
is doing a great thing, they
could go and apply to continue
doing that great thing, but it
wouldn't be just the city of
Farmington anymore. After that,
There are currently 6 counties
that share 2.8 million, about
2.8 million a year before it
gets to the statewide formula,
and we did all sorts of digging
thanks to to Joy, the director
of the Association of Counties
that tried to help us figure out
why those six counties got the
first cream off the top, um, my
county was not on the list, uh,
Sibola County, Grant County,
others greatly impacted by these
harms were not on the list. The
language says it's
Those doing alcohol detox. So at
first I assumed because Bernna
Lea was on there, that these
other counties had alcohol detox
like Bernallio has mats, but
they don't. But these six
counties, as it's been said to
me, and, and I, I think there's
probably some truth to that.
Those 6 counties had members on
Senate Finance and House
Appropriations when this went
through decades ago, but
otherwise, there's not a rhyme
or reason to why those six
counties got a sweep off the top
before we then go into the
statewide formula explained by
Representative Parahon.
So that's why once we saw this
funny business going on, we
wanted to.
Come back into this conversation
about how to best use that
money. Um, just quickly to say
we were also concerned about big
drops in alcohol, making alcohol
cheap that would actually allow
for more purchase and more
consumption. I certainly have
lost lots of nights of sleep
over this. Represented Parajon
first said, what if the price of
alcohol drops, I thought we're
living in a capitalist market in
a capitalist America, folks that
are making money are going to
keep making that money and then
of course this tax would be
directly paid to consumer
directly held in front of
consumers.
Fatah has done some research to
help quell that worry, and then
finally, as you've named.
Younger, while, while I still
may not have been convinced, and
today I'm not, that these
massive tax increases or any
massive tax increases are really
going to change behaviors for
New Mexicans holding the most
and struggling, like they're
gonna find what they need to not
get sick that night. Um, and
that might mean they are a
little bit short on rent or some
kids are a little bit hungrier,
but they're gonna find what they
need. The population where I
agree with you is different is
younger drinkers, and the
problem we're sitting with is
people
Under the age of 21 are not
supposed to be purchasing and
consuming alcohol. So like you,
um, I want to be more creative
with this. Previously, money
from these funds was going to
things like.
Uh, abstinence prom, those
leakers local leaders will tell
you they tried to give away
iPads, they tried to make it
cool. Nobody showed up.
So I've asked, why are we not
buying shuttles?
Or paying for shuttles, um,
making some agreements with
local law enforcement, maybe
parents signed some kind of slip
for the night.
That we're gonna pick all those
students up and we're going to
drop them off at the the end of
the evening, cause I would
imagine that evening there may
be more of them getting home
safe and not engaged in risky
behavior, then trying to
pull them into a prom they don't
want to be at. So I'm really
proud that we've already because
of these conversations, made
moves to open up more prevention
dollars, but certainly, like
you've said, those kind of
campaigns, those counties are
ready to roll, but we want to
make sure their money is not
reverting so that they can use
it to the best be possible.
Brett Bothan had a quick follow
up on one of those, um, just
really quickly on the impact of
the GRT, um, so in Maryland,
what we, the Maryland study that
we just saw, uh, they levy 9% of
tax on their alcohol and they
don't levy a sales tax, so that
goes towards their fund. Um, in
this case, ours is the, the, the
alcohol tax, which is the 3%
plus the 8.118% that you
See when you check out of the
register. So if you add those
two together, um, that's 8, 10,
11%. That's, you know, in some
counties it's gonna be more than
9% on that, on that piece.
Thank you, members of the
committee and chairman.
Thank you, representatives. I
wanna just
Appreciate the both of you for
taking the steps that you have
thus far to creating something
that
A colleague of ours,
representative Jason, uh,
Jason Harper mentioned that was
transparent.
to be progressive.
And then make sure that all of
the funds go to programs for
alcohol alleviation. That's
super important, but really
wanna also recognize the work of
Senator Cedo Lopez of
Representative Joanne Ferrari
for encouraging this type of
discussion, right? I, I, I think
it's because of that, that
encouragement in some, in some
ways harsh, in some ways
confrontational, in some ways,
we don't always get what we want
the first time, but it makes
people think creatively, right?
And, and, and we understand
that.
In New Mexico.
If we want to increase the
number of dollars that are going
to go to alcohol alleviation
efforts, right? We don't want it
to be simply
Built on the backs and on the
addictions.
Of red and brown people.
Right? And we recognize that the
presentation before us.
It was incorrect that it's not
white people in New Mexico in a
majority minority state is gonna
bear the brunt of these costs.
It would have been people that
we all represent in our smaller
communities.
And so the way that you
approached it, uh both uh
represent Parajon and
Representative Cadena.
I can appreciate it because it
brings equity into the
discussion. It brings make, it
makes mention of how we can be
more creative, uh, using a
different formula, and that the
way things have been done in the
past, don't always have to be
that way at all. What we inherit
as legislators, we have the
ability to change for the good.
So I can appreciate that and I,
I look forward to the next
presentation, but for the both
of you, thank you again. And as
we move forward, we look forward
to the further con uh discussion
on this matter. Next on our
agenda, and I appreciate we have
2 minutes left in this, uh, in
this meeting, but we will move
forward because it's very
important to discuss agenda item
number 9, proposal to increase
taxes on alcoholic beverages to
fund an alcohol harms
alleviation fund.
We have several presenters,
Representative Joanne Ferrari.
Antoinette Sero Lopez. Senator
Shannon Pinto, uh, Marlene.
Vera?
From the New Mexico Society of
Addiction Medicine.
And uh the owner and chief
executive of SBS evaluation
Program development specialists.
And presenters, if, if I may in
Respect to time.
Um, are, are you looking for an
endorsement this afternoon, or
are you looking to present it?
OK.
OK. Yeah.
Very good.
OK.
OK.
And as I said before, um, very
open to working with um
With other colleagues who have
other proposals. So if I may,
Senator, then in the, in the
interest of time, then if we can
skip over the issues of alcohol
in New Mexico. We, we understand
what it is and, and, and the,
and the issues of it. Let's look
at the tax policy of it all, OK?
Thank you. OK, um.
We
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
committee and those online, um,
thank you for joining us. We
appreciate the time here to
present the foundation of the
alcohol harms alleviation
legislation, especially when
we're trying to depict the scale
of the.
Extreme complete loss of
physical control of alcohol use
disorder in the far-reaching
harms to others in many ways.
This is a long withstanding
issue and requires the
establishment of stable funding
is our key goal here.
And when we talk about what's
existing already, the
punishment, shame, humiliation,
those are not solutions, so we'd
like to move forward.
This is a lifetime battle and it
passed on generation to
generation.
We must give the opportunity to
alleviate the harms.
So, no,
no further ado, have our
presenters here. Thank you, Mr.
You have your we have your
legislation.
No lights. There was no request
to make copies of it. If we have
it on.
On a slide show, we can present
it here. We have it.
OK.
You do that. OK, yeah, they're
gonna put it up here.
Usually they're brought.
Well, while the slides are
getting up in the interest of
time, I'm gonna start off. Um,
my name is Marlena Lea. Thank
you so much for the opportunity
to present today. I know we've
heard a lot about the harms, um,
so I'm gonna go through the
initial slides pretty quickly in
the interest of time, we do have
a a few New Mexico specific data
points from the alcohol
epidemiologist that I want to
bring up since that was asked
earlier. Um, we can go to the
next slides, um, starting off
with the burden of harm of.
Excessive alcohol use in New
Mexico. Just like to highlight
something that Doctor Jernigan
said earlier that the way that
the scientific community and the
public is thinking about alcohol
is changing. There's more and
more data to suggest that really
no level of alcohol consumption
confers public health benefit.
Next slide
As I believe we're probably all
aware, New Mexico has had the
highest rate of uh
alcohol-related mortality since
1997 and has been 1st, 2nd or
3rd since 1981. Um, a few other
statistics that are New Mexico
specific that I think are very
interesting. Uh, we all know the
burden from opioid overdose in
our communities and we're 6th in
the nation for that. Our rate of
death from alcohol is actually
twice our rate of death from
opioid.
Overdose, and alcohol is
frequently involved in gun
violence, suicides, homicides,
so many of the issues that New
Mexicans, New Mexicans are
thinking of on a daily basis
with regard to crime and
violence. Uh, next slide, I'm
gonna skip this one since Doctor
Jernigan went over it already,
um, now we're on the downstream
effects of alcohol consumption.
Just wanna highlight here.
But, um, Doctor Jernigan
mentioned how each standard
drink costs the state about
$2.77. Um, in terms of economic
costs. If we were to just adjust
that for inflation since that
estimate came out, the cost to
society is now almost $4 per
standard drink, um, and the
amount that the state receives
in revenue ranges from 4 cents
to 7 cents per standard drink.
Moving on again in the
of time. Um, I do want to
highlight this slide because it
does show New Mexico specific
data, um, specifically, the
alcohol-related uh rates of
death by race and ethnicity, and
also
The prevalence of alcohol
consumption by race, ethnicity.
What's really interesting about
this slide is if you, if you see
the column on the left, um,
Individuals who are American
Indian or Alaska Native, have an
alcohol-related mortality rate
of approximately 280 per 100,000
population. Um, in contrast, at
the lower end of the, the table,
individuals who are white have
an alcohol-related mortality
rate of approximately 67 per
100,000 population.
So as you go down that column,
um,
The rates change. In contrast,
if you look at the percent of
individuals who have had an
alcoholic beverage in the last
30 days. It's actually very
opposite. So American Indian or
Alaska Native individuals, um,
report less drinking in the past
30 days, and individuals who are
white. Let's go to the next
slide.
So this highlights what was
mentioned previously as the
paradox of harm, and there is
substantial evidence to show
that individuals with
Lower socioeconomic status
compared to individuals with
higher socioeconomic status,
experience greater harms from
alcohol when they drink the very
same amounts.
And what this suggests is that
there's actually a
multiplicative effect of alcohol
on the risk of adverse health
outcomes because of things that
were mentioned earlier,
structural violence,
intergenerational trauma, social
determinants of health, lack of
access to health care.
Um, let's go to the next slide.
Evidence on the impact of
alcohol control policies. We've
already heard extensively about
um how alcohol policies reduce
harms from alcohol. So let's go
again to the next slide.
There's a strong body of
evidence that suggests that more
restrictive alcohol policies
impact a host of downstream
effects ranging from suicide and
gun violence to
Alcohol related deaths from
alcohol use disorder and
cirrhosis, um, even cancer
deaths related to alcohol. Next
slide.
The World Health Organization
recommends increasing alcohol
taxes. Next slide, and the New
Mexico Department of Health
recommends increasing alcohol
taxes. We've already heard an
overview of alcohol excise taxes
in New Mexico. So let's skip
forward two slides, please.
And I'll pause here to to
highlight some of the
differences between excise taxes
and sales taxes. Um, a sales tax
was presented earlier, um, both
approaches can work.
Both approaches can lower
alcohol consumption. There are
some pros and cons to each of
them. Um, so we can return to
this maybe in the discussion if
we have time, but just want to
point out that this slide kind
of highlights some of the pros
and cons.
Let's go to the next slide. This
is a conceptual framework
showing how alcohol taxes relate
to downstream alcohol health
outcomes. And again, let's skip
ahead, um, we've heard about
Maryland and Alaska and
Illinois, so we can kind of go
forward and that is my very
quick 4 minute summary on the
background, pass it over. Thank
you.
like
I think Joanne goes next.
Thank you.
Well, oh shit will have, uh,
will be talking about our
proposal for the alcohol harms
alleviation Act.
And are, I just wanted to cover
um the current alcohol tax
structure, as we've mentioned on
many occasions, the um increase
of the excise tax hasn't
happened since uh
1994, so we're 30 years of not
having um
This proposal or this go
through.
Um, the cost to society for each
standard drink we've talked
about too when adjusted for
inflation.
Now is um $3.93 so almost $4 a
drink.
I, um, what it's costing us.
And yet the revenue to our state
has just been pennies.
And the alcohol excise tax
revenue amounts to 500 million
annually.
With half of it going to general
fund which um both both
presentations have talked about
what that means, um, you know,
in taxes per gallon for beer, 4
cents per drink, uh, for wine, 7
cents a standard drink and
spirits only 7 cents a standard
drink.
So what do we need to do to move
the needle um on alcohol-related
harms and health disparities.
This is so important to our
state. We're highest in the
nation, uh, 3 times the national
average, um, these are things,
um, this is a health crisis in
our state.
So we need to decrease the
consumption and um have creative
effective programs.
And legislation that we're
proposing.
would decrease alcohol
consumption by 5% to 10%.
With um
Uh, every, um,
Uh
Bit of tax increase.
And we need to collect um
200 million to 250 million in
annual tax revenue to stabilize,
to make sure that we have
reliable funding.
Um, and bolster public health
investments.
For prevention, such as for
underage drinking prevention and
excessive drinkers.
And um,
Make sure that that alcohol use
for alcohol use and treatment.
And alcohol use disorder and
related harms, such as for um
victims of domestic violence,
sexual assault in and even gun
violence.
This not only the consumption
reduction will help in its own
way, but then also to have the
programs that would um also uh
reduce those harms.
And we've had conversations with
um the uh local brewers and they
support changing.
Um, this problem around. They
recognize that it's critical to
our state.
And um they getting something
done is really important to them
also.
So, um, they also have said that
they don't agree with the sales
tax because that is going to
impact how the retailers have to
collect that uh funding.
So next, we've changed, so we've
changed the proposal and try to
respond to some of these issues,
um.
What we want to do is first of
all, uh, adjust the alcohol
excise tax to account for
inflation. So the part one of
our bill would increase the
alcohol excise tax, um, just
bring it up to what inflation
has been since 1994, and then
really importantly, include
inflation adjustments every 3
years going forward.
And then part two, we're doing
something different and that is
imposing a temporary 20%
standard drink public health
investment fee to address the
public health crisis that we are
experiencing now in New Mexico
from excessive alcohol use. The
public health investment fee
would sunset after New Mexico's
rate of alcohol-related death is
less than 40 per 1000 for five
consecutive consecutive years.
And we think that if we have the
whole state focusing on this,
that if we could accomplish
this, we, we would have moved
the needle on so many indicators
in New Mexico.
Including health outcomes,
education outcomes, crime
outcomes, um, and so that's why
we've kind of structured it a
little bit differently.
So how would this translate to
taxes per standard drink?
Taxes would range from 28 cents
to 35 cents per standard drink.
Um, and, you know, it's divided
now into beer, wine, spirits,
cause that's what's in the
statute, but we've noticed that
modernized um
Uh
Taxes on alcohol focus on the
percentage of alcohol in the
drink, instead in or percentage
of alcohol because now we have
fortified wines and then we have
these fortified kombucha. We
have all kinds of different,
different things and so we need
to, I think, help the department
focus on what the real problem
is, and that is the amount of
alcohol in the drink.
Um, and just to the inflation
adjustment that we talked about
would essentially double the
current alcohol excise tax.
That's the, that's the, that I
think is really important. And
then the temporary public health
investment fee would add 20% per
drink. and we would, we should
be transparent about what this
is. Um, and we want to be
transparent with everybody. The
anticipated public health
impacts, um, it would decrease
alcohol consumption and raise,
we we've been talking about
Stabilizing, um, our tax rates,
and I want to focus on
stabilizing what we spend, cause
I've made the point over and
over again is when we cut our
taxes or when we experience an
economic downturn, um,
Alcohol treatment programs and
behavioral health programs are
the first to get cut.
And over time, we've had these
programs that go up and down in
what they've been been able to
accomplish and we think it's
very important that we stabilize
the amount of money that goes to
these treatment programs, um,
and so it would uh provide a
stable revenue source for
effective programs and
infrastructure, and this is why
we really agree with, with the
um representative Parajuan and
uh Representative Cadena that
all of this money that is raised
from the alcohol tax should go
to.
Treatment programs
But what our increase would
generate 200, about 235 million
in stable annual revenue for
public health programs, and
that's what we think would,
would
Really raise the needle as a
representative um Cadena said, a
lot of these programs need
capital investments.
And they're not allowed to use
it with the current income
stream that they have now. They
need to have more beds. They,
they can't use it. Some programs
like the Veterans integration
Center in Albuquerque. They have
the building, but they don't
have the people to run the
programs. So we want to to see a
lot more money, um, and this
raises, I want to introduce um
My, my colleague, um,
Uh
your last name I, yeah.
Miss Suckerman, um, to talk
about what we can do. She is um
She is somebody who actually
works in the field and has a lot
of experience in the field.
And we really hard on talking
with.
Talking with nonprofits and
talking with the counties,
talking with the DWA people to
talk about what we could do.
And.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee, um,
I'm, first I wanted to start by
saying that I'm extremely
excited that we're having these
alcohol harm conversations
again. It's been years and so
I'm super excited that a lot of
members are are bringing this up
again. Um, and so what can we do
with some of the funds? We have
gone out to community members,
community prevention coalitions,
the WI programs, um,
And the help lines as well to
try to figure out what is needed
in our state and so what could
be done with some of the funds.
And again, we're very in line
with where funding should go.
One of them is looking towards
um achieving the public health
outcomes and
All of this through a
multifaceted approach. you, you
have heard this through multiple
conversations. It's not one
method that is going to address
the problem that we have in our
state.
Um, it's too big of a.
Of an issue currently. So what
are some things that we're
looking at? We're looking at um
Addressing robust prevention
treatment, and recovery
services, culturally relevant
programming. So again, we're
aligning with a lot of where
we're thinking that the money
should go, um, stable funding
for the New Mexico, um, Alliance
of Health Councils, we're
looking to figure out how do we
support the victims of
alcohol-related harms.
And, you know, recently there's
been a lot of research like has
been mentioned, um, as to how
alcohol impacts cancer as well.
So that's another um issue that
we want to look at.
Next slide, please.
Um, so there are, this is
A summary, I know it says
extensive list, but it really is
a summary based on what
communities departments have
identified as being needed in
our, in our state. And so for
us, I think that there are um
there are some that I just want
to point out.
Um, I, even with my glasses, I
can't read this, so I apologize
um for the, for how small this
list is, um,
But I think in general, we are
looking at screening and brief
intervention referral to the
mental expert type services so
we could quickly identify.
Currently, there are a lot of
Currently that there are a lot
of um the safety that hospitals
that are currently mandated to
implement EP, but there's a lot
of um
A lot of clinics that also could
implement as services underneath
that financing. I know we've
talked a lot about um media
campaigns. I do want to say that
yes, there is a need for
advertisement, but we know that
that is the lowest level of
information dissemination
community norms and does not
necessarily lead to behavior
change. So I want you to keep
that in mind as well. It's not
necessarily programming,
prevention, or implementation,
um, or treatment services. So,
although we do encourage that,
it
We need to keep that in mind.
Um.
Expansion of school-based.
Um, health centers.
Looking at home visiting
programs, we need to start early
on with prevention in the
adolescent population as well.
Including prevention services
like Project Venture, um, in the
school system.
Looking at enhancing long-term
treatment.
We constantly hear about our
communities being sent out of
state.
For treatment services,
especially residential services,
including for tribal community
members. So I love the idea um
that represented Pahon had
mentioned like if, if the tribal
community wants to create their
own um whether it's a sober
living system or uh sober living
homes or a residential program
that they would have the
opportunity to do that. Um, of
course, services for um domestic
violence programs.
And expansion to um ABC and
Special Investigations Unit.
Many times we we hear that
although there are licenses to
that we have too many licenses
in current counties or cities,
we have um delivery, home
delivery. We have all these
different programmings, but we
don't necessarily have the law
enforcement to do the work that
they need to do, um, in order to
prevent cells to intox or cells
to minors. Um,
There's a long list. I know that
we have a time limitation, but I
just wanted to say that.
We need to be there and we need
to provide funding for the
programs that for, for the
people that are most in need and
most impacted by the alcohol
industry.
We, we see that there have been
taxes for.
Tobacco taxes for marijuana,
alcohol again has not been taxed
in over 30 years and so we need
to consider that. Are we looking
at all of the products, all of
the substances that cause harm
in our community.
So with that, um,
Oh, summary summary next steps,
um, I think in general again, is
how do we mitigate harms?
How do we mitigate disparities
and address.
Current harms in the consumption
that are taking place and build
a healthier and more equitable
future for people in New Mexico.
So we welcome collaboration. We
hope that we can work together
to come up with a solution to
impact this um these harm
harmful impacts that the alcohol
industry has, um, on our
community.
And
We stand for any questions you
might have.
Thank you.
Books, uh, end of your
presentation?
Yeah
Great. Appreciate the uh
presentation. Let's go to the
committee members for any
questions and or comments.
You don't have anyone on the
list, um, but I, I'll, I'll ask
a question then, and I
We apologize that we didn't get
the
The handouts to read in front of
us. So, uh, going back then to
your presentation, um.
You, you want to raise $200
million a year, is that correct?
Is that the number?
Yes,
um, that's the estimate of what
this tax would raise. We think
that that's, that's, um, would
take a big step in our state is
to have that that many
resources. And then in regards
to how to raise that money, uh,
did I also hear then that
The sales tax approach would not
be the approach that you would
encourage.
I'm open to that approach as
long as it raised money, the,
you know, the sales, it, um, we
heard from the producers that we
talked to from the um craft
brewers that they did not uh
like that idea. Um, so we didn't
put it forward, but we, you
know, at least from, from my
perspective, as long as it was
raising the amount of funds.
That it, it, I, the thing I like
about it is we wouldn't have to
be coming here to adjust for
inflation all the time. Yeah,
yeah, and I think in regards to
Looking at things.
forward thinking is that we
don't want to set up a fund to,
to fail, right? And if the
intent is that we want to raise
money to help alleviate alcohol
abuse in the state, then we want
it to fail because we don't want
to raise that much money because
that means it's working because
people aren't buying alcohol,
right?
And so
And so in my mind, it seems like
To a point that
He was seriously uh Senator
Munoz had made mention that
yesterday that we have about $9
billion of unspent capital
outlay money in this state,
right? Uh, what if we took a
portion of that to help
kickstart, so to speak, um.
Alcohol alleviation funds.
F, right? In, in regards to
trying to kickstart something
like this, so that
As we get started in its
infancy, and if the intent is to
completely
Or to reduce alcohol harms in
New Mexico, then we're we're
hopeful that people won't be
continue to spend money on
alcohol the way they are, right?
So we won't be raising 235 $200
million a year. We hope that
that number will go down.
Right? I mean,
intentionally,
although, um, it's not gonna go
down to 0 down to 0, but
it seems to me then that both
presentations
It may be
then to approach and start to
look at if there's money that
this state has in a time of
abundance of financial
abundance. Why, why, why is this
not a priority and that we could
use some of the money to
kickstart.
Um, I think that that's an
excellent question. We haven't
done that, um, and the problem,
um,
We and we talked, we've talked
about it all yesterday. And that
was stabilizing income. If we're
in abundance now, but what what
our proposal does is we're
starting to plan for the time
period that we're not gonna have
the abundance that we have
today. We're looking for a, for
a stable source of funding for
these programs, because these
are the programs that are always
cut.
Um, and so the alcohol harms
alleviation fund, the way the
bill has created it is it will
be a fund, because we know that
200 million, if we collect that
the first year is not going to
be spent in one year. You have
to rev up to spend that kind of
money. But we would create a
fund so that it wouldn't
constantly revert to the general
fund, but it would grow over
time, perhaps have no more
allocations, but this is a
starting point to do what we've
done in a lot of areas, and that
is create a fund that will
support the important.
of
alcoholic or uh uh alleviating
or eliminating alcohol abuse in
our state and
excuse me.
The ver to join in.
Oh, and I'd like to defer to,
uh, Joanne.
I mean sorry.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
think it's important that we
also consider how raising um the
um
Excise tax.
To inflation is really important
and that we keep the excise tax.
The other proposal would
eliminate that and then also
with uh such a small sales tax
would actually reduce the um
taxes and um increased
consumption and consumption
besides having the money for the
um different programs and
projects, it's going to be
important that we um
Also raise uh the taxes or the
impact on um the sales or the
drinking.
To a point where it will reduce
consumption.
At least to a certain level that
will help us um with the impact
of the other programs that will
be funded.
But we, if we started with a
small amount of funding for the
AA fund.
Then built on it because we are
increasing taxes. And if we did
a hybrid of the um liquor excise
tax being raised to inflation,
which is about um
5 cents a drink and then
increasing the sale if we did it
with the sales tax idea, it
would have to be a lot more than
a 3%. It would have to be at
least 12% of a sales tax to
generate the funding that we
need for these programs and to
keep that as a stable income for
the programs and for their
success.
And if we, um,
Uh, and we'd have an 8%
decrease, um, with that
combination.
In consumption.
Thank you. Thank you for the,
for the answers. Let's go next
to Representative Parajun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you guys so
much for your presentation. I
really appreciate it, senators,
um, and I, I had uh two quick
questions. Um, one of them is
that.
I, I don't know if I saw it on
the page here, but the 200
million that's raised is there
an allocation, um, for our state
departments, our DFA staff
members, for instance, do you
know, estimated how much it
would cost to uh administer that
much money, Mr. Chair.
Um, the allocation of course,
this amount of money would be
allocated in the future, and so
we would need to figure out how
much they need to to distribute
it.
So, you know, I don't know
whether it's 1233 additional
staff positions.
Yes, that's absolutely critical
to making this work.
Thank you.
And then my other question, Mr.
Chairman, just really quick is
um
Mm
So, as a representative Ferrari
just said, there's a 8% decrease
in consumption, and is that on
the year or in total over the
course of 10 years? Is it going
down 8% every single year.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Parajon, um, so
we've tried to model it multiple
ways, multiple assumptions, um,
using
Kind of what I think are the
best practices for for modeling,
we would expect to see about an
8% decrease in consumption in
the initial year, um, if we were
to do a hybrid proposal where we
adjusted the excise tax for
inflation since 1993, 1994, and
we added on a 12% sales tax that
would also generate
approximately $250 million in
annual revenue.
No. Um, so I'd be happy to work
through any of those 12% in
addition to the already 8% GRT
that's added to the. Yes, that
is similar to the cannabis
retail tax. The cannabis retail
tax is 12%. It's actually
increasing to 18% over the next
several years. Um, so in a
similar way, if we could come
together to try to come up with
a hybrid approach.
We could introduce a 12% sales
tax and we could also adjust the
existing excise tax for
inflation, and just one other
point is that actually no states
in the United States, um,
That are not state-run
monopolies for alcohol have
actually eliminated their excise
sale tax excise taxes. Um, a
number of states, as you
mentioned, have added on sales
taxes. So in the case of
Maryland, Maryland has an excise
tax and that sales tax is added
on, so we could very much do
something in the same way, and
we'd love to collaborate with
and so in in regards to that 8%
decrease that happens per year,
then is the 235 million
generated, does it decrease over
time?
Or are you assuming that it,
like, where's the 8% decrease
happening? Yeah, thank you, Mr.
Chair and representative. So
It depends on the behaviors, um,
the initial calculations look at
what's expected kind of
immediately, right? As inflation
increases as programs start to
come into effect and we start
rolling out um really robust
public health efforts to
mitigate the harms of alcohol,
we would hope that the decreases
in consumption would continue,
um, and as Senator Serio Lopez
just mentioned.
If this were a fund in a trust
that could grow over time even
though perhaps the annual amount
might decrease that um annual
fund would actually grow over
time because of compounding um.
Thank you.
Yeah, it's the same concept that
we've been talking about for the
last two days with stabilizing a
fund.
You know, putting it somewhere,
having it grow.
Yeah.
Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. Thank you. Any
questions or comments from the
committee?
Seeing none.
Senators, representatives, and
folks, thank you for joining us
this afternoon. And as we move
forward, then obviously it's a
work in progress, but we
appreciate the presentation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Good
to see you. You've come to the
end of our agenda, folks. Thank
you, thank you, thank you for
staying 30 minutes after class,
but we appreciate the work that
you've provided to us the past
couple of days. Thank you to the
