And we have a fiduciary
responsibility to, to generate
uh revenue uh for those
purposes. We've got about 12% of
the land in the state when you
look at our surface acreage, uh,
and we're doing really well.
We've made about $10 billion
since 2019.
It's an incredible amount of
money that is predominantly uh
from oil and gas, and we're
looking for ways to not have all
of our eggs in one basket and
try to uh diversify.
If you look at page 6 and 7.
That really just is to highlight
the fact that the lands that we
utilize are tied to specific
beneficiaries such as the public
schools, school for the blind,
school for the deaf.
Any money that we earn off of
that land goes to support that
specific beneficiary.
So it very much is directly tied
to our beneficiaries and the
decisions that we make on the
land are incredibly impactful in
that way.
Slide 8 provides a general
overview of uh the historical
revenue that the land office has
brought in.
Um, as you can see, what we're
bringing in these days in terms
of 2.5 billion last year, a
record 2.7 the year before.
These are not normal levels and
in the context of
diversification, you know, we
approach this with a full
understanding that we're not
going to be able to replace all
of our revenue sources um in a
way that, uh, or replace oil and
gas with other revenue sources
that's really 1 to 1, um, with
regard to oil and gas.
In terms of how our, our revenue
flows, uh, slide 9 provides a
snapshot.
We really have two different
types of funds, and this is
really important from a
stabilization uh perspective in
terms of the, the money that we
earn.
If
he
Yeah, if the activity that we
are leasing.
Or is related to renewable that
could be renewable energy, it
could be agriculture, it could
be commercial development,
anything that is a non-permanent
depletion of our land. That goes
into the land maintenance fund.
These are distributed on a
monthly basis they go straight
to our beneficiaries and this
last year was actually the best
year ever on record. We
generated
We do leverage it.
We invest it, we grow it before
distributing it.
So slide 11 really shows a chart
from the SIC that, you know, $1
in from the land office, we're
actually getting about $5 back
in terms of value prior to
distribution. Um,
The next slide, you know, you
look at the land maintenance uh
fund, and these are gonna be
where our earnings are
diversified in terms of
renewable energy, commercial
development, etc. We, we don't
have that, that added value. Uh,
a dollar in is a $1 out.
Um, the other problem is we have
a lot of volatility and you can
see on slide 13, um, the, the
revenue change year over year,
and corresponding to that, the
amount that the, the
beneficiaries get really
fluctuates a lot. So,
For example, the school for the
blind, their land maintenance
Might be 10s of million the next
year. It's really hard to, to
plan for. Um, we're on the land
grant permanent fund side
because it's stabilized before
it comes out, those
distributions are uh much less
volatile.
Um,
Flight 14 uh is just an example
of that volatility, um, looking
at, uh, you know, uh, FY 24 and
How
We're actually going through FY
24, um, how the different income
sources really go up and down
depending on the year, and, and
that uh can have a really
Big impact in terms of our
beneficiary's ability to budget.
OK, I'm gonna jump now, uh, into
what we're doing on
diversification specifically. So
starting on slide 15,
Um,
We had a great report come out
by Headwaters Economics, and I
think you're gonna hear uh from
Mark, uh, I think after, after
this session.
To be working toward
diversification. And we have
been making a lot of progress on
these. There's still a lot of
work to be done, um, but we are
moving in that direction.
It provides a nice strategic
plan for us, um, to, to move
towards, but once again, you
know, emphasizing we are under
no assumption that we are going
to be able to replace oil and
gas one for one. It's just, it's
not gonna happen.
But that doesn't mean that we
shouldn't invest in economic
development, other, you know,
renewable energy, other things
that, that put us on more stable
footing and essentially grow the
pie of our traditional revenue
sources at the state land
office.
Site 18 is just an example of
really the diversity that we're
engaged in, in these days. Uh,
Stephanie Garcia Richard, when
she came on as land commissioner
wanted to meet our mandate of
revenue generation, but also
wanted to look for ways that we
can meet the needs of
communities while we're using
state trust lands.
We have labs in every single
county in the state.
And we have a lot of
opportunity.
Um, you know, sometimes it can
be a little challenging to, to
work on state lands because we
have some unique rules, but uh
we are advancing a lot of
different projects in different
contexts. We have hotels, like
right across from the state land
office to El Send El Sandero
Hotel, um, all the money that we
make off of that hotel goes to
support the University of New
Mexico.
Netflix Studios in Albuquerque,
uh, they're sublease, uh, helps
fund, uh, also actually you and
that land was assigned to UNM.
And then in Albuquerque, another
example is the Luminaria senior
housing complex, and we just
recently broke ground on another
one, Ferrelito. Both of them are
90 unit senior affordable
housing units, uh, that are
providing critical affordable
housing to uh the community.
So we can make money, we can
diversify, we can do things that
are job creating, um, and also
meet the needs of communities.
Another key area with respect to
divers diversification as
renewable energy.
Um, as you can see on slide 19,
we've got projects statewide.
To put this into context a
little bit in 2019, when we came
on board, there were 12 active
renewable energy leases. We've
got 42.
35 applications in the hopper.
These are real money makers. Um,
they're not gonna bring in all
their money in year one. They're
spread out over some time as the
projects get geared up, as they
become operational as they
expand. But you know, we did two
wind leases last year that are
going to bring in about 139
million over the lifetime of
those leases, pattern wind
project, a massive project.
We're looking at about 300
million over the uh the life of
that project.
These are real dollars and
cents. This will move our state
uh in a direction, um, where we
are creating more revenue from,
from other sources and oil and
gas.
And you know, just to kind of
tie back uh uh initially, if you
look at the slide.
Um, on our, our revenue
generation at the beginning of
the, the presentation, you know,
when you look at it from a
historical standpoint, it's
slide 8, there was a time when
we were only making, you know,
50 to $600 million a year. So,
when you start talking about
10s, hundreds of millions of
dollars in renewable energy,
that really is pretty
significant.
And also along the lines of how
can we meet the needs of
communities along the way. I
just want to point out we're
really um emphasizing community
solar as well that the
legislature passed that
renewable energy, uh, um, uh,
I'm sorry, the community solar
program. We just signed our
first lease. We've got another
one coming out very shortly. We
have about 11 total projects in
the hopper.
So, uh, 20 just provides some of
the renewable energy forecast.
This is very conservative. These
are only uh leases that we have
in the door. So, you know, we
may be talking single digits
now. We're gonna be moving to
double digits as these projects
go along, go online, and then,
you know, down the road we'll be
talking about hundreds of
millions of dollars coming in.
We're also trying to be creative
in terms of how we can tap into
other revenue sources like
conservation. There's a lot of
money going around these days in
terms of carbon markets and
conservation leasing. If there
are people that want us to um
protect rare species of plants
on, on state trust land and they
want to pay for that. That can
be a huge win-win for the school
kids and uh doing right by the
land.
Lastly, in terms of
diversification, I wanted to hit
on kind of the other side of the
ledger.
We can make more money in
different areas.
Uh, that's one part of it, but
we also need to deal with the
legacy fiscal risk that we have
out there. If we're spending
state trust land dollars,
cleaning up other folks' messes
that were irresponsible.
We're not distributing that
money to our beneficiaries, and
we're not ultimately offsetting
uh taxpayer funding. And I think
that's really important here
also to recognize when we talk
about billions of dollars that
we're generating, this is money
that the legislature and the
public don't need to come up
with in taxes. So,
I wouldn't say it's a tax cut,
but it's definitely a tax
offset.
So we have focused a lot on some
of the historical messes we have
on state trust land. Um, since
launching our accountability and
enforcement program and, and uh
uh 2021, uh, we have now
plagued, I'm sorry, plugged 570
wells.
This is completely at industry's
expense. So this is separate
from the federal program where
they're allegating allocating
tax dollars to plug wells, we're
going to companies and saying,
hey, under contract, you agreed
that you would clean up your
mess. You never did, so you
gotta clean it up. And that
saved about $500.
So
I know I went through that
really quick, but I'm gonna jump
to the next uh topic which is um
our oil and gas uh uh royalty
rate proposal.
And this actually does very much
have to do with diversification.
I think sometimes it's
counterintuitive when you think
about how raising a royalty
rate, uh, on the oil and gas
side is actually helping us
diversify our revenue away from
oil and gas.
Um,
because of the royalty is going
into the land grant permanent
fund.
And because
That provides an opportunity to
grow those investments before
they are distributed.
We are creating money off of
money, and that's
diversification.
So, if we can capture
Uh, are new leases moving
forward on the best tracks under
a higher royalty rate, we have a
better chance.
To actually grow that value and
um uh create additional revenue
for the, for the state, not just
off of what oil companies pay,
but just off of the value of the
growth of the land grant
permanent fund.
So a couple of things that I
wanted to hit on that
Really are, are key points, um.
Royalties are not taxes. This
comes up uh often. Um royalties
are what a company pays for the
sale of a public resource.
So the deal is, uh, we give them
a 100% of the oil and gas.
They bring it to market.
They develop it
And right now under state law,
we get 20% of the value and they
get to keep 80% of the value.
We're trying to change this, so
the public gets 25% of the
value.
But the company still get that
75%.
The oil and gas rates uh were
last uh raised in the 70s, um
for the royalty rate.
That was a completely different
world. The Permian Basin.
is one of the best, if not the
best, chill.
Opportunities, places in the
world.
Um, New Mexico has some of the
best rock.
In the world,
We have some of the lowest
operating cost to be able to get
that uh uh resource out of the
ground. Industry is an
increasing efficiencies in terms
of laterals and uh their ability
to, to drill that is reducing
cost.
Um, and there's no reason why
the state land office should be
capped.
Uh, at a rate that is below
market.
The market rate for the best
tracks in the premium basin.
It's 25%, whether you're talking
about the private lands or
whether you're talking about
Texas.
So all what we're asking is give
us the ability.
To charge the market rate.
For a public resource when we
sell it. That's what it really
comes down to.
You look at uh
25, uh slide 25, it's just a
Illustration of really, you
know, where our production is in
New Mexico. Uh, almost all of
the oil production is in the
Permian Basin. Uh, and that's
really what we're talking about
when we're looking at increasing
uh royalty rates, and we say the
best of the best tracks. We're
talking about basically oil
shale plays in the Delaware
Basin down in, in the Permian
Basin.
Um, the next couple slides just
really highlight the point that
uh New Mexico really is the best
of the best. Um, most of the,
uh, oil, um, from the premium
basin, although it's spread out
about two-thirds on the Texas
side. One third on the New
Mexico side, the best rock is on
the New Mexico side.
So, to those that say, well,
they're gonna pack up, they're
gonna go to uh North Dakota.
They're gonna go to Colorado,
they're gonna go other things.
Location, location, location.
There's a reason why there are
companies in Manhattan, downtown
Manhattan, even though it's more
expensive.
Then maybe situated in
Albuquerque, um, if they want to
be by Wall Street, if they want
to be in New York, I mean
location matters. When you're
extracting a resource.
Location matters in terms of the
geological formation.
Uh, and, and what they're able
to produce and and what the cost
is.
Um,
Although I did say very
So, uh, royalties are not taxes.
I think one issue that is often
raised as well, you know,
royalties are still a burden on
the company. So when you
increase the royalty rate on
companies, it means that company
is gonna be paying more as a
verdict. That's true. Um, I
mean, there, there is a cost,
uh, uh, to, to business when you
increase that cost. We think
it's, it's fair, um, and there
are a lot of companies, um,
EOG is one of them that's
testified before the legislature
said, listen, you know, I mean,
yes, we don't want to pay more
money, but we're, we're willing
to do it because it's a fair
bargain as part of uh the, the
contract we have to, to develop
these lands.
But so slide 28 really
highlights how we compare on the
tax side.
Um,
You look, this is from an LFC
report.
And it's looking at production,
uh, taxes that are related to um
oil and gas, and, and we're
right there in the middle and
you look at Texas, uh, uh, 8.3
compared to New Mexico, the
effective rate is 8.5.
Uh, production, property taxes,
etc.
So we're not totally outside
some realm of this is gonna be a
tipping point where, where
companies are going to be
leaving uh based on this. And
the other kind of important
aspect of this, and I don't want
to go too much in the weeds
here.
I
Not every lease is the same.
New Mexico's lease is in
statute. It's drafted by the
state legislature. We don't have
control, unlike other areas to
uh negotiate the terms of, of
those statutes. It's really
favorable to industry.
Not just in terms of the royalty
rate, but for example, in New
Mexico, um, uh, there's a lot of
deductibles that you can take on
the gas side, particularly, so
it's essentially net rather than
growth.
So, looking at Texas,
It's gross or not.
That's a big difference. In
Texas, they charge at different
depths. So if you're hitting
different plays along the way,
you gotta pay different amounts.
Um, that's not the case for
state trust land. You just, you
get the mineral estate and you
can go wherever you want. So
there are a lot of areas where
that don't have to do with the
royalty rate that still make our
lease more favorable to
industry.
And I've almost done here. Um,
uh.
529, another issue that often
comes up is, this is gonna put
the little guys out of business.
A couple of points.
One
If the cost is really that
important that, you know, a
couple $100,000 over the life of
a, a well, uh, is gonna put you
out of business. You might not
want to be in a really highly
regulated industry. We want to
ensure that these companies are
capitalized in a way where they
can uh develop the lands, have
enough money to clean up down
the road. And when we looked at
what are who pays these
royalties on state trust lands,
it ain't the little guys, and it
ain't New Mexico company.
In FY 23,
We brought in $2.6 billion in
royalties on state trust lands.
20 million.
Came from New Mexico.
Registered company.
It's not the small New Mexico
companies that are paying the
bulk of state trust land
royalty.
And to be clear, and I think
This has come up in the past,
um, we're only talking about
prospective. We're not talking
about messing with anybody's
contracts. A lot of these leases
folks have are actually old
royalty rates of 12.5%. We're
not gonna mess with that. We're
only talking about moving
forward. But even when you're
moving forward and on, on slide
30, it shows, and I know this is
impossible to, to see in much
detail, but it shows the green
is unleashed parcels, the red is
the leased parcels.
Um,
That we do have some unleased
parcels that are in really prime
areas of the Delaware Basin and
the premium in general.
We don't need a lot of tracks.
In terms of new leases to make
real money and a lot of money
that could help out our state.
For the last slide on 31.
Go through, you know, what we're
talking about here.
Um, probably a minimum, there
are 2 estimates of $500 million
a year, uh, LFC says it's
between 500,000 and 75, we
estimated between 550,000 and 84
million, but those are the
additional royalty earnings that
then go to the land grant
permanent fund.
Then as we discussed, because
the land grant Permanent Fund
invests.
Uh, it grows the value of that
money, the bang for your, your
buck is actually a lot more. So
the SIC said based on that,
you'd be looking at 1.5 to $2
billion in more SIC value that
they would have in the land
grant permanent fund by 2050.
And what that would mean in
terms of the beneficiaries and
offsetting taxes that, that are
working families pay.
is between 750 million.
And 1.3 billion in a cumulative
distributions over that period
if we put this change in place.
That's a lot of extra money that
would be coming down. It helps
with stabilization like we
talked about.
And it also helps with
diversification and that it
allows us to make more money off
of money, uh, in addition to
the, the core royalty earnings.
I know I went through that
really, really quickly, Mr.
Chair, um, but I'd be happy to
answer any questions the
committee may have. Uh, thank
you very much, Deputy
Commissioner Stewart. We're
going to questions first on the
list, we have a Representative
Scott, Representative Scott,
please.
Mr. Chairman, I'm curious.
About your association with
Netflix. How much?
Revenue is that bringing to
State land office at this time.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Scott, the deal, uh, brings in
about 20 million over the life
of the lease, um.
Yeah
That's over the life of the
lease.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, well, it's a
little hard to say because the
way that those um uh leases are
structured cause you've got
You know, an initial period of
10 years or so where you have
defined payment amounts and then
we do a reappraisal, so we
assess, OK, well, our land is
now more valuable, and then in
out years those amounts can step
up. So I don't know, you know,
in year 20 with an appraisal
would, would come in uh at that
is under a um 40-year lease, but
kind of that initial phase is
that that 20 million.
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart.
Uh, what is the value of the tax
credits that the film industry
is collecting annually from
New Mexico right now. Do you
have that number?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, I'm sorry, could you say
that one more time? What is the
tax credit? What tax credit?
But it's the value of the tax
credits.
That are being
What I would call showered.
Upon the film industry.
Annually.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott.
No idea outside of my uh
knowledge base, but I bet you
know.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart is on
the order of $2000.
A year.
So
$20 million over 40 years
doesn't look.
Oh
Attractive from a business
standpoint.
Let me move on
I understand.
From multiple sources that
State land office is no longer.
Offering business leases.
Or pipeline right of way.
To transport fresh water.
For use in the oil field.
That accurate?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, that is not accurate.
And,
uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart,
can you tell me how it is not
accurate cause I know of a
number of operators of these
types of facilities that are
having difficulty getting state
leases for those people, Mr.
Chairman Representative Scott.
So as you know, the commissioner
said that she doesn't want to
use state trust lands to develop
freshwater sources for the oil
and gas, um, uh, industry.
Uh, in terms of fracking that we
should be using non-freshwater
uh sources. Um, what that has to
do with is um uh the actual
easements to bring the water out
of the ground. What you're
referring to is to be able to
transport across uh state trust
lands. What we have done, which
requires additional information
from applicants is we're
beginning to ask, well, where
are you getting that water from.
Um, we need to understand.
Is that coming from state trust
land. Uh, we've had several
cases where the water being
transported across state trust
land that they had proposed,
they actually didn't have the
water rate.
And we can't be involved in, you
know, authorizing that if, if
they don't actually have the
legal right to that, that water.
So you, you're right that we
have put in place additional
measures that probably have
slowed things down in that
context as we work through and
understanding of what the water
rights are and uh where, where
that's coming from, um, but we
have not prohibited, um, and we
continue to issue uh uh rights
of way for pipelines that
transport fresh water across the
state.
Trustling.
And
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart, would
there be any problem at all?
Obtaining a permit to transport
freshwater.
Across state surface, for
example, to grow corn.
Is that an issue at all?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, it's not.
OK.
And I believe I heard you say
that state land office has a
fiduciary responsibility.
To the people of New Mexico and
those beneficiaries. So,
If we're making it difficult to
transport.
To produce and transport fresh
water.
For oil field purposes.
Uh, Bob my calculations, the
Water requirement for one
circle.
Of corn
Grown in this state.
One circle, one season.
The economic value of that
circle of corn.
It's about $7000.
If we transport the almost
identical amount of water.
Across that same state surface
and use it to drill and complete
an oil well.
That is very typically.
500,000 barrels.
In today's world.
At a cost of $110.
The value in taxes and
potentially royalty to the state
in that circumstance is $3.3
million plus whatever gross
receipts tax is paid.
As a consequence of that
drilling and completion
operation. Now,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart.
There's no comparison
So
It appears to me at least that
that policy is
is misguided. Let me move on to
carbon credits. Mr. Chair, Mr,
how would you propose to
monetize carbon credits.
Mhm. Using state resources, Mr.
Chairman, Representative Scott,
just on your last comment real
quick. Um,
I think the difference between
agriculture and the oil and gas
operations. You can't grow corn
with frack water.
Or at least New Mexicans don't
want to grow corn with frack
water.
And what we're saying is that in
the oil and gas context,
especially when you look at the,
the premium, companies are
moving towards recycling. This
is happening. It's, um, uh, you
know, they're constantly touting
and successfully moving New
Mexico away from from utilizing
fresh water for oil and gas
operations. Now, do you know,
there's always gonna be a little
bit of fresh water that may be
needed, but they're successful
in that regard. We, we don't
have that in the context of of
corn.
Um,
In terms of your question on on
carbon credits. So the, the way
that we're looking at this and,
and, you know, we're trying to
figure out, honestly the best
way to structure it.
His companies are coming to our
agricultural lessees, and
they're saying, hey, we will um
pay you money if you manage the
lands in a particular way that
has benefit for the soil, and
that has benefit for the land.
And those companies pay the
agricultural lessee, and the way
that we would get revenue is
essentially getting a third of
that cut.
So that's kind of one model, um,
that, that we're looking at, uh,
and that would be, you know,
essentially voluntary or it
would be voluntary partnerships
with our agricultural community.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart,
somebody.
Excuse me, sir.
Eventually
has to pay for that credit.
If it carries value, the state
takes 100 bucks.
If the states collecting $30 off
of that.
Metric term CO2 credit. Somebody
had, has to buy that.
And
I don't see any other place to
sell that credit.
But to the consumers of New
Mexico.
Who are buying gasoline.
And diesel
Thereby
Raising the cost of those
products who are consumers.
Do you, do you see?
Mr. Chairman, this church, see
the logic there.
Being careful to cultivate this
carbon credit culture and what
it might be doing to raise the
cost of living in New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, um, I, I'm not gonna
purport to be an expert on the
carbon markets, um, uh, I think
they are, you know, some of them
are national, um, and, you know,
the way that they buy and sell
those different carbon credits
within different industries and,
and, you know, I'll be honest
there, we, we've had concerns
when we've looked at this in
certain context is, are we, you
know, is there greenwashing, you
know, we want to ensure that if
people are actually paying,
Uh, for carbon credits and that
we're participating in that,
that there's real added.
Value. I don't, I don't know
that it gets passed on to a
consumer in New Mexico, uh, but
it is something that we look at
in a thoughtful way, like we
would look at any other industry
and, you know, an example is,
um, you know, when people say,
OK, well, we're gonna get do
carbon credits on state trust
land because of foil carbon
capture.
Well we're having them go out
there and do soil sampling and
testing and show us like that
that actually works. Uh, um, so,
um,
That said,
We are an agency.
With very much a private
Sector mindset in that if there
is business and it is
responsible business.
We should look for ways to make
money for the school kids.
And so in the conservation
leasing context and carbon
credits in that world, that's,
we're gonna see if we can tap
that for the school kids.
OK. That's, that's fair enough.
Now,
And photo that you put in there
of the
Nasty tank battery.
Well soaked well ahead.
Are you familiar with
The oil and gas industries tax
paid into the conservation fund.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Scott, I, I am, and um, you
know, the key difference there
is, you know, industry, they pay
taxes, uh, money goes into that
fund and it's meant to plug
orphaned wells, um, and
What we're focused on is we have
a contract with the company.
No different than a lease when
you're a residential, you, you,
you, you rent a house?
I rent an apartment, and when
you're done, you got to clean
up. If not, you got, there's a
deposit and you got to pay. Um,
and
You know,
100% on the land office. The
eggs on our face for decades and
decades, we didn't do much at
all.
We're playing catch up.
You look at slide 22.
And it looks like a shotgun
blast on the satellite imagery
and, you know, you're aware of
this area, that's around Loco
Hills, you know, an area of
historical production.
We're trying to go back and say,
listen,
You had operations, we had a
contract. You said you were
gonna clean up, you didn't clean
up, it's time to clean up.
That's totally separate from,
from the uh OCD well plugging.
In addition, I think what's
important, they only OCD only
looks through the way they're
regu regulatory structure works.
They only look through the lens
of an operator.
So they're focused on who is the
operator of a well.
We focus on who is the lessee.
You might have multiple
operators of different wells,
and our contract is with the
lessee. So even if you have 3
operators that are bankrupt,
rather than using tax dollars uh
from the fund to uh clean that
up. We think it's our
responsibility if we've got a
party who's on the hook for it,
who
Uh, you know, is able to clean
it up, to go to them and say,
hey, it's your job to get these
guys to clean up or we're gonna
make them clean up. And it's
been effective. I mean, you
know, 570+ wells.
Completely, none of it at
taxpayer expense out of, I
think, about 1200 at the
beginning.
Wow, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart.
It's important to know.
That that money paid into the
conservation fund was intended.
To handle orphan.
Circumstances like this, and it
has not been used.
Historically, to do that.
It's been used historically in
the general fund has been used
historically to pay the salaries
of the old conservation
division, and you can understand
why the industry
is looking sideways.
At this money that they've put
in specifically earmarked.
To solve problems like this.
Now,
The least of record.
On a lease that may have been in
effect for 90 years.
May or may not have any bearing.
To the operators that are
currently on that lease, and
therefore, the operators
sometime in history that may
have caused the problem.
So you're holding these guys
responsible when
I guess the only way that it
would go to the conservation
fund is if they've all died.
So
I think there's
It's, it's my opinion that there
is a lot of money out there.
That has been.
Earmarked
To solve problems of this nature
that have, that has not been
suitably utilized.
And that's probably our fault.
But to go to folks that have no
relation to the operations that
are on that lease now and
saying, you got to clean this up
because the least see a record
that leased this in 1935, is now
defunct.
Let's
I'm gonna, Mr. Chairman, I'm
about done here.
Let's talk about
State land office.
Determining
The economic limit.
On some of these strip releases.
That then
Requires
From your office,
That those wells be shut in DNA
and remediated it.
Now,
Very obvious question.
Economic limits in the eye of
the beholder.
And a 3 barrel a day, well,
The ExxonMobil is not going to
be economic.
The small Roswell Independent.
Very well, so.
Within
The industry
There is concern.
That the state land office is
utilizing
These techniques.
The force operators.
The plug and abandoned wells.
Such that the lease reverts back
to the state and can be released
for this higher royalty burden.
Now, let's talk about that for
just a minute.
At 25% royalty.
It's only one of several
expenses.
Yeah
An operator has an obligation.
For
Royalties were.
The 9% in taxes is another.
The hostile regulatory
environment.
That you have just described is
another, and I have seen several
studies.
That show that the burden
On New Mexico operators
currently.
is very near.
The top of the burden on all of
the operators in the lower 48.
So
Let's take all of those.
Direct cost into consideration.
Before we start talking about
raising royalty rate, and that's
only a portion.
Of the expenditures that are
required.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, Representative
Scott. We really appreciate not
only the comments, but uh your
knowledge as we move forward
with that going next to Senator
Ceda Lopez. Senator Cedia Lopez,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you for the presentation.
I think that this is really an
illustration of how the state
land office is putting the, the
interests of New Mexicans first.
Um, and I, I just wanted to, to
say.
Um, I think it's awesome that
you're checking water rights
when you're, when you're giving
these permits because it, it's
um it furthers the policy of the
produced water statute that we
passed in 2019, and it also
makes it so that we don't have
all these silos like you like.
Um, we have the, the state
engineer who's, you know, who's
whose responsibility it is, but
they don't know that somebody's
stealing water and not and not
uh and not entitled to the water
rights, so that you're
furthering that. So I, I think
that, that that's great and I
was real happy to hear that.
Um,
And then when we talk about the
regulatory environment.
In New Mexico. Um, are you aware
of the best available control
technology regulation in Texas?
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator, I am
not.
Well, the best available control
technology in Texas requires
that somebody um comes into
Texas,
use and, and it's a complicated
formula. I'm not gonna be able
to explain all of it. But
basically uses the best
available control technology to
prevent the methane escapes to
prevent that kind of thing. And,
and what I understand has been
happening is Texas is going in
with this new complying with the
regulation in Texas, which all
Texans like because they like to
see their their.
um kept clean.
And they're selling their crappy
stuff here in New Mexico.
Um, and I'm wondering when when
I was hearing about, oh, all the
regulatory stuff. I started
thinking about the regulations,
what that must cost in Texas to
ensure that the, that the people
who are drilling there are
actually uh doing the best they
can to be good stewards of the
land, pursuant to regulation.
And so I think regulation is
An important way for um
To protect the assets, the
resource, which actually
belonged to the people of the
state of New Mexico, and I would
commend the state land office
for being such a good steward
and a good trustee of, of this
land, um, I'm, I'm looking at
this best available control
technology because it bothers me
to think of, and this is my
imagination, of all of these
great uh air pollution, um,
controls that are in Texas, but
not in New Mexico.
Um, and it's all the same air,
so it's just, it just bothers
me. I think uh it would be nice
to, to look to Texas and, and,
um, think about what they, what
they're doing to protect their
their air, um, and I'd be
interested in what the cost is
to the
To the operators in Texas.
Um, with regard to the, this,
um,
The issue of the non-permanent
or the uh LMF and the LGPF
funds.
Um, that is those funds that go
directly to the beneficiaries
and those funds that are
leveraged.
Or is it, should we be thinking
about leveraging um the the
funds, now that we're, they're,
they're increasing so much. I
mean, this is, this is really
impressive that they're
increasing so much and I'm, I'm
just wondering what did it, they
go into the funds directly
because it wasn't that much and
so there was not a, an impact,
and should we think about
leveraging now, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um, I shouldn't said
that explicitly, uh, also, uh,
We would encourage that change.
Um, uh, you know, I think
there's
When you make 214 million.
And you think about, I, I can't
remember, it's the rule of 7 or
8 of it doubling if you were to
invest it.
You know, I mean, we just looked
at what 500 million in increased
royalties could do to the
permanent fund. If we were
putting 100 to 200 million and
leveraging our renewable energy.
Revenue, just like we do with
oil and gas.
You would have significant more
value, uh, and, uh, it, it is a
change we've thought about
legislatively. Um, the, the way
it's structured now is our
budget is paid from the land
maintenance fund, uh, and then
it's, it's distributed. We would
need to come up with a mechanism
to ensure in the short term that
the beneficiaries that are
relying on this, you know,
because next year, yeah,
stabilize that you would need a
transition which is, which is
doable. But ultimate
The, why wouldn't we stabilize
it, and be grow and invest.
A dollar from a renewable energy
project like we would for a oil
and gas. Um, so I, I do think
that's something that the, the
committee um
should consider, we haven't
formally put that forward as a
proposal, but it's something I
agree. I think that
that, that makes sense when
you're talking about this much
money, and my guess is the only
reason we didn't is the money
used to be so small, it didn't
matter. But now that it's so
large, we should grow it, and we
should stabilize it while
protecting the beneficiaries
now, so I, I thought that was an
excellent proposal. I mean, it,
it wasn't a specific proposal,
you just pointed it out and so
my question is, God shouldn't we
do, shouldn't we do it? So it's
very
Effective in getting uh getting
us to think about it. And then,
um,
This issue with regard to the
obligation of lessees to do
reparations as they promised to
do?
I think that that's really
important, um, that they signed
these leases that the
legislature actually wrote. We
don't even let um the state land
office negotiate these leases,
which honestly I think you, I
think you do better than than
the little lease that is uh in
statute, um.
Are we doing the same thing with
regard to wind leases and solar
leases, are we making sure that
when at the end of their useful
life that the lessees, the
original, you know, the people
are on the hook cause one of the
things that bothers me is when
these operators come and go,
come and go, declare bankruptcy,
leave, open up as a new company,
and then we have these orphan
wells. That's really horrible,
but at least the lessees who
actually made the contractual
promise.
is still on the hook, and, and
that's good, I think they should
be because they signed the lease
and they got the benefit they
got all of the benefit and they
did the subleasing and they also
did the hired the operators and
went through all that. Um, so,
but do we do it for wind and
solar Mr.
Chairman, Senator, um, we do, so
the contractual obligation
regardless of the context, um,
is we want you to clean up when
you're done and, and restore
the.
The land. So, um, we take very
seriously wind projects, for
example. You're talking about
tens of thousands of acres in
some instances, with massive
installations of these wind
turbines that, you know, every
couple of years, they're getting
bigger and bigger and bigger. So
actually what we do is we build
into their leases a financial,
um uh assurance structure that
essentially ramps up over the
life at least. Um, the risk in
year one for a win.
project that's a 50-year project
of all of them going, you know,
bankrupt before they even.
Start, it's very, very little.
They haven't put anything on the
ground, etc. But as that goes
up, it ramps up and then by the,
uh, toward the end of the lease,
they have a full assurance. So,
uh, whatever the cost is to, to
take those turbines down, um,
you know, we're protected and
that the land office doesn't
need to step up to cover those
costs, and you compare that to
the oil and gas sector where,
you know, bonding is a hot topic
that, that we've discussed and
we want to do more on.
You know, a bond for the company
can be $25,000 for a mega bond
for all of their wells in the
state.
100, I mean, uh, and this is on
the state land office side, not
on the the OCD side. Um,
That doesn't give us a lot of
assurance and
We don't have access to the OCD
bonds. We can't pull those
operator bonds and, and, uh, you
know, I, I think, uh,
Representative Scott has raised
this in, in different context,
um.
You know, and, and, and maybe,
maybe we should be able to, but
legally we, we can't right now.
So,
We do treat other industries the
same, the general principle is
always the same.
Act responsibly, and when you're
done, clean it up so the
taxpayers and the beneficiaries
don't get.
That is really reassuring
because I, I mean, they're
great. The wind projects and
solar projects, but then I look
at him and I think, God, 50
years if they're just rusting in
the ground, it's really gonna be
disturbing. Um, just like these
pictures are awful like in
picture really awful pictures um
in the future. And then the
stripper whale issue.
Um,
One of the things that I hear
and about these, these um small
independence.
That, that you, you know, that
use these stripper wells and,
and are in the area, is that
they're the ones that make the
most.
Uh, messes, I guess, just to,
just to be colloquial about it
and they're also the ones that
don't have the resources to, to
fix it. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
um, it often is correct. I, I
think, um, you know, when you're
coming toward the end of the
life of the well, um,
calculations change and, and
maybe, you know, as pointed out,
you know, one party may still
feel like it's economically, um,
Uh, uh, viable where another
party may not.
But the risk definitely goes up,
and we become concerned if a
well is teetering, you know,
there are times that it's
preferable to just go ahead and
shut it in because the revenue
potentially that we could get um
is being outweighed by the risk
of keeping that in, in operation
and to the point of like the
small, you know, not all strip I
was gonna say not all strippers
are small, but that sounded
absolutely terrible.
Um.
All right.
All right. Not all stripper
wells are, um, you know,
operated by small companies, um,
and I think one of the reasons
why the governor, you know, uh,
vetoed uh the, the, the stripper
well tax credit last time as it
wasn't actually narrowly
tailored. I mean, you can have
XTO or, you know, big companies
that are able to, to uh benefit
from those as well.
That's, that's an interesting
point because the governor did
veto that, and I, I agreed with
her. It was a gift basket, um,
but could we do something more
targeted, um, with something
like that tax credit, like if
we're gonna apply a best
available tech control
technology regulation, like they
have in Texas, maybe have some
kind of uh incentives to do that
or I don't know, those are,
those are things to think about
because
I, I, again, I just want to
commend the state land office
for really taking the
responsibility of um
Of making sure that the resource
benefits all and, and really,
um, you know, I, I just think
that the state land office has
done a really great job. So, um,
thank you for that and thank
you, Mr. Chan.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Boy, I
could talk about Senate Senate
about 64 for a long time, but uh
uh.
The fact that the governor did
veto it is, is disappointing to
me. However, the governor did
say that she would support the
bill if it comes back and
addresses certain little
concerns that she had in the
bill, so she is, she's told me
that personally and I believe
that that's exactly what she'll
do.
So, but um
One of the things with, with
stripper whales real, real
quick, stripper wells, a lot of
those things have lost pressure.
And so they're able to continue
to uh to pump to get the little
bits of oil and gas out of those
wells, uh, for who knows how
long.
And so for different guys, the
um
Whether those things are
profitable or not.
I, uh, is really up to, uh, up
to them.
And they probably wouldn't be
continuing to try to produce
them if they didn't feel they
were.
They were somewhat profitable to
him.
Um,
One of the things that I think
when we we talk about oil and
gas, we talk about the state
land office and this stuff. We,
we see.
I think that we've got a little
too much really of an
adversarial relationship between
the land office and the
operators, uh, at large.
And it's, it's unfortunate we do
that.
Because
They're the guys that helped
make us all the money that we're
making today. So we need to find
a way.
Maybe.
You know, sit down and actually
come up with some of the
solutions that everybody's
trying to uh.
To get at, but, um, Mr. Chair,
I'd, I'd like to, to ask you.
Um,
And um,
In the leash that that you guys
have granted it's statutory.
Uh
Is there a requirement stating
when well.
Must be plugged.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, it's got
to produce in, in pain
quantities to be able to stay
and
Uh, production, um, or else it
would expire on its own terms
and looking at Greg, is that
correct?
Yeah.
And, and Ms. Stewart, thank you
for that, but I mean, are we
talking about the well itself,
or we talking about the lea
sorry,
uh, Mr. Chairman, um, uh,
Senator, so you can have a lease
that is thousands of acres. I
mean some of the old ones really
are pretty big, and you can have
one well that is holding that
lease, or you could have
Dirty wells on it, um, and
they're in different stages of
some maybe being inactive and at
the lease wouldn't expire uh as
long as there are, there's big
quantities, um, on the lease
itself.
And, and Mr. Chairman Stewart, I
mean, that's what I wanted to,
the body to understand uh the
requirement to plug and abandon
the wells or the way I
understand it or once the lease
has expired.
Not when the well has quit
producing.
So there's
Tremendous differences between
those, those two things. So just
Just to be, to be clear.
Um,
This the uh chair and Mr.
Stewart, the renewable uh
project right now that they pay
royalties to the state.
At all, or did they just, is it
just from the, the initial
setup? How, how does that work?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
so in the renewable context,
it's not technically called a
royalty. There is a mechanism.
It's called percent rent, um,
that we utilize, but we get paid
through a lot of different ways,
um, as opposed to just a couple
of revenue streams. So you have
uh base rental uh that we
charge, um, just a per
amount, uh, that steps up
depending on, are they in a due
diligence phase? Are they moving
into operational, you know,
stages, um, uh, if it is an
operational plant, then there's
another mechanism, the percent
rent that can kick in, which
It can be a little complicated,
but essentially if certain
megawatt thresholds are, are,
uh, met, then we get paid on how
much production uh from the
megawatts, we get additional
fees there. We get uh surface
disturbing fees, so every time
if you're gonna put in a new
turbine, uh, we get charges
related to that. I think there's
like 12 or 13 different ways
that we get paid. Uh, it's not,
it's not called a royalty in the
percentage rent, but um that
something
Different, but the concept of
riding with them in terms of the
more production, uh, we get more
revenue. Uh, that is something
that we have built into our
lease structure.
And, and thank you for that, Mr.
Chair, and, and Start again, uh.
On on that is that,
was that a, a legislated
document or is that a a created
a document created by the, the
Landau, yeah, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um, we get to create
our uh renewable energy leases.
We get to negotiate those, um,
we get to adjust them based on
market factors and, and what's
happening. Um, so, you know, we,
we've hired different uh parties
to provide us guidance on like.
What to charge and those types
of things, but the one area that
the actual lease itself is stuck
in statue, where there's no
ability to negotiate that's
unique to oil and gas.
And and Mr. Chairman struggled
back to go back to the, uh, you
know, the oil and gas leases.
Um,
On gas leases are, are produced.
Usually basically on probation
units.
And we talk about Croatian units
of different sizes throughout
the the areas where the wells
are.
Uh, then they've also
Some of them been unitized.
Where the uh uh and especially
in the with the big horizontal
wells, there's a variety of
leashes within every producing
unit.
Uh, of which at that point the
uh
I'm, I'm guessing the, the land
office is aware of who the
operator is and who the uh.
Uh
Who the operator of the well and
who the lease holder, less or or
the lessee is of the, of the
particular way. So we, we know
who everybody.
But he is out there. So when we,
we go back and we talked to
The
lessee about plugging a well
that we know is operated by
someone else, uh, and operator,
that just seems the wrong place.
You go.
Because that operator.
Through all these other
documents that exist.
Is a responsible party for that
responsible party that we should
be going after if we believe a
well needs to be.
and cleaned up.
Uh, and is that, did I
misunderstand that and that's,
that's not how we're doing it.
We're back to the actual West to
do that. Well, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator, and you know, I think
Representative Scott's question
also got to this as well. Um,
you know, the starting point
should be and is how we approach
these that we go to the
operator.
Right, that's gonna be the, the
first place, and we're gonna
look to the operator of the
well.
But if the operator is
nonresponsive, and if the
operator or is bankrupt or
there's some other issue, then
we, we do look to the lessee.
It's a very unique and strange
environment and I often
You know, when people ask about
this, it's it's really hard to
explain where you have a lessee,
and then sometimes very little
relationship between the
operators on the leases. Um.
Our contract is with the lessee.
That's who we have on the hook
and, and this is one of those
areas that because the OCD
framework, you know, they're
always looking to the operator
they've got a lot of rules that
pertain to the operators.
Where we really
look to
The lessee, but the first step
is always gonna be to go to the
operator, see if they can
comply. That is where we start.
And chairsood, I'd say that, you
know, the state land office has
been getting payments.
From the operator state land is
certainly aware of who the
operator is. There may be other
documents that the state land
office is signed in order to uh
to agree to pooling. I'm, I
don't know if there is, but, uh,
but there's a lot of that there
that
Uh
You know, the the operator more
than likely is a more capable
financial party and maybe that
little, that little me she, but
What I'm, what I'm trying to get
at with all of this, and it's
not, is it
We're having
We have communication issues. We
have issues between us and, and
And operators and lessees and
other, other players out there
because somehow we've created
this, this real adversarial
approach to working together.
And until we fix that,
We're gonna continue to have
stuff like that, uh, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Stewart, we're, we're
talking about water.
Talking about water from a well.
a water right from that
particular well has to be given.
To to an individual or a
business.
From the, from the state
engineer.
It doesn't come from the state
land office. It comes from the
the state engineer.
And then the state land office
is sitting here saying, but you
can't go across us.
Because you're using it for
something that we don't approve
of.
That's the that's, that's the
state fighting the state.
And that's stuff that doesn't
doesn't make sense to me, and
that started with uh with state
engineer Dunn, I believe, so
it's not that it's a uh a
Democrat Republican deal. It
was, uh, as Aubrey was certain
there were certainly a
Republican at that point. So,
uh,
It's just what I want to see, I
guess maybe it was kind of like,
you know, why can't we all get
along stuff?
But these are the guys.
These are the guys that are
making all the money you get to
spend.
And if we can work together to
find better ways to get some of
this where the it doesn't seem
to be a fight.
the Senate Bill 64 was designed
solely for them.
was to let these guys come in
and clean up their well to make
it meet our requirements.
Art requirement
And to produce those wells for
years and years to come.
What we're saying is, well,
those wells may not be good
enough and they shouldn't be
cleaned up.
I guess.
Because we don't like that well,
we don't like Senate Bill 64.
It's foolish.
It's foolish.
And I think what we need to do
is help these guys do what they
can do to help us. And so, Mr.
Chair, I'm, I'm gonna quit
rambling. You guys aren't gonna
have to listen to me too much
more. So, but I, I gotta get my
shots in when I can.
Thank you very much Stewart,
thank you for being here and
tell Stephanie I miss her.
Being here today.
Thank you, Senator. Appreciate
your comments. Let's go to
Representative Bore.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
