Okay are we back on.
Thank you so much okay
we'll resume and
we have an update on the federal
radiation exposure compensation
out better known as rica and
thank you
miss mary bartina's fight is
member of the tool rose are
based in down windows consortium
thank you madame chair members
of the committee as I started I
want to acknowledge a senator
gregs and representative john
black
this is my home land and front
to ladder so originally mom and
data also from carizozo
while I live in last cruises and
joan and jeff are the folks that
I see every day this is still
home to me and your advocacy for
new mexico state here at all
gordo
I really appreciate near dear to
my family's heart I watched my
brother walk this stage my
sister came to the nursing
program and so thank you so
kindly for the work that you
deal
and thank you for all of all of
your here for all of your work
as well
so madame chair members of the
committee I marry much then this
white and i'm here to tell you
about the three day trip to
washington washington dc
that the two lot of service and
down windows consortium took
along with others and
as the consortium seek to have
new mexican included in the
radiation exposure compensation
act and or just as I begin to I
want to explain why we continue
this effort
new mexico of course was the
site of the first atomic barm
the trinity barm and that bond
was one of the most problematic
bombs because it was debt to
need it so close to the ground.
Sadly
and somewhat unnervingly it's
it's difficult to know that are
federal government new exactly
what the results would be they
knew that there would be
widespread radio radiation over
exposure because they had tested
this balm
in may just before
it was detonated in force in
full in july so they knew that
there would not be any death and
destruction that day they knew
that there would however be
widespread radiation
contamination
are the bombs thereafter for
here assume that nagasaki were
calculated to for maximum death
and destruction and so while
they got radiation exposure new
mexico experience ten thousand
times more exposure than
heroshima nagasagi that number
comes out of the last alamos
historic document retrieval
architect
it's also a bit difficult and a
bit unnerving not a bit it is
very difficult and barian
nerving to know
that our federal government new
full well what would happen they
knew the effects of gamma
radiation we know that gamma
radiation will go straight
through the human body and
effect every part of the human
body the most difficult part is
that it affects dna which means
potential continuation of their
of the contamination to future
generations it takes a little
over a foot of lead to stop a
gamma particle from causing its
destruction and with the force
of two kilotones the trinity
atomic bomb contaminated new
mexico and far beyond there is
also ten point seven pounds of
weapons grade blutonium that
still exists in the environment.
It has a half life of twenty
four thousand years
and so while we don't blame any
current generation the
decisions of the past generation
are still with us because of the
illness that we continue to
experience and we
feel it is extremely important
that this be acknowledged by our
federal government and for the
current generation because we
don't want any of our kids who
are being recruited to work at
los alamos to work at home when
it for a space or any of our
military institutions to
have to feel or experience what
open homer did recall that he
his quote was I am become death
the destroyer of worlds
and so as we work in new mexico
for the defense of our nation we
really need to strike the
balance as a representative
block said you know are we going
to harm any future projects we
hope not we you know we want to
help with the defense of our
nation and at the same time we
need to walk into gum we need to
be able to take care of folks
innocent folks who can be harmed
in the interim working with
nuclear weapons storing nuclear
wasted new mexico is dangerous
business and some innocent folks
are going to be harmed along the
way and we just need to
acknowledge and make sure that
we have funding to cover when
that happens
one of the significant blowbacks
that we continue to get from a
very small contingency now
primarily in the us house is
cost and when you do a pie chart
to compare the cost of what we
spend on nuclear weapons versus
what has been paid their help
folks
through the radiation exposure
compensation act you have to
exaggerate the little line of
two point five billion dollars
compared to the rest of the
pitcher.
Because it disappears so you
have to exaggerate the fact that
some money has been paid out out
of the huge amounts that have
been paid toward a nuclear
weapons
so I think that the argument
that it costs too much is an
illegitimate argument and when
our congressionals use that as
an excuse I really think they
shoot themselves in the foot are
because we just we don't buy
that it's so it's not it's not
correct so to tell you a little
bit about the three day
washington trip we
start we all we start with the
fact that new mexico is patriot
as a state of patriots and so we
don't understand why other
states have been covered under
the radiation exporter
compensation act and new mexico
has never been covered
my family has served in the
military and continues to
service do others in new mexico
we are a state of patriots
including the heroes of the town
death march hours are the heroes
that we call the novel code
talkers more new mexican served
and world war two and died and
world war two than any other
state in the nation we have six
military installations including
one of the largest land bases in
the world white sense missile
range so we continue to play a
significant role in our nation's
defense and again when innocent
folks are harmed we really need
our nation to have our back as
well so the three day advant in
washington dc was on september
twenty four twenty five and
twenty six we were there along
with members of the novel nation
the guna alcohol hop and other
radiation your raniom mind
survivors and down windows and
we were there to demand action
on the stalled rick a program
the first day of the three day
events was a breakfast hosted by
the naval honation
right there in washington dc
downtown by the naval honation
president bunigran who has come
on board in a very big way.
This has been a very bipartisan
initiative and in the us senate
when the bill was presented we
got beyond a super majority
which doesn't happen anymore so
folks recognize that
cancer these radiation exposures
affect ours and these alike and
we are bill was supported by for
example java
marker rubio lincy graham ted
cruze of many of the of the
heavy hitting republicans but
the hold up continues to be some
a handful of republicans in the
house if speaker mike johnson
would allow the bill to be heard
it would pass
so
after our breakfast in dc we
marched through the streets are
drumming and chanting and
carrying signs we were supported
by boom I grand who walked right
along with this as well as his
staff there was a very highly
attended press conference where
members of congress and advocate
spoke some of the folks present
were senator moilen from guan
again
president neighborhood
senator new pon stansbury ledger
for non desk basket senator josh
holly from
we're all an attendance and
spoke and we as a result we got
some forty press releases and
articles are from the event
there were performances and
dancing by denata dancers
we did another march where we
were wet to be marched to
speaker mike johnson's office in
order to present a letter to him
from this committee
in addition to the letter from
this committee which his staff
said they highly regarded so
thank you all very kindly for
that letter
we also presented invoices just
from the protesters that were
present.
And those invoices were over
seven million dollars that it
costs to battle those cancers
and so what we're asking for is
we're not suing the federal
government we're not asking for
a ton of money we're asking for
one hundred thousand dollars one
time comparison to payment so
that for example folks don't
have to sell the house in order
to battle these specific
nineteen radio genetic counsels
it in addition
in the three day
event we had a counter like
vigil in front of the capital
building which included cultural
prayers singing chanting
it was all
difficult and extremely moving
and very impact for
and beautiful
there is a potential compromise
of foot during the three day
trip meetings were held with
about a dozen members of
congress including the house
majority whip in the entire utah
delegation which is tending to
be the hold out again you talk
is primarily citing cost as
being the issue
a compromise cap is being
discussed the cap would sunset
the program at five in five or
six years and or five million
dollars whichever comes first
and we consider that compromise
to be pretty darn good because
in thirty three years only two
point five billion has been paid
out to all down windows and so
we think that that five billion
dollars will go a very long way
to help new mexico down windows
uranium miners and others we
also had a very positive meeting
with a representatives less than
lloyd from utah who has
previously been opposed and we
really think that she could be
instrumental in the flipping the
utah delegation
I ict political news reported
that republican representative
tom.
Call kickshop from oklahoma told
them that he would urge the
republican health speaker mike
johnson are to hold a boat is
representative call said I think
those things are to come to the
floor and that the house work
its will
he added harm was done and
appropriate compensation needs
to be rendered so all of that
hinting at this his support also
pretty expanded bill this is
huge to us
because representative call is
the head of the house
appropriations committee and he
has a lot of power to help bring
to bear to take our bill forward
also
the state's newsroom which is
widely red entice listed ricker
as one of the quarter quote
unfinished business items for
congress to address before the
end of the year now was the goal
of the three day of that was to
make sure that the state at the
four of the attention and so
that we could get some passage
in the lame duc session after
the trip tina court of
members of the steering
committee channel cordova bernie
scutiers elerator anderson from
lubublo
met with a keen jeffreys house
majority leader who said who was
very receptive in he said I i'm
with you until we get this done
and then he repeated until we
get this done and so he pledged
that sb thirty eight fifty three
would be a priority and
negotiations with speaker mike
johnson
again the three day about was
extremely moving
it was colorful at it got a lot
of attention especially from
people on the street as well as
news media and so finally our
call to action if you are so
inclined and and would do this
for us we.
We really know when I believe
that senate bill thirty eight
fifty three is the only bill
that will gain traction it has
widespread support the other
bills which would
it which would extend riga not
include new mexico has very
little support and they might as
well not even bring it to the
floor because it will not pass
so
in the past event heral was a
champion of hours and we really
ask that she come back on board
we need her right now and I
think that
in the past she has wanted to
include new mexico and for
whatever reason
she is working with the handful
of folks that are a hold out as
it pertains to cost and so we
really believe that she saw this
in the past she understood what
we were asking for she met with
us in the past and
all of our congressional
delegation in new mexico is for
this her opponent is for this
and so we hope that she will
jump on board as well because we
really need her help in the past
she actually brought jim
jordan's who is was the past
chair of the freedom caucus
brought him on board so we thank
her very kindly for that so what
i've listed here is speaker mike
johnson's phone number and the
messages very simple it is to
please pass senate bill thirty
eight fifty three and finally
recognize that new mexico was
adversely effected there were
five hundred thousand people
living within a one hundred and
fifty mile radius thereafter
the federal government said that
they would evacuate
everyone for a hundred and fifty
miles before they ever did this
again and sadly and also
nervingly they never did that
they proceeded to test in the
marshall islands no one was ever
evacuated
so this really needs to be
acknowledged and before I end
madam chair I want to clarify
the letter that you are provided
to us.
We have gotten resolutions from
city council's county
commissions
many of them we've gotten
we have gotten.
I'm trying to losing the name of
what they're called in the house
are letters of support from the
senate from the house and send
it that we've been able to use
and how the folks but we
hesitated to hand your letter to
her keep geofferies when we met
with him because we didn't ask
your specific okay to do that
it's a memorial we have
memorials from the from this
state house and sell it and so
we needed to clarify can we use
your letter that you are wrote
specifically from my johnson as
we use memorials just to show
support for down windows we
thought we've better clarify
that
um
before we did it
and with that madam charil while
stand for questions yes
thank you for asking I think our
letter directed to the speaker
was to help move the bill but it
does not mean that we don't
support in any way you can use
that letter you know because
we're supporting you
and everywhere possible
especially with that letter I
think thank you madame speaker
will will feel free to add it to
our portfolio support support
documents thank you kindly yes
thank you yes
sorry I realize I just walked in
on the middle of that so forget
but mary are you saying that you
want to take the existing letter
and just or you saying that you
want the letter address to
the minority leader not just the
existing letter as it exists
occasionally we will have used
for it depending on who we meet
with whether it be
us congressional staff or
members yeah absolutely it is
part of your arsenal thank you.
Okay
yes represent block
okay thank you manager did you
have something else to say I
didn't want to cut you off or
anything manager okay thank you
so much thank you so much miss
martinez wait for being here and
for your advocacy I appreciate
it you know especially
representing the affected area
it is super important to me that
rica is extended to new mexico
because like he said we have so
many page rates here so madam
chairman and
martinez white
have you guys spoken to folks in
the house the representatives I
know when I was as working in an
advocacy group in dc for a
little while and we tried to do
a discharge petition to
discharge it from committee and
have a vote on the floor and new
mexico I guess we just call it a
blast blast into the floor but
have you talked about supposed
blasting to the house floor on
this since it is peers you have
the support and you would just
need fifty percent of the
members to sign their signature
on the petition manager
I don't think we have thank you
for that i'll have to look into
exactly what a blast to the
house floor means and how we
pull that off we have some very
supportive members of the
congressional delegation who
meet with us routinely and help
strategize with the so will be
sure to ask them about that
appreciate that yeah thank you
manager i'm just trying to think
outside the box to make sure the
home network presentative block
and senator griggs are the
martiness family has its family
reunions here in all the mobile
though and three hundred and
fifty people show up and that's
just a small fraction of who we
are in new mexico so yes we are
very representative of of the
affected community so.
So thank you for that thank you
madam chair and thank you for
that as well and my great aren't
married a martinez back in the
day so we might be related
somehow you're probably a
primarily somewhere probably for
you
most that's right
the thing was I remember I was
at an event actually was in it
was in a whilst crucials and I
spoke to staff for congress
former congresswoman of it heral
and they indicated to me that
the the former congresswoman is
on board with the record
expansion to new mexico so I
guess I would just I would just
try to get a statement from them
and I i'm sure I could help
connect you with them cause I
believe she is very supportive
of them and I believe she said
that publicly in in the media
i'd be happy to help provide
that for you you know if you
could get us in the door that
would be hugely beneficial to us
because indeed she actually met
with us in gallop
and when she came into the
meeting she was not quite
convinced but when she left she
was fully on board and where she
is right now to our
understanding is that she is for
the bill by a u talk
representative that extense rica
but it doesn't expand it and so
what new mexico needs is
expansion to new mexico
specifically the op I actually
the only legislation that
expands it to new mexico is esp
thirty eight fifty three and so
we may be you know
putting on my very optimistic
cat maybe it's a matter of
clarification that we would
really appreciate being able to
meet with her or her staff and
if you could open the door we
would greatly appreciate it
thank you so kindly thank you so
much madame chairman and thank
you for that night I will
definitely reach out and I think
that's that's great and then I
would just reaffirm I would look
into that discharge petition to
start that up if you have this.
Port like you say which I
believe then it shouldn't be a
problem to get that to the floor
and madame charges quickly it's
in the house side now it's
passed the senator ready it's in
the house site it's just in the
hopper when they take looks
bad
representative but that's
exactly right it passed the
senate by beyond a super
majority with jd bounce in all
of the heavy hitters that I
mentioned and now we know that
it is speaker mike johnson he is
the one person standing in the
way of it being heard in the
house
we are told what the behind the
scenes hold up might be that it
could be the
freedom carcus concerned about
cost and again if they would sit
with us and listen to us and
take a look at the piechards the
specific data that we have
collected they'll see that the
amount that has been spent on
down windows or affected folks
is
a it disappears in a pie chart
its negligible and indeed we
think that there should be a
line item in every budget and
every defense budget that helps
remediate contamination that
helps folks who were innocent
buystanders who are in
advertisingly harmed
I think that that should be
something that would be a
phenomenal change that would
ever happen
okay thank you so much manager
and I will or wrap it up so I
appreciate it thanks again for
your presentation ender keep on
fighting and I I hope you get it
done so thank you manager
thank you and a I just was a
going to say with the compromise
cap that that seems like it
should
persuade more people to and
maybe even
candidate event harold to you
know support.
But also
I just wanted
to mentioned about this saturday
did you mention that already oh
I did not thank you I actually
happened in my notes yeah the
saturday october nineteenth
you're going to be having an
awareness
at trinity gate
yes we're gonna be conducting
our annual peaceful protest as
folks driving into a visit the
trinity site we have a peaceful
protest that hands out
information and we
do this every year and folks are
available it will be at the
stalling and gate on highway
three eighty five at the
starlian gate highway
three five then the following
weekend we have an event at
los hardiness institute in south
valley albuquerque that is in
the cd two that if it heral
might be interested in knowing
about a her opponent is also
invited we don't know if you
will be there but certainly if
she will help us you would be
most welcome
that will take place again in
the south valley of a war to let
you know that the documentary
first we bombed new mexico
continues to make its way across
the country and is winning
awards as it goes
this saturday it will be in
poland california.
That's amazing yeah it's a great
film too that depends you know
what has happened in is
secretary kenny mentioned in
another you know part of
um standing up for new mexico
and others but especially you
know we were a sacrifice so and
and we still are in many cases
so this is something that
should be you know for justice
are all of the people who were
here absolutely especially when
our sense thank you madam chair
especially when their sons and
daughters
are working for these
installations my dad retired
from home and air forest and
died of lukimia
and and I won't go into the
family history but I certainly
could in mind would not be an
unusual history so
so we really really hope that
that a fraction of the dollars
that are spent on these projects
will be set aside for
remediations and to help
innocent folks who are by no
doings of their own or harmed
so thank you good luck and thank
you for all of your great
efforts in
a tina
parliament interesting bernie
semi so thank you thank you
thank you matter chair thank you
members of the committee.
Okay next we have the white
sands test facility clean up
mrperiod rick sheen director
resource protection division of
med and trustee maggie hearts
debins
of office of natural
resources trusting.
Did you see it.
Good afternoon insurer
member of the committee
might also like to note
my inlaws are martinez so they
also have another another party
to go to each other
thank you for
allowing us provide an update on
the
on the regulatory actions going
on if the white sands test
facility which is a small
portion of the much larger white
sands missile range however
rumble nasa.
Um
uh first i'll jump into the
second second sly the
regulations this may look
familiar to the curtain air
force miss our presentation as
we are sort of the same as a
similar situation where the
weights are the way sounds test
facility that is it's a
permitted facility
by the state of new mexico
through its resource
conservation recovery act are
program and that's in the
hazardous ways bureau
the regulations that that are
available to us and then we
enforce for both federal
recorder and then the new mexico
hazardous waste act and the
house of swestac permit
corrective action fee
regulations.
Uhm as I noted this was a a
permit.
It has an epa a id number
however as the state of new
mexico since nineteen eighty
five has add primacy to issue
these permits
also you've seen this the slide
as well the correct of action
process
just like their current site
this
this one is in the investigation
part of the sort of the forge
the force step or four phases of
corrective action under the
recorder are gains
so we're still looking for
nature and extent of
contamination also media.
That's going to too detail but
the next three correct measures
evaluation correct measures
selection those that starts when
the public starts get involved
which with the site and also the
current one site and when that
when we get to that fares and
then the implementation the
correct of those who that's
actually what the the clean up
will be could be one it could be
too it could be several in
several types of remediation
technologies put together at the
same time
currently also it's a site going
on it's it's in within interim
measures which i'll describe a
little later
this is a a map just just to get
a sense
since of the space we're talking
about the contamination plan
footprint
so you know it it is about over
two million
square eggers for white sands
missile range while this is
sixty thousand acres of the
weight since test facility since
more familiar with it this area
than them that myself be all
being from doing out of county
but as i'd mentioned earlier now
since the current soul operator
of the weight sense test
facility and the entity that we
hold responsible and has the
permit so a little bit about the
permit history as I mentioned
nineteen eighty five the state
regards primacy to issue right
for permits
for facilities around the state
they got their first one and
nineteen ninety three which was
a treatment storage and
disposable facility with that's
just sort of a large scale for
another facility with one of
these is the last one with
session
though this committee is very
familiar with
september ninety four we have a
post closure permit once
activity started to slow down
and where we identified
several discrete units where we
know contamination came from.
Um where they were a categories
there's a hazardous waste
management units or him use or
also my favorite one that solid
was mentioned units or snows and
there's also areas of concern
around around the testing
facility.
A ricker permits are issued on a
ten year period better in fact
until until the new one is
putting to place
it may be familiar with the the
white permit that just came up
that was a little passed it's in
your date
but two years ago we were able
to renew it with a ten year.
A ten year period
so currently the permit that
they have it does have some
treatment storage and disposal
operations that are going on
site
it hit the permit also includes
the treatment of hazardous ways
that earning of aberration
treatment unit also is a fuel
treatment unit and
the
this presentations warn the
corrective action at the at the
facilities schmooz ac's and
close hazards with managing
unions as well as the post
closure care for some of those
hazardous ways unless.
It necessarily inceased its tst
f operations in june of two
thousand and nineteen very more
recently
then that is to say that they
with the amount of hazardous
ways that the actual generate
was much smaller and it was then
they had been in the past and it
got to about twenty two hundred
pounds per year and that's the
it's it's currently considered a
large quantity generator so but
it does get inspected on a
regular basis.
The current permit
was actual started in march of
twenty twenty three
and that includes postclosure
care permit so that's all of the
even after their don't clean it
up there there's a monitor in
requirement and some metals that
are due to the new mexico
environment interaction at least
while this facility is open.
And still being worked and in
there's work so going on
we still require corrective
action at the different smooths
in the closed areas as well as
we manage manage the hazardous
way so generated as I mention
this it's a large quantity
generator so it's not considered
it doesn't care it doesn't
produce more than twenty two
hundred pounds a year
after this was
this then it the next week just
give you a sense of what the
property looks like and on on
the right hand side ideal you
see a budget the smaller boxes
on the dots those are all of the
the areas that were actually
permitted those are the smooths
the arcis and the closed as a
diswaste management units there
also don't lines
little dotted circles around
what are the the current interim
measure which is a pump and
treat system which is broken up
into two parts they have a mid
plum and then they have a bloom
front treatment system.
The contain minutes of concern
at the same are basic are more
of a tetrical etherlane or track
lower etherlane those are tcu
pce those are solves they are
used and sort of cleaning
machinery
it is well as natural
not your so did mathem metholome
and in the ndma
which was actually put in a it's
a portion of the rockets
as well as many other uses.
Give you a sense of work the
groundwater direction is the
crowd water flows from east and
and to the west
as you can sell in this those of
the card to align so we have in
the smail
print perspective the the plumes
on this are about
the place about four miles long
and half a mile wide
at this point that's end in a tc
plum and in the ma clue they are
on the site give you perspective
the curtail involved fuels
facilities spill when it was in
the furthest and says it was was
about a mile and a half long at
that point give you a impression
how long this has been
traveling.
Skin the corrective actions in
investigations of started since
two thousand and twelve
with the thirty one smooth a c
and the hazardous was units
crowdwater data collection
remediation systematically mean
it's it's going on
three of the of the closed hms
about subject investigation and
are clean closed and do not
require any post closure I care
which is the end goal of the
clean up at each of these
schmmes and a o c's
there is currently still ongoing
surface investigation to find
out the nature and extent of and
other smooths
better than that still have not
been cleaned up and ongoing
there is about twenty one
projects that occurring on the
base of anyone or in the
facility at any one time
excuse me
so there are two hundred and
fifty monitoring locations or
grow water monitoring wells are
on the site and there's as I
mentioned two intermeasure pump
intrigue remediation systems one
being the front at the front of
the plom so that the downgrade
in end and one and be in the
middle that intercepts most of
the mass.
To this date and this is a
number there was updated since I
presented last year two hundred
twenty eight million galance of
water has been treated
I will add it's been treated and
reinjected so it's not lost to
the system it's actually just
it's bumped out cleaned up and
then put back into the ground
too that's not lost
last water
and rejection actually was re
authorized under um a discharge
from it to the groundwater
bureau and may seventeenth of
last year.
Here's also a larger a better
idea of the plume
of the blue that both clothes
the tca and
and the end of me in the ndma
plum apologies i'm sure trustee
that stands can say a better and
I can
and this is from the most recent
data provided in the fourth
quarter
of last year
so this this would be what they
provide us and say this is the
nature and extend other sport as
we know it as of the fourth
quarter of last year.
Current status is a corrective
action still going on
but we're gonna have a still
working with nasty to submit
work plans in different
investigation reports for the
different smooths and esis one
site the groundwater are
managing program is ongoing and
for the foreseeable future
yeah that's as required by the
ricker permit
but grown water remediation post
calls repaired the the five
years will continue as required
under the permit in the
foreseeable future.
Continue and I would the current
status we've since the last time
I presented this was last year
last september we've
participated in several
discussions with now technical
staff as well as officer natural
resource trustees
which since meeting last year I
think we've better collaborated
on the site which really helps
all parties involved
and since the september last
year we wish you twenty seven
response letters to various
corrective action documents that
they have submitted so that's a
lot of that that's why I work by
staff which we have a one to two
working on at a time.
Any decontinues the receive the
regularly scheduled new work
plan and documents
correction action documents from
from nasa
pro pro regulations and and for
the permit.
The snack slide rate here is not
from it to really read
sorry for me to see it but
they're about fourteen documents
imagine that's one that's more
than one per month that we're
having to that staff is having
to review addition to the other
sites the the staff
is responsible for
the path forward
we will have and assert continue
with their substances
investigations they'll do
additional site and sort of some
investigation work which if we
find anything that might require
a risk assessment and further
clean up in different areas that
we don't currently we're not
currently cleaning up
their so is going to continue to
operate it's interesting with
the compensate and in order to
prevent further spread of the
contamination cloom and as we
discover anything
any new emergency contaminating
issues at the site that will
require additional
investigation.
Thank you for your attention
that will handle it over to a
trustee hard seven.
Thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee my name
is maggie heart stevens new
mexico is now to resource these
trustee
and I want to see thank you for
inviting me to be part of the
second panel I
hope I have told you before how
much I appreciate this
committees focus in attention
focus on an attention to this
white sounds test facility
situation um.
I don't know if you need if
you've got the presentations I
will worry about the sites
we we have hard happy I think
we're going to have it thanks
all back.
The.
I'm ok so so I do you have
already seen this morning so
unless you have questions I will
firm skip that again that's the
distinction between what the
environment department does and
what the offers the natural
resources trust he does that
this are um this is consistent
across sites including white
sounds test sounds test facility
spite number three is just a
brief overview of
operations at weight sounds test
facility
now so has been testing rocket
engines there since the a public
space program was established in
the nineteen sixties
and their activities
are many um
many of which are very likely
involved fire suppression
it's side number four as mr
sheen has said the contaminants
that the that own our tea is
concerned with tce pce and are
co trustees are.
The
united states department of
defense and the united states
army because they are the they
own the property
now certain that united states
army and dodger also the
potentially responsible party so
responsible for the releases at
that site
rick has already gone over this
mr chain has already gone over
this but this is another slide
that shows how water is moving
across the site so on the rate
you will see at the recharge so
that's the rain that falls in
the area it then travels
unfortunately through all of the
source areas and
brings the contaminants into the
ground water
you'll see this site also has a
shows um that pumping treat
system wells.
Um
side number six mr shane is
talked about the remedy of
activities that an immediate
overstate nasa and the
department of defense are
undertaking out the site
and per nouse's own modeling the
clean up of the contaminants at
the site is expected to take at
least a hundred years.
I believe you are probably seen
this i'd be for it shows the
relative that proximity of the
white sounds test facility at a
groundwater contamination
relative to us crucials the city
of us cruises revise on two
ground water awkward for basins
for drinking water that you're
not of them where the basin in
the mercea basin and the white
sounds test facility plume
contamination clinton is within
that you're not a deal more
though aquifer.
N
side number eight years another
map of the site and I I have
included this because there's an
important clarification of uh I
just of the definition of
boundary so when wait sounds
test facility when they're
reports come out they show this
black boundary that you will see
that surrounds all of these um
these different parcels if you
look at the right hand side
that boundary includes
properties that are owned by the
beer of land management in the
new mexico state land office so
this is important because
we have heard statements from
the response that potentially
responsible party that
nobody really cares about this
water there's no injury because
it is all a been east the white
sounds test facility property
that is clearly not the case
and this is just another slide
number nine is a slide that
shows the same thing that even
though could nasa continue to
despite this um this operational
boundary they are in fact
including in that space.
A new mexico state land.
And this is significant outside
the side number ten that is
significant because the geology
of that the hydrogeology of that
area that affects the
contaminant plume outweight
sounds test facility
is such that
that red line is a hydrogeologic
fault
and to the east of that the soil
the
i'm not decided so i'm not sure
how to see this but
the the soil is quite am compact
and it's very low perocity so it
does not contain a lot of water
to the west is olivia
settlements and that very hot
that has have a lot of procedure
they hold the board of water so
most of the volume of the plan
but the the actual water in the
blue year's
west of that red line and a
significant um
volume of the plumas actually on
under steep trust louns.
Approximately fifty percent of
the ground water anyone we're
talking about the volume of that
plan it the but I now estimates
it is at least thirty thousand
acre feet of ground water that
has been contaminated.
In another important aspect of
any ground water contamination
is that when there is a remedial
activity going on like a pump
and treat system there may be
restrictions outside the
boundary of the plumb
you don't want people pumping
ground water in a way that my
impact the remedial action and
so that's known as a halo so
there is a halo outside this
plan
that restrict access to that
ground water.
And
as i've said before the office
of the natural resources trusted
our authority in our mission in
our obligation is to bring
claims for injury to natural
resources but now does the
resource but also to bring
claims for loss of use of a
particular resource and service
loss so
side number eleven again just
shows where um
you know where that were the
bulk of the groundwater plume is
and if it's on state trust my
and then it could or should be
available for use
but it nobody can use it because
it's contaminated
side number twelve so
the goal of the work that we do
is to restore the injured
resource and restore
the public's use of the injured
resource and this particular
case ground water so
the second bullet gives some
examples of the different types
of restoration projects that we
could implement to
in the weight sounds test
facility situation replace the
resource as I said it's gonna be
at least a hundred years before
the before that water will be
usable for irrigation for a
drinking water for any of you
for delivery at you know for the
state's compact obligations to
texas and so it is it the
likelihood of
a it is it is likely that we
will have to look to replacement
projects so those can be
conservative projects those can
be preventing future
contamination or finding
alternative water sources and
um.
Spit number thirteen at a dress
is the same thing the different
things that we could ask now
certain fund in order to make
that the communities in that
area hall so that's recharge
enhancements waste water
improvements removing invasive
species to reduce the um the
draw on ground water do
additional ground wider
remediation or seek alternative
water supplies
and we have then in a
conversation with the city of
last crucials we have looked at
their long range water plans to
see what has what have already
been identified as needs in the
community and strategies for
for providing water that the
city of ask process in that
region
will need going into their
future.
Um so
this we
have had the opportunity to
present to this committee a
couple times in the past so i'd
love to bring you up to date on
um
a positive things that have
happened
I think the last time that
either I spoke or our executive
director key gerard spoke to you
we were we felt like we're at an
impasse with the department of
defense in the united states
department of justice over the
best we had very hit several
years ago invited now so in dod
enter into settlement
negotiations rather than
litigating this case last time I
spoke to you we were not making
any progress but I am really
pleased to report today that in
august the united states
department of justice reached
out to us to say that they were
interested in entering into
settlement negotiations and in
october we had our first in
person meeting with their
department of just a
attorney who has been handling
this get so
we see that as a very positive
development I again I believe
that the letter that this
committee sent to the
department of justice and nasa
probably I know how to rule in.
In breaking this blues so
nothing to report other than
that we have had our first
meeting but we are very hopeful
that again the united states
united states have justice will
work with us and good faith and
try to reach a solution
as in other cases we have
prepared a packet of items it
packed but a proposal for a
number of restoration
projects that could be used to
begin to address this the ground
water injury and the loss of
service to add at the vast
cruises area
so we are hoping that we will
make some progress on that so
there is
again there is my contact
information or executive
director please reach out with
them with any questions
excuse me
again because of the activities
that have taken place out weight
hands test facility we do have
good reason to believe that
there have been releases of
people's and that quarterly
reports that nowserve releases
do mention a
a pefast report they've been
seeing that for some time that
it's under review so we are very
much looking forward to seeing
that
not no data available to us yet
it's at the another thing i'd
like to bring you up to just up
to speed on when key to ride
talk to you about a year ago
she mentioned that we had some
concerns about ndma detections
that that were outside what nasa
was defining is the bloom
boundary and um.
What nasa had told us was that
that was just a an error in the
way that the samples had been
processed but during covered
they were using inferior quality
gloves that were somehow
contributing ntma to the ground
water samples we think it is
more likely that those
detections of
india may outside the plumbound
reward probably more likely due
to the fact that the pump in
treat system several of the
wells head not been operable
over the proceeding eighteen
months and as all the ground
water miles said indicated the
plum was continuing to move in
and
in the in the direction that had
been predicted so
we have not seen reports
bringing us up to speed on
what is happening at this point
in time but
we're hoping that pumping treats
back online and the poom
continues to be contained
and just back to the pm
oh you know mr shane mentioned
that clabration between the
environment department and the
office of the new mexican
natural resources trustee has
improved it spent great we
credit a record his team with
helping us get to this get over
the impasse with the united
states department of just as
some of the conversations that
they have had over the last six
months have resolved questions
that we're keeping us from
getting to that point so
and finally wait sounds test
facility as part of white sounds
missile range is part of the
states claim against the
department of defense for pefos
releases and so
we will be keeping an on our t
is is a party to that claim so
we will be keeping a close eye
on
what they are finding as first
please get so with that.
Again thank you for your
interest in this and happy to
answer any questions
thank you and we will go to
senator steinborn first
man chair and good how you both
record to see you again maggie
again
couple questions rick first fall
for you are you
happy with the with the project
case of the project and the
collaboration with the white
sense test facility.
Manager senator like like the
other sites
I don't think any any anything
this last it's alone to get to
this point so happy is is a good
response but.
Uh
at this point where one I guess
I happy that the past we've sort
of broken down and in past and
gotten
gotten from our part the
primitive bag the back to the
table and seriously considering
what it needs to do
to get to get the groundwater
finally starting clean up so as
we yes it's better work has been
happening
and then amount of chair would
you say that at this point
like we've heard with these
other projects were still
characterizing the problem to
you than moving to a final
solution have we characterized
the extent of this problem
where I mean forget cause i'm
sure it's it's in amongst all
that material you just present
into us but where are we on the
continuing from characterization
of a mediation
I managed here and senator I
think we're since there are
multiple sites
it depends on what type of
target about I think for the
most part they probably have
about eighty percent to ninety
percent of them
contained especially the don
ground water sites but I I would
say for the most part about
eighty eighty ninety percent
there with characterization so
close to the correct of measures
of valuation for many
for it for many of the sites
okay did you want to see that
manager missed your chairman I
don't
we don't have it rolled on the
remedial activity so I can't
really will so here's my
question for a year thank you
you would mention that you're
officers beginning conversations
about
settlement of
you know resource damage you
know a settlement I guess my
question is
is how can you judicate a
settlement amount if mean if we
don't know the totality of the
impa.
Of the damage or the opportunity
costs lost or whatever the
valuation is based upon if
that's still a moving target how
can you pick a number right now
and settle this without knowing
the for in.
Madam chair senator steinborn
we do to hake into account all
of those impacts you mentioned
when we
determine what we believe is a
fair
fair compensation so our process
works this way so that
the first thing we do is is
characterized the extent of the
injury how much ground water has
been affected um both from the
start of the release to the
current situation because no
other claims now to resource
damage claims can include a time
element sort of like in other
legal cases damages grow over
time and so understanding what
is the reason what is the
release when did it happen
what's the extent of the injury
today and
so we can't we know what the
injury is we then look at
restoration projects what are
the different restration
projects that could make this
rate that could make the
community that could either
conserve ground water into the
future that could protect
ground water into the future
that could bring water in from
another basin that could fund
decel what are the different
strategies for making this right
and then we can't we scale those
and we caused them and that's
where we come up with a number
so it is a defensible process
it's something that is used
nationwide it is dictated by
circle and
so we follow those steps that
and so a great thing about
following those steps as if we
do go to litigation we have
rebuttable presumption so we
have been very can't just about
doing our now to resource damage
assessment according to the
rules so many chair
so do you feel like
like you're able to quantify the
impacts of the stage which the
project is at.
Are you doing other settlements
kind of at this stage or were
still characterizing
the problem we don't as silly
know the way it's going to end
madam chair senators time point
part of our damage calculation
so when I see damage I mean the
amount of money that we are
asking
out to fund these projects the
damage calculation does include
the extent of the injury going
forward so pump and treats it's
gonna take a hundred years we
can factor that into our art
damage um our damage number
and
we feel that we do enough do
know enough at this point in
time about the injury about the
potential remedial strategies to
again use the the guidelines
provided by federal outcome up
with a defensible estimate thank
you and I guess given the impact
in the opportunity costs last
serve
of providing resources to the
town of los cruces or other
impacts it's good to realize
alternative strategies now and
funding now rather than waiting
for a very long point in the
future to do so so as long as
we're not you know cutting
selling ourselves a little short
in the deal you know cuz hundred
years seems like a long time a
blayer tell you what is like
some of these deals twenty
thirty years later and you
haven't moved a whole lot so but
a hundred years is a while
call okay but I just wanted a
just also remind that I know you
know that the site is that the
food hills are the san andreas
will life refuge
so you know hopefully we're
talking to the fish and wildlife
service as well who manages that
say where I think it's a big big
horn cheap restoration area and.
Any a lot of habitat there the
foothills are those mountains
where this site is moving nine.
Potential impact there as well
clearly water supplied for the
city last cruises as paramount
issue but it is at the foothills
of a national while life refuge
and that is worth considering as
well how how this is impacting
that say how it could
potentially impact it in the
future
how do we safeguard against that
and should money or
consideration be given to that
site in its needs as well given
this issue appreciate you you're
interested that's I have and
thanks thank you for all your
excellent work as always well
thanks matches
thank you senator and
yes we are so glad to hear that
there are uhm
you've had your first meeting
just this month and that's
wonderful um and as things you
know do tend to move slower than
faster but I think it was
represented block who mentioned
about technology and is there
any chance that new technologies
will come in to play that could
speed up the
restoration the I mean the
remediation of robot oh okay
the one that's in the starbucks
commercial
manchester are during the
corrective measures evaluation
the responsible party are
gorough permittee will look at
different variations and and
usually though they will include
a institute treatment so that's
like putting putting something
down into the into the ground
water into the pollution to
clean it in place and that those
are newer technologies
cars sufficiency what will play
into it but certainly we have
will have different choices to
choose from that to include new
technologies
okay n.
Justice demons
will that impact your
negotiations at all if something
like that
madam chair at this point in
time we look at the remedial
strategies the remedial options
that are available that is what
we are basing our
damage assessment on at this
point in time clearly for it if
you don't for the benefit of
people who live in their area
for
taxpayers um the quicker this
gets cleaned up the quicker that
contamination gets cleaned up
the better off will be all or so
we are we would love to see
new strategies that will make it
happen faster but at this point
in time we are basing our work
on what is currently available
now in twenty twenty fourth
thank you that's yeah I would
imagine that's what we have to
go on it happens sooner better
that would be great I just want
you all to know too that we did
invite
nasa but we got no response so
they for some reason aren't able
to be here to give us their
ideas about what's going on but
i'm glad to hear also that
uh
trustee that you're able to
reach out and talk to the
communities you know that are
affected I mean you can't to the
wildlife but the caretakers of
the
uh game in fish I guess
this and why like yes
service
and again
right part of it okay so over
the state and the federal
but especially to our
communities that are affected
you know.
In the last few sister that i'm
glad to hear that there is lots
of
restorative ideas and things
said you can
a value wait and put a number on
and make that part of the plan
so thank you very much for that
and um with that anything else
okay thank you so much for being
here both of you and and we
appreciate
getting
updates in more information
thank you manager if if I could
i'd be remembered I did mention
it's the first time i've been
front of your sense but last
year you helped us in endorse in
a doors I can't set a work at
last almost natural app of
getting a group of a experts
together that group was formed
collaboratively with the oe um
looking at them all the parties
are looking at the draft report
right now and hopefully in a
month or two were able to
finalise in and get the
information to you but so so far
so good on a medicine
that's great to hear and does
that mean um that though they'll
start
you know pumping again the wells
and putting those into them
surely they have already let us
know that they've turned back on
the internet measures
the the pumping treat so guess
they've resumed as since that
report came out of draft so
thank you and do you know if the
bloom group like was expected
for removed because those wells
weren't pumping their
so a lot of information i'm
cleaning through the report
but that there is a
concept it could it could have
gone further than what what we
knew at this point
but it's certainly they're
they're looking at
it sounds like that they are
recommending
putting wells on the outside of
the plane.
To start pumping it into in
mitigated much like they did the
current on air for space versus
trying to pump it from the
inside and keep it in the same
place
glad to hear that anything else
okay thank you again we
appreciate your patience and i'm
not sure if there's sandwiches
left but if you
would like anything to eat drink
on your way home please help
yourself.
Okay
next in last but not least um we
have
andy
chocolates
they pronounce right with the
source water protection team
lead and the drinking water
bureau with nm we will be
hearing from and the remotely by
zoom so thank you for being with
us.
Chair members of the committee I
think you for the opportunity to
present this afternoon you all
hear me okay yes
correctly.
It's it's any yoke.
It's a bit of a tricky one madam
chair so I never have the
expectation that people get it
at the first tries though
have
your comes
if it were a wide s three for
that thank you.
They came out of turk.
Again matter chair and members
of the committee I greatly
appreciate the chance to present
you all this afternoon uh I also
appreciate the chance to present
virtually and I do apologize for
not being able to present in
person
I was fortunate enough to uh
camp in cartening over near high
rules about a month to go with
my family and I certainly regret
not being able to visit that
beautiful part of the state in
person this month as well so
thank you again for the chance
to present virtually today my
name is and yokums I am the
source watered protection team
lead at the drinking water
bureau at new mexico environment
uh my bus my bureau chief joe
martinez is also present curious
and attended this afternoon and
I will be presenting on AP fast
we saw people as contaminated in
our drinking water resources at
regulated public water systems
in new mexico in the work that
the environment department has
done on this topic to date.
We heard quite a bit about the
technical background of peace
this morning from the panel
comprised of secretary kenny
trustee heart step ins and
doctor fernandez from bravos and
I thought that they did a very
excellent job presenting on this
very complex family and very
large family of contaminates
which have recently came quite a
bit of traction at the federal
level in the table that i'm
showing here on sway two was
also shown by doctor fernandez
these are the recently finalised
drinking water standards force
six different pass chemicals and
again we heard this morning debt
in fact there are many thousands
of key fast chemicals uh the six
happened have some of the
greatest body of research and
toxicological understanding and
that's why the federal
government in eps chosen to
focus on these at least
initially to be regulated in the
art drinking water resources in
what i'd like to point out from
this table is that
you'll notice in the middle
column that the maximum
contaminant levels for these
people ask chemicals at the
mcl's or the unit called ppt
standing for parts per trillion
which is nearly unprecedented
among the epa's drinking water
standards for at this point
about ninety six almost a
hundred different types of
contaminants in fact the only
other contaminates that concluse
to being regulated at this very
low level sometimes equivalent
to a quivolated to something
like one drop of water in an
olympic sized swimming pool the
only contaminants that so far
have drinking water standards
that come close to the small
level or edb which we heard
quite a bit about earlier with
the curtment air force based
panel.
And contaminate known as dioxin
which is probably best known as
it can component of agent orange
so that hopefully provides some
idea of how seriously epa and
state
drinking water regulators are
taking these contaminants and
the levels at which were
concerned about them in our
drinking water supplies
the other thing i'd like to
point out before moving on about
these regulations is that they
also include something called
hazard index and that's shown
here at the bottom of the table
in the hazard index is a new
approach for epa in terms of
regulating contaminates and
drinking water in what this
basically consists of is looking
at a mix of two or more of the
four p fast chemicals shown in
the lower left of the table
in other words at least two of
these have to be present in the
given drinking water sample to
calculate the hazard index which
is then compared to a value of
wine and assessed for whether or
not it violates epa's newly
finalized mcl for the hazard
index.
I'd like to give an overview roy
quick of some of the monitoring
requirements of our regulated
public water systems in
utilities in new mexico and
these applied to utilities all
across the country
the epa finalised the pass
drinking water standards in
april of this year and public
water systems now have basically
a three year period to comply
with these initial monitoring
requirements set by epa
basically by april twenty twenty
seven
community water systems must
have sampled a four the six p
fast contaminants in at that
point the results of those
samples will determine what they
must do for
compliance monitoring purposes
after april twenty twenty twenty
seven.
The.
Now the other important
regulatory requirement that will
kick in at that time in twenty
twenty seven will be the
reporting of people resorts in
drinking water samples that
water systems in utilities must
provide to their customers in
their service populations
now there is a small caveat to
that and will talk more about
this here in a second
but some systems are actually
already doing various types of
key fast sampling perhaps most
notably for what is called for
short hand you see a more five
this is the fifth unregulated
contaminant monitoring rule
which is perhaps a bit of a
misnomer now for certain people
that do have drinking water
regulations but this is
essentially required of certain
types of public water systems
to complete this type of peafact
sampling in the informed between
twenty twenty three and twenty
twenty five so you can see that
it's an ongoing effort in the
systems that have already
completed that sampling uh then
have twelve months from the date
that the last sample was taken
to report the results of that
sampling to their customers and
indeed many systems in new
mexico have already done so
notably systems like a core in
clovis uh in several other
really relatively large systems
around the state and will talk a
little bit about the uh in
season of the resort from that
you see a mar five sampling
effort to date here in a few
slides.
For a get to that however madam
chair in the members of the
committee i'd like to give an
overview of work that enemy any
media has done in a a you know
very collaborative and
investigative effort with the us
geological surveys new mexico
water science center in
albuquerque and this this
particular collaboration began
in twenty twenty now i've also
included here a substantive
sample set in the media
completed either on its own or
in conjunction with the
department of health are prior
to that starting in twenty
eighteen
and these are just some of the
basic facts about the sampling
effort to date the map on the
right shows.
Apologize the map on the rate
shows
where samples have been
collected around the state we've
collected about two hundred and
eighty samples again this is
that public water systems
regulated public water systems
around the state in these two
hundred eighty samples were all
in allies for at least twenty
eight different pieces compounds
including the six that now have
those mcl's established by epa
now this represents about eighty
six unique public water systems
in these efforts have been
funded by the drinking water
state revolving fund uh that is
the federal funding source
proved by congress that funds us
as the primacy agency the
drinking water regulators in new
mexico as well as capital outlay
for this state in that in
particular funded a twenty
twenty one effort to collect
number of samples in kurry
rozavell and not terrible
counties in the eastern in
southern part of the states of
course we're more located today
and you can see that indeed
those counties have uhm
relatively high density of
samples that have been collected
in those areas you'll notice at
least a few different gaps in
this map throughout the state
such as lincoln county sierra
county luna county in the
southern part of the state for
instance in what i'd like to
point out is that uh although
i'm talking today about public
regulated water systems anyway
in other energies have also
worked to collect private well
water uh quality samples four p
fast analysis from from a number
of areas of the state including
those counties that I just
mentioned.
And in the distinction is
important to be made that uhm
death water quality in private
wells is not regulated in the
same way that it is at public
water systems uhm for the most
part there are really no water
quality regulations for private
wells and that's true er of many
of states in the country.
Um but I did want to point out
that some of the gaps we see on
the maps and presenting to you
to the committee today or not
quite as
a lacking in peace data as they
may appear.
I'll show a couple peers of maps
in this presentation and what
they show or related but
slightly different things
on the left here you see a
mapped the with the red and
green dots in this is showing
the public water systems where
our sampling efforts along with
the US geological survey show
that the p fast that were
detected at those water systems
exceeded one or more of those
maximum contaminate levels set
by the epa
on the ray is showing the total
piefast concentrations
measured at public water systems
around the state and you can
notice some similarities between
these maps and also some you
know rather notable differences
for example you can see some
relatively large orange to red
color dots on both maps in otero
and curry counties in those
represent water systems
where he fast including at least
one or more of the six regulated
compounds were found it
relatively high levels and
public water systems
um however you'll also notice if
you additional large dots
representing high total phase
concentrations and you'll recall
that uhm I mention this sample
sampling efforts analyze not
just those six regulated p fast
chemicals uh but up to twenty
eight different p fast chemicals
and so the map on the right is
showing where some of those
other different types of tifas
chemicals were detected but are
not necessarily among the six
the epa is now regulating across
the country in the reason I felt
that it's important to point the
south is that
as we heard from from the panel
this morning there are many
thousands of peace as chemicals
and among those thousands of
chemicals the fraud only a small
handful that we h.
Have a robust said of of
scientific data for
and so I think it's worth
keeping in the back of our minds
date it is possible there are
additional pest chemicals could
be proposed for regulation in
drinking water in the sure in
its important at a state like
mexico has a a strong baseline
to refer to should those
developments come about and the
map on the rate is is kind of
getting at that possibility in
showing us where to keep an eye
on other p fast chemicals we
will again are are quite
familiar with in aware of the
six that epa is now regulating
or asking us as a primacy agency
to regulate but there are others
out there that could be
concerned of greater concern as
we learn more about them in as
the research community in the
academic community learns more
about them.
And actually before I move on I
think another thing that's worth
pointing out is that there are
quite a few of the slightly less
than a hundred systems included
in this sampling effort across
this state that don't have
peafests
to date at those systems in
those drinking water sources.
So if not all bad news
fortunately
that we discuss briefly the uh
fifth unregulated contaminate
monitoring rule
this is the fifth iteration as
the name applies of this
requirement by the epa and this
time around the effort involves
all public water systems at
serve greater than thirty three
a hundred folks
in new medical that's a
relatively small subset in fact
we have about seven hundred
different water systems that
will be subject to the new
people regulations so he seem r
five by encompassing you know
what we would what we would call
medium to large size water
systems uh is actually only
going to give us a small slice
of the pie when it comes to all
the systems that will need to be
sampling for prefess here in the
next several years
you see a more five does include
a small uh subset of eight small
systems it would be those that
serve less than thirty three
hundred votes uhm but of course
you know when you're comparing
that against the number of seven
hundred that's that's quite a
small number in in fact most of
our small are public water
systems in new mexico do belong
to that class of small to very
small systems often serving a
hundred folks or less in many
cases the funding force for you
you see more five is directly
from epa accept in the case of
large water systems this would
be those like albuquerque santa
fe in alamo border as well that
serve greater than ten thousand
customers are in most cases
footing the bill themselves for
analysis of desamples.
Today and again this is an
ongoing effort that will
conclude in twenty twenty five
about six hundred and seventy
samples have been collected for
p fast
enusumer five also through was
in wine additional compound for
a total thirty in that's lithuan
which is unrelated to people as
um but due to epa's
determination process for
easymore five day to make it
onto the list for this round of
sampling and I would also be
happy to answer questions about
the fear at the conclusion of
this presentation
in total about seventy three
water systems will
have or will soon have collected
samples for you cmr five as
required by epa today and
october twenty twenty four we
have fifty sample uh systems
that have reported simple
results at this time.
In those reports look like this
again are just like the previous
set of maps on the left we're
looking at water systems where
one or more of the epa mcl
matsum contaminate levels for
peace were exceeded
in the green dots of course on
the left or the systems where
they were not found in in most
of those cases no peaf as were
found and on the right we're
looking at the total phase
concentration adding up each of
the twenty nine compounds in
this case that are analysed in
each sample collected for you
see a marf five
once again we can see that the
maps are relatively similar but
there are few differences in
places uh there's one system in
santa fe county for instance
that has uhm you know
a moderately
high level of heavens that was
detected but it's not included
amongst those six that are now
regulated in pete fast compound
uh in epspect regulations uhm
in general though these results
are tracking pretty well and I I
again would highlight some
positive news in debt many
systems around the state are are
not reporting any peace as
whatsoever which is excellent
again this is a fraction of the
seven hundred or so systems that
will be subject to the t v psps
regulations.
So just to summarise these
sampling efforts to date both if
new cm r five in the new media
and usg s collaborative sampa
fast investigations around the
state that public water systems
are total of a hundred and
twenty one unique public water
systems have been sampled uhm so
we're looking at you know
roughly twenty percent of all
the systems that must eventually
collect prefer samples for
drinking water per eps
regulations in peace of any type
amongst those twenty eight
compounds at least at any level
were detected at about slightly
under a quarter of systems that
have been sampled so far this
would be twenty eight of the
hundred and twenty one public
water systems that have been
sampled now focusing in a bit
more on those epa mcls again uh
the bargain on the right shows
four of the six mcls in these
are the four that have one or
more exceedences at sampled
systems in new mexico to date
uhm in with this chart is
showing is that most frequently
what we're seeing and this is
only at seven systems in the
states or very small number out
of the total that had been
sampled to date
where we are seeing those m c
l's exceeded they tend to be
either for the compound appear
for way or that hazard index
are addictive prizes for
different people chemicals again
at least two of there must be
present for the hazard index to
be calculated also mentioned
that the hazard indexes are a
relatively new addition to epa's
drinking water regulatory
portfolio will have an online
calculator that public war
systems can consult uh so they
won't have to worry about you
know messing up the the analysis
reported for regulatory purposes
you know again it's a new facity
of drink ep is thinking water
regular regulations and will
take some getting used to but
there will be tools offered for
systems.
To assist them in understanding
in using the hazard index
and its lower rates uh the
compounds pfos in pface have
been detected at a total of
about four systems in exceedence
of either of those epa mcl's so
that gives us a rate so far of
about six percent of all sample
systems exceeding one or more of
the mcl's in that puts us behind
the average calculated from ucm
five nationally which is about
eleven percent
so there are there is reason for
cautious optimism uh with the
sample results that we have so
far around the state for person
drinking water but again I would
put I would say that the picture
is still in folding as we worked
eh complete our or set of
roughly seven hundred systems
that must sample for people as
in drinking water for the new
regulations.
Before I conclude I just quickly
like to talk about treatment
for phase against there is good
news out there in this in the
sense that there are ways to
remove key fast from drinking
water and four of the most
prominent technologies are
listed at the top of the slide
the top left in these include
activated carbon and I and
exchange in then two
technologies that are often
lumped under the category of
high pressure membering
treatment reverse ausmost nano
filtration some of these are
familiar because they're
actually used for home drinking
water
treatment purposes but they can
be scaled up to the utoria scale
and we can see here in the photo
on a right and example and
a rather extreme example of
activate the carbon being used
to treat p fast for the city of
two son arizona.
Our treatment costs will depend
on a few things and they could
very quick widely around the
state depending on for example
which technology and affected or
impacted system chooses to
employ to treat for prefers the
size of that system of course
and I think it's real relatively
into it that perhaps the city
like the size of alamo border
will be
probably needing to to show up
quite a bit more money to treat
their drinking water for
preference then a small system
with a single impact well
serving a community of uh
perhaps over a hundred folks
again that's a generalization in
the third factor there often
comes into players what the
background water quality is of
course there are those other
ninety some are containing its
that have federal drinking water
standards in systems that are
all already dealing with one or
more of those may have treatment
in place or may need to
reconsider their treatment
uh technology used to treat
their water quality
based on how those other
contaminants interact with p
fast in the water
without getting to technical
about it essentially these
technologies listed here at the
top can sometimes be impacted
where uhm the the material used
to remove contaminate from water
is sort of being
filled up so the speed by other
contaminates you know blocking p
fast from being removed from the
water uhm it is sort of perhaps
uh a simple way of putting it
but again these these
technologies have been shown to
remove the fast from drinking
water at the utility scale in
the are available for for water
systems there are impacted by
defess in their source water in
the environment department does
have a great from the epa this
is called the emergency
contaminants in small or
disadvantaged communities grant
that we will utilise er to help
water systems both sample for p
fast to.
Satisfy their initial monitoring
requirements for the new
regulations and for the systems
that are impacted by prefers to
help them study and ultimately
implement a successful treatment
technology and we will we hope
to roll out a work plan for that
grant uhm receive from from e p
a
record of the end of twenty
twenty four or beginning of
twenty twenty five.
And with that or conclude thank
you very much madam chair in the
committee and I would be quite
happy to take any questions you
have.
The.
Senator steinborn has some
questions man chair and
any thanks so much couple quick
questions for you so are all the
water systems in the state
basically fall under this
including the small mutual
domestics and water systems.
Medium share senator that's a
great question.
There are total of about good
giver take twelve hundred
public water systems in the
state and they include anything
from water systems like what
we're sort of conventionally
familiar with from as you
mentioned the mutual domestics
up to large utilities like out
of court their alamo gordo were
clovis uhm and they also include
things like uh camp grounds or
gas stations are or even restops
in some cases and there is a
subset of water systems there
are subject to these new peoples
regulations and they are the
ones that do include you know
what we think of conventionally
as public water utilities are
albuquerque alamo gordo again
and those mutual domestics
places like rest areas what we
call a transient non community
water systems meaning that they
have an irregular set of folks
who rely or use that drinking
water washing not the subject to
the new peak fast regulations
okay.
It says that the public system
is must complete their their
initial monitoring by april of
twenty seven and sell systems
are out there getting tested
when do they have to comply with
the new higher limits what's the
timeline there.
Madam chair senator also going a
great question
there are couple ways to sort of
approach that answer because
there's another timeline that I
I did not show uhm ultimately
public water systems will need
to have their uh initial
compliance monitoring results by
that april twenty twenty seven
day in terms of whether they
actually have AP fast problem or
not they do need to report that
they've done that that people as
testing at that time to their
customer or their service
population basis
but if they've actually exceeded
one of the violations they have
until twenty twenty nine to
report that under what's called
deter system of public
notification reporting you may
have heard of this before this
often includes
you know serious contaminants uh
of course they're all serious
but what we call contaminants
things like nightfreight where
we want to know very quickly if
it's in the water drinking water
source in the system has
basically twenty four hours to
give notice of that kind of
problem all the way through tier
three which is a a more relaxed
time frame prefers for in the
middle of that under tier two
were a system has thirty days
from the time there uh an mcil
was exceeded to report the
violation in in basically
systems there are exceeding one
or more mcls you know when they
find out that it's a problem is
when they need to begin
addressing it
working you know with nmed with
our various drinking war water
oriented nonprofits around the
state to look into those
treatment technologies and begin
to implement them uhm so I I
would territorize the the
necessary turn around it's
rather fast with a slightly more
relaxed time frame for some of
the reporting requirements
manager.
The.
For money two did again
funding to help systems comply
and install the requirement
share senate.
The the federal government is is
is it I would characterize their
their response to some of the
cost concerns about uh complying
with these new people
regulations is very serious and
in a stood
for instance they have awarded
us there there emerging
contairment it's grant as I
mentioned in that as partly
meant uh meant to help fill in
some of the gap suspecially in
terms of treatment ultimately a
four systems that are impacted
by people uhm there are other
the funding sources out there
including through the drinking
water state performing fund
there's also the clean water
state revolving fine both their
administered by the new mexico
department of uh finance and uh
in financial sense and then any
a practical on the ground sense
through the environment
department uhm and both those uh
funds now have sort of an
additional emerging contaminants
category added to them uh dead
gets a little bit away from the
traditional loan structure of
those grants uhm and actually
has some some you know for
basically interest free options
for for water systems you may be
struggling with financial
resources to take advantage of
those to implement some
prepared technologies when you
say interest.
Like no car share whatsoever.
Madam chair senator I I believe
that is that that's correct that
that's the the model for these
uhm e a there are there are some
studies out there in some
opinions from other primacy
agencies that the the episode it
for costs to comply
nationally with the prefers
regulations was perhaps in an
underestimate and I think
they're beginning to realize
that in course correct a bit to
make sure that these uh that
these resources are out there
for water systems that just
don't have the means otherwise
to to implement these
technologies to keep their
customer safe right last
question.
Man chair so you know in some
places like in clovis and gordor
terrill county in a you showed
big bubbles there and we've
heard earlier today about the
piefast contamination connected
to the military basis is there
any correlation there between
those water systems showing up
as hot spots and what we heard
connected to the military basis
set.
Madame chair senator that's also
a great question in in by
enlarge
it's a bit case specific also
with the terror county and and
alamo gordo which does have one
well where people ask has been
reported uhm however I believe
it was noted earlier by senator
gregs that the uh two rose of
base and awkward for a sort of
centered at a low point under or
very close to holland and air
force base in actually the the
well in question belonging to
the city of alamo cordo is
located up hydral greedy and
from that so it would appear
based on what we know so far
that uh activities at hollowmen
are not the reason for the
the detection in this case of
the chemical pf away at that
well uhm
the end what some of the other
large dots that you do you
noticed in the terror county
senator would actually be
represented in uh representing
detections at the cloud craft
water system in a system of
springs that they rely on for
their drinking water source
a little bit east of town there
the source of those has not been
confirmed there are a couple
possibilities including a nearby
ski hill preference have been
found on to be a component of
ski wax uhm end uh possibly some
other complexities in the high
sacramental mountain awkward for
system in the case of the the
detections in curry county uh
these are largely at two systems
uh the mel rose water system in
western creek county in the
texaco water system in eastern
cream county the account of mill
rose again is up hydro
ingredient from canon air force
base and it seems that we can
therefore rule out the base in
that case as a a reason for the
contamination in mel rows.
Uhm at the town of texaco uh the
source is unconfirmed as well
uhm
based on what we know about the
hydrogeology in the area it
seems unlikely that can and
therefore space is the reason
for the contamination there
but we can't see for sure at
this point uhm instead and I I
think doctor fernandez mentioned
something to this effect uh uh
in in like these secretary kenny
as well uhm
do you pick with the of AP fast
in especially developed areas
can make the actual specific
source somewhat hard to pin
point in certain cases
it could be from from graywater
reused on
things like golf courses in
public parks that is essentially
drawing contaminates from the
entire developed area water said
uh but there are some co-
conflicting factors
unfortunately that make it hard
to pin point a single point
source in these cases thank you
managed.
Do you given the dangerous
nature of the contaminant do you
try to figure out what is the
source of a contaminant like
that is that part of
what you normally try to figure
out or just pretty much just
clean it up make sure.
Madame chair senator though I I
would classify that is as a very
er emerging area of research
in some cases amongst the
research community it's known as
prefast finger printing or
sometimes prefers forensics
where where the idea has to look
at a given pess chemical and
treaty tier to a particular
industry or type of source such
as firefighting form in say if
we're seeing a large amount of
pfos for instance then it
very likely came from
firefighting form run off at a
base or an airport somewhere and
installation like that
however I think that she worked
there is an emerging area of
research and were sort of
waiting for the analytical
capabilities of laboratories to
catch up what was catch up with
what we're seeing in these field
results to be able to to
take a finer look at what some
of these individual sources may
be
so again and and I unfortunately
at this point I would say that
often times particularly in
developed areas ah the exact
single source if there is one
can be difficult to pin point
but there is a silver lining in
that this is a an issue gaining
a lot of intention among the
research community and we are
optimistic that it won't be long
before we have better tools to
get at those exact tapes of
court questions.
He showed csa pifas right and
we're going to go slipping for
that thank you for four year in
depth answers today appreciate
thank you
along that line they finger
printing
nda and other thank you very
much for your presentation I was
wondering
and the
seven systems
that epa found the mcls
exceeded um
where they
guess the national us ucmr
average how many people are were
affected by those wells
I guess you said there were four
systems that it was AP f
was affecting and I was
wondering if you can relate that
to how many people.
I'm sure that's that's an
excellent question and it it can
be a little bit difficult to
take an individual well in in a
identify the exact number of
people that are is served by
water from that one well or or
other type of source but I
primarily use well because as in
fact the source water that most
new mexicans have as their their
source drinking water
in the reason for that is is
that many systems blend their
water with other sources you
know for example uh a medium to
large size towner city may have
upwards of a fifteen to twenty
wells or even more in may blend
water from from multiple wells
uhm so it makes it a bit
difficult to
evaluate how many people exactly
are served by any given source
unless it's a single source
system of course as it's the
case for many small systems
around the state that said
amongst those seven systems
around the state where people
ask have been identified in
excess of uh an are given epa
mcl uh into all those systems
serve something like seventy to
eighty thousand people uhm so
it's compared to the statewide
population obviously not a huge
number but certainly not
insignificant uh in again it
probably is a subset of of that
number of people uh there are
actually served by water from
any of those those specific
seven
sources that have been uh found
to have those mco exceedences
thank you.
With
I don't know what this act I
can't remember the
acronym but I mean the acronym
is crewer the um wells down in
sounded to reset area
was it
something you i'm sure testing
overseas that correct
matter.
Correct and
yes it is certainly in the drink
your water world it's an
alphabet super of afternoons uh
in people as you know exceptions
but yes crew uh the community
real regional utility authority
is a regulated public water
system
and I don't.
P five but was it a soft year
gaset that i've gotten to to
higher level because of the
monitoring system.
Adam chair and it due to the
some of the mode monitoring
system chemistries uhm this this
is a a system i'm as familiar
with you know my my team largely
works with preference but my
understanding is that the
primary contaminate of concern
their has been arcenic
with some second secondary
effects I believe in the ph of
the water again due to some of
the systems chemistries which
can be quite complex
i.
Remember arsenic
so also it was kind of
as someone who goes up and down
I twenty five and stops if the
rest stops why are they not
included in the monetary.
Madam sure that's a a great
question as well and
I I think probably the the
simplest framework that I could
use to answer that question is
that those those types of
systems restops gas stations
camps camp grounds in places
like that uh what we call treaty
at non community systems uhm
historically have not been
subject to many of the uh
drinking water regulations that
epa has passed over the last
fifty years or so since the
initial actment of the safe
drinking water act uhm so I
think I think the most
straightforward answer to that
question is is simply precedent
uhm in perhaps a part of that is
also the logistics of of
regulating those systems in
coordinating the various
sampling requirements in that
kind of thing
i'm i'm not a toxical just or a
health expert uh but I I might
also
at least speculate that um part
of that is that when when e p a
derives these maximum
contaminant levels for many
types of content minutes like
people or arsenic or any of
those nearly a hundred or so
examples uhm they're doing
they're coming up with those
numbers in calculating them by
assuming
fronic exposure through daily uh
uh drinking of water that has
those contaminants and the the
idea would be that folks going
through where restations in
things like that and dress stops
or not uh exposed to them at
least that particular source on
a regular basis.
Don't consider it a high enough
level to impact the person's
health if they're just doing it
once every
week or even less than that.
That would you
madame chair yes so that that's
my perception of of the
justification for the
distinction between types of
public water systems
okay.
Can regulate or or test.
I'm adam cherry off the top of
my head i'm i'm not sure and and
i'm not sure if other states
regulate such systems in a
similar manner but I would be
very happy to look into that in
in get an answer back to you as
soon as possible okay thank you.
Yeah any other pretty yes i'm
sorry website
thank you so much madame
chairman thank you so much sir I
hesitate to try to pronounce
your last name and butcher it so
others call you sir or mister
expert or something but madame
chairman I a couple questions
real quick page nine it says
these
ways that we can remove peer
fast from drinking water so
madam chair i'm just wondering
you know I know we know these as
forever chemicals we call them
forever chemicals are here
forever but if we can filter
them out
is that still a forever chemical
and then also in that same vein
when we fill through these out
such as with reverse osmosis for
example madame chairman the
filters how do we ensure that
those filters that make contain
that p first are being put away
in somewhere that they cannot
contain or contaminate again
with p fast whatever they're
touching madam chairman.
And a chair representative thank
you for that that great question
in that gets it something that
perhaps has been alluded to
today but we haven't necessarily
had the time to get into too
much detail on that uhm to tance
of the first part of your
question madame chair
representative
that these removal technologies
are or just that they're removal
rather than destruction
technologies so madam chair
representative as you observe
the the phase content minutes
are still there they're still
forever containing its better
now stuck on the filter material
uh rather than in the drinking
water
so we it will in this sort of
scenario we can think of it as
having a
solved one problem but
potentially creating another
direct machine on it during his
presentation earlier
on the white since test for saw
the uh alluded to the resource
conservation recovery act or
rick rose it is often known
and epa's working to uh in
proposing new sorts of
regulations under that as well
as a better known as super found
to designate certain peace
chemicals er as hazardous
substances in the reason that's
important for this for this uh
discussion is that then she
should those proposed
regulations come come about then
the materials like the drinking
water filters or exchange resins
or room reversals mostly
membrains and filter like
material
then potentially you're
considered hazardous materials
that have to be disposed of uh
according to federal regulations
however epa does seem to be
aware of the issue this poses
for what secretary can you refer
to earlier as.
Passive receivers which would
certainly include things like
drinking water treatment plants
were wastewater treatment plants
where the prefast chemicals
weren't generated on sight they
were simply filtered out of uh
out of the the water influent
entering those facilities uhm so
epa is working to care about
exemptions and to craft these
proposed regulations in a way uh
that drinking what a utilities
and waste what utilities are not
underly
subject to it to dealing with
the cost in burden of disposing
of these materials at least from
a a financial standpoint
it remains to be seen what
exactly some of the options will
be for destroying these
materials to ensure that the
forever chemicals are in fact
destroyed uh be epa is also
currently working on a
destruction in disposal guidance
that will help passive receiver
entities and facilities answer
those types of questions.
I had I appreciate it and he
thank you
great thank you very much we
appreciate you
it sounds like you were with
this most of the day
efforts so thank you alright
next will go to public comment
recommending that you since
there's about ten people online.
Okay so we have a lot of people
who have been
uh on zoom with us and but we
can't tell who it is that would
like to make a public comment if
you could raise your hand
then we can identify you and
call you at if they're if you
don't want to make public
comment
don't raise your hand.
So we have
no one okay well thank you for
joining us today and thank you
committee for being here we
since we were just a
subcommittee will have to wait
until we
to approve the the minutes from
our september thirteenth meeting
so will do that next meeting
plus the meet minutes from this
meeting okay so thank you again
and I just wanted to thank
you
president uh cow.
From almost order
branch of animated as well as ah
interim president monica tortos
or helping us make arrangements
and also judy who helped get the
refreshments for us and thank
you to the university for
providing that to for us
and then thank you staff for
being here and everyone have a
safe travel
