sure that we had compliments for
our sandwiches. So thank you,
Lauren Abbey, the government
affairs director for the Museum
of New Mexico Foundation. Um,
she took real good care of us
today, um, so we, uh, have two
more presentations for the
remainder of the day.
and then um I'll do a little bit
of housekeeping before we get on
the road. Uh, several of us have
to drive back, uh, more than 45
minutes. I keep looking at
Representative Laricadena
because we're both in the same
hood.
um, and how we might see each
other on the road.
Uh, so, um, we have the overview
of the congressional
Reconciliation bill. And again,
this is like was, as I've
mentioned before about the wheel
of a bicycle and this is one of
those really important spokes
when we start talking about this
conversation of do we or do we
not do a tax package and how do
we help um make sure that we're
being fiscally responsible and
um practical and what we're
doing with the money that we've
got.
So we have Helen Hecht, who is
from uh uh Uniformity Council,
the multi-state Tax commission
and Richard uh Inklem, am I
saying your last name right?
Thank you, Richard. Uh, names
are important. So, uh, president
and executive director of the
New Mexico Tax Research
Institute, um, I know that, so
you've, I think you've probably
recognized that we've had a lot
of a number dump today.
Um, and so if you'll just be
patient with us as we get our
brains back into this, this, but
I'm gonna let you go ahead and
start, uh, if you will, uh, to
give us this presentation.
Representative Lunstrom spoke
very highly of this because she
saw that in the federal
oversight committee and said
that we're going to get a lot
out of this, this, this
presentation. So I'm gonna let
you go ahead and take care of
it. Helen will let you start
off.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you members of the
committee. Uh, just quickly
about our organizations. I know
you're familiar, uh, but, um,
the multi-state tax commission
is a group of state uh
commissioners and secretaries
from the tax agencies in the
different states. Um, it's
funded, it's an entirely
government organization funded
by governments, um, we now have
members, uh, we have all the
states are members. Some are
compact members, sovereignty
members or associate members,
New Mexico has been
a member since its founding in
1967. It's a compact member. Uh,
and Secretary Chaon-Clark uh has
recently served as our chair.
Um, and I'm gonna let Richard
talk a little about, about the
tax research institute.
Yeah, so the New Mexico Tax
Research Institute is a member
supported um non-partisan
nonprofit organization dedicated
to providing tax-based research
and principled analysis to the
tax policy debate in New Mexico.
We were born from New Mexico
first in 1999. New Mexico first,
some of you may remember, was a
Domenici Bingaman bipartisan
thing. They would have town
halls and try to resolve issues
like water concerns, and they
had a town hall on taxes, and
angel Fire in 1999. And one of
the recommendations
was you needed independent
organization, and that's how we
were, we were created. New
Mexico first, sadly, is now
defunct, um, but they used to do
some pretty interesting stuff.
Um, and just a little note about
our background. So, um, both of
us come from an accounting
background. I'm also an
attorney. Uh, neither one of us
are economists, um, so, and
we're gonna be talking in a
pretty high level about some of
these things, but we're gonna be
talking mainly from the
perspective of an administrator
or taxpayer or practitioner uh
who has to sort of make sense
out of some of the new rules.
And we're gonna be focusing
mainly on um the uh the tax
pieces of the OBBBA or 3BA or
whatever you wanna call it. Um,
it's official title, I think is
uh Public Law 119-21. Um, once
it was signed by the president.
Um, but we're gonna be focusing,
there's a lot of stuff in it.
We're gonna be focusing on the
tax provisions, um, and talking
about how those will affect the
states and affect New Mexico.
Um, just a quick caveat on the
next slide. Uh, any opinions
that we express are our own
unless we say otherwise, not
the, not the official position
of our organization.
Um, OK, just some history. I
think this will be helpful.
Uh, over time, as you know, you
there is both a federal income
tax, both for corporations and
individuals and uh applies to
things like trusts and other uh
other entities.
Um, there's also a state, state
taxes on income. State taxes
came first, but when the federal
government enacted the uh the
federal tax system. It made
sense over time for states to
conform to that system.
rather than having 51, 52 state,
uh, different kinds of systems,
it made more sense to just have
one and have the states uh tie
into that system. And so that's
really what's happened over
time, and that's why whereas uh
when it comes to sales taxes or
grocereceipts taxes, it's not
what the federal government does
necessarily that impacts us
directly, but when it comes to
income taxes, it does have a
direct impact. It also has
indirect impacts that we'll
talk a little bit about. Um, but
conforming to the federal tax
code, even when we maybe don't
agree with the policy or we
don't understand exactly how
this is going to affect things.
Um, it makes it, it makes some
sense uh from a number of
perspectives. It simplifies the
reporting by taxpayers, again,
if you know you're gonna have to
file a federal tax return anyway
and that the computation of
those numbers and that return
are going to then fold into your
state return
it's a whole lot easier to just
do it once.
Um, so that, that's a big part
of it. But also, I think you
should keep in mind uh how much
the states rely on the Internal
Revenue Service, and Richard and
I are going to talk a little bit
more about some of the specific
ways in which uh they do that.
But
anyone who's ever picked up the
Internal Revenue code's 2
volumes, by the way.
uh, where the regs, which is
like 20 volumes, knows that it's
very, very complicated and very,
very detailed, and it really
takes an organization like the
Internal Revenue Service to make
it work. The laws, the tax laws
they're passed by Congress, just
like a lot of the laws that are
passed by state legislatures.
are very general in their
terminology. And when it comes
to applying those law laws to
specific situations or figuring
out how to reconcile things
between different laws.
Um, you've got to have somebody
that can do that. The court
system does part of that, but
imagine what it would be like to
have to take every issue that
you have to figure out how this
applies and litigate it before
you can figure out the answer to
it.
So, the Internal Revenue Service
is critical for that purpose. It
helps to uh administer uh the
law issues, regulations, that
sort of thing.
But it also uh uh simplifies the
reporting of information because
a lot of information that is
reported to the IRS is then
shared with the states.
So that's a good resource for
the states, and they know also
that uh
the, the funding, the, the
payments of taxes, uh, sometimes
get shared, so if there are
refunds in the state or federal
system and liabilities in the
other system. There can be
offsets of those amounts, so
that there's a way to kind of
make sure that, uh, to the
extent it's possible that taxes
get paid.
and then also audit adjustments,
um, so because the IRS is out
there doing audits of these
numbers that the states conform
to, uh, states also get the
benefit of that, so they don't
have to audit.
all of those numbers on the tax
return. They can simply audit
the numbers that affect the
states.
Um
but even though most states
conform, they also make
modifications or adjustments to
the federal base. Anything you
wanna add to that about for that
very last point, I think we're
going to discuss more later. Um,
we use the term conformity, and
that's important because where
we conform, how we conform is
what determines what federal
changes flow through directly to
uh New Mexico State returns, um
so keep that in mind cause
we're, we're gonna be rolling
into that shortly.
So on the next slide, there's a
chart, 22 charts that show, uh,
two tables that show how states
can form.
Now, this is really simplified,
but it's important, so there are
some states that start or begin
their calculation or look to,
uh, the federal taxable income.
uh, and how that's computed. So
take that number or start with
that and then make modifications
to that.
Most of the states are like New
Mexico, and they start with
federal adjusted gross income.
Um, and then there are other
states, there's a handful of
states that just pick and choose
the provisions of the Internal
Revenue Code that they want to
include in their own tax code
for the computation of uh of
their tax base.
But this is deceptively simple,
and in truth, what happens is,
even though this is the starting
point for the state.
there are often lots of
adjustments that are made, added
additions and subtractions to
these starting points, and a lot
of references to the Internal
Revenue Code for that purpose.
So if you're making an
adjustment, the state might say,
uh, with reference to the
deduction under section XYZ, we
are going to allow a certain
part of that or we're gonna add
that back.
um, and so you almost have to do
a search through the tax code of
the state for all references to
the Internal Revenue Code to
really figure out exactly how
that state conforms.
And he called this slide
simplistic because just because
you see 5 states that tied to
federal taxable income and you
see a lot more than that,
including New Mexico that tied
to AGI.
Um, that doesn't mean that
they're all the same and they
all tie in exactly the same way.
We've lumped them into one
category, but, but they're each
and every one of them have have
their own subtle differences
that as helen so you have to
research. Exactly. You can't
assume that good point. You
can't assume that the states
that are in one category do it
the same way.
On the next slide, um, it also
an important feature of this.
There are some states that say
we can form as of this date.
And when they do that, that
means even if the federal
government changes the law after
that date, they don't
necessarily automatically
conform to that change.
Uh, most of the states, although
it's, it's pretty evenly split
or what we call rolling
conformity. That is, they
conform to the law that's
applicable at that period of
time.
so that if it changes, that
changed then also affects the
state.
Um, and that, uh, there are pros
and cons of both of those. If
you conform automatically, then
you have to back out or change
the things that you don't want
to conform to. If you don't
conform automatically, then you
have to continually update, um,
in order to conform to the
changes that the federal
government would make.
OK. On the next slide, and
again, a lot of this has been
simplified, watered down, and I
know you've had a, a, a number
dump this morning, so we're
gonna try and keep it simple,
but the um the, the, the point
to keep in mind really is there,
it, it's a, it's a longer
calculation, and sometimes the
words that we use to refer to
things can be confusing. So,
we're just gonna, we're just
gonna point out a couple of
things here so that
we keep it all straight
Um, the first is, when we talk
about exemptions or exclusions,
things that are exempted or
excluded.
from tax, um
so you take all of the income
that I may have from any source.
Maybe it's
donations from people or gifts
from family members or whatever.
Then you say some of that is not
taxable at all. It's gonna be
excluded or exempt.
That's the first category of
things, um, and then it's not
taxable and it doesn't become
part of the gross income or
revenue that's reported for tax
purposes.
Um, then you may have things
like deductions, and in the
federal income tax, there are
two kinds of deductions.
There are the deductions for
just a gross income, and they
adjust and the deductions from
adjusted gross income.
And there are two provisions of
the Internal Revenue Code that
are important. Section 62 and
Section 63.
So, if you're talking about a
deduction, you have to know, is
it flowing into AGI and, and of
course, New Mexico conforms,
although they make adjustments
to it. They can form, or is it
something that's taken after
um, you compute AJR at the
federal level, in which case,
New Mexico would not conform
unless they say that they will
allow that deduction as well.
So that's the trick. Um, what
goes into AGI versus what
happens after a, after AGI is
computed at the federal level.
Then you have the tax rate for
federal purposes and credits.
Those don't affect New Mexico
taxes directly.
Um, obviously, just like the
deductions from AGI unless New
Mexico says specifically.
We, we apply our own brackets,
um, to that age to that taxable
number, um, which is why we're
different. That's why the rates
at the federal level don't,
don't impact us in a direct
manner. Um.
because we do apply our own. We
didn't always do that as a quick
example of rolling versus
non-rolling conformity. When,
when I was
right out of college, I guess,
um.
we still had to go to the
legislature to get the personal
exemption and standard deduction
raised to equal the feds because
we didn't conform to those two
items. Now they do. I think you
all got tired of doing that
every year. Um, and there was
one or two years that was just
oops, and people were kind of
unhappy. It might have been 4
years.
but uh but that was an example
where even though we're a
conforming state, we didn't
conform in those cases.
Federal tax increases or
decreases can be a lot of
different things, um, as Helen
was mentioning, um, it could be
those gross revenue inclusions
or exemptions, increases or
decreases in deductions from
taxable gross revenue to get to
AGI.
or increases or decreases in
deductions from HGI to get to
net taxable income, which is
what was essentially just said,
um, you can also change tax
rates, and, you know, the feds
have been known to do that. And
you can create new or repeal tax
credits. You can do all of those
things
um,
at the federal level to increase
or decrease taxes.
So this raises the question I
think that comes up when you go
to Washington, you talk to
Congress people there. Um, do
they think about how this is
gonna affect directly the texts,
uh, systems in the states when
they're doing this. And the
answer is sometimes
a lot of times, no, but
sometimes yes, they know, for
example, that if they raise the
rate or lower the rate, it
doesn't impact the states in the
same way that um
that say, changing what is
exempt or excluded income would.
Um, on the next slide, again,
this is just our focus here. So
they're, we're not gonna focus
on some of the things, uh, as
much if they don't have a direct
impact on the state.
Um, and then let's talk a little
bit about the, the mechanics of
both the personal income tax and
the corporate income tax, so two
different systems
right, and New Mexico, it's
7-2 or 7-2 is the
uh personal income tax 7-2A is
the corporate income tax.
So in the personal income tax,
and they, and then they both
conform, but they do it in
different ways.
In the personal income tax,
you've got um some terms that
are key here. So you've got
basic, this, this is all in the
definitions. So if you're
looking for, how does this
conformity work?
Much of it is contained in the
definitions. There are also some
references to the Internal
Revenue Code and other sections,
but look first at the
definitions.
uh base income
First of all, I'm gonna go one
direction. You could also go the
other direction, but base
income, start with base income,
it equals the federal adjusted
gross income. So that's again
how we can form, but not for
estates and trusts, and we're
not going to focus on estates
and trusts here, but just know
that for estates and interests,
it's different, it's taxable
income for estates and
interests.
Um, so you got base income, it
equals adjusted gross income
with adjustments. So there are a
list of adjustments that have to
be specified, and then you get
net income.
So net income is then uh base
income with the adjustments.
and uh taxable income is net
income with adjustments.
So we're making adjustments at
different levels, and some of
those again will go back and
reference the Internal Revenue
Code sections.
So it's not that something that
doesn't go into AGI is
necessarily not going to be
followed. It's just that it's
got to be specified. Go ahead. I
was just gonna say if it wasn't
clear, these, these definitions
are New Mexico definitions.
They're not federal definitions.
It's, it's our way of tying our
definitions to the Internal
Revenue Code. Thank you. Yes.
So you find those in the, in the
New Mexico statutes.
On the next page, um, again,
forms and instructions are
really important. In fact, when
I was in private practice, I was
surprised, coming from the state
and going into private practice,
how little practitioners
sometimes paid attention to the
statutes and the regulations.
They're focused a lot of times
on the forms and the
instructions and what's the
process for getting these
numbers and how do you, how do
you calculate it. So you can
also see this connection between
the federal and the state
uh tax in New Mexico on its
forms. You can look at the
federal, uh, for example, 1040,
and see the calculation of
adjusted gross income, what goes
into that?
You can also on the next page,
look at the New Mexico return,
see the how they tie into the
adjusted gross income number
from the Federal Return and then
make adjustments to that.
So that's another way if you
kinda just wanna simplified
version uh of figuring out how
does this all work. The forms
are a good, a good resource for
that.
OK, so definitions. I'm gonna go
through these pretty quickly.
Um, but how would it will
provide you as a resource, you
can come back to this and say,
OK, let me figure out where does
this go and how does this work?
To the, to the extent that you
need to
but whenever you modify, right?
And I'm sure your staff knows
this. I worked with your staff
uh long enough to have great
respect for them, and they know
that with all these moving
parts, you gotta be careful when
you make a change. Where do you
make it? How do you make it? How
do you word it?
um, etc. But in, in the personal
income tax statutes, again in
the definitions, we've got the
definition of adjusted gross
receipts there so it references
the internal revenue Code
Section 62.
Then on the next page, you've
got base income, again, for a
state's interests, it's
different for state's interests,
it's taxable income, but for
individuals, and that's on the
next slide, uh, adjust a gross
income. Base income is adjusted
gross income, and then there are
adjustments. So this is the list
of specified things that get
adjusted.
Uh, one of the big things that
always gets adjusted, and this
is true for most states, is not
operating losses?
Um.
because you're gonna take a net
operating loss, um, and at the
federal level and for state
purposes, it's always, uh,
there's always some differences
in computation and some
differences in how it's treated.
Another adjustment here on base
income is uh this uh
tax for the pass-through
entities that New Mexico now
has, and then a lot of other
states have. This prevents that
from getting counted twice. I'm
not gonna go into a lot of
detail here, but it's necessary
to keep that deduction from
being counted twice.
uh, for that, for that tax paid
at the entity level, which then
the owners get a credit for.
Um
then base income also includes
for all taxpayers other income
that's not included at the
adjusted gross income level.
but on which federal taxes
eventually calculated. So if it
doesn't go into that line, but
it's part of the uh federal
taxable income, then it gets
added um back to that along with
um this um federal alternative
minimum tax amount, uh, that's a
separate amount for federal
purposes.
Um
and then for all taxpayers base
income also includes uh the
amounts that are deducted for um
these are for higher education
uh funds, the section 529 funds.
uh, and some other, uh, related,
uh, funds.
Can we have the
the pit adjustment form. And
again, this is uh a, a
recommend the forms and
instructions sometimes it's
easier to figure out exactly how
this works. It kind of sets it
down in a sort of mathematical
formula kind of way.
But on that uh form, you see the
specific adjustments that get me
to uh adjust the gross income to
get to the eventual federal or
the state tax base.
OK. Base income excludes some
things too, and one of the
things that it excludes, which
is important for New Mexico is
the federal, and this is kind of
a double negative.
The federal government normally
allows business deductions.
It does not allow business
deductions if they're, if the
business is, um, the sale of
illegal drugs.
The federal government considers
marijuana illegal
Some states do not. New Mexico
is one of those states.
Therefore, we allow the
deduction that the federal
government would not allow
because of this uh provision in
the Internal Revenue Code. New
Mexico changed that when we
legalized canvas. Yes, exactly
right. So, so that they can
deduct, so these businesses can
deduct the normal business
expenses that they would that
they would have like cost of
goods sold, right, exactly. I
mean basic things.
Um, then on the next page, net
income. So now we're, we're done
with that income, but we've got
to adjust base income then to
get to net income.
And from net income, we take uh
two things that are important,
obviously. The standard
deduction in Section 63 or the
itemized deductions in, in that
section. So taxpayers can take
the standard deduction, the
itemized deduction, and the
definition of itemized deduction
is important here.
So we think of itemized
deductions as including just
anything that's deductible from
adjusted gross income.
But there is an exception to
that that we'll be talking
about, uh, here in a little bit.
But just keep in mind on the
next slide, these are important
standard deduction and itemized
deductions, we generally conform
to, even though those are
deducted from
AGI because we're
deducting those to get to net
income. So we're still
conforming, we're just
specifically conforming to the.
Um, in Internal Revenue Code,
Section 63, you've got this
definition of what itemized
deductions are.
And so itemized deductions are
all these deductions from AGI
except for these things in
subsection B here.
So, um,
the, the itemized deduction
definition refers to this
section B and says these are not
um these are not included in the
term. So they wouldn't be
included for New Mexico's
purposes either unless they say
otherwise.
So one of the deductions that is
in that section B, that's not
considered itemized.
Um, is this 199A deduction for
certain business income of past
due entities, and this was done
by Congress in 2017 to
effectively lower the rate on
pass-through entities because
they lowered the rate on
corporations.
and they decided it or
pass-through entities, it's much
harder to just change the rate.
because it's the ultimate
taxpaying partner who will pay
the tax, and their rate is
determined by their attributes,
which includes their other
income. So if it's a high income
taxpayer, um, they would pay a
different rate than if it's a
lower income taxpayer. So
instead, the, the benefit they
gave to pass through entities
was in the form of this
deduction under 199A.
Uh, and New Mexico would has to
conform to that specifically in
order to be able to conform.
Another type of deduction there
is the charitable entity
contribution deduction.
Um, net income also excludes the
following items. So in addition
to the to the itemized
deductions and standard
deduction. Um, it would, it
would exclude the personal
exemption, same as the federal.
Uh, it would exclude amounts
that the state is prohibited
from taxing under the
Constitution. So sometimes the
federal government can tax
things the states can't, uh,
just, this is just a nod to that
reality.
Um, and then that operating loss
is another thing, again, because
it's not that New Mexico doesn't
allow net operating loss.
It's just that they compute it
separately.
Um, and then taxable income
means net income, less a lump
sum amount, and that's not
something you really need to
worry about, but there it is, if
you are, are curious about that.
So that's the personal income
tax. That's how we get from the
federal numbers generally down
to the state numbers. Again,
there are other references to
the Internal Revenue Code
throughout the section of the
statutes on personal income tax.
So it's not that
this answers all the questions,
but that's, this is kind of
where we, where we start from.
And I apologize. I know base
income, net income, taxable
income, it all starts sounding
the same, but it's important
because it's how our laws
intersect with their laws and
how our definitions interact
with theirs. So it's, it's an
important thing. The page you're
looking at now is the corporate
income tax, very similar base
income equals federal taxable
income. These are New Mexico
definitions, base income.
equals net income combined if
it's a combined group, um.
A portion net income or loss
equals net income allocated in
apportioned and taxable income
or loss equals a portion of net
income or loss, um.
and we use other terms as well
And I do wanna, if I can,
Richard, I'm, uh, you, you,
before you get too far along,
um, I'm grateful that in these
presentations, there are
definitions, because it is a lot
of information that I think many
of us on this committee are
going to go back and look at,
because it is so complex. Um,
you all make it sound so easy.
Thank you, but it's a lot to
digest, and so, um, I'm, I'm
grateful that you're
you're being patient with us and
that that there's a lot of
information here, but it's stuff
that we can go back and refer
to. So that's what, so thank you
for that. And Madam Chair, we'll
move quickly for you. That's all
right because we know it's, it's
a lot to hear. It is a lot to
hear, um, and you know, and I
know that um that you are always
available for, for questions.
uh, this committee, you know, by
this point of the day, it might
be a little rough to, I'm, I'm
having to do active listening
because it's a lot of
information. So I, I do
appreciate it, but uh uh thank
you for your sensitivity on
that, and I'll let you continue,
Richard. Thank you.
Yeah, the next page is simply
the uh corporate income tax
version of the New Mexico Return
affectionately referred to as
the sit one, and you can see
where our taxable incomes before
NOL adjustments enters in on
line one. So that's, that's our
starting point on the Federal
return on our.
state return from the federal
return.
So same, same kind of process
here, and I'm not gonna dwell on
on this. It, it's a little
simpler corporate income tax is
a little simpler in terms of how
we can form, um, so not gonna
spend as much time on these.
Again, base income, that's an
important definition. So it
starts with federal taxable
income and then we make
adjustments to it.
Um, so you're gonna see those
adjustments on the next page.
We're gonna add some things to
that base income, including um
this this credit for uh the pass
through entity tax again where
we're not wanting to double
count that, so that was an
important piece that we added
recently.
Um, and then on the next page,
subtracting some things from
that income.
um, uh, some other, some
additional things from that
income.
that uh the, we're gonna make
that adjustment because the
policy is in New Mexico, uh, not
to include that in the tax base.
So that's what that means when
we're, when we're subtracting
this from base income, we're
saying this is something the
federal government includes in
the base.
and that we're not going to
include in the base. One of the
things you see here
is this income under section
951. We'll talk about that here
a little bit in a minute.
Um, base income also would
exclude um expenditures
uh again for, uh, the cannabis
production here in New Mexico.
So that's what that did, uh,
additional, um, exclusion
deductions for
that would not be allowed at the
federal level.
Um, and then net income means
base income, uh, and combined
now we use combined filing now
so of corporations that are part
of a unitary business, they file
a combined return.
um, and that's the important
distinction for net income. And
then, of course,
after that we apportion that net
income. So we can only tax a
portion of the corporate income
tax that's earned in New Mexico.
That's true of all businesses,
by the way, so whether it's a
pass through entity or
corporation, we use the same
rules of apportionment and
sourcing that we would use, uh,
if the business was a
corporation, um, but we
apportion the income and then
that becomes the taxable income
in New Mexico, so that's the
last term.
Yes
before what conformity means.
I'm sorry, my mic is a little
loud. Um,
and it means different things,
but, but in general, if, if the
Internal Revenue code changes,
uh, those changes are going to
affect our taxes, but with some
exceptions, and we're going to
get more into that. Some changes
may take effect immediately, um,
others may be deferred.
Interpretations of Internal
Revenue Code provisions by the
IRS or courts will also affect
state taxes
um
although it's unclear in the
future the effect of the
regulations and things of that
nature, uh, or the certainty of
their regulations.
The Internal Revenue Code
contains around 3 million words.
That's a lot.
And the IRS regulations have 3
times more than that.
So you could imagine it really
is a a fairly complex world in
this regard, but it is all
connected so that the provisions
within the Internal Revenue code
reference each other.
and it, it works out
well, it works out the way it
works out.
So what provisions are in the
OBBBA, uh, which was Public Law
1 1921. Um, according to
Bloomberg, they listed uh
changes by category,
approximately 120 repealed
extended or added. Those are
just the tax provisions, yeah,
just the tax provisions, and
then 31 credit provisions, but
as you can see on the slide
credit provisions do not affect
our tax base. All those
definitions that we ran through
with you before. Credits come
later on the Federal
Return and have zero impact on
our tax base. They could have
indirect effects on our economy.
You know, it could be a credit
that helps or hurts business and
has an indirect effect on tax
revenue as a result, but they do
not affect us, so you don't have
to worry about those. We are
focusing on the kinds of things
that do intersect with our tax
structure as opposed to more,
more of these indirect items.
But I should add, you can get
fairly exhausted lists of all
the changes in the OBBA if you
want to stay up reading,
Excuse me, from the Federation
of Tax Administrators, um, the
Tax Foundation, I think, uh.
uh tax Policy Center might have
something on that, right? And,
and you can the the um
Congressional Budget Office and
the Joint Committee on Taxation
at the federal level and the
congressional website also has
good information about the
provisions.
OK, so we're just, like I said,
focused on some of the more
important provisions here. We're
gonna go through these pretty
quickly. Uh, you've heard about
some of these, so the standard
deduction again in Mexico
conforms.
um, has been raised.
There's also a deduction for
seniors, um, the, the new
deduction that uh has a phase
out but applies to those uh in
the lower income brackets.
On the next page, um
the changes to Section 68. So
this is the Ps limitation,
sometimes called. This is a
restriction or a limitation on
itemized deductions.
That was changed and because we
conformed to itemized
deductions, so this affects
potentially New Mexico
um, the, again, the limitation
explicitly excludes this
qualified income deduction of
199A. So it's not affected by
this, so taxpayers that are
entitled to take that deduction
or limited under this PS
limitation.
It also doesn't affect the salt
deduction limitation that we'll
talk a little bit more about
here in a minute. It has its own
limitation, so it's not affected
by this.
On the next page, section 170P.
This makes um the charitable
deduction for non-itemisers
permanent.
um, it's in effect now, um, and
or the new limit or the new
maximum is that it takes effect
in 2026.
Um
section 164B. This is a cap.
This is the cap on the state and
local tax deduction.
So, um,
the deduction which was capped
in the TCJA in 2017.
has been raised from $10,000 per
uh for the individual uh filing
separately to $40,000 I think
that's filing separately.
Um, and
the um it's phased out for
higher income, uh, individuals
back down to the $10,000 limit.
Now, about this salt cap, um,
when this came into being so
the, so the federal government
is always allowed a deduction
for state and local taxes for
taxpayers computing their
federal tax.
So it's like an expense or
deduction that uh taxpayers get.
Uh, and that's been in place
since the federal government
enacted its income tax back in
the
30s and even before that when
they had temporary taxes before
that.
That, so they decided that that
was sort of like subsidizing the
states and especially the states
that have higher taxes. This is
both property and income tax,
um.
and they decided that, uh, they
didn't think they needed to do
that anymore and so they were
gonna stop allowing that
deduction.
This has an effect on taxpayers.
It doesn't have an effect
necessarily on state revenues or
state tax systems.
So, so the taxpayers within that
state can no longer deduct their
tax above this, above this
limit.
but the cap does not apply to
businesses, including
corporations and, and pastor
entities.
Um, so after Congress passed
this cap, a number of states
said, well, we're just going to,
in that case, impose the tax at
the entity level on the past due
entity.
Um, and so they'll pay the tax,
they'll get the deduction, the
partner of the patent or the
owner of the passivity will get
the benefit of that deduction
reduce the income that they have
to recognize
and then they'll get a credit
for the tax that they would have
owed, so we'll still compute the
tax that they would owe on that
income.
But since we're only gonna tax
at once, we'll give them a
credit for the tax that was paid
at the entity level.
Uh, so that's how the states
sort of reacted to that. That
was blessed by the IRS in
informal uh ruling, uh, there's
no indication that that Congress
is gonna back out of that. They
tried to um do some things that
looked like they were gonna
back, they were gonna say that
states could not
provide this
uh effectively workaround, uh,
to the salt cap, but they, they
didn't end up enacted.
Um, other important, uh,
provisions on the individual
side. It makes a permanent the
uh increase in the student loan.
uh payment
um, the, this is for employers
paying for student loans.
uh, the increase in that and the
amount that's available for
that, it increases the mortgage
interest deduction and makes it
available for certain kinds of
other um
um insurance premium, uh, parts
of the mortgage insurance uh
premium.
And um section 163H4 and 62 A
22. These are deductions for
interest on loans.
for the passenger vehicles that
are uh assembled in the United
States.
So, so this is a big deal, um,
of course, automakers are
interested in this because it
will incent people potentially
to buy US made autos. It's not
clear to what extent and to what
uh in.
how much of the automobile has
to be made and resembled in the
United States Assembly, uh, is
the word used.
Um, but those provisions go into
effect this year, so they're, so
they take effect for things that
are happening in 2025.
Um, Helen, excuse me, before
you, you go on, um, one of the
things that, and this is going
to be, I'll ask the question at
the end, but um you might wanna
uh
prepare for questions of what it
was before.
to what it is now, right, um,
and so that might be, that might
be something helpful in the
future on presentations is this
is what it was. This is what it
is now. Right. And I, and I
apologize for that, Madam Chair.
The, um, uh, so some of this has
been in effect.
So some of this was part of TCJA
and it just maintains it and,
and, and so, yeah, it's, it can
be a little fuzzy about, uh, to
what extent this changes
something that we're already
sort of dealing with. Um, that
credit for cars assembled in the
United States as an example of
something that's brand new, but
it also interestingly takes
effect
in the current year, which is
kind of unusual for some of
these provisions. Well, OK, so
then on uh the next page, uh,
the internal remedy code section
224 and 63B.
Um, so these are the, these are
the two provisions that have
gotten a lot of attention. This
is for tips and for overtime
compensation.
um, and again, this, uh, the
reason that the reference to 63B
is highlighted here is because
remember
we, in New Mexico conforms to
AGI and itemized deductions, but
under 60 under Section 63,
Section 63B says these are
non-itemized deductions.
So these are separately taken
deductions. So New Mexico would
not conform to these
automatically. These were
referred to previously as
deductions.
from EGI as opposed to 4 AGI
which aren't automatically
incorporated. Yes, right, right.
Well, these are, yeah, these are
things that you would normally
think of.
as we conform to because it's
itemized, except that it's not.
I mass deduction, so it's
specifically excluded from the
federal IMI deductions. Yeah.
Um, so for those provisions,
there's been a lot written about
those, how they work, how
they're gonna work, the effect
they're gonna have.
states are looking at the fiscal
impact of those things. Uh, but
what you need to know is that um
taxpayers in New Mexico would
not be entitled to these for
their state tax calculation, uh,
only for their federal tax
calculation.
Um, OK. And I, and that's
basically the next slide. So
then we're on.
some of the other individual
provisions. Yeah, this is not
inclusive list of some of the
repealed credits, which, as we
mentioned earlier, do not flow
onto the New Mexico State
return. So these would not
directly impact
Mexico's personal income tax
revenues, although indirectly
any
repeal or addition of a credit
might
have indirect effects, so we're
not trying to suggest that
that's not the case.
All right,
so now we're turning to the
important business provisions.
This will go a little quicker,
um, basically what the federal
government, the big thing that
the federal government did in
terms of these um business
provisions was acccelerate some
otherwise deductible expenses.
So you'll see this, this come up
in in a number of different
provisions that are included
here in this, in these slides.
but basically, these are things
that would have been deductible
at some point.
in the same amount, except that
they would be deductible over
time as depreciation expenses.
Now their deductible sooner,
either accelerated appreciation
or immediately when the um when
the things are purchased.
There's this interesting uh
provision here that might affect
New Mexico, and this is uh
section 142 of the Internal
Revenue Code, and this is for
Spaceports.
um, and the use of uh exempt
facility bonds. So these
provisions were expanded to
include spaceports, and again,
this takes effect immediately as
soon as the law was signed, um,
July 4th.
Then we've got important
business provisions in the next
page, the changes to IRC 163J.
This is a limitation on how much
interest expense can be deducted
by corporations. Congress was
concerned about how much
interest expense was being
deducted and whether it was
incenting companies to go out
and borrow money as opposed to
um get money from shareholders
and, and that sort of thing.
There are some, there are some
incentives to do that.
So limiting the deduction um was
done in 2017.
That deduction has been changed
somewhat. The base has been
raised for that limit, which may
affect the amount of the limit
for companies that are subject
to it.
Uh, it also changes the rules
for capitalizing interest
Uh, Section 168N. Uh, this
allows bonus depreciation, so
this is part of what I'm talking
about. So there are different
provisions that have this
effect.
One is this uh provision of 168
in
which allows the so-called bonus
depreciation for certain uh real
estate and, and its use.
Then on the next page, we've got
the deduction in 168K and, and
in section 66 460C.
These create the permanent, uh,
what are now permanent 100%
depreciation or immediate
expensing uh for certain
property.
Uh, taxpayers can also elect to
expense
40 to 60% bonus depreciation.
for qualified property. Again,
all of this starts in 2025, so
for this year, this tax year.
it might be worth adding that
when, when we're talking about
expensing and and bonus
depreciation, things like that.
Those affect your taxable income
in the current year, but it's,
it represents a timing
difference. So even though we
follow most of those provisions,
um, in New Mexico, it will
affect us in the first year of,
of its effect.
But anything you deduct in that
first year, you don't get to
deduct in subsequent years, and
that's why we call it a timing
difference, right? Um, so it, it
helps on one end, it doesn't
help on the other. So depending
on what your investment plan
looks like, you know, in some
cases, it may not even be
beneficial to you to, to get it
the first time around.
Right? And then, and it affects
states in a way. Well, I'll talk
a little bit, uh, briefly at
least about the effect that it
has on the states. So again,
even though it's a timing
difference
because states
apportion income over time.
it can, it can have an effect.
It's hard to predict, but it can
have an effect.
Um
on the next slide on section 168
N. this is again the bonus
depreciation, uh, just another,
uh, accelerated depreciation,
deduction.
Um, and then also
the immediate expensing under
Section 164e and 164A.
uh, also take effect in 2025. So
you're, you see this speeding up
of the deductions that are the
businesses are entitled to for
certain investments, certain
expenditures that would normally
be capitalized and depreciated
but are now being taken uh as
expenses in the current year.
So,
Richard mentioned, yeah, the
note, the no, I mean, so, so
it's a timing difference for
federal purposes, for tax
purposes.
But the other thing you need to
think about is, um, there are
two things that, that
affect this
uh, from a, from a policy
standpoint more broadly.
One is that it makes the tax
system or the revenue from the
system much more volatile.
So imagine if you're a company
that's gonna have to build a
huge plant and then, uh, you
know, all the equipment and the
operating machinery for that
plant.
And over time, it's gonna
produce over the next 20 years,
it's going to produce all these
products and you're gonna make
income from these products.
If you amortize those costs over
time, income is a lot more
stable.
Uh, the, the net income of that
company would be a lot more
stable, whereas if you expense
those things, you're gonna have
big losses in the first years.
and then you're gonna have
bigger income in the following
years.
So revenue is gonna go like
this, revenue from the tax is
gonna go like this.
The other thing you should keep
in mind, um, I think we
mentioned this, but um
is that
we again, income taxes are
reported on an annual basis.
and an annual period doesn't
always reflect the real business
cycle for a business.
but we also apportion income on
an annual basis. The states do.
So you can have a business
again.
during the first years when it's
generating losses.
doing that through facilities or
personnel or whatever in certain
states.
And then when it gets ready to
sell products, it's involved in
more states and it's got income.
And in those periods, it may be
apportioning the income
differently.
So because we apportion income
on a
annual basis, it may not always
match exactly what was done in
that state to generate that
income, which is the whole point
of apportionment, is to try and
match
the property and the payroll and
the sales in the state that are
generating that income with the
income that was generated.
Uh, so some of these provisions
that accelerate um the
expensing, uh, could potentially
have some of those kinds of
effects, very hard,
unfortunately, to predict.
OK, some of the last things
we're gonna talk about real
quickly are the changes in the
multinational entities and the
effect of these cha or for the
tax changes for multinational
entities.
Um
just background, real quickly,
um,
the federal rules, so I just
mentioned apportionment, that's
what how states divide up the
income of a multi-state
business.
At the Federal International
level, that's not the system
that they use.
Um
it uses instead the system
that's based on sourcing each
item of income based on the
nature of that income? Is it the
sale of property? Is it
interested interest income is it
some other kind of income source
it based on this rule, associate
direct expenses with that income
and then allocate the overhead
and the non-direct expenses to
those items.
And that's how you get the, the
income for um the all the
different jurisdictions in which
an international company may be
doing business.
That's a much harder system.
It's more complicated. Uh,
states have historically said,
this doesn't really work for us,
but we still conform to this
system.
Um, so,
part of what that means in
conforming to this system.
is that if an entity is a member
of a group that's conducting a
single business.
then
its income, uh, is not going to
be taxed here if it doesn't have
some presence here, so the
United States will impose tax on
on companies, entities that have
a significant presence here.
and because of that, we have
these intercompany transactions,
which have been a big issue for
the federal tax system and
internationally.
And in fact, the OECD has been
looking at this for the last
decade and saying, how do we
make this system work when we
know that these related parties,
these related corporations
are engaging in these
uh intercompany transactions,
and we don't know if those
transactions have economic
substance
We don't know if they're being
priced uh properly. Maybe
they're just being used to shift
income out of one taxing
jurisdiction into a more
favorable jurisdiction.
And with the rise of intangible
assets, you have even more
ability to do that.
Um
and it's, it's complicated. The,
the, the tax pricing rules,
international sourcing rules are
complex.
Um, you see lots of litigation
going on at the federal level.
Um, lots of very complex federal
litigation involving literally
billions of dollars of potential
tax base.
So Congress has long had some
special apportionment or special
for sourcing rules for certain
kinds of income called subpartF
income.
Um, it's first foray into this
saying we're going to source
this a little differently is uh
for investment income, so
there's a part of subpart F
income is investment income.
Uh, in New Mexico conforms to
that, so it's really hard to
source investment income, and
instead of using the rules or uh
that the federal government
traditionally used or
apportionment, which you're
gonna conform to the federal
treatment under subpart F.
Um
but
again, states have always looked
at this as fairly unworkable.
Um, and Congress sort of started
to come around to this idea that
maybe this system is not working
very well.
Maybe the ability to source
income when you've got related
entities, not all of which are
reporting as a part of a
combined group.
or you've got all kinds of
things going on internationally.
There are hard to sources.
Maybe that's just not the
greatest system. So in the tax
cuts and Jobs Act, they enacted
provisions to try and start kind
of ringing this back in, and
there's a number of different
things that they did.
Um, but one of the things that
they decided to do was to create
a car uh category of income
called global intangible
low-taxed income or guilty.
And yes, they gave it that name
for a reason, so yes, they were,
they were trying to make a
point. So they, so they said
this is a category of income
that the way it was computed was
to say this is excess profit
over and above any kind of
tangible or real property that
you might have in this foreign
jurisdiction. So we're gonna say
that that was really created by
domestic activities for domestic
parents.
and you're using intangibles to
shift that income, uh, and so
we're gonna include that
category of income in the base.
Now this has been amended by the
most recent federal legislation.
and this new federal legislation
now calls this guilty income.
uh net CFC tested income or
NCTI. It's computed on a much
broader base. So this is a much
broader base. It's not limited
to excess profit on certain
assets.
So it's a broader base
uh, but there's also a deduction
for it.
uh, in the old PCJA version. It
was a 50% deduction in the new
uh most recent edition, it is a
40% deduction, but that
deduction is computed on the
same broad base.
So the base got broadened
The deduction got lessened a
little bit.
but there is also a foreign tax
credit that got increased
So to the extent that the that
the taxpayer can show at the
federal level, we pay tax in
another jurisdiction.
The federal government will give
her credit. States don't conform
typically to these federal
foreign tax credits.
In addition to those provisions,
though, we also have this thing
called the base erosion and
anti-abuse Tax.
beat, which is a separate
provision, it's a separate tax.
Um, this is really not part of
the income tax that we're
talking about, but this was part
of the strategy, uh, that the
federal government wanted to use
to try and again shut down some
of this uh international income
shift. So there's more
information on that there.
Um
and I will say the, the one
other thing that we don't cover
here is the corporate
alternative minimum tax.
That's also a new tax, uh, went
into effect, I think.
last year
Um
but it's unclear to what extent
it's going to um
now sort of
affect these other, these other
changes. So you've got
international, multinational
entities saying we've got to
look at how this affects all of
these different federal tax
provisions as well as our
international taxes.
uh, in determining how we think,
uh, you know, we're gonna do our
business.
Have we seen significant
information saying that
companies are going to shift
because of these provisions, how
they do their business or where
they do their business, not so
far, at least in my opinion,
we've not seen
information that, uh, that kind
of
um addresses that.
Couple of things that we're not
in the bill just real quick.
Um
there was some, again, some
thought that Congress might try
to shut down these pass through
entity taxes, their workarounds
for the salt deduction cap.
Those did not uh get enacted.
There was also a push to
preempt to broaden the
preemption.
uh under a law that was passed
in 1959, um, that didn't get
enacted.
And uh there were also, um,
some, there's been a lot of talk
about
um, I don't know, reforming, I
guess it's probably the, the
best word. The way in which the
federal government and most
states
tax partnership income.
Partnership incomes taxed on
pass-through basis. It's very
complicated.
Uh, the rules in, uh, the in the
Internal Revenue code are not
sufficient to really handle some
of the new
things that are going on in this
area. That's been talked about a
lot, but none of that was
included in the bill.
Um, and just a few other things
real quick, and then
Richard, anything you wanna say
also at this point.
Um
we're watching the effect that
this new private economy is
having so it used to be that the
big companies and the big
businesses were publicly traded,
not so much anymore. There are
fewer publicly traded companies,
many more really large private
companies that are not going to
go public for a whole host of
reasons.
Um, that changes how they're
taxed. It also changes what we
know about those businesses.
digital assets and
cryptocurrency are a big deal.
Feds are still looking at that.
Um, lots of litigation going on
at the IRS. Lots of people
saying, hey, we need regulations
explaining how all this is gonna
work. Uh, but with a shrinking
iris work workforce. It's not
clear, um.
uh, how quickly they're gonna be
able to address some of these
things. And on that point, um,
you know, Richard and I both
started out our careers at the,
well, for the most part at the
Taxation revenue Department.
here in New Mexico
And um so we appreciate the jobs
that tax administrators have,
and we've also both been
practitioners. So we also
appreciate the work that
practitioners do. Tax
administration it's not just
done by governments, it's also
done by taxpayers and, and
practitioners.
Um
but with not having a government
organization that can respond to
taxpayers or practitioners and
give them answers.
This is a really important
thing, and I think it can get
overlooked in the details of
some of the rules and the
changes that Congress can
affect.
the fact that maybe the IRS is
not gonna be able to respond to
some of the stuff.
Maybe they're not gonna have the
personnel or the resources. I
don't know what you think about
that, Richard.
Well.
I think throughout my entire
career I've seen
people loving to hate on our tax
authorities, whether it's state
or federal, and who can blame
them sometimes? I've seen them
up to bad behavior myself in the
past, but it used to be, um, it
didn't matter what side of the
aisle you were on, you didn't
like the tax collectors, and,
you know, it, it's, it's an
important job that no one wants
to do it.
And I think it's important to
recognize the weaknesses that
we're experiencing like at the
federal level they've honestly
been going downhill for 20
years.
It's just kind of accelerating,
but we rely on them a great
deal. Secretary Chardon Clark,
um, who I think a great deal of,
you know, her, her agency relies
on the, on the data that they
get from them to do their jobs.
And since I get a W-2 and given
the work that I do and I can't
cheat on my taxes. I really
don't want anyone else to be
able to either. So when you say
don't audit rich people, don't
audit poor people, anyone that's
cheating, go audit them and make
them, you know, pay their bills
just like everybody else. That's
I don't expect any more or less,
you know, but that's
of course, maybe if I were
different and in a position to
get away with something, I might
feel differently about it. Um,
the other thing I did want to
mention though, um,
were probably to repeat.
this is not all encompassing.
You can get detailed lists,
especially the stuff that would
have nothing to do with New
Mexico. There's a few other
aberrations, you know, we
focused on the income tax code,
personal and corporate.
But for instance, royalties on
federal lands are falling.
We still get a little less than
half of that, and it's a direct
re general fund revenue source.
So we are going to see a
decrease in revenues in that
line item, maybe Izzy can tell
you how much, I'm not sure. Um,
but we'll definitely see a
decrease at the same time, maybe
the lower rates will encourage
more activity on our side of the
the border with Texas
I do the same thing on state
land offices because of that
differential. Will that make up
for the direct loss of revenue?
Probably not, but it's, so
things to think about and
with that, unless you have more
comments, we'll, we'll turn it
over for questions, Madam Chair.
for questions. Um, I appreciate
that a great deal. Um, I, I do
wanna make a comment and then
I'll go to the, the committee.
Um, I do feel that we're kind of
a little fatigued because that's
so much information and I'm kind
of feeling it. I don't know if
I'm just projecting or not, but
I'm, I'm having, am I
projecting? I'm having the
active listen, but also it's,
it's a lot of information. And I
think one of the reasons that,
you know, it was so important
for us to hear from you today
is to see really how we are
going to have to respond.
as legislators to what is, how
it's going to impact our
communities. And I think
ultimately that's, you know,
kind of some of the things. And
so, as I pointed out, Helen
about, you know, what was it
before and what was it, uh, you
know, like the nonprofit
charitable, the, the donations
that are 1000. What was that
before? And how is that going to
impact the nonprofits that are
doing things in our communities
and their donations
Um, so I think those are, those
are some of the, the questions
that you might get from this
committee. Um, so at this point
if there are folks who would
like to ask questions.
Um, OK, Representative Terazas,
would you go first?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Um, quick question, um, thank
you, by the way, for the
presentation. I know people are
tired and so forth, but uh,
on page, I don't know if there's
a page here.
Your changes on uh IRC code
163J.
It never mentions the max, what
is that max deduct deduction,
excuse me.
What's the actual dollar figure.
There's J I'm sorry, I see a
page from its cause there aren't
page numbers on here, yeah,
that's OK. I, I totally
apologize for that when we
changed it says important
business provisions on the,
that's the page that says it on
the left and then there's two
programs here in 63163J and
168M. Yes.
I'm sorry. Um,
Madam Chairpresentative, what
was your question, Madam Chair,
uh, madam, thank you for your
presentation again. What is the
max deduction on that those
changes, what was it before and
what is it? I think that's a
good question, but what is the
maximum on that? S1 63 J. Right,
so on that provision,
specifically, uh, uh, it's got,
it's got a couple of moving
parts. So again, part of the
reason it's hard to say is it
depends. So the way it's cal
cul ated has been changed to
broaden the base.
Mm.
I'm sorry
Let me see it again. It's been
changed to Bro the base. Um
which will increase the
deduction, is that correct? Yes,
exactly. So that increases the
limit, yes, exactly. Now,
how it affects a particular
taxpayer will depend on the kind
of uh borrowing they do and the
kind of interests that they
have, um, but yes, uh, I, I
would expect that it will
increase the amount of uh
deduction for that interest, and
it also affects uh
capitalized interests, so the
rules for capitalizing the
interest will also affect the
deduction that you can take for
good. So it's expanded. Uh,
second, um, we'll just go down
to the next paragraph.
168 and 12:45 a.
3G
I see that they're gonna have a
100% bonus depreciation. I'm
trying to understand this. To
get your normal depreciation.
and then you get an additional
100%,
I'm sorry, I understand that,
OK, good, good question, ma'am
I'm sure representative, when
they talk about bonus
depreciation, it's usually a
percentage like an uh an an
additional amount, but this just
means you get to deduct 100%.
They just it's a term that they
use bonus depreciation, and
Madam Chair, uh,
Madam, I'm sorry I didn't get I
should be calling you by your
name.
Um
you can call me goddess if you
want.
Sorry, man we're so sweet. Thank
you,
is it heck?
Hecht is he OK, heck, Mrs. Heck,
thank you. I totally stumped you
on that, didn't I? Did I catch
you off guards representative? I
get that at home. I got women,
you know, I've got 3 daughters.
You're a smart man and my and my
wife, so I, I got to do a, do a
lot of that.
So, quick question, I see
agriculture there
on bonus depreciation, um, and
so my question is,
being that cannabis is not
legal, do they accept that as a
depreci a, excuse me, as, as
does, do they, can they get that
depreciation?
That is, that is a terrific
question, uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Abre, the, um, I would say that,
um, this is a, so again, this
happens where you've got one
provision that feeds into
another provision that feeds
into another provision.
So the expense provision that
limits the ability of businesses
to deduct expenses related to
illegal drugs is
encompassing, and so I think,
and again, you'd have to you
don't, don't quote me on this,
but I think that to the extent
that the provision itself is
encompassed within that
limitation, and we don't follow
that limitation, we would allow
it.
You would through the state but
not New Mexico would but federal
but not noted do not. Yes, yes,
I just wanted to clarify that
and, and, and Madam Chair, the
other thing is I was looking at,
I'm just gonna keep moving quick
because I, I know everybody's
tired. No, that's OK. I, I think
that obviously the state will do
it from the way I would
understand it, they'll allow
that deduction, but I don't see
it happening federally. And I'm
only talking about cannabis, not
because I have a farm or
anything like that, but because
those are things that are
affecting New Mexico, Madam
Chair, uh, also the following
page you have an extension here
IRC uh uh 168K.
or 60C6B
and
I'd like this, let me make sure
I've got the.
OK, on this one
this is all pro-business. It's
all pro business, um.
when, when I see permanent 100%
depreciation, does that mean
that when you sell that, you
don't have to recapture
anything.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, that is a great
question. Um,
yes, I think that's what it
means. Uh, I mean, I think it's
treated for this purpose, not as
not as accelerated depreciation,
but as, as an expense, so yes,
yes, you get from the way I'm
understanding it is, you don't
have to recapture it later on if
you sell it. So you, you can
take the, the it wouldn't be
subject to the recap, Madam
Chair, does that mean we, when
we take the depreciation, let me
read it first.
Usually furniture, machinery and
so forth is, is, is a short-term
um
depreciation
and that being said,
you can take the 100% or you can
do it over 5 years. Is that
right, Madam Chair?
I just wanna make sure. And
then, uh, the following page
it's another bonus depreciation
and that's what just kind of
threw me off. I, I don't
remember ever seeing the word
bonus depreciation and it keeps
making me think that, is there
more than
OK.
So those are my questions, Madam
Chair. I don't want to get into
everything real deeply yet.
I did this a long time ago in
college, all right. Thank you.
I appreciate that,
Representative. Thank you so
much. Um, Senator Bergman, did
you have?
questions? I know, is there, if
there's anybody else on the
committee, just go ahead and
make eye contact with me and
that's all.
Um, if you want to go ahead and
speak, but Senator Berkman, is
she ready to go? So
Representative Duncan is looking
at me though, so my detecting
No
You've heard this? OK.
All right. Senator Berkman,
thank you, Madam Chair. My
questions actually are about the
exact same section as
Representative Tadasis, um, but
I have a smaller, a lower level
understanding, I think of how it
works than he did, um, this is
purely all federal.
correct? And do we, does the
state match this part? Like,
will these changes affect the
state revenue or is it purely
federal in these sections. Now
this, this will affect the
states, yes, and this will
affect the but but it'll be
timing differences as we were
discussing because the
recognition of that expense will
be shifted. It won't go away, so
it's not an exemption per se.
Right. And that timing is thank
you, Madam Chair, that timing is
still hard to predict.
Uh, yes, madam Chair, uh,
Senator, the, um, the, the
problem is depending on what
kind of property it is, it may
be subject to immediate
expensing, but it would have
been subject to five-year or
10-year or 20-year depreciation.
So it's hard to to know.
you know, there are some, there,
there are, there is some data on
the kinds of property purchased
in general by different
industries and you can tell
based on the type of type of
property
over what period it would
normally have been depreciated.
Um, but the, of course, the
federal government is doing this
with the idea in mind that this
will incent additional
investment. So how do you factor
that into that kind of thought,
yeah.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Tadasso asked the
rest of them, so.
Sure, Representative Terasas, go
ahead and follow up.
more
I'm sure I have one more Steen
and
with all what I'm reading
and I was gonna ask someone else
to do it on my way out, think
about 10 glasses of water, but
in those pages, what I, what I
did like about all that.
is I want our, our committed to
recognize
all of those are pro-business,
pro reinvestment in, in America.
Um, legislation.
It
the way I'm reading this
is it, it encourages people that
have manufacturing and other
agricultural things, and I'll,
I'll, I know it well because I,
in my area, I see all the egg
that comes in.
uh from the southern border
coming across. Lines and lines
of semi going through um the
corridor there coming out of
Columbus or the Puerto, uh, um
the port there. OK, port of
entry there, all the way through
Columbus through Hatch and then
coming up north or whatever.
And this would help us with ag
to help those people reinvest in
their farms.
reinvest in manufacturing here
in all sorts of ways that we've
lost to other countries. So I
think this is a great
uh advantage to
America, period, in, in the way
I'm reading it. Would, do you
have any comments on that?
Um
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Terrazas, um, I think it's a,
there's a very good chance that
could be the case.
But I think it depends on the
proposal and the provision,
because this is a big basket of
them, and some of them from a
pro-growth pers perspective,
make more sense than others. So
some provisions may very well
encourage some activity, other
provisions, you know, maybe not
as much, uh, whether they pay
for themselves, you know,
becomes the question, that sort
of thing, and that's always a
tough question with tax.
But I think it, you know, it's,
it's extending TCJA did
eliminate the disruption that
was anticipated by having it
revert back to prior law and the
associated increases that go
along with that.
And I would say in general, uh
did you go ahead, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative, one
thing I would also say is the
immediate expensing for research
and development expenses, um,
that that is also uh an
incentive for a lot of
businesses that don't invest
necessarily in in a hard assets.
So, Madam Chair, I think what I
wanna do is explain to the
committee in just general, when
you see a permanent depreciation
for immediate expensing.
For those people that don't,
don't, that means I can go over
there and I can build
I can purchase and furnish and
so forth.
that that particular deal, and
uh, and I can take 100% of what
I spent and depreciate it rather
than over a twenty-year period.
That's a huge, huge deal.
for people that don't, you know,
in business, that's, that's
hiccup, that's a gift that's
humongous. So you go and you
build whatever, you get to
expense it off your taxes. You
can carry that over to, so you
can basically um uh I don't
wanna use a
you can offset your tax.
um, your taxes.
where you can reinvest that
money and keep growing.
for any person that understands
business. It's not just
you know, people sometimes, we,
we tend to look at, oh well, the
business is gonna benefit.
Actually, I think we'll all
benefit because it brings
commerce
it brings jobs
and it brings investment and
re-energizing our, our
manufacturing and our um
our agriculture, I would say
that, Madam Chair,
that is very new
but I can assure you any
businessman.
I mean, any businessman that
wants to take advantage of this,
this is enormous, and it's just
passed, it was just passed on
July 4th. So you're not seeing
the, the effects now, but I can
assure you, we look back at this
in one year, you're gonna see a
lot of people going, man, I can
build a whole new plant that I
can do this, and I can do that,
and completely
permanently depreciate it and
not recapture it. So if you know
anything about taxes,
you have to recapture that when
you sell.
There's no, there's no
recapturing, which is a
humongous gift. That's all I'd
like to say. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much,
Representative. Any other
questions or comments before we,
uh, let these folks go.
All right. Thank you very much.
You caught us after lunch and
you caught us after a very heavy
numbers morning, so I appreciate
that.
Um, remarkably, committee, we
are, we are, uh, roughly 35
minutes ahead of time. And then,
yes.
um, if you want, um, Secretary
CERNA is gonna be up here. He's
used to you asking him
questions. Um, we're gonna
finish off our, our last
presentation, um, really about
the state road fund revenue
sources, uh, you know, and I,
and as, as uh Secretary Cernan
and his crew come up, uh, you
know, I, I'd always hear secret
Senator Munoz talk about I-40
and the road out to Gallop in
Farmington and, and how there
was some desperate need, and I
know uh Representative Montoya
knows this as well, and it
wasn't until one of our
committee meetings was up in
Gallup in that area, and I was
like, I totally get what he's
talking about and how important
it is that we are able to help
because not only does I-40 serve
as a major corridor for import
export of our state, um, is such
a thoroughfare, but we've also
got I-25 and we've got I-10, and
all sorts of stuff. So, um,
Secretary Serna from the
Department of Transportation. I
know you also have Michael
Morrison, who is your chief
econom
ist
Uh, so we're grateful that
you're here today and uh I'll
let you go ahead and start.
Great. Thank you, um, you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
remarkable early.
That's good. Sorry, we're a
little flustered. We just, uh,
we headed over as quickly as
possible. And so, thank you so
much for doing that. We kind of
saw it was going to happen, so I
wanted to make sure. And so you
all members have this
presentation and then Michael
and I will just uh kind of
bounce back and forth, um, off
one another, um, and then we
look forward to any questions
you might have.
As you'll see on the first slide
here, um, the, the, the vision
and mission for the agency, just
kind of a quick by the numbers,
2500 employees, uh, right now
we're operating with a $1.3
Have 77 active projects to only
$1.4 billion and then you'll
kind of see uh what we're
working with in terms of um
uh footprint. I do want to share
going back to some of the
numbers that something that
we're discussing on a regular
basis, um, to manage better as
an organization and agency is
that first number, the 2500
employees. At this point, we've
gone from a vacancy rate of 19%
just a few years ago to 14%. Our
payroll costs, including
overtime, is about quarter of a
billion dollars, $250 million a
year.
And in a little bit, you're
going to see that the sum of our
state road fund distributions is
just about half a billion
dollars, which means that half
of our state road fund is going
toward
agency personnel related costs,
right? And the state road fund
is the primary fund for overall
agency operations, and so half
of it, right, is, is going just
to, just to payroll. And because
the Department of Transportation
doesn't receive any recurring
general fund that will continue
to be a taxing measure for the
state road fund. On slide 3, I'm
going back to um Madam Chair's
comments about the need.
Every single year we partner
with the Associated Contractors
of New Mexico. And they partner
with an organization that
provides a trip report that
essentially captures a couple of
meaningful metrics. One of them
is pavement road overall road
conditions. The other is bridge
conditions, but two important
numbers is the gap between what
revenue we have presently and
what revenue we would need to
essentially address all of the,
uh, poor bridge and pavement
conditions, um, in the state
existing.
And um then the second number
is, what does it cost New
Mexicans as a as a as a
consequence of not having good
pavement, and so that gap in
funding needed for uh
transportation projects is $5.6
billion and the annual cost to
New Mexicans as a result of us
not being able to shore that up
is 3.6 billion annually. That's
vehicle operating costs, safety
costs, and congestion costs. And
that's real dollars, right? I
mean, we, we got video just a
little bit ago about I-2
5 northbound. There's a vehicle
fire on, on the right of way and
everybody's at a standstill.
That's commerce, right? That's
UPS trucks, that's FedEx trucks,
and that's how those things um
surmount over time. And so, um,
we present that trip report. It
typically is 2 weeks into this,
to the legislative session
annually and we start with
distribution of that to the
House Transportation. Um.
Slide 4, our budget is, um, at a
glance, pretty simple in that it
comes pretty much 50/50 from our
uh state road fund tax
distributions to our federal uh
apportionment. And so if you'll
see on this table right over
here, um, going back to FY 13,
we do see gains in overall um
federal apportionment,
proportionate to state road fund
distributions, but you'll see
here that about 550 million of
that is coming
from the State Road Fund. That's
how I arrive at almost half is
being used on personnel-related
costs, and another 558 is coming
from our federal apportionment,
right? And so that's federal
highway distribution dollars
directly to DOT, not just for
roadway construction, but for
some other programs that are
determined mostly by the uh
federal infrastructure bill,
right? So right now we're
working with BIL and that bill
is said to be reauthorized in
about a year. And so we're
working with uh our counterparts
across the country
other secretaries and, and
executive directors of
transportation to work with our
congressional delegation to
start chiming in on what do we
want the new transportation bill
to look like, right? And um we,
of course, uh, you know,
received a tremendous amount of
new funding uh from BIL, but a
lot of that attach was attached
to a lot of new programs. And a
lot of that was also attached to
federal grants, meaning that as
BIL increased revenue to support
a lot
of states, they also increased
opportunities for local
governments to go after federal
grants, and that kind of created
a, a pool of competition for us,
and there were instances over
the past few years where us in a
municipality applied for the
same grant in the municipality,
got it.
And that's OK, but I think what
we learned is that on the front
end of BIL we realized that
there was going to be increased
investments in transportation,
but there were two things that
came with that. One, increased
program and 2 was the need to go
and get that in a competitive
environment. So this is just a
summary of our $1.3 billion
dollar budget.
On page 5
we're gonna break down that
state apportionment for you all,
um, and, and this is important
because uh much like every other
state in the nation, um, New
Mexico Department of
Transportation is funded, at
least at a statewide level, with
what you can describe as road
user fees. These are all fees
that essentially impact not just
New Mexicans, but visitors to
the state that essentially need
to utilize our roadway systems,
including um the extent to which
they put gasoline in their
vehicles. But you'll see this
$558 million is broken down
primarily into four major
buckets are gasoline tax or fuel
tax, special fuel tax, or
diesel, we distance tax and then
bringing in forth his vehicle
registration fees.
The um motor vehicle excise tax
as you'll see here um on the
right-hand side is uh.
about $61 million which lags
behind vehicle registration fees
by about 25 million. And so you
all might maybe call and we'll
talk a little bit more about
that. We've, uh, entertained and
long discussed the number of
measures to, to move these
levers in in the right in a way
to generate revenue for DOT. And
so we've always, of course,
positioned our opinion that if
you want small increases to road
users, you increase the largest
reven
ue generating fees, right?
Instead of going down here to
this other sources of 31 million
to generate an additional 60
million, right? You would have
to double those fees, right?
Whereas if you go to gasoline
tax,
to generate another 60 million
would be, you know, about a 10%
increase. So those are the
things that we've, um, we've
looked at
on slide 6,
we don't want to shortchange you
all with a whole lot of credit
for the revenue that we receive
at the Department of
Transportation. And so going
back to 2019, the legislature
and the governor have supported
DOT to the tune of about $2.3
billion through 2025, OK? And
so, um, what does that mean?
That when the state saw that it
had enough revenue non-recurring
to
support infrastructure and many
other initiatives, uh, uh, in
partnership with the executive,
the Department of Transportation
became a big priority. And so
going back to 2019, through um
really a couple of measures,
mostly a special section 9 in
the back of House Bill 2, we've
been receiving one-time
appropriations for a number of
things, and they're here on this
table from maintenance to
construction, the transportation
project fund is a local
government infrastructure grant
program that we manage, Avi
ation is a combination of
capital improvements for
municipal owned airports and
support for our rural air
service program, wildlife
corridors, later beautification,
the purchase of heavy equipment.
to sport ports of entry, uh, our
rest areas, and then, of course,
the, the um we've received um
about $10 billion through 2024
in electric vehicle charging
stations. Well, one of the
discussion points over the
course of this session when the
budget is being developed is to
what extent is DOT exhausting
these resources, right? Because
it stands to reason that you
don't want to keep investing in
us if we're not spending that
money. And so this table shows
you here going back from 2
019 through 2024, we've received
2.1 billion in just those years,
and we have expended 97%
expended and or obligated that
funding.
And so
what we also received in 2025
was an additional 189 million,
and that money only became
available a couple of weeks ago,
right? So we did roll it up into
the table, but one thing to
point out, um, of the 189.5
million last year as it did for
the very first time, going back
to 2019, include any revenue for
construction, OK? And so, um,
again, going back to um some
things that we'll talk about in
a little bit or going forward to
some things we've talked
about in a little bit. That's
typical for us understanding the
rising costs of doing business
in this industry and, and what
that means for the industry, us,
and for New Mexicans. And so
we've been really pleased to
report out regularly as a
talking point that we spend
about $110 million a month at
the Department of
Transportation. So we're uh um
we're, we're a fast-moving train
and um to be sure, uh, we
believe we have capacity to do
more and so do our contractors.
And so,
I'm gonna turn it over to uh Mr.
Morrison, and he'll pick it up
on slide 7.
Good afternoon, uh,
as you said I Michael Marston,
and we have um 57, the uh
short run forecast for the state
road fund to look at line 21 at
the bottom, that'll be the
total.
for about the ordinary and
extraordinary incomes and we'll
see that in uh
up by 25, we did see an increase
of about or forecasted increase
of about 30 million. Um, that is
gonna remain relatively flat
going into the FY 26, uh, a
small decrease, but more or less
flat. And then uh
we, we'll see growth again in FY
27 at 570 million and uh growth
throughout uh the out years up
until about 5:30 when our
forecast ends.
and that would be a
um, not quite
um the next slide we're looking
at, um.
by 8, we have the long-run
forecast, and this is just
showing uh first or top.
revenue streams in the long
range forecast to see that um
I think you may have seen
versions of this in the past
where we have uh
our motor fuel tax revenues,
special fuel or diesel tax, and
gasoline tax both.
increasing up until around 2030.
see that the revenues decline.
The reason for that initially is
going to be or we expect to be
with um
increases in fuel efficiency,
not
alternative fuel vehicles, but
more uh just
vehicles getting more and more
efficient with their gasoline,
that's resulting in fewer trips
to the uh pump, and that's uh
starting to hurt us. We expect
the weight distance and vehicle
registration to show slow but
steady growth vehicle
registration growth is uh pretty
closely tied to population
growth within the state.
Michael, before you go on, if I
can, Ricky, if you're Mike is
on, can you turn it off cause
I'm being told that it's, um,
they're kind of cutting each
other out on the webcast. So
yours is off. OK, great. Thank
you so much. I guess it's just
me.
That's all right.
If you go to the next slide and
we'll show the total state road
fund forecast, uh, in nominal
terms, and we'll see that that,
looking at a um about a 13%
decline in uh
the state road fund uh between
now and 2050.
And we're looking at that
decline going forward. We did, I
did have a, a note that there is
a rather large increase, um,
between 2019, 2022. That was
from the increase in motor
vehicle excise tax distributions
that occurred.
Um, but this is only part of the
story when we go out in the
forecast as far out as 2050. You
also need to consider inflation.
So if we look at
the next slide, that'd be um
slide 10, we'll see the state
road Fund forecast that is
accounting for inflation, and
once inflation forecasts are
taken into account, we're
looking at about a 50% decline
in state road fund revenues.
That is combined with uh
forecasts from S&P Global of
136% increase in the costs of
road construction. We have kind
of
running into problems coming and
going, I guess.
Um,
the stinging just a little bit
on slide 10, something to look
at here, this inverse
relationship between the State
Road Fund long forecast and what
it's going to cost to do, um,
construction.
If you go back to 2003, the
Federal Highway Administration
started indexing the cost of
construction in the, in the
state, uh, in the, in the nation
rather. So it was simple for
them to essentially use the data
at that time to index road
construction at a million
dollars a mile or an index of
1.0.
Today that index is 3.16,
meaning that um the cost over
that 22 year period has
multiplied by 3. And so right
now, roadway construction is a
road new roadway construction is
about $3 million a mile.
And uh as I explained this
morning as we were celebrating
the, you know, groundbreaking
over at Los Luna is, and that's
when you own the property,
that's when it's pretty level
and it's ready for construction
and doesn't include a whole lot
of rightaway acquisition,
bridges, interchanges, and other
types of structures that can
only increase that cost, um, per
mile.
So I'm going to slide 11.
I want to preface this a little
bit because we stole it actually
from a presentation that I
believe was given to this
committee a couple of years ago.
and what um what the presenter
was essentially doing is what we
were asked to do, which is,
well, how does other, how do
other states operate, right? We
know how New Mexico DOT is
generating its revenue and uh we
want to know how other states
are doing it to leverage what
expertise, you know, they've
been, they've injected into the
process, right? And so we saw
this presentation along with uh
you all and we're looking at um
what states are doing anything
differently, and so what we
decided to do was launch a task
force
over last interim and ask the
questions. One is, what are
other states doing that, that
might work in New Mexico, and 2
is, now that we have some
breathing room and it's not in
the midst of the, the session,
uh, and, and we're not just
churning around the um FIRs, you
know, on, on a 24 hour period.
The second question we asked
was, well, what is New Mexico
considered thus far, and when we
take a step back and really
dissect it, does it make sense?
OK. And I'll give you some
examples of that in just a
little bit. So
we, we pulled this group
together. It's called the
Sustainable Transportation
Infrastructure revenue Task
Force, and we pulled together a
number of stakeholders, um,
including some national policy
experts from the Association of
State Transportation officials.
and we borrowed expertise from
other states who have done like
kinds of assessments brought in
contractors, we brought in tax
and rev and it was a good group
of people. And we set out to
answer those two questions,
right? And
and so I'll answer uh both of
them for you now.
What are the other states doing
that um New Mexico could be
doing differently, uh, and the
answer in a nutshell is not a
whole lot.
OK? And if you recall that
presentation, um, it, it, it's
kind of substantiated that for
us. So if you look at slide 11,
you'll see, right, what, to what
extent motor fuel taxes, both
fuel and diesel fuel.
the role that it's playing in
overall transportation funding
across the nation, right? We're
not even the highest. If you go
to our neighbor like Colorado,
almost 60%, OK, of their
transportation construction
revenue is being generated by
some sort of fuel tank.
OK? And you'll see throughout
the presentation, Mr. Morrison
will share with you is that, you
know, they're gonna fall in
line, right, with motor vehicle
excise tax as well, and some
form of weight distance tax,
whether it's by mile and pound
or load weight or by a robust
registration, uh, for truckers
in the state, but so the, the
good and bad finding to that
first question was it's good
that we haven't missed the boat,
right? That somebody isn't doing
something that we haven't been
doing.
better. But the bad side of it
is, well, not a whole lot of
stuff we can rip off from
people, right? So that was the
downside. The second thing was
we, the second question, of
course, is, what are some of the
things that have been
considered, that we're looking
at.
And do they make sense? And
should we continue to spin our
wheels by introducing pieces of
legislation on matters that
sound really good, but when you
really dive into them, may not
be as clean as we thought, and
I'll give you an example of one.
And it's the Transportation
Trust Fund, right? The idea of
uh what we did, you guys, and
the executive with the early
childhood early Care Trust Fund,
right? And so that was one of
the questions that we kind of
asked in the context of um what
has been tossed around
and what might not work in Rose,
what we saw what happened to the
early childcare Trust Fund,
right? It started with $50 and
now it has like a jillion
dollars.
That's kind of the perception of
it, right? Can we replicate
that? Well, there are some
things that go on there that
fundamentally you'd have to
replicate here too, which is
where are you going to feed a
revenue on a regular basis,
right? And that trust and that
early childcare trust fund has
revenues feeding it, right? And
so similar to
what we got is, if we were to
just establish a billion dollars
of a trust fund, right? Invest
the heck out of it. Take 5% out
of the average annual earnings
every single year in perpetuity
so that we never touch the
corpus, right? Well, you'll find
is that's not enough money to
keep DOT running, right? We'll
have a billion dollars stuck
there. Nobody will touch it.
They'll get something like $25
million every single year to do
something with it. We won't have
the billion dollars and then
every time they come and ask us
for money, well we'll tell them
is we already gave you a billion
dollars, and we said thanks for
the 25 million. We'll see what
we can do at $3 a mile, pick
your 7 miles.
And so those are the discussions
we had, right? So that when we
do these FIRs during the quick
and 24 hour turnaround, we can
tell you we kind of thought
about it. And we did this for a
number of different measures,
right? Like do tolls work in New
Mexico? How does that work? You
have some states that rolled out
um programs like delivery
surcharge. Colorado was one.
They said, OK, any third party
delivery surcharge from Amazon
or from that comes through UPS,
Walmart, everything with the
exception of like food and
medicine and other essential
things.
We're gonna tack on a surcharge.
And it was great because
Colorado said in Minnesota said
it's working for us, it's
generating $62 million in new
money a year. And again, they
said, that's not enough to build
roads, but you know what it
serves as for those two states.
debt service
which means that they went out
and said, we're just gonna
borrow like $3 billion.
and that's 68 million, that's
going to pay for half of our
debt service.
And so those are the things that
we got to explore over a period
of time. And so, in a nutshell,
reporting out to the committee's
request is, what are other
states doing? Well, either they
copied us or we copied them.
right
And some of the creative
innovations that they're coming
up with are surely generating
enough revenue.
to support debt service
initiatives, bonding, borrowing,
and the like.
So on slide 12, OK, uh, Michael
talked a little bit about what
are um fuel efficient vehicles
doing to the state road fund
because there's been a lot of
ongoing discussion about the
extent to which electric
vehicles are impacting the state
road front, right? And to answer
that question in a nutshell, um,
what, what is, uh,
what are electric vehicles doing
to um
the New Mexico State Road Fund
right now, they're like doing
nothing.
It's like not doing anything,
right? Because there's so few of
them, less than 1% of all
vehicles registered in the state
of New Mexico are electric
vehicle or hybrid, OK? And we
see that even for a vehicle that
travels 15,000 miles a year that
would get 22 miles a gallon.
That person is paying about 115
bucks a year in fuel tax, right?
So if you have a car, you drive
about 15,000 miles. You get 22
miles a gallon. Your
contribution to the state Road
Fund at about 11 cents or 13
cents a gallon is
115 bucks, right? So if you go
out and get an electric vehicle
right now, full electric
vehicle, or we're losing from
you is 115 bucks. OK? In fuel
loss, in fuel tax loss.
And so what is more detrimental
to us has been this steady
increase in the average MPG of,
of vehicles, right? So you'll
see on slide 12, the orange area
shows the forecasted revenue
loss due to increased MPG. And
so you'll see just from FY 24
through FY 30, we expect that
vehicles are gonna go from an
average of 22. That's why we use
that number right now, MPG to
nearly 24, a 7 or nearly 8%
increase in fuel efficiency and
you're thinking to yourself
like, well, what kind of big
deal is that, right? Well, the
calculation over that six-year
period is, we're going to lose
out on $36 million of recurring
state road fund revenue.
because those drivers are in
more efficient vehicles, right?
Now, will that be compounded in
some way by electric vehicles?
Sure, to the tune of like 2 or 3
million bucks, you know, give or
take. And so all of this is
assuming, right, that, you know,
um, constant that uh MPG
remained constant from 24
onwards. So that, that's just
kind of like a snapshot of
what's really hurting us and so
we're not necessarily moving
into a space where we have to
focus in on electric vehicle,
um revenue loss. But the problem
is bigger, it's not electric
vehicle, it's efficient vehicle
and how from a policy
standpoint, do we say, good for
you for buying a vehicle that
saves you money on gas.
Now we need to do something to
make it more expensive for you.
so that we don't lose that money
in the state road funds. So it,
it makes for an interesting
challenge. So one of the
challenges for us, uh, from a
policy perspective, revenue and,
and road infrastructure
perspective is, um, 13 of the 17
cents of a tax on every gallon
of gas comes to the state road
farm.
and you'll see here that New
Mexico is the 4th lowest fuel
tax in the nation.
And it's not lost on me the
irony that about 4 months ago,
the news reported that we have
the worst roads in the nation.
And so maybe there's a direct
correlation. I'm not sure, but
and we'll argue about that
report too, um, we'll save it
for another time. But at the end
of the day, right, if um the
lion's share, like in Colorado,
OK, uh, their state road fund
recurring revenue is reliant on
fuel tax and it stands to reason
that if you want to increase
very quickly how much revenue
you have for state roads, then
you go to where you get the most
money for them and that's fuel
tax, right? And so New Mexico is
the lowest among neighboring
states, and just to give you a
sense of
what
how big this lever is, every 1
cent increase would result in
6.8 million of new revenue every
single year, right? And so if
you take like
that 13 cents and you say, let's
increase it by 20%.
OK? And you go from 13 cents to
1/5 of that, right?
And you jump up and you say, oh,
that's 4 cents.
That's $28 million.
of new revenue every single
year.
And when you do that, right?
and you add 4 cents
from 17 to 21, and you recall
that I told you
your contribution was 115 a
year, 115 bucks.
It jumps from 115 to 140.
And so the impact to a New
Mexican is, all right, $25 more
a year.
and you promised me that you're
going to fix my roads.
You know, that's the give and
take. And so this map here shows
how we fare relative to other
states understanding that for
the most part, other states are
relying on that just like us.
And I won't belabor the point,
but you'll see here on slide 14,
um, likewise, we're, uh, we're
pretty low, um, in the top 10
cheapest diesel fuel tax in the
nation, and you'll see, of
course, um, even compared to our
counterparts, diesel fuel here a
little higher, 1 cent increase
generates another 6.6 million.
So,
um those are just some figures
and some comparisons to what
other states are charging.
And so on slide 15, this kind of
shows you over time nationally
where we're ranking through um
um our current ranking of 4th
lowest in, in regular fuel and
9th and diesel. So what is this
telling us, right? Is that at
some point, we were on par.
We were like 17th and 8th
respectively.
And we've cut that in half
basically. Why?
Well, there was actually a time,
believe it or not, where we
reduced our fuel tax.
In fact, the last time we
touched it, that's what we did.
But more importantly, other
states have said we can survive
here. Like we gotta keep going
up and as they go up, they push
us down. And so as other states
slowly to accommodate for cost
of living index that
construction cost over time,
they increase, we rank better.
so to speak, were lower and
they're keeping up.
And so what it what it calls for
for New Mexico is, what do we
do?
If the cost of construction goes
up 25%.
and our revenue stays flat, we
have two options. We increase
our revenue and we keep doing
the same amount of work, or we
don't increase our revenue and
we're doing 25% less work. Like
it's basic math, right? It's
basic math. And so, I'm here to
report that that's kind of what
we're doing.
We can assure you that as a
result of what we've said so far
DOT is doing about 25% less work
today.
than it was just 5 years ago
Because based on that 3 times
multiplier, right? The annual
inflationary cost is about 12%.
So now I'll turn it over to uh
Mike for slide 160.
the mics
and uh unfortunately, this is
the part of the uh presentation
where I think we get into um
I believe the church called it a
uh number dump. Um, so I'll try
to go a little quickly through
here. Um, I do have hope that
gets quoted in the paper
somewhere, but we have to have
credit to Senator Sher, Senator
Sher, yeah, myself, for number
dump.
Yeah,
we'll share credit. OK, thank
you. OK.
Um, so what we have now is just
actually, uh, you know, just
expanding off of just the tax
rate, but we look, decide to
look at the actual revenue
collected by New Mexico and the
other states. Um,
on slide 16, we do have a map,
but on 17, we do have uh the
senate table, we showed that uh
gasoline revenue per lane, lane
mile. So we've
uh kind of even the score a
little bit to get a more apples
to apples comparison. We find
that New Mexico is lowest among
our neighbors and 6th lowest in
the nation.
Uh, doing the same for diesel
revenue on slides 18 and 19.
Uh, this is actually a little
bit better. New Mexico is 16th
lowest in the nation, uh, and
second lowest among our
neighboring states. The main
reason for this is because uh
I-40, I-10, I-25 are major
freight corridors. So most of
the freight traffic coming from
the port of LA in Long Beach,
the two largest ports in the
nation are coming through New
Mexico along those three routes.
And we are collecting diesel, uh
tax revenue or special fuel tax
revenue on those trucks that
come through. So we're doing a
little bit better on that.
However, we still are in the
bottom half of revenue for that.
Uh, going forward, uh, switching
over into slides 20 and 21.
We're looking at vehicle
registration, uh, charges, and
to make it easy to compare,
compare vehicle registration
rates between states. We've
broken it out into newer
vehicles, which are vehicles at
4 years old, 4000 pounds, and
$20,000 in value. Um,
and on slide 21, I'll show we're
19th in the nation, and lowest
in the nation and lowest among
our neighbors.
For older vehicles, which are
the uh 12 year old vehicles
weighing 4000 pounds at $20,000
value. That on slide 23 or 21st
of the nation, so we're much
closer to average on that.
for the registration, uh,
vehicle registration fees.
Um, however
onto the uh next areas of slides
24 and 25. We're looking at
heavy truck registration fees.
So these are semi trucks. Uh, we
are
dead last and by quite a bit,
actually we're um the next
closest state is Louisiana. We
have $172 registration fee.
Louisiana is $504.
Now, this is a little um
misleading because because most
of the other states, Louisiana
included,
have a larger vehicle
registration fee and don't have
a weight distance tax. So
they're equivalent to the weight
distance is just the vehicle
registration. However, even
among the states that have uh
wait distance taxes, which are
New York, Kentucky, Oregon, um,
I think there's someone else
that I'm forgetting, but um we
are still the lowest, next
lowest is Oregon, and they,
their registration fee for heavy
trucks is uh.
$998. And Michael, if I may, and
secretary, if you can confirm
with me if it let me know if the
last conversation we had when we
were bringing this up, uh, to
the legislature and like
increasing these fees, weren't
the truck drivers that drive
these routes saying that there
were fine with an increase
because they're, I mean, you're
saying that
they're the ones who are doing a
lot of really wear and tear on
our robes.
and they recognize that. Am I
correct in remembering that? Uh,
that's correct, Madam Chair. And
so when, um, when, and we'll
summarize our the that bill in
the last slide, but you're
absolutely correct. We had
incorporated into it, uh, with
help from Senator Munoz and
Senate Finance at 35% increase
to
um weight distance tax that was
supported by the New Mexico
Truckers Association under one
condition
every new dollar of that new
revenue go directly to the
roads. And so they too say, we
get, we know what we're doing.
and we can invest if it comes
right back here.
Thank you. I'm so sorry. Thank
you, Michael. No problem.
So, um
we are working, but
unfortunately, it's been rather
difficult to offer a comparison
of the different weight weight
distance tax structures.
between the states that do have
it just because of um
various differences in the
structures between the states.
It's made it very difficult, but
we're working on that.
Um, go on to the next slides,
that's 26 and 27, that's uh
motor vehicle excise tax. Um, we
switched up and went to green
for the map. Um, but now we're,
so we're 6th lowest in the
nation. That includes um New
Hampshire and Montana, which
don't have any attacks on
vehicle purchases.
And again, our lowest among our
neighbors as well.
Thank you, Michael, and then
just one other note about motor
vehicle excise tax, um, for New
Mexico is
um, not only is the rate um 6th
lowest in the nation, but um the
Department of Transportation
does not receive um all of the
weight distance tax that the
state generates, and I'm trying
to
21%. And so we receive about 50%
of the total weight, um,
distance tax that's generated
for um through the state of New
Mexico.
Um, going ahead, we're almost
there to slide 28 is just a
quick snapshot here of um war
states you'll see here we're all
kind of dipping into the same
buckets. Um, the ones that are
unique to a handful of states or
those related to tolls. And so,
for example, if you look at both
Texas and Oklahoma. Um, when you
compare some of the um apples to
apples registration fees, taxes,
um, an excise tax, um, we
were pretty much on par, but
you'll see where some of the,
the increased revenue that
separates us from that 2000 per
lane mile to the 5 times that
are the revenue that they
generate through some of their
tools. So this slide here gives
you that kind of sliding scale
for the southwestern part of the
country, um, and then at the
very, very top, you'll see the
the US average.
um, and what's happening there?
And so that's an important note
here, and this is something that
we'd like to kind of watch over
time just at the very top, um,
you'll see that nationwide.
5% of transportation funding in
2000. So it'd be good to see how
that kind of increases over
time.
Um, and then, um, total state
and federal revenue. This is the
biggie, right? Because when we
talk about our $1.3 billion you
look at that, um, by, um, uh,
um, you know, Lane Miles, but
you'll see here in total about
$1.6 billion of total revenue,
and, you know, we're kind of on
par with states like Nebraska,
um, South Dakota, Idaho, things
like that, but, um, part of what
our challenges, of course, is
how rural a state we are, but
you'll see that we're about 15
lowest in the nation. Um, the
slide that's really exciting to
kind of do that apples to apples
comparison by Lane Myers on 31.
And so you'll see here that um
uh New Mexico will receive about
$22,000. Um, I mean you divide
our total revenue by total lane
miles, which is about a third of
Texas, um, about 50% less than
Oklahoma, um, for sure, half of
Arizona, uh, 50% less in
Colorado. So this is the funding
we have by Lima with which to
do.
um our work. And, you know,
we've been talking about that 3
$3 million per mile on
construction, uh, when you think
about maintenance, we're talking
about for, uh, for major
rehabilitation maintenance,
about 500,000 a lane mile, and
so that gives you a sense of um
what we're able to do.
I'm just gonna jump ahead, Madam
Chair, to the end here. Um, to
talk a little bit about what
came of some of these figures
and what came from that stir
task force and understanding,
you know, um, what, what might
be uh an understanding our
position as a state. So some of
the mechanisms that we have yet
to kind of figure out our uh two
of them that are very critical.
One of them is how does the
legislature provide recurring
revenue to the Department of
Transport.
And that's been an ongoing
debate, right? Because um if
it's through general fund,
that's got a double-edged sword,
right? Because it allows for you
guys to say, here you go, and it
allows for you all to say, here
it comes, right? And so
recurring general funds through
the appropriations process, as
you know, as a legislature, you
have the ability to kind of go
up and down on and, and, um, so
depending on the support at the
time, depending on the state
revenues at the time, we can, we
can kind of fluctuate through um
predictable funding
The other mechanism that we've
yet to figure out, of course, is
how do we appropriate for an
extended period of time.
And so let's just say for
example, the legislature with
CERA, 3, you need $5.6 billion.
We're gonna give you $2 billion
right now. Here's the check.
Take it while we have the money,
right? Well, right now, the life
of that money through a special
appropriation is 3 years, and I
can promise you this, we cannot
spend that kind of money in 3
years. That's a lot of work. And
so what would inevitably happen,
right, is after 3 years, we'll
have spent like $800 million and
then we'll come back and you'll
ask us, why haven't you spent
it? Why haven't you spent it?
And
there again, if times get tough
for the state, you may decide,
well, we're not going to reauth
it. We're just going to pull it
back to pay for other important
things. And so that mechanism is
another that we haven't put in
place. And so
given those two things, what we
decided to do was introduce
legislation that would support
that ongoing practice of issuing
bonds, right, or debt for Rose.
And so the reason why I kind of
preface it with the levers is
because really the only pushback
we get to bonding is we have so
much money, we'll give it to
you.
And we say you can
but you got to give it to us for
like 9 years, because we can't
spend that kind of money, right?
In 3. And after 3 years, a
legislature may come around and
say, that's enough. We need it
somewhere else. And so why is
bonding give us that kind of
flexibility? A couple of
reasons. House Bill 145, which
gave the state Transportation
Commission authority to bond up
to $1.5 billion also included
about $72 million of new
recurring revenue.
That was about enough to pay for
70% of the debt service.
So not only did it give us the
authority to incur debt, it gave
us 70% of the debt payment. And
the great thing about that was
we're already paying debt. Going
back to 2003, the last time that
the Department of Transportation
was authorized with bonding
authority was in grip.
And so we're paying debt now to
the tune of $120 million and the
most debt we would be paying on
this 1.5 billion would be
something like 110.
And so the $70 million in all
actuality would be new money,
because we would refinance
existing debt with new debt,
we'd be using our existing debt
service payment of the 70
million would be capacity, OK?
And that would give us more
money
not necessarily to hire staff
but to operate. But the state
road fund does something that
our federal funds cannot do it
pays for maintenance. That would
be $70 million of maintenance
capacity.
And here was the cool thing
about it is,
it didn't charge the state
recurring revenue, and it didn't
touch the state's non-recurring
revenue. It didn't touch the
state's STB capacity, geo bond
capacity or sponge bond
capacity.
which meant that even as we all
sit here understanding that the
state may need to shore up.
federal program and services
that are no longer available
that bill wouldn't be one, you
would say, oh man, are we gonna
have to roll that back?
Can we still afford to give DOT
that? The answer would be yes,
because it didn't cost anything
to do it, right? Now, is there
liability? Sure, maybe somewhere
down the road, DOT might say
like, man, we can't pay that
debt anymore.
um, which hasn't been the case
in the last 22 years. And so
the bill wasn't rooted in this
notion that we just want money,
how do we get it as quickly as
possible. It's rooted in this
notion that we don't have
mechanisms to
give you the ability to say,
every year we're gonna just,
this is gonna be what you get
every year.
Or to say we're so loaded with
cash, we're gonna cut you that
big white check and you take
your time using it.
And the bill came with the
guidelines and guardrails that
said, Hey, we want to make sure
that you're gonna build like the
Rikki Cerna rail runner
extension to Mexico, right? To
me, to kind of hold the agency
honest to ensure that it funds
projects that are paramount to
the state, meaning that we're
using crash data, average daily
traffic count data.
And so what it would have done
is said, OK, we're gonna do this
and take care of DOT and every
year they're not gonna come and
ask us for hundreds of millions
of dollars, but you know who
would is your community's work.
And so it would leave you all
with that.
that discretion to say, well,
now we took care of DOT and it's
not costing recurring or
non-recurring. And so instead of
giving them 100 or 200, like 189
like you gave us last year.
Could we give local governments
that money to fix their roads
because when that report came
out that says New Mexico has the
fourth roads in the nation. The
next sentence out of the
reporter's mouth was, and the
overwhelming majority of them
are local roads, and you can go
to the Northwestern part of the
state if you want to find them.
When you look at our national
rating for number one in
pedestrian fatalities.
in the nation since 2016.
I once talked to the governor
and said I can cut that in half,
and she said, how we just got to
annex Bernal Leo County to
Arizona.
because that's where the bulk of
them are happening, right? Which
means that we're going to put a
dent in that figure before we
leave as an administration,
which means that we're going to
make investments in Bernal Leo
County. That's the only way to
do it.
And so those are the things that
we thought of as foresight to
addressing some of those
challenges for us as a state,
but to be sure, those levers
were moved, which means that we
distance tax was going to hit
commercial vehicles.
Vehicle registration fees was
gonna hit you and I, all right?
Um, those were, you know, a
shift in vehicle X and, and
motor vehicle excise tax.
was going to hit some of those
buckets too. And so, basically,
our philosophy was
we all want better roads. Are we
going to invest in them as road
users, including commercial
vehicles.
and how do we do that in a way
that doesn't um
present challenges financially
for the state. So, um, that's,
that's in a nutshell, Madam
Chair, we stand for any
Christians.
Thank you so much, Secretary. I
appreciate that. And I remember,
so I looked it up, HB 145 died.
So none of this went through for
you. Am I correct? I mean, I'm
sure it's correct. We got it out
of the house and all the Senate
committees and uh we, we
couldn't get her on the Senate
floor. Right. OK. Um, and before
we go to committee, uh
you know, one of the things that
I worked on a couple of years
ago in the tax package was to
increase
the tax rebates for electric
vehicles, um, because if we want
to try and encourage
that at the time, the $500 tax
rebate for used electric
vehicles wasn't enough to
entice, I felt, uh, to entice
people, many people in my
district, uh, who are at the low
income level or below, um, to
even consider buying a, a, a
used uh hybrid EV and so we got
that up to $2000. Um, but I know
that one of the conversations
that's been going on is like
folks who drive electric
vehicles
don't have to pay a registration
fee
but they want to, cause they
know they use the roads. And so
can you kind of give an update
on the electric vehicle fees,
and then I'll go to
Representative Tarassas after
that.
Great. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. So we had baked into
HouseBuild 45 uh.
$80 and $120 vehicle
registration surcharge for um
full electric.
and then we cut that in half, I
believe, for um hybrid electric
vehicles going back to this
figure here, right, of $115 a
year with, with a, with an
increase to fuel tax over time.
which was going to generate, I
think like 2 million bucks,
right? Um, in the first year and
then it was going to go up
steadily from there.
And so that was baked into 145,
and so it doesn't exist because
it didn't get passed. But what
happened, right, um, after that
was a measure that kind of had
us thinking like we, we can't be
too slow to do things because
they may happen at a different
level is the federal government
then said, we think we're going
to impose one nationally.
and it will come on top of
whatever any other state has as
an EV surcharge, right? And so
US Department of Transportation
was looking at a, a national
imposed electric vehicle
surcharge that would have come
on top of anyone at the state.
And so had that, that's not
happening now, but had it
occurred, right, what would have
happened was we'd be taxing New
Mexicans for that and sending
the revenue to USDOT.
And then
the, the, the likelihood of us
doing one for New Mexico revenue
would have become difficult,
right? Because it would have
been very taxing for New
Mexicans to pay 100 bucks that
goes to the feds and then 100
bucks that comes to us.
And so right now there is no
state surcharge and there is no
federal surcharge.
All right, thank you very much.
Um, one other quick question and
when we, before we finish,
um I want you to end with what
you're needing or wanting
from this, this, OK. So, but
I'll have other questions go
first. Um, Representative
Tarasas, do I have others who
want to ask the secretary
questions. Senator Maestti.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Secretary for and uh
Mr. Morrison for the, the
presentation.
It, it, you know, it's, first of
all, I wanna thank you for all
you do cause I mean you guys
have done a lot of work and and
uh I don't think you get ever
any
praise over what you do do
um, but you guys have uh really
in my book, done a great job,
District one,
so what basically this whole
presentation just says that you
really like my diesel.
All right. So, you know, I'm,
I'm just looking at this and
I'm, I'm thinking, you know, how
do we, um, Madam Chair,
you know, in this situation, I'm
not a uh uh in favor. I'm gonna
be honest with you, of
increasing taxes. I just, I'm
just trying not to do that
because there's other ways. I, I
just believe in, in, in other
ways of doing that.
Um
and so, Madam Chair, there's
when I'm teaching my son how to
do business. I tell him, son,
there's only 2 ways to make more
money. You make more.
by doing more work, right? Uh,
or increase your prices or
decrease your spending.
And that's the only way to do
that.
And so in this case, I see that,
you know, we have a smaller
population
Madam Chair, then the
neighboring states.
Therefore, um, and then in
combination with the reduction
in the cost of fuel.
that I don't know that that got
brought up. I didn't hear that,
but I think that also compounds
that situation.
Now, Madam Chair, in my opinion,
uh, there's other ways to
increase revenue.
and that has to do with how we,
how we do business.
The more commerce that we have,
the more people we bring here,
the better, the more people you
people are, are that you have on
the roads, and that can be done
through tourism, right?
And what does tourism need? Uh,
they want to come to nice roads,
they want to be able to do
certain things. I'm just gonna
use this as an example. Uh, they
want to be able when I've
traveled and I like to use my
side by side. I want to be able
to go and, and know that I can,
if I register it for it
properly, I can go on the roads
that I want to because I paid to
be there and that insurance and
blah blah blah. But I want to be
able to access all these places
that I maybe I have a bad knee
or back or heart or whatever
that I can access. And I think
that's a big
industry that we've totally
ignored in a state that has um
such a beautiful landscape that
we're not sharing with it
properly or getting its full
potential, I guess is what I
would say. Um, I think, you
know, in order to increase more
of that, we have to also get our
crime under control.
Madam Chair
or people who feel safe and want
to stop in New Mexico and spend
a little bit more money and
revenue.
Um
the also, the other thing that I
was that that I when when I was
just processing this.
because I'm thinking, OK, we, we
create more revenue by some of
those things, uh, and that would
have, have to.
it would have to take place with
our legislature understanding
that the more revenue, that the
more people that we bring in and
make them feel comfortable and
safe, whether it's education,
whether it's our, our, uh,
roads, whether it's uh public
safety, whether it's um, believe
it or not, in a medical
malpractice to help her bring in
doctors and other commerce, all
that has
plays a part
Now, I saw that, you know,
weight and distance, you were
talking about waiting distance.
And, and I, and I don't know the
answer to this. I'm just gonna
kind of put this together. Is
there a way that you say the
truck drivers association and
all this is all for this, Madam
Chair, if it's a possibility
because I don't think you can
have two taxes, but you can have
a tax that you increase that.
but for citizens of New Mexico
and businesses of New Mexico,
you give on tax credit
for deriving and having their
home office in New Mexico.
To me
bringing people in, right?
Bringing, you're bringing a
business in and you're saying,
you know what, we're gonna,
we're gonna raise these
the, the weight and distance.
but in, but for our, the people
that bring in
uh revenue and, and make their
home office here, where the
revenue's gonna come here, we
will give you a a tax a tax
credit or whatever to offset
that we're we're not using
weight and distance in two
different deals, but giving them
the opportunity to invest here.
Um, also, um
I know that there's been an
increase cause I, I, we all
drive.
plenty madam Chair, throughout
the state, and I see that uh
guardrails are just
being tore up left and right.
I think Madam Chair would be
something that would be
interesting for at least myself,
maybe some other members here
would be to find out
um how that guardrail
expenditure has increased during
a time of um
that we have, uh, uh, legalized
marijuana.
I may think that there may be a
correlation there. I'm not sure.
but I think there's something
there too, and I know, can you,
my question real quick because
I'm trying to hurry out of the
chair, so I don't do this ask go
back and forth.
The question I have is, has that
is my visual, uh, you know, just
reading of, of our state
guardrails. Have you seen an
increase in cost um
for that
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
that's a great question. It's a
great question, and, and we'd
have to look at it to see how
that's increased or what those
expenditures have been over
time, to be sure. I will say
that one of the things that
we've got to get better at is
recouping through the claims
process, the cost of
infrastructure that's damaged by
road users, and one big example
is, uh, in, in your area
representative um in Lordsburg.
In Lordsburg, we had the
overpass hit just outside of
Lordsburg and uh at the fault of
the trucker who did not know
their accurate height, they hit
the, they hit the overpass and
it came down and stood in front
of it the other day. It's gonna
cost about $5 million to short
repair it, and it's a good thing
that it was due to be um
replaced anyway, but now we're
spending time and resources
going after that truck company
to say,
we're going to say you owe us 5
million bucks uh for for fixing
this bridge. And so we actually
have a clear process by which we
do that for everything from
guardrail, cable barrier, etc.
We, we just weighed it out with
the amount of time and energy we
expend and what we get from all
of that at the end of the day.
That's your uh secretary, I
really appreciate that and I
think that is something that
needs to be looked at. And I
appreciate the chair, uh,
recognizing that and, and the,
the citizens of New Mexico
recognizing that they travel on
the roads and EVs are just an
important should pay their fair
share. Um, the, the last thing
cause I don't want to go on and
on, um
if you could, if you were able
to
I'd like to ask this, these type
of questions. If you could get
anything you wanted, I, I know
HP 144, I love that bill. I
think it's a great bill.
But if you were able to get
whatever dollars you need
what would it take to, to handle
what you need to get us up to
par where they wouldn't, it
wouldn't, that wouldn't come out
on national news and we have the
worst roads.
Um
Madam Chair, first of all, I, I,
I, I think the, the way they
rate those in the process of
getting all that data, it's
ridiculous, and so I feel way
better about our roads and the
way it's designed, but
I believe that
House Bill 145 is the answer to
your question because it puts
process into the hands of
engineers who are going to say
you're right.
Um
if we want to get off that
ranking, we can tell you based
on state roads where the, where
the worst of them are. We
literally have a van scanning
pavement conditions, smoothness
index conditions, rough index
conditions
that ban is running 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, 365 days a
year. We can tell you. And um
and we're trying to do likewise
with things like crashes, riding
in, and other metrics that are
near and dear to us. And so we
could play the numbers
if we have the bonding bill, we
can use it as we get these
projects ready and spend the
money over an extended period of
time.
and um I had one other point to
make, um, but it's slipping me
now. Oh, going back just talking
briefly about some of the, you
know, the investments that you
talked about that could come
from really doing better in
other areas is that becomes very
much like a chicken and an egg
type of thing. And I'll give you
a couple of examples. If, um,
for example, if uh we're working
with uh Sandoval County.
Sandoval County to bring
business into the Rio Rancho
area on PDV Passe devocon,
right? Big project we've talked
a lot about it
Well, we got to build the road
if we're going to bring them.
And so there's the road comes
first and then the business.
Then you look at the tourism,
um, about a year ago, I got a, a
bumper sticker and I think
Senator Sher can relate the
bumper sticker said, fix the
damn road.
It was DAM
and what dam were they talking
about?
Navajo Dam
And so one of the reasons why we
don't get a lot of outdoor
recreation visitors to the state
is because the road up to that
dam is rough, and even more so
if you're going to bring a
camper. And so there, there's
kind of that chicken and an egg
where we may need the
infrastructure investments right
to set the stage for the they
will come piece of that
equation.
So Madam Chair, thank you for
that, mate, and I think the
reason I ask it in that way is,
is I'm trying to kind of put my
mind around it business-wise.
I'm thinking, how are you
competing against
Texas
These contractors are moving to
Texas, Arizona. I mean, I'm
just, I'm not in that business,
but I can see it happening where
these guys are from all over the
place and you're competing,
which means that the cost of
that they get to kind of pick
what and choose cherry pick. I'm
gonna use that word, madam
chair. Will they get to pick,
you know what? I don't know. I
like that road better. It's
easier for me to do and I'm
gonna profit more than I would
over there. Um, and that's why
to me, when I'm building
something, it's important, Madam
Chair, uh, secretary to
get in front of it. In other
words, build as much as you can
as far as you can, because
overall if you, if you kind of
piecemeal it over a period of
time, it's gonna cost you more
money over time, and you get
behind, and you, you just can't
catch up with inflation, you
can't catch up. The things that
are affecting them, Madam Chair,
like, um, I think in the
environment department just
tried to pass it. I don't know
what it, where it is because I
haven't paid attention. Um,
that you have to take breaks
every, I don't know how many
minutes, being out in the sun.
How would something like that
affect your road building?
And, and how would you be able
to compete, and I'm being
honest, look, I'm not sure, I'm
a business guy. So if you're
competing with all these guys to
bring in contractors, how would
that affect you getting a
contractor to come in and build
your highway and, and, and cause
I'm gonna be honest with you, if
that was to pass, I'd go to
Texas, Arizona, Colorado,
anywhere else but here. And
before you answer, secret, um,
Representative, are you good
with that being your last
question so we can move on to
the others, or did you have any
others right,
I'm gonna
let the secretary answer it and
then you finish it up. Sure, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, the,
the rule, um, the
representatives talking about is
the heat exhaustion room. And so
two things. One is, yes, there
would be financial implications
to both the, the DOT and
contractors, if some of the
measures that are currently
being proposed would be put in
place. Some of those measures
are, um,
uh a steady flow of brakes,
right, on a consistency for
workers providing shaded areas,
providing transition time
um, for new workers and things
like that.
Um, and so clearly there would
be cost implications, but the
second point I want to make is
that our understanding based on
news reports and some things
that are happening at the
federal level is there's a
possibility that federal OSHA um
may move the rule, which means
that it it'd be an imposition
on, on, on the state. And so,
um, regardless of whether or not
that occurs as a staple, there
may be one at a federal level
that, that we'd have to come,
you know, a adjust to, you know,
uh, Madam Chair, I just hope
that they, that I don't think
that will help us now federally
you can't do anything about it,
but state-wise we do have a
choice. So my last question, uh,
Madam Chair, um, Secretary is
all the fatalities that we have
on I-10. You know, I own the
mortuary there. There's a lot of
fatalities due to the dust
storms.
And I think that's what we're
having all the guardrail issues,
that's we're having. I mean,
because I see it, and I, and,
and were you having fatalities
and so forth?
What are you guys
able to do to mitigate the dust
that's been
that brought up there in that,
in, and it's just a corridor,
would you, would you say maybe,
well, it can go, it can go
pretty big, but it starts and it
derives there probably in about
30, 40 mile area.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
a few things. Um,
so there's some root issues to
those things, and I'll talk
about some of them so you can
see the extent of how that
corridor can get bigger. One of
them is development.
And so let's just take for
example, the developer is going
to come in for wind or solar
energy production, they're gonna
lay right either panels or
they're going to put the blades
up. Well, one of the first
things they do is they go in and
they clear the property, right?
Like they clear it of all
vegetation. And so what that
does is it creates, right, that
environment that is prime for
dust, dust storms, right? And so
there's some regulatory things
we could probably do there,
which basically means that it's
part of the site readiness and
dust mitigation needs to be done
and so that's good
discussions with, you know, with
RLD and with Environment
Department, because the same is
true of us if we're out there
working on a project and
generating too much dust, to be
sure, environment could come in
and say, you're gonna need to do
something even during the
construction phase to get that
fixed.
The second, of course, in a lot
of parts of the state is over,
um, is over grazing, and that's
not so much happening in the
South, but like in parts like
the northwestern part of the
state, where we also have a lot
of
dust blowing from over grazing
is creating a wildlife corridor
challenges, meaning that the
dust is blowing
um so much that it's covering
cattle guards, it's coming, it's
creating bridges across fencing
and a lot of people are getting
hit by cattle or the other way
around, cattle are getting hit
by a lot of people. They throw a
good right hook. It's, well, you
know, some of them fight back.
And so, um, we do have our
environmental team that's
working on dust mitigation
measures. We have a big project
that we're working on in Los
Lunas and in fact, um,
um next week, uh, when I'll be
down in Silver City and Demming,
um, for tiers. I'll be meeting
with a local contractor there
that believes they also have
material that could serve as a
dust mitigation, um, strategy,
and we'll introduce that to our
environmental team, but we do
have the dust mitigation
strategies that we can put down
there again, knowing that in
some instances, a lot of that
would be work on private
properties. You know, I
appreciate that, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the time. I'm
sorry I
there's, there's a lot here. Uh,
I just, I appreciate you
bringing and addressing that. I
think one other uh entity that
you could talk to that deals
with a lot of dust and stuff and
they're very good at handling
it, believe it or not, Freeport
Macron, and they, they also are
real good at at putting a
vegetation down right on their
dumps and so forth. And uh
Gabriel, uh, excuse me, Senator
Ramos and I live in that area.
We've seen them literally
transform these dumps into, they
look like, you know, artificial
mountains, but they've got
vege vegetation to, to keep that
down. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
we've got um 35 minutes left, so
we've got a little bit more
flexibility unless y'all want to
get on the road earlier, but um
that's why I, I let you ask
those questions and, and Senator
Maestas and Representative
Duncan, the, the extends the
same to you, Senator Maestas,
you're next, and then followed
by Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, gentlemen, appreciate
the
appreciate the refresher course.
The um
couple uh couple things. One is
the
we really gotta at some point.
get away from dollars and cents
in the tax code.
You know, if we have, if we have
a percentage tax, then
it it adjusts for inflation, it
doesn't affect things, but if we
put dollars and cents in the tax
code, we have to come back
every, you know, every 8 years,
every 1012 years, and adjust it
for inflation. We've gone
3.
decades without any adjustments,
without any adjustments.
so 17 cents back in '94.
is somewhere in the neighborhood
of, I don't know, 35 cents
today.
So, uh, so when and when you
add, you know, costs and things
of that nature, it just
exacerbates the problem. I, I
tend to agree,
Madam Chair
with the points that
Representative Terazas was
making in terms of
it was my point earlier about
permanent funds is we can create
a tax, we can get more taxes by
growing an economy.
However
that
that philosophy doesn't apply to
roads.
It simply does not apply to
rules because roads are paid for
by primarily the gas tax, excise
tax.
We have been putting general
fund monies into the road fund,
but that, that could go away in
a, in an instant, um, so I
appreciate that point.
But just a quick, what costs
more, what costs more, uh.
like a 1 or 2 cent increase in
the gas tax or a brand or a pair
of 4 new tires on your truck.
So, OK, you, I was actually
asking like for an answer, but
I'll, I'll make it rhetorical.
Um, so anyway, I, I, uh, I, I
appreciate the gas tax for for
numerous reasons.
and I
and one is it's a user fee.
You don't drive, you don't pay
it
to use it now granted, we all
benefit from it, from all the
goods and services on the road,
but it's a, it's a user fee,
which means it's fair.
Uh, it deals with maintenance
costs, you know, brand new pair
of tires is, I don't know, $1000
800 bucks.
Um, if I can delay that brand
new set of tires for, you know,
a year or 2 or 3 or 4, then
that's definitely in my
interest.
What we forget many times about
them too is the economic
development component of robes.
Uh
according to your presentation,
it's $3.04 for every dollar we
put into roads, some of the the
trip analysis that we get
annually has a little higher.
but uh but without roads, New
Mexico is nothing. Our, our
whole state is based upon
transportation
uh, and in particular new road
projects
in uh in areas that we hope to
grow economically. And then
lastly, Madam Chair, the um the
elasticity of a gas tax.
which is a fun word, but if we
were to raise the gas tax 10
cents
it doesn't raise the price of
gasoline 10 cents, it, it.
it maybe will raise the price of
gas in like 7 or 8 cents.
So the consumer is paying 7 or 8
cents more, but we're, but our
roads are getting 10 cents more.
a gallon, so we, we, we get, you
know, obviously that 23 cents.
is absorbed by the
producer and the retailer, but
the consumer isn't hit that
hard. So,
it's unfortunate that we have
not been able to make
adjustments
to this uh to this provision of
law in several years, I think.
we should give it a try with an
outgoing governor, I think we
must do it with an incoming
governor, they're not going to
talk about it, no, no
candidate's gonna talk about it,
but if it's on their desk,
hopefully they have no choice
but to, but to govern, you know,
but to govern. So,
and it, and it ideally it, it
needs to be
uh nonpartisan situation for
those of us that
can, can stand in front of 100
or 100 of our constituents and
explain it, but it's a, it's a
serious problem. We, um,
with, with the sense dwindling
down.
in terms of a percentage of the
gasoline tax and costs going up.
And then like you said, uh, cars
being more ener energy
efficient.
uh, we're, we're headed for
disaster. So
I just want to make those
points, Madam I'm sure. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Duncan, you're
finishing this off unless there
are any other comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
to the senator's point, I agree
with the tax on gasoline.
as long as you tax equally and
by equally I mean if you're
living in an urban area as
opposed to um some of the folks
in my district to drive 40 miles
an hour or 40 miles just to get
to the gas station, another 40
to get to a grocery store or
doctor.
That's not fair
Um, and some of those are the
poorest people in the entire
state.
I don't know the right, I don't
know the right thing either. I
don't know what the answer is,
but I do know that we have about
$6 billion in capital outlay
that's been sitting there for 30
years.
Why don't we just take some of
that, Madam Chair, and uh let's
make a dent in some of this.
I do agree that HBU 145 is a
great bill. We all voted for it
in the House.
and I, and I hope it comes back.
I'll support it again for that.
Now,
having said that
if, if you could, and, and what
some one other thing that
frustrates me to no end is we
have a gas tax and it should go
to our roads, and it doesn't. It
goes to the general fund and
then the general fund is
generous to give us money back.
Uh, we have registration and it
goes to, you know, general fund
and, and we might get a little
bit of that back as you stated.
So if you could
and you were king for the day
tell me what you would do with
some of those things, those
funds that are coming in that
direction.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
good question.
So the, the way the, the gas tax
is essentially come directly to
the, the taxes that come to us
come to us directly by way, so
they don't, from my
understanding, and Mr. Morrison,
correct me, they don't get put
through the um through the
general fund, um, but there's
one in particular that that
existed for the purposes of road
infrastructure, investments, and
that was a motor vehicle excise
tax. And so not all 100% of the
revenue generated from these
distributions come to deal.
DOT. And so that would be a
starting point, but we know that
if you take, you know, 140
million of motor vehicle excise
tax that goes to the general
fund and you give it to us.
that money is paying for
something there, right? And so
it's incumbent on you all to
say, well, we probably can't,
you know, untangle it and see
exactly what it's being paid
for, but it's part of your
general fund, which means that
you've got to replace it with
something else and that likely
would come out of the bottom
line or less reserves.
Um, but, but it would minimize
the need to raise taxes at all
if you were to say this is the
ones that they already charge.
that we already charge as a
state that mostly go to roads.
What if they just all went to
Rhodes, and that would be a good
starting point. But the answer
to why that would just be simple
is let's just say the
percentages that don't come to
us equate to 400 million of
recurring revenue to the general
fund. The question becomes,
well, where does either we cut?
services with that, or we shore
it up somewhere else anyway.
And then when we can get that
done, we go back to, well, then
we just got to generate more,
more money, more new money.
and that's when it hits road
users
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that, Secretary. I think
we're in a catch-22 situation
here.
Um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna take my
district again, for example, I
have folks driving.
bad roads, lots of miles.
their vehicles take a beating
We can provide all the social
service programs we want to
them.
and help them out there
We're still gonna do 3 $4000 a
year damage on their cars.
and those cars are going to be
um you know, as legislators, we
probably provide, you said $115
that we drive, we probably
provide
closer to $300 a year with all
the miles we've put on. Um, so I
think we have a catch-22, and we
need to come back to what those
monies were designed for.
and say, OK, if these funds were
designed for a road fund, let's
put it back in the road fund.
Um, and then we'll figure
another way to help
uh fill that uh that pot that
needs to be filled some other
way.
But either way, we're hurting
the people who can't afford this
the most anyway.
be it bad roads or, you know,
having to maybe not give as much
as we could as a state. So
anything that we can do, I think
we need to do that.
Um, the cost to the not only the
individual families, but the
cost to the state and perhaps
oaks not coming here or or
coming here one time and saying
I'll never go back to New
Mexico, those roads are
horrible.
Um, I'm on a, an RV
web.
page with other folks and man,
they, they talked about it. They
talked about how bad they are,
and, and, you know, these folks
are driving
234 $5 million rigs, and they're
not coming back to our state no
matter how enchanting it is,
just because of that.
So, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Secretary. Thank you,
Representative, um,
Representative Terrazos, I'm
gonna give you 2 minutes. You
want to do a follow-up. Is that
good? All right, go for it. So
Madam Chair, thank you very much
for the time. I think maybe I
didn't do a good enough job in
in explaining what I was trying
to do, um, to, to, uh, the
senator's point, I, I think you
make your revenue based on the
number of gallons sold, uh, is,
is basically a road tax.
that so my point that I was
trying to do is if we can
if we can bring um
these trucking companies here by
incentivizing them that you're
gonna give them a, some sort of
credit, and they would have to
buy more fuel cause it'd be
based out of here.
The more people that we get to
come here
we can increase our necessarily
our, our population overnight.
but by bringing people that come
and go to the pump and and fuel
up to visit and, and, and
explore state is more of what I
was doing. And to the point that
Representative Duncan was making
when I took my motor home up
through Northwest New New
Mexico.
I will not travel that road
unless I ask some questions
again and, and, and we do avoid
them. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Tarasas, and it doesn't feel
like the tax business and
transportation meeting without
Senator Shears, uh, horn going
off on his phone when he gets a
text message. So I'm gonna let
him, uh, close out you wanted to
make a comment or a question,
Senator. So, Madam Chair, it's
just uh
Representative Murphy's not here
now, but he did ask a question
and I just wanted to point out
that uh oil and gas uh
puts about a million dollars an
hour into the state's coffer and
uh cannabis puts about a million
dollars every 10 days in.
so just if we're comparing how
we're going to fund things. We
need to smoke a lot more dope.
Oh,
God, I hope that it's quoted.
Um, I've got some gummies for
you if you need it. Um
I think we're gonna start a
bingo sheet with stuff Senator
Sher says that's so out of
character. Uh, thank you,
appreciate that for that ending,
Secretary, uh, thank you both
for coming here today. Um, I
appreciate that greatly, and,
uh, and make sure you're in
touch with us about what you
need.
OK
All right, thank you. Committee,
I'm just gonna be really quickly
about some other, uh, some
housekeeping. Don't forget to
fill out your forms if you
haven't yet, uh, so that staff
can go ahead and log your per
diem. We have 3 committee
meeting dates left. Our next one
will be at the Burrell College
in Las Cruces on Tuesday,
September 2nd, and on Wednesday,
September 3rd, we will be, um,
at the Border Industrial
Association in Santa Teresa,
getting a tour of that and
updated tour cause there's
constantly buildings going up
there.
while at the Burrell College,
we're going to be exploring the
different ways to help our
medical providers. We talked
about medical malpractice
insurance. There's also um
electronic uh storage fees,
which we know are also costly.
We're gonna hear about what are
the practical ways all of the
different expenses, um, that our
medical providers, uh, have to
fork out and how we can help
them, because in order for us to
understand this, we need to look
at the bigger picture, not just
a couple of different points,
um, at the Border Industrial
Association, we're going to see
how our border commerce may be
impacted by taxes and how that
' s going to impact, uh, just a
couple of housekeeping bits if
you would like a bill that has
not been presented yet.
to be considered for endorsement
from this committee. Got to
start working on it now on
October 1st, we will set aside
time if we hear of any bills
from any of you that, and these
are bills that have not been
heard before. We will set aside
time on October 1st for those
bill presentations and then on
December 16th, the very last day
of our committee, we will set
aside time for the committee to
vote on those endorsements. So
our committee dates September
2nd and 3rd in Las Cruces,
September 30th, October 1st here
in Santa Fe.
December 15th and 16th here in
Santa Fe. Um, I'm so grateful
for all of you. I really enjoy
this committee even though the
topic blows my head up all the
time. Um, I'd like to thank the
staff, Christina and the staff
were setting up the facilities
and getting all of our handouts.
Lauren Abbey for providing us
with lunch. Um, she's the
government affairs director for
the Museum of New Mexico and uh
and for all of you, thank you
very much. I appreciate you.
Have a safe trip back home and I
will see you on September 2nd in
Las Cruces at the Burre College
