OK.
Again, good morning to our
committee members here in the
room. Good morning to all the
audience members that are in the
room. Good morning to those of
you that are tuning in online,
either on the webcast or on
Zoom. Happy to have all of you
here and in the work that we're
gonna do over the next day and a
half, uh, wanna go around the
room first and allow for
introduction. So if I can start
with the folks on my right,
representative Laura Karena,
would you please introduce
yourself?
Good morning, Mr. Terry
Representative Lada Kalena from
House District 33 in Daniana.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Mark Duncan,
District 2, San Juan County.
Thank you. Good to be here.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and uh
audience uh Doreen Gallega's
District 52 down in uh Donana
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
uh everyone. Uh my name is Bill
Burt, uh, Senate District 33,
uh, most of Otero and Lincoln
County and uh this is my final
meeting, official meeting as a
legislator, so I'm glad to be
here. I'm glad to share it with
all of you guys. Looking forward
to a productive day and a half.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and, and
welcome and we happy to have
you, honored to have you again.
Let's start with our left hand
side.
Like was German, uh, Senator
Craig Grant, uh, Rear Rancho
District 40. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, Vice Chair. Happy
holidays to everybody, Liz,
Stephanics, uh, Senate District
39, parts of 6 counties until
January 1, then I'd go down to 4
counties, Berleo, Lincoln, San
Miguel, Santa Fe, Torrance, and
Valencia. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair, uh, Peter Worth Senate
District 25 in Santa Fe.
Senator Bill Tomlin representing
um,
Senate District 18, which is a
portion of northeast Heights,
Albuquerque. Look forward to
today's discussion. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, to our staff
for all the hard work that you
all continue to do. Again, happy
holidays to each and every one
of you and uh today's and
tomorrow's agenda very, uh, very
appropriate when we start
talking about, if you will,
quality of life here in New
Mexico. So many great things to
look forward to. I'm state
Senator Pete Campos representing
all the parts of 7 counties in
northeastern New Mexico, always
great to go ahead and be here
with you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Vice Chairman, thank you for
being here and for being a
mentor, uh, during this past
legislative session interim uh
session as the vice chairman.
Let's go to uh someone that just
walked in representative, would
you please introduce yourself?
Good morning, everybody. I'm
Susan Herrera, I'm a
representative from the District
41, which is Moria Riva County,
a little bit of Santa Fe, a
little bit of Sandoval, and a
little bit of uh tests.
Good to be here.
Thank you. And uh once again,
Merry Christmas to everybody and
happy holidays to everybody.
Thank you for being here once
again. Derekente from Sandia
Pueblo, uh, honored to represent
the 65th district in the House
of Representatives, where I
represent parts of Rio Rebuck
County, Sandoval County and San
Juan County, and uh, without
further ado, let's start this
meeting off today with the first
agenda items, which is titled
Quality of life as an economic
development strategy. Today we
have Amanda Weinstein, PhD
director.
research knowledge and
evaluation at the center on
rural innovation,
Doctor, the floor is yours
whenever you're ready. Thank
you.
Look I messed up. Sorry. Got it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you members of the committee.
Uh, I'm excited to be here today
and excited to talk about this.
Uh, so, I am Doctor Amanda
Weinstein. I'm the director of
research, uh, knowledge and
evaluation at the Center on
Rural Innovation, and this is
based on research that I
conducted with my co-authors,
Doctor Mike Hicks and Doctor
Emily Wornell, uh, Doctor Mike
Hicks is an economist like I am,
uh, don't hold that against me.
Uh, so we have an Emily Warne
who's a
Physiologist just to make sure
that she keeps us economists in
check. Um, so,
I wanted to tell you a little
bit about my background.
Uh, I am an economist, as I
said, uh,
Living in Ohio, also an Air
Force veteran. I went to the
United States Air Force Academy,
uh, where I studied math, so
I've always loved data and
numbers. Uh, I was a, an
economics professor for a little
bit, and now I am at the center
on rural innovation.
Uh, so I want to tell you a
little bit who we are at the
Center on Rural Innovation. Um,
we believe that small towns are
home to big ideas, uh, but small
towns need new ways of doing
economic development, uh, in new
ways of doing economic
development in order for them to
uh be part of the nation's tech
economy.
Should I tell you which side to
kind of go on if you want to do
let's see.
Did we want to put this stuff
on.
Oh, you guys can see it. I, I, I
can see it on one of my
televisions here. Oh, that's
gonna be hard because I can't
tell which one. So, so now we're
looking at the graph.
Number 4
is what I'm looking at. That's
perfect. Uh, so at the center
Armour innovation, uh, we focus
on data to understand what is
going on in rural America, and
we know that rural America has
seen a growing divide between
rural and non-rural America for
decades. Uh, and this is part of
the reason why we do the work we
do. And one thing when we see
these growing divides is we
know that what we've been doing
hasn't been working. The
economic development strategies
we have for rural America have
not been working, and we need a
new strategy.
So if you go to slide 5,
this is true not only for the
last few decades, it's also true
over the last 5 years, we see
non-rural America falling
behind, um, the country, and
this is also true for states who
have higher populations of uh
rural residents. So New Mexico
has over 33% of the population
uh in rural America. Um, so we
would expect the fate of rural
America to heavily be affecting
New Mexico as well.
So if you go to slide 6, I think
you can see a Superman looking
guy right now. Uh, so, when
communities are struggling, a
common practice that they turn
to are what we call kind of
traditional economic development
policies or traditional economic
development incentives. And
these are typically uh fiscal
policies to try and lure large
plants to struggling
communities. And this strategy
is uh pretty ubiquitous.
across America and I think that
it's well-intentioned, and that
we think these traditional
economic development policies
are and if we can be successful
and attract this large plant. We
typically view them as this kind
of savior that's gonna come and
save this town, uh, kind of like
Superman, um, so to take you
where I'm from a little bit near
Cleveland. Cleveland is the home
of Superman, the man of steel,
which makes sense. That's where
we make steel, and it's not
surprising.
To me that this is where
Superman came from as this kind
of figure who would come and
save the town. And this is a
little bit how we view, I think
traditional economic development
incentives is that someone's
going to come from somewhere
else and save the town. Um, a
lot of the research we have on
these traditional economic
development incentives though
suggests that they don't work.
Uh, I have 3 kids, so now all my
references are pretty much
superheroes, so you're just
gonna have to stick with a
superhero references.
Uh, I think instead of Superman,
it's a little bit more like
syndrome. If you've seen this
movie, if you haven't, it's
fine, um, but syndrome really
wants to be the superhero, but
he's just not. He's not a
superhero, and he ends up doing
more harm than good, even though
he wants to be a Superman, and
he wants to save the town.
So if you go to slide 8,
Uh, the research we have shows
that it's a little bit of a
vicious circle, where struggling
communities because they're
struggling, are looking for a
way to come back. Many of them,
for example, lost large plants,
large manufacturing plants. They
lost some type of large
employer. So they're looking for
that way to come back, but we
know that incentivized firms,
they typically fail to create
more jobs than firms who don't
have the incentives.
We know that incentives tend to
crowd out other businesses when
you look long term, right? So
when you look over the span of
not just one year, but over 5 to
10 years, what you see is
incentivizing one firm ends up
crowding out another firm that
would have happened had you not
incentivized that one firm. And
so the very thing you're trying
to get those businesses, you end
up crowding out.
And part of the reason can be
that money that is used for
these tax instead of policies,
um, come at a cost, right?
They're not free. And they can
come at the cost of, for
example, residential services,
which means you have to lower
residential services or account
for it in some other way, or
charge residents higher taxes.
So not only do we find that it's
this vicious circle where it
tends to on average lead to
lower growth for communities.
It's actually especially bad for
rural communities. Rural
communities increasingly have
difficulty attracting these
large plants, um, and it ends up
leading to lower growth.
Uh, so we know from previous
research that states with larger
tax incentive programs, having
an especially negative impact on
rural areas. So the graph that
you see here shows on that
x-axis, the larger that tax
incentive program is, as a
percentage of value added.
And it, what it looks at is
growth in rural areas in that
state. So that declining line
that you see there means that
the larger the state tax
incentive program is the smaller
the growth in rural areas within
that state. And so I've circled
there in New Mexico for you
there. And you can see right
there are some outliers, so
there's some areas that do kind
of worse and better, but
generally what we see is the
larger these programs are, uh,
the worst rural areas do in
those states.
And so sometimes when I talk
with policymakers, their
question is, well, what if we
make the tax incentives bigger,
um, maybe that will do it. And
we have also done that. So the
size of fiscal incentives has
tripled since 1990, so we have
tried to make them bigger, um,
yeah, and I was told that we
have to stop and pause for a
second while they get the closed
captioning up on our webcast.
Got it. No problem. I'm I can
pause.
We're gonna have to look at the
Hulk for a while.
OK.
I do think that picture is kind
of funny though when you
compare.
What Hulk looks like over time.
Now,
although you might wonder why
we're looking at a picture of
Hulk for a little bit, and
that's all right.
closed captionings are.
OK, folks, doctor, good to go. I
say we're good to go. Great.
All right, so we will move on.
Um, so I would like to take you
to Muncie, Indiana for a little
bit, where my co-authors are
from. Um, Muncy became the town
it is because of the ball
corporation. So if you have ever
had the ball jar where you
canned fruit that uh comes from
muny and that town really grew
when that plant came there, um,
around the late 1800s. And from
his memoir, if you look at the
Ball Brothers who started the
ball corporation.
Uh
He actually says in his memoir
why they chose Muncy, and he
basically says, um,
It wasn't nice. We didn't choose
that town cause we think it's a
nice town. Hopefully no one's
from Muncie here, but it's all
right. My co-authors are fine
with it. They didn't choose to
go to that town because it was
nice. They chose that it was
kind of friendly for business,
and friendly for business at
that time then it had railroads,
and it also had natural gas, and
it also had a ready labor
supply, uh, basically coming off
the farm that we're pretty well
educated. So it seemed like a
very nice place to do business.
So fast forward 111 years later.
All corporation moves out of
Munsey.
And where do they move to? They
move outside of Boulder,
Colorado.
Uh, why did they move outside
Boulder, Colorado, uh, because
they have a growing aerospace
business, and they said this is
where we can get people to go.
We can't get him to go to Muncy.
We can get him to go to Boulder.
A lot of them are already at
Boulder. That's no problem. It
wasn't because they had lower
real estate prices uh than
Muncie, Indiana, they don't. It
wasn't because they had lower
wages than Muncie, Indiana. They
don't. On almost everything,
they actually have a higher
costs moving outside Boulder.
But the one thing Boulder had is
it was easy to get people and
they could get people to move
there.
So I was actually telling this
story to uh one of my classes,
and I saw one of my students
really nodding along, like
really understanding what I was
saying. I was like, OK, no one
understands.
What I'm saying that much. Oh,
that's gonna be awkward.
Um, and I asked her what's going
on?
like on a Zoom meeting.
Oh, I've got 3 kids. I'm used to
a lot being thrown at me.
All right. Are we good? Oh yeah,
that sounds better. So I tell
her this and she says,
Uh, my boyfriend is interning
with Ball State, and I think
we're gonna move to Boulder.
And I imagine what this
conversation looked like with
her parents, where she tells her
parents were moving to Boulder,
and they think, of course,
right? That's where the jobs
are. You're moving to the jobs,
but nobody stops to question why
the jobs are there? Why are the
jobs there to begin with?
Yeah
So when you think about this
kind of history of the ball
corporation that spans over a
century from going to a place
that was just simply a good
place to do business, to a place
where they viewed as people like
it and it's a high quality of
life place. This actually
matches with the recent research
we have in economics, where this
is a quote, so we've seen uh in
recent research that the success
of cities hinges more and more
on cities's role as centers of
consumption.
And what he means is more than
centers of production. It
doesn't mean that cities aren't
producing anything. It means
that they've changed their
focus, and they've changed their
focus to centers of consumption
to be the place people want to
be.
And this is especially important
for these knowledge economy type
jobs, for example, the aerospace
industry that Ball Corporation
does.
And so we also saw this pivot,
so this is uh during the
pandemic where we see mayors of
large cities shifting their
focus from attracting firms to
attracting residents by
improving quality of life, but
they haven't stopped trying to
attract firms. They're just
changing their strategy. They're
doing it by making their city a
place where people want to be
and seeing the jobs follow that.
So a lot of this research in
economics is based on large
metropolitan cities. Uh, partly
because that's where we have the
data, but also that's also where
a lot of economists are from,
are from large cities. Um, so
what we wanted to do is have a
method that was a little more
inclusive. And when we look at
these methods for measuring this
kind of broad idea of quality of
life. Is it a nice place to
live. We wanted a method that
would be inclusive of rural
areas and smaller counties. And
so we do
is using the same economic
fundamentals, uh, that the
traditional quality of life
methodologies used. Uh, and if
we have any real estate agents
in here, we know that real
estate agents have 3 favorite
words is location, location, and
location, right? They know that
a large part of that home price
is simply where it is, right?
You take one home, either, you
know, where I am near Ohio to
Santa Fe, New Mexico, and the
price will be higher here,
right? There's some part of
location there.
that is in that house price,
other than the rooms and the
size. So what that means is we
can use housing markets to get
this kind of location premium.
What is the premium people are
willing to pay, just simply for
the location that house is at.
And we can do it not only out of
housing markets. We can also do
it out of the labor markets. Uh,
so people are actually willing
to accept lower wages to be in a
place where they want to work.
And so this is sometimes a place
where some people are like.
Do they really, uh, so usually
if I talk to HR at a large
corporation, they say, oh yeah,
our headquarters in, you know,
in another location, we'll say
it's North Dakota. We always
have a harder time getting
accountants there, and we pay
them more. We have to pay him
more in, in this location, North
Dakota, because it's harder to
get him to move there.
Uh, but I was also talking with,
uh, another co-author in
Michigan, and he says, oh yeah,
that's Traverse City, Michigan.
And I said, oh, what do you mean
that's Traverse City, Michigan?
He said, Well, everyone knows we
have a saying here, right? In
Traverse City, you get half the
pay for a view of the bay.
They know, they know they're
giving up wages to live there
cause people like to live there,
but what that means for me as an
economist is I can use this. I
can use the data from housing
markets and labor markets, and
extract that kind of location
premium.
And so what we're doing here is
it's called this housing
residual, so we're taking this
location premium, aside from the
age of the house and the size of
the house and some other
characteristics and figuring out
what that location premium is
out of the housing market.
That's that housing residual.
And we're doing the same thing
out of labor markets. So we're
estimating wages, and we're
accounting for your industry,
your education, various other
characteristics to get that
location premium out of wages.
And so if you look in that top
left corner of this scatter
plot, these are the ones with
the highest housing premium and
wage premium to live there. So
these bluer dots would have the
higher estimated quality of life
proxying for from these markets.
And so we can see places like
Hawaii, Hawaii. This is the
garden island of Hawaii. Uh,
these are all small towns I'm
looking at, by the way. We also
see, uh, a county Wasatch, Utah.
um, so they have a ski resort
there. You see Taos there, uh,
as these are great places where
people love to live, and these
are all small towns, so we can
do the same thing for a large
towns, uh, so in my research, we
really wanted to focus here at
this point on small towns.
And if you look at the top
right, what you're seeing there
is a little bit more of a mix.
It's a little bit nice to live
and nice to do business. The
bottom right, that kind of
orange or red color are the
places that are probably really
great to do business, maybe not
as nice to live. Um, a lot of
those places stand out is oil
and gas counties. Um, this is
where companies can make a lot
of money, um, great place to do
business, but people might not
want to live there. And then the
bottom left corner is a little
bit um can be not the best of
either world.
I don't like to focus on the
negative part as much, so.
Uh, so if we pull out the
Midwest premium. So I'm gonna
take you to the Midwest a little
bit. So if you compare these
scatter plots here between small
towns across the nation to small
towns just in the Midwest. What
you can see in the Midwest is a
much heavier focus on that
quality of business, not as much
on that quality of life, and the
Midwest as a region has been
struggling, um, for quite some
time. So I did the same thing
with the data. So this is
looking at the southwest. So
here it's New Mexico, Arizona.
Nevada, Utah, and Colorado. And
this is looking at all counties.
So this is looking at a small
towns, uh, and large towns,
looking at every county in these
uh states. And we can see it's
so compared to the Midwest,
where we really don't have many,
uh, in that quality of life.
Um, part there, we see a lot
more spread out. And we
especially see small towns. We
see a lot of small towns that
are in that quality of life
section, as places that are
generally the people there think
are nice places to live.
So what we do is we take this
housing residual and wage
residual. This location premium.
And we get an estimate or a
proxy for quality of life in
every county across the United
States. So in this map, the blue
areas have higher estimated
quality of life compared to the
nation, and the orangeish
reddish areas have lower
estimated quality of life. And
we can see some regional
patterns coming out that we
might predict. So if you look at
the West Coast, people probably
like beaches. We can kind of
pull out the mountain range
there, people probably like
mountains. Uh, so you can also
pull out, um, Appalachia, for
example, if you're familiar with
where Appalachia is. We see a
pretty heavy orange area there,
um, where Appalachia is.
The other thing we can do with
this data is estimate quality of
business based on where
businesses are willing to pay to
go. And again, you see things
like Silicon Valley pop out,
where businesses really want to
go there. Um, this is where
businesses are willing to pay to
actually pay for those aerospace
engineers, for example, or those
tech workers, and we see this
pop out in some of those
regions.
So
Where quality of life is looking
at where do households want to
live? Where do they want to be?
Where's their location premium.
The quality of business is
looking at that location premium
from a business perspective.
Where are they willing to pay a
premium to locate their
business. And so what these two
methods give us, um, in
economics, there's always a
little bit of a chicken and egg
issue, right? Do the jobs come
first or do the people come
first? Are people moving to jobs
or jobs moving to where people
are.
And it's probably always been a
little bit of both.
Um, but something I really like
about economics is trends can
change over time. We can make
different choices. We can change
our preferences. And so what
this data gives us is a way to
kind of estimate where are we
now in this kind of chicken and
egg question. Do we see more
people moving to jobs, or do we
see more jobs moving to where
people want to go.
So here I'll pull out our small
towns in the Midwest. Uh, what
we generally find across the US
is that quality of life matters
more for population growth,
which we might expect. This is
where people want to be, but it
also matters more for job
growth. Uh, this is true across
the US, uh, both rural and
non-rural. It is actually
especially true for rural areas,
and it is especially true for
the Midwest. And so you can see
that Grand Traverse County.
If you look at the top left is
looking at the relationship
between our quality of life
measure and population growth.
You see Grand Traverse County
there, as that's one of those
standouts in quality of life,
where they also have a lot of
population growth on the right
hand side is showing you that
relationship between our quality
of life metric and employment
growth. So we see a strong
relationship there between
quality of life with higher
estimated quality of life being
associated with higher
population growth and higher job
growth.
So in the next one I pulled out
the same data for the Southwest.
And here, and so I just labeled
a few of those so you can see
Wasatch County is another one
that comes out, um, and we see
in general the same relationship
with higher estimated quality of
life, uh, being associated with
higher population growth and
higher job growth.
So when we look at the quality
of the business environment, we
generally find it is not related
to population growth or job
growth, um, either negatively
related or just not
statistically significant in any
way.
And we see the same thing with
our southwest counties that this
quality of that business
environment, uh, proxy is not
associated with population
growth or job growth.
So, most of this study data,
this original data was done
before the pandemic. So we also
have uh a new study where we
wanted to see what happened post
pandemic. So much changed uh
with the pandemic, especially
with the rise of remote work
means that people can
increasingly work wherever they
want to, which means an
increasing number of people are
free to live wherever they want
to. So we wanted to see in the
wake of the pandemic, did things
change?
And what we see is the
relationship between quality of
life and things like population
growth. Not only did it hold
strong, but it actually
increased. So what we see if
we're just looking at the
southwest counties that the
increase was a 4 times increase
in the relationship between
quality of life and population
growth. We see the same thing
happening across the country,
that this relationship is
strengthening between population
growth, job growth, and quality
of life.
So we also wanted to look at
what does this look like across
space. Um, so what that means is
we wanted to look at how does
one county affect its
neighboring counties.
So when one county is focusing
on that quality of the business
environment. It actually
negatively impacts the counties
around it. And this is pretty
common with traditional economic
development incentives. There's
a lot of what we call job
piracy. When you're attracting a
plant, that plant typically
comes from somewhere. Sometimes
it comes from the county nearby.
Or a state
not helpful for the neighboring
county, they lost that plant for
the county that got it, they won
it. So what we see is those
counties folks on the quality of
business environment, have that
negative impact on the region
through this kind of job piracy.
When we look at the counties
focusing more on quality of
life. They actually have a
positive impact on the counties
around it, meaning that even if
your county does nothing for
quality of life, but the county
next to you improves their
quality of life, you actually
get higher population growth and
job growth in your county, and
in some parts because people can
live in your county and still
drive to the nearby county if
there's something nice about
that county they want to visit.
For example, the counties near
here might come here to go see
the galleries and go to the
restaurant.
And that's nice for the counties
nearby and actually helps the
counties nearby.
So when we look at quality of
life, this idea is a little bit
of this kind of vague idea,
right? What does it mean to be a
nice place, right? So if you
believe me that quality of life
is important for economic
development. Your next question
is likely, OK, but what makes
the place nice? What actually
increases their quality of life.
So the first thing that we
wanted to check was, uh, the US
Department of Agriculture, the
USDA has a natural amenity
index, um, which takes into
account a host of things,
mountains, beaches, generally
natural amenities that people
like. And generally with the
trends that we've seen, we would
think that our quality of life
measures should be associated
with having better natural
amenities, and that's what we
find. We find that the higher
you are on their natural amenity
index.
The higher estimated quality of
life.
So when we break down other
things that are associated with
our quality of life metric. So
what we do is we use a
statistical approach where we
throw between 200 and 300
different amenities. Basically,
anything we could measure and we
let it pull out the most
statistically significant
things.
And what it pulled out for us,
if you look at the top one,
recreation. These are actually
recreation businesses.
So when we use this method, what
we find is that USDA natural
amenity index, the impact
actually goes away.
Because it matters more how you
are leveraging your natural
amenities than if you actually
have the natural amenities. So
what pops out more are the
recreation businesses. Do you
have recreation businesses that,
yes, could be used for tourism,
but also are just used for
residents that residents have
access to use every day.
Another one that pops out, uh,
is arts and culture, right? So
you walk around here and even
walking around the rotunda,
right? You see arts everywhere,
arts and culture is an important
thing for quality of life.
Um, but I like to say with both
recreation arts and culture.
These are arts and culture
businesses, um, that they
matter, but they probably look
different in every single
county, right? So it doesn't
mean that what arts and culture
works for here will work in
another county. It can and
should be unique to that county.
And I'd like to give an example,
I actually show a picture if you
look at the top right, this is
Lawrenceburg, Kentucky.
And there this is kind of the
bourbon trail type region. And
in Lawrenceburg, Kentucky, a
very small town in Kentucky,
they built this splash pad with
a bourbon barrel spraying water
on kids. I don't know if it's
appropriate, but I do kind of
like it cause it's building on
their kind of arts and culture
in a way that is really for, I
mean, tourists could use it too,
but it's also for residents to
be kind of proud of who they
are, of their heritage, of
what's unique about that
community, and it's really
mixing a lot of things here,
right? Is this recreation
right? Is it parks? Is it arts
and culture, right? It's a
little bit of everything really,
when you look at that splash
pad, right? Is it for the
adults? Is it for the kids,
right? It looks like it's for
the kids, but I can tell you as
a parent, being able to have my
kids go on a splash pad for an
hour, and I can sit there and
chat with a friend. It's also
for me too, right? It's, it's
pretty nice. Um, so when we look
at a lot of these kind of
amenities and nice things,
right? We find things pop out
that are similar in all the.
things like recreation arts and
culture, while still being
unique to that area.
Other things that pop out are
better health.
Having better health, food
stores, um, so this is often one
that I think is overlooked. Do
you have access to even just
simply grocery stores. Um, so
I've talked to, uh, policymaker
in Boston who said, I don't
think grocery stores are that
important. I said, that's
because you have them, right?
When you have it, it doesn't
seem like it's that important.
When you don't, it can become
hugely important. Grocery stores
matter. Uh, so there's a small
town in Illinois, where they
didn't have a grocery store. The
town actually came together with
their
local government to put in a
grocery store. That grocery
store is more than a grocery
store. It's actually where they
meet up. This is where you meet
people. This is where you go for
an hour, you shop, you chat,
that grocery store is more than
a grocery store. It's also a
place where people come
together, where they share
what's going on in town. It's
essentially for other towns,
it's their coffee shop, except
for it's their grocery store.
So a lot of these places,
especially in smaller towns, are
really doing multiple purposes
for its quality of life.
Another one, personal care
places. So these are things like
barbershops, salons, um,
proximity to a metro. So this uh
shows up in uh
pretty much any rural research
that it helps to be near a metro
area.
And that's kind of where we
usually leave it. And we kind of
understand this to be true. If
you're a rural area, the better
your connection to that nearest
by metro area, the better you
do, um, but we don't often
really talk much about why that
is, right? If being near a metro
area really helps. But why?
Well, usually people say, well,
it's for the jobs, right? You go
there for the jobs. Well, then
why don't you just go live in
the metro area.
If you could live and work in
the same area.
And, well, that's where they
want to live.
Right? So that really helps
being in the area because you
can live in the place that you
want to live and have access to
a job.
So other things that matter,
things like low crime rates,
good schools.
One of the things that uh shows
up very statistically
significant that I cannot get
rid of is just having good
schools. Do you have a good K-12
system and specifically here
we're looking at how well funded
your K-12 system is. Uh, how
well funded your K-12 system is.
Now whether that, how much that
matters for uh school outcomes
that
What matters is parents think it
does. And here, where people are
making decisions is they think
it matters for their quality of
life, that they are choosing to
be in locations where they have
better funded K-12 schools.
Uh, so another one that comes
out is basically, can you work
from home?
So it would be broadband access,
a lot of that. Do you have the
ability to live there and
potentially uh work from home,
be a remote worker.
So when we look at some of these
amenities, uh, this is just
looking at a state look. So on
the left, just to give you an
idea by state is looking at how
much uh their value added
outdoor recreation accounts for
in that state. So the darker
blue areas are spending more, a
higher portion essentially or
more of their output is really
going towards outdoor
recreation. On the right-hand
side, this is looking at arts
and cultural. Uh, so how much of
that value add is going towards
arts and culture type.
activities in the economy.
And so it really just gives you
a kind of a comparison, at least
on those top two, kind of how
each state compares.
And so sometimes when I talk
about this, um,
I've gotten the feedback that it
seems like I'm very
anti-business and a lot of it
is, uh, I understand my data
cause I'm, you know, in it all
the time, that a lot of the
things that pop up are actually
businesses, right? So the
recreation I showed you or
actually recreation businesses,
the arts and culture I showed
you are arts and culture
businesses, the personal care
places, the food stores, all of
those are businesses. They're
businesses where they
specifically are having their
largest impact on quality of
life, because they are providing
the things that we need. We need
growth.
g ro ce ry stores, but also that
we want. We want recreation
places. And so this is where I
would argue that small
businesses can have the biggest
impact that isn't captured by a
lot of traditional measures,
when they are the businesses
that are providing the goods and
services that local residents
need and want. So I have two
kinds of pictures here, so this
is from, uh, where, uh, you
know, my hometown where I'm in
Hudson, Ohio, two of my favorite
businesses. So one is Farmers
rail, so this is a restaurant,
so we're actually um
historically
a dairy farming town, um, and I
point out this restaurant
because, uh, everybody loves it.
Um, but it really builds off, I
think, the character of the
town, and they've done it in a
nice way. Um, so we've got a
history of dairy farming, and
they actually sourced locally,
um, local dairy, they also
source local cows. You actually
go pick out your cut of beef and
all right there in the store. So
it kind of is this providing
this great restaurant that we
love. It is also related to the
history of our town.
And on the left is Sky zone. Um,
it turns out Ohio has winters,
uh, where it's not quite as fun
to be outside and you can't use
the playgrounds, uh, in the
winters. I mean you can, but my,
you know, most kids choose not
to. Um, but I love Skyzone cause
it's this indoor playground for
my kids, right? So what this is
really getting at is it's a way
to be out and about doing
something active for every
season. And one thing that I see
with um some of the areas that
are kind of doing a
better is they really tout every
season, right? They don't hide a
season. They don't say, oh, we
have a great summer, just ignore
the winter. Um, but they are
really, so I think Wisconsin is
actually a great example of
this, where if you go to a lot
of their, their local websites,
they will tout every single
season and what people are
doing, and they're out and about
in every season. They love every
season there. I don't know if
everyone would, but they do love
every season.
And so I just want to point out
with this too, uh.
I, I think this focus on quality
of life is really uh
It's not new, but a different
way of thinking about economic
development. And it is really
focusing locally on our local
community and what our local
community needs and wants. Uh,
and if other people love it too,
that's great, but it is, I
think, using kind of tax dollars
and our businesses to think a
little bit more locally. Um,
But one thing that we uh also
caution is when you look at some
of these, if we look at
recreation jobs, for example.
If local residents don't have
ownership in that company, that
that is not their company, then
those jobs are often lower paid,
so a lot of the tourist type
jobs. And so I highlight here,
um, some recent pay. So at the
bottom where that arrow is are
um that personal care that
showed up as a business that's
important for quality of life.
Um, also food preparation and
food service important for
quality of life, but it tends to
be lower paid.
And so one thing we need to make
sure is that I think we're
giving people access to economic
opportunity to either own that
restaurant or own that business.
Or to have access to other jobs,
not just these, for example,
recreation jobs. And so I
highlighted at the top there are
these computer and math jobs,
these are essentially tech jobs.
Um, which have the most access
to remote work, uh, of any
occupation, and they tend to be
very highly paid. Now, a lot of
tech jobs are moving to where
high quality of life places are.
But, right? I kind of also think
about this as these kind of
foundational elements for
economic development. It's a
start, but it's really hard to
have a tech job if you don't
have broadband.
And so there's more that comes
with this, I think as well, is
the quality of life is kind of
the foundation, making sure that
everyone has access to the
various aspects of quality of
life and access to economic
opportunity, which includes
other things like broadband,
which also showed up in our
quality of life measure of just,
it's important to have that
connection and to have that
broadband.
And so I'd like to point out um
a new business that we actually
have nearby me in the in the
town of Akron and a little bit
of the history of how this
business came to be. Um, so
Akron, if you didn't know, is
the rubber capital or was the
rubber capital of the world, um,
rubber is actually making it is
um kind of very gritty work.
Typically the men have stained
black hands from making those
rubber tires. And so it's kind
of got this greediness to it,
um, and, uh, after a long day's
work, there's there were places
where.
The rubber workers went, and
they're still around. They're uh
bars where they went and they
still have this kind of, I think
of this like grittiness with
this bar, um, and, uh, this is
uh a picture of Jamie, who went
to this bar with his friends,
and they started, so I don't
know if this is debatable, but
this is where the Akron sound
came from and the birth of this
Aron sound and the birthplace of
punk. So we are one of the
places that would claim to be
this birthplace of punk and some
of this kind of, I think of a
little bit, some of it is a
little bit grittier music.
And he was also this kind of
tinkerer, loved to use his
hands, solve problems that way.
And if you've heard of the Black
Keys, the Black Keys come from
Akron, Ohio, and he toured
around with the Black Keys and
the Black Keys guitarist said,
you know, I just need a
different pedal. I don't play
guitar, but this is my
understanding of guitars, right?
They have a pedal that can
change the sound of these
electric guitars. And he said, I
want a different sound. Do you
think you could make that for
me? It's like, I think I could
make it for you. So we made this
pedal, uh, for the guitarist of
the Black Keys and then word
got.
out, he started making pedals
for other people, and now he has
his own business, and there's no
place that you wanted that
business other than his hometown
in Akron, Ohio.
And based on this kind of long
history of the city and
something the city is known for.
So I also have a picture of
there, we have uh an event every
year called Porch Rocker, and it
really just started off as a
couple of people and a couple
bands on people's porches and
they would play.
And now it's kind of grown and
grown and is a huge neighborhood
event with lots of porches, lots
of bands, lots of food trucks,
right, kind of building off this
kind of culture in Akron that
turned into a very real
business, and there's no place
he wants that business than in
Akron, Ohio.
So when you do a survey of
entrepreneurs, of where they
want their business.
Right? Many go to their
hometown, uh, many also go to
places with high quality of
life, like you heard the Ball
corporation do.
They want a place with high
quality of life. Why? Because
it's easy to get workers. It's
easier to attract workers to
your business when you have that
higher quality of life.
So when we looked at our same
data.
When we look at that index of
quality of life and the growth
in the number of business
establishments. We see that
higher estimated quality of life
is also associated with just
simply more businesses, more
businesses start in places with
higher quality of life. So I
also gave you an example again
of Traverse City there, and some
of these businesses are, yes,
they're restaurants, and they
are these businesses
contributing directly more
directly to the quality of life,
but this one actually is a
robotics company that started in
Traverse City.
Where you see they're locating
where they want to locate and
giving people access to a
broader range of economic
opportunity.
So I also looked at the data for
the Southwest, and we can see
again that that higher estimated
quality of life is associated
with more business starts, the
higher estimated quality of life
you have. And so I gave you just
a few examples here. So this is
looking at Wasatch County, Utah.
um, so they have this entum, um,
for triathlon bikes where you
can buy. So building on kind of
a recreation activity that
people really like to do in that
area. And you see bikes there,
but you also see a lot of
venture capital.
And specifically, uh, some of
these more banking type
activities are happening in this
area. They're investing in local
businesses. So that's what this
hyperactive um new business is
doing is investing in local
businesses, giving them the
startup capital that they need.
So 98% of all venture capital
goes to large metropolitan
areas, more than half goes to
just 5 metropolitan areas across
the US, which means the vast
majority of businesses in the
vast majority of places.
are not receiving venture
capital, something that's really
important for these businesses
to actually scale.
Uh, so this one is looking at um
in Colorado, and so some of
these businesses are things like
they have a tequila business
that started up that is now
renowned. They also have, um,
Different things associated with
recreation, and so there's kind
of this wide range of businesses
starting in these high quality
of life places. And so, as I've
mentioned, I think this quality
of life, there's a lot to this
model, but really is I think of
quality of life as these
foundational elements, um, and
it includes a lot of different
things. It includes why people
like to live there. And there
are some common reasons why
people like to live there. For
example, we find recreation arts
and culture, um, public health
and having good K-12 schools,
but there can also be things
that data.
can't capture. If it's just a
welcoming community. If people
like to be there, if they have
those social networks, all of
those are kind of part of the
fabric of quality of life, to
build on these other elements.
For example, broadband
infrastructure, access to
educational opportunities and
supporting these small
businesses and entrepreneurship.
Um, and so I like to highlight
Taos, um, so I, I'm sure we have
more Tao experts in the room
than I am here, so Taos is one
of the communities we work with
at the Center on Rural
Innovation. And one thing that I
like to highlight about Taos is
Taos has the highest quality of
life, um, other than I think
Towson Traver City are probably
pretty close, um, then most of
the communities that we work
with, um, but the people we work
with in Taos are really um
intent on giving people broader
access to
economic opportunity. So they're
doing a lot of work to not only
build out their infrastructure,
make sure that people in Taos
have access to the same quality
of broadband as any large
metropolitan area, but that they
also have access to things like
coworking spaces, where remote
workers can go and meet and talk
about their ideas and giving
them programs to access tech
jobs where they don't have to
leave and go to that nearest
metro area to get that job,
where they can actually be
trained in non-traditional
programs and get those higher.
paying jobs if that's what they
want without having to leave if
they don't want to leave. And
where we can also have things
like entrepreneurship support
programs where we can support
those small businesses so that
they can have those startups
where they're at, and again,
where they don't have to go to
that large metropolitan area if
that's not where they want to
go.
And so when I think about the
data that we have is I think
instead of that vicious circle,
it's really a little bit
becoming more of a virtuous
circle when we think about new
models of economic development.
And here what we did is we
looked at our data at a longer
look between 1980 and 2019. And
we looked at the correlation
between quality of business and
quality of life. And if you look
in the 1980s and this generally
fits with previous research. The
1980s and before, businesses and
residents just disagree.
On the places they wanted to be.
They wanted to be in different
places, businesses like this
place, households like this
place. When you see that
negative turned to a positive
and become larger. What we're
seeing over time is generally
over time, businesses and people
are starting to agree more and
more. They are agreeing on the
same places where they want to
be. For example, that bolder
example I gave you with Ball
Corporation.
And so we're seeing more and
more evidence for this kind of
virtuous circle.
high quality of life places are
attracting businesses and
they're growing businesses and
startups and attracting
population and attracting jobs,
and we see that highly skilled
people, workers in those places,
they end up starting more
businesses. And we know that
those small locally owned
businesses, they actually have a
larger impact.
And the
Those non-locally owned
businesses do.
And sometimes I like to say that
the size of the ribbon cutting
doesn't determine the size of
the economic impact in the end.
But really a lot of those small
businesses can have outsized
impact once we look at those
measures.
And we see this is true not only
um with
Areas that are doing well, for
example, if we look at boulders
and the aspens of the world, we
also see that entrepreneurship
has an especially important
impact even in lagging areas. So
even in lagging areas, even in
high poverty areas that it has
especially important impact.
And that we know that these
small businesses can increase
the quality of life in this
place, and also increase access
to economic opportunity and help
giving people ownership in those
businesses, which then gets
reinvested back into the
community, which can be
reinvested into more quality of
life type things in the
community.
And so when I think about this
research as a whole, so we start
off with the superhero's idea,
um.
I, um, typically I try not to be
the economist that like lets
people down and really tells
you, but there's no Superman,
right? There's no Superman
coming to save anyone's town,
just doesn't exist, right?
There's no Superman.
The Superheroes that we find are
regular residents. Nobody's
gonna love your town more than
the people who have already
chosen to be there.
There's nobody that you can
bring in.
that will love that town more.
The people that love that town
are already there.
And so instead we need to make
sure people know that they are
the superheroes, the people that
are going to save that town are
them.
By promoting their
entrepreneurship and promoting
that entrepreneurial spirit, not
only to start a business, but to
start a business that increases
the quality of life in that
place to address the needs and
wants in that community. And
when that community has a
challenge, right, that they're
encouraged to pursue those
opportunities to solve those
challenges in entrepreneurial
ways.
And so when I think about these
kind of recommendations we have
for
Uh, economic development, right?
The first when we think about is
investing in quality of life.
But that's kind of first off,
right? Do you have the quality
of life? What we find a lot of
rural communities actually do.
Just talk to residents. They
love living there. A lot of
small towns and a lot of towns
already have quality of life,
right? Doesn't mean they're
perfect, doesn't mean it
couldn't be better. But they
already have high quality of
life in many small towns. That's
why people are there. And so
then,
build on that.
Right? So making sure you have
infrastructure, modern
infrastructure. So that would be
things like broadband and places
for people to be. That place
where people can come together
and meet up, and especially
those remote coworkers, right?
So those remote workers need a
place where they can be and
interact with people and see
people so those co-working
spaces can be especially helpful
for remote workers and just
members of the town.
Um, and when we think about
Strategies to increase, for
example, remote workers or
people who want to start a
business. Your best bet is
either the people who are
already there or the people who
are from there.
Because they already know the
benefits of the town. It's gonna
be a lot easier to convince
them.
And I think with all of this is
that there needs to be a focus
on residents, right? It is not
building something that we think
some tourists will come see. It
is building something that we
know residents will love and
will access. And sometimes does
that mean tourists love it?
Yeah, but really the focus is on
local residents when it comes to
this economic development
strategy, whether we're talking
about quality of life or
building on quality of.
And that's it. Thank you.
Thank you, doctor, for
Making a presentation this
morning.
We will go to the committee for
questions or comments. Anyone?
Questions, comments?
Nobody, OK. Representative
Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sweinstein.
There's a long article in the
Wall Street Journal this
morning.
About companies.
Rescinding.
The ability to remotely work.
And it appears as though that
circumstances accelerating.
How does that factor into
Your study, so we, what we've
found with remote worker, uh, so
the trend is, was increasing
even before the pandemic. It was
just small enough that we kind
of didn't notice, and I'll say
it's true even in the field of
economics. So what the pandemic
did is really put it on
steroids. Suddenly, everybody
notices it. So part of that was
out of necessity. And some of
that didn't.
Needs, we don't have that
necessity anymore essentially.
So some of what we've seen with
the data is it's come back down,
but it is still orders of
magnitude larger than it was
pre-pandemic.
And what we see is a lot of it
depends on the workers. So it
tends to be higher paid, a
little bit more of these kind of
white collar jobs, uh, finance
type jobs, tech jobs that they
tend to have more access to
remote work, and if they don't
get access to remote work, what
we find is they have the ability
to leave and that they do, and
that they leave and find a
company where they do have
access to. OK. Thank you. That
was it.
Thank you, Representative Scott.
Let's go to Senator Burke.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you number one for your
service to our country. We
greatly appreciate that, and we
appreciate you being here. This
has been a very enlightening
presentation. Uh, I come small
town here now in New Mexico
called Alamogordo next to
Holloman Air Force Base. My
husband was actually born there.
Oh, really? Well, we should,
well, no,
uh, anyway, this is just a
struggle, I think that every
small town, uh uh deals with and
um
Oftentimes we've brought ideas
to the table, and um
Sometimes the business community
or the financial community
within these towns.
are afraid to support something
like that because it's
comfortable doing what they've
been doing. And I think that is
probably
One of the biggest challenges
that a small town has is how.
You change the mentality of
residents who love being there,
uh, and they want more
amenities, but they're a little
afraid of change.
Obviously, you have had to come
across this. Do you have any
suggestions or thoughts on how
you change the direction of the,
the decision makers in the small
community.
Yeah, so I, so we have an
article and it's about what we
call lighter, quicker, cheaper.
So the other um hard thing about
small towns is the budgets are a
lot smaller as well, and you're
right, it's a change and it's
also a risk, right? So if you
put a lot of money into
something that you think will
improve quality of life and it
doesn't, that can have a huge
impact on a small town. But when
you do what we call lighter,
quicker, cheaper, is it could
start, for example, so we had
one town who they really wanted
um to get a grant to redo this
historic bowling alley, and they
thought it would be great.
But you don't know. Do people
still like bowling? Well, they
like bowling in this town. So
what we suggested to them is
during one of the festivals
where everyone is kind of in
town or I can't remember how
much, for a much lower cost. You
can do it, it's kind of a blow
up bowling alley. And just to
see how much will residents
engage with it? How much will
they like it? And so you can do
these kind of pop up places, um,
just to see, do we think it's
worth it? Will they like it? And
if you see, oh, it turns out
nobody really likes this, you
know, bowling alley, then maybe
it's not a good idea to try and
get a grant for the bowling
alley.
Uh, so we also saw it with a
nature center uh near Akron,
where they wanted to change a
pump house building to a nature
center, but they started with a
pop-up nature center, just to
see if the local community would
come by, would interact with it,
they enjoy it. And it was the
pop-up was such a success that
they were able to apply for a
grant to completely redo this
pump house into a nature center.
And so what these lighter,
quicker, cheaper projects do,
they start to build momentum
without a way that seems huge.
And it's also a way to get
grants.
too. So if you do this bowling
alley or this pop-up nature
center and show that it's a
success. So for the funders of
that grant, you can also say we
already think this is going to
do well because this pop-up
nature center did well or this
little pop-up bowling alley was
the most popular thing at the
festival they had. And so it
gives you a way to kind of, I
would say build momentum. So
you're not starting with this
huge project, you're starting
with small little things that
the community can see and
interact with. And it also
involves really, I think
conversations within the
community and making
the whole community is involved
in terms of what do they want?
In one town, it might be a
splash pad, right, in another
town, it might be something
else. What is that something
else? What is it that they don't
have or that they want or they
want to make better.
OK, well, I thank you for that.
I, I just, I just see, like I
say, some of the people who ran
positions.
In communities like mine.
say they want change, but they,
they really don't. They're very
comfortable with what they're
doing, and to change that
mindset is, is very difficult.
Unfortunately, the people who
are right behind them who want
to take that position.
have that same mindset and, and
moving that dial is, is very,
very difficult, not to say it
can't be done, but, but it's
very difficult. Some people come
up with really great ideas for
our community, um, and yet they
don't seem to be acted upon or,
uh that group or those, those
folks get channeled off into
doing something and that big
idea kind of falls by the
wayside, uh, and then you wait
for the next big thing to come
along. It, it's, it's a
difficult
thing to pull everybody together
and keep them together. That's,
I think, the struggle that many
of us have in most small
communities in in New Mexico. It
it's
I firmly believe in my heart
that you can be overcome.
But it takes a few people who
are willing to work at 365 24/7
to make that happen, and finding
those people in today's
environment who are just
Try to make a living, uh,
becomes a struggle as well. We
just don't see younger people
trying, want to get involved in
Kiwanis Rotary and in the
chamber of commerce and things
like that, like many of us used
to, uh, so that's a little bit
of a challenge too is changing
that mindset because they want
to work, they want a paycheck,
they want to go home and sit in
front of the tube.
So, anyway,
thank you. Thank you, Senator
Burr. Let's go to Senator
Stefaniks.
Si.
You didn't ask, OK, that's OK.
We'll go right next then to uh
Representative Ferrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your presentation, um.
I found it fascinating. I
represent the rural North, uh,
including Taos.
Um
I just, I have more of a
statement, I guess, rather than
a question. I, you know, it
really depends on water,
broadband, and electricity to
start a business, and, you know,
I think this state has really
neglected water infrastructure
for rural.
Rural or uh rural counties. Uh
we have a tribal infrastructure,
we have a colonial
infrastructure, uh, so we have
really helped those communities
upgrade their water water
infrastructure, we have not done
that for rural communities.
We've had a lot of good water
legislation. I'm not saying we
haven't done that.
But we haven't created a
separate.
A separate um fund.
To do rural water
infrastructure, and I think
that's desperately needed. We
did put 100 million about 4
years ago into broadband, and
all I can say is I don't think
the executive office is really
managed to really make that fun
work. It, it just hasn't
happened, and I'm just gonna say
that and as far electric Kit
Carson is one of the leading,
you know.
Companies in the in the in
really in the whole United
States, you're kind of a real
leader in Louis Rees and his
team have done, and his board
really looked way ahead.
And, and then a lot of amazing
things. We have uh electric co
ops and these, you know, these
were, I don't know these, these
borders were drawn years ago,
and, and if you live in a large
rural co op.
That doesn't have um
I wanna say, uh, a visionary.
You know, a visionary view for
their for their constituents,
it, it can really be
problematic, so I, I just think
if we're really gonna talk about
changing the quality of life in
rural New Mexico. We need as a
state to look at those systems
and see how we can upgrade
those, or it's, it's really not
gonna change very much at all.
Um, you know, you, we have good
businesses, we have good local
businesses. I come from a small
town of Dixon.
And it's amazing. We did a co op
years ago. It was um.
I wrote the grant. My husband
did the business plan. I
remember that first year it was
a grant we had to raise 100,000.
I said, we'll never raise
100,000, but it was a grant so
and we got a match. It was a
USDA and we got a a match uh
from a local millionaire and uh
We started it.
Fast forward 20 years, that
business now hires 20 people,
uh, uh, during his local produce
in to that co op, uh, and it's
$2 million business a year. I
mean, it, it's and it has become
the town center for this little
village. So I represent a lot of
historical villages, but we we
really struggle with them.
A decent water systems that are
basically run by volunteers.
And, uh, you know,
That's the water that feeds our
schools and our businesses and
everybody and these water
systems, these mutual domestics
are run by volunteers, and I
think if we don't have.
Um
Uh, legislation uh to correct
that, and I will be introducing
some. It's, it's not gonna
change anytime soon. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I guess it's a, it's
a comment more than a more than
a question. Thank you. Thank
you, can I respond? I was gonna
say thank you, representative.
So I think, um, so it's not
about water, but you sometimes
underestimate the impact that
even infrastructure can have, so
I have a friend um with a home
in rural West Virginia. And she
had a friend who created this
new app and says it's gonna be
so great, you can take this app
and find any trail where you're
at.
And find this thing to do and
this thing to do, and she said,
well, how are people going to
access it? She said, what do you
mean? She said, we don't have
cell service and we don't have
broadband. How are they going to
use that app? And her, her, the
friend that created this app
just had, had no idea that the
infrastructure that wasn't
there, that was enabling so
much, so much other things, and
I would also like to comment on
the comment, the co-ops that um
you mentioned the electric co op
that, uh, so we have a recent
broadband study. And one thing
that we see with the co ops is
they have a different
business model. It is a
community centered business
model. It is also a model of
long-term investment, not
short-term profits. And so what
that means is you also see these
co-ops do things like not only
invest in uh in electric coop
investing in, for example, fiber
broadband, but you also see, and
it's, you know, locally owned by
the the members of the co op.
They also do things like
They have an ice cream truck and
they bring it to every football
game, right? Which is a nice
little thing, but it's because
they are so ingrained in the
community. What we saw with
these co-ops did not only the
infrastructure, but they did
these other things that would
improve quality of life in the
area because they were locally
owned and such strong community
members. Thank you. Let's move
on then to Senator Tollman.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, uh.
Doctor, excellent presentation.
You're an excellent presenter.
Um,
You know, a lot of folks, uh,
think that all we gotta do is
lower the taxes and reduce
regulations, and we're gonna be
on easy street, well, your
research proves that that's,
that's certainly not.
Correct.
Um
I was a city manager for a long
time and
And we heard from small towns to
medium-sized cities.
And
Often thought that
Those financial incentives were
a waste of money, which is a way
of bribing people, and it's too
bad with
United States couldn't get
together and decide.
To stop it.
Because it's just chasing after.
The, the person gonna be most
easily bribed.
And it really didn't
It really helped things, just a
big, as far as I'm concerned,
was a was a waste of money.
And there again your research
proves
But that's wrong.
So on page 19, talking about
quality of life.
chart shows that the quality of
life in Vermont.
It's better than most of upstate
New York.
So you
I grew up in upstate New York
and I was in Vermont a couple of
months ago, so why, why is that?
Oh, that's a great question in
Vermont and upstate New York.
Yeah, so with this data would
suggest is that it's local
resins when you compare it, it
doesn't mean people don't like
living there. But it means in
comparison, people
potentially like living in
Vermont, you know, even more.
Uh, so I have never been, I've
been to Vermont. I've never been
in upstate New York. My actually
my researcher who's an
anthropologist lives in upstate
New York. Um, and he loves it.
He, you know, he is a
researcher. He also has a farm,
he loves it. Uh, so, Vermont, I
think they've, I know that
they've done a lot on
Uh, and I know my colleagues who
live in Vermont, we're actually
headquartered in Vermont,
although I'm in Ohio, is they
say, especially our young
coworkers, they all say they
love uh kayaking. They love
skiing. They're all out all the
time. They are just, I think
they are made for Vermont and
what Vermont has to offer. And I
know Vermont is also seen, uh,
since then, a lot of New Yorkers
move to Vermont, which is really
upped the housing prices and
been a struggle for residents.
And really I think
This kind of brings up, it's
also this kind of circular thing
where you have to constantly be
checking. I would love to say
just do this one thing, your job
is done. You never have anything
else to do. But so they're at
the stage of where this quality
of life really has attracted a
lot of New Yorkers, and now it's
a struggle for uh the residents
who have lived there, so they're
now trying to figure out how to
deal with housing in Vermont to
um make sure that uh that
The residents who are there have
the same quality of life that is
not brought down by a bunch of
people moving in. Uh, but yeah,
so I'm not as really with with
no, but I know in Vermont, it's
a lot of they I know they love
the skiing, they're outdoors all
the time. They love the
lifestyle. They love the
kayaking, the rivers, and they
all have, you know, one of those
things that they love.
Well, thank you for all that,
but they also have all those
things and um.
Upstate New York. I don't I
don't know but I still think uh
you didn't like to. Also on the
next page 20 why is uh
Quality of business
environment better.
Along the Hudson River than the
rest of New York State.
Yeah, so I kind of think about
the quality of business as I
think about it, um, going to
dinner with a friend. So if you
have a friend who only goes to
dinner with you when you pay,
you don't have a friend. You
have something else. I don't
know what the, you know, it's
not a friend, right? And so
businesses are a little bit like
that. If a business is only
gonna come if you pay, probably
not a friend. Uh, where I think
what this is showing, especially
these New York area, so like in
the New York area, you just have
a lot of finance going on. You
also have a lot of tech even in
like the Boston area going on.
And you have a huge labor pool
of very highly educated finance
people, lawyers, tech people,
and if you want to go where
they're living, that basically
saying they're willing to go
there to go to those people.
Close to New York City. Oh,
absolutely. Yeah.
Well
I have more questions, but I
don't want to take up time. You
did an excellent, uh,
presentation, um.
And uh thank you for being here.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
on to Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just
one quick question for you.
Would you mind sharing that, uh,
lighter, quicker, cheaper. Oh,
absolutely. So I'd love to.
Yeah. It's a great, yeah, I
think it is a really great way
to get started. Uh, the other
thing, I think it's a great way
to.
Slowly shift the mindset, and I
think it's a great way for
representatives to see what
people are engaging with,
because I think it can be hard,
um, who shows up to a city
council meeting even. Not
everyone has time, even though
people might care deeply, but if
you can find people where
they're at and see what they're
engaging in, if they're engaging
in, you know, the little bowling
alley like I said, or in the in
the uh little nature museum
that, that was there that you
can see, oh, these are people I
never see at my city council
meeting, but I see they're very
much into this, and this is
something that I should support.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
exactly what I, my point, all of
us have little communities and
in the municipalities in our
area that could probably use
something like that to help them
out, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let's go to Senator
Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for the presentation. So I'm
just, I want to follow up a
little bit on Senator Burt's
focus on his hometown and.
You mentioned that you're doing
work for Tao. So I'm just
curious.
So Taos obviously, or once you
tell us, did they come to you?
What's the scope of work that
you're doing for them. I, I just
think it's, it would be
instructive for other smaller
towns. Uh, so we have a rural
innovation network. It is now, I
think we just added another one.
So I think it might be up to 40
communities that are in our
networks. Um, and so what our
network does is we do kind of a
host of things, um, so we help
with grant writing. We also help
with uh standing up a co-working
space.
or an incubator hub. Uh, we also
help with accessing
non-traditional tech training
programs to kind of in broad uh
broadband is another one we do
help them with grant writing to
get more broadband. Um, and so,
when we, when I think about what
we do is a lot of kind of
building out this access to
economic opportunity with these
other pieces of economic
development that kind of builds
on this quality of life. I
think, um, you know, TAS has a
great quality of life. A lot of
people don't realize it is only
recently come out of.
Uh, being classified as a
persistent poverty county. So
there's a lot of issues with
access to higher paying jobs,
higher wages, um, so a lot of
what we do with communities is
really helping them either uh
get access to the funding they
need or to the pieces that they
don't have, whether that's
broadband, depends on what it
is, but it's also a lot of kind
of partnership building. So I
think of it as kind of community
centered economic development
where um our communities come to
us, so nobody, you know, no, we
don't work with anyone who
didn't.
want us to work with them. Um,
so they come to us, you know,
asking for help and, and
building this and a lot of what
we find is
A lot of these communities have
the pieces.
But they're just not connected
or they don't have partners
connecting or there's only kind
of one person spearheading this
project and what we find is
having multiple community
partners be engaged in, for
example, um, an incubator space
having the chamber be involved,
having if they have a local
community college or higher
education being involved. And so
a lot of it is building up these
partnerships and working with
businesses, higher education,
uh, local chambers and city
council.
and kind of building up those
partnerships to kind of see what
pieces they might need, uh, to
build out their tech economy
ecosystems.
Sure, I appreciate that.
Just, just a comment again, I, I
represent Santa Fe. I've done
that for 20 years in the
legislature, and during this
time, I think.
I've really seen.
Kind of an understanding and an
emphasis on what the economic
impact of the arts, tourism and
culture economy really is.
And so
Right.
To some extent was taken for
granted. And I just think
recently we, there's been that
type of economic analysis of
what these
Institutions bring to, to a
local economy, just as an
example, Santa Fe Opera has a
$200 million a year economic
impact on the Santa Fe area and
they do a uh
Really extraordinary policy
makers.
Night at the opera, which I
encourage if you haven't been,
you should go.
Make a little itch for it, but
it's just, again, for folks from
all over the state that that
aren't aware, it's like, OK, the
opera, but just to hear how it
impacts our our economy. I just
think each, each of us should
really look at what we have and
try and figure out how you value
it and, and help.
because that center I think
that's the way you're gonna move
your constituents is by
educating them about what's
there and what's needed to
actually take you to the next
level.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go
then finally to vice chairman
Compos.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and of course, to the committee
and doctor, thank you very much
for the presentation.
My approach is gonna be a little
bit different first of all, of
course, we do want New Mexico to
become that quality of life
state where we do attract uh
people from all over in the and
enjoy, if you will, the
amenities of, of our state and
the kind of things that we do
have in our small communities.
But I'm gonna take a little
different approach, so in
Albuquerque, uh, real ran to
that area as we see the ongoing
development of housing, and then
we see the growing population
who work here in Santa Fe, so
the commuting back and forth,
particularly with Harry young
population,
uh, continues to create, if you
will, uh, a troublesome issue
because in it, people would like
to work close to where they live
and.
Close to where they work. So
that's one thing. So, uh, when
we start dealing with housing
and leasing, uh, of, of
properties.
And in home purchases with
property taxes, what do you got?
Go forward along with with
insurances, and then we start
talking about some of the other
things that uh that happened,
but we have
About 970,000 of our population
on Medicaid, and that's gonna
continue to grow.
With a 2.2 million population
was actually
to support, if you will, the
growing number of people that
really require, if you will,
additional incentives and and
support.
And then with our young
population.
Particularly the entrepreneurs,
whether they'd be in a small
community, they're trying to set
up a business, and they find
with the tax base they find with
the um properties that are
available, and if you will, they
really need to go ahead and have
not only the income, but um
the population to support those
businesses.
And they deal with that.
And then we have people moving
And they decide, well, I'd
really like to go and have a
mountain top and this is
actually occurring in smaller
communities where they
purchase a piece of property,
they fly into one of the nearby
airports. They go there at home,
they're doing their uh long
distance uh business.
But from there, they're not
totally participating in these
communities, so, uh, we see if
you will, the mixture of
The kind of things that we're
all trying to deal with, to
create, if you will, a great
environment to work, to live.
But at the same time, we
continue to struggle, if you
will.
With that population that
definitely does not have.
Theportunities to to do so in so
many of our communities.
So maybe you can help us to
better understand.
As a stage and you have great
ideas as a state.
How do we take care, if you
will,
Of
larger areas and this is
predominantly the same in other
other states.
Yet at the same time we have
small communities that are
struggling populations leaving.
Um
They're making this shift. So on
page 19, if you look at the
quality of life area.
That's basically the district
that I represent.
But we see the population
leaving.
And so there is the struggle. So
how does it stay support these
small communities, but yet at
the same time.
get the point across and educate
people that in the larger areas.
those resources need to come
into these areas so that we can
Do, if you will, as we move
forward. So
My first question would be
relative to that.
It's not just about one or two
communities in the state, it's
the entire state.
And as you studied uh and
reflected upon what we have here
in New Mexico.
What are your thoughts for us as
the global peace for uh for our
state. So one thing that
we've seen, and this is true
across the nation, and it's
actually especially true for
small towns is a decline in
entrepreneurship.
Um, and economies have actually
been a little more than a little
worried about this for a while.
And if you look at even these
traditional development
incentives, they typically go to
plants with um larger than 1000
employees, about, I think it's
about 30% of those plants moving
get money. If you look at small
businesses, I think it's about
0.2% that actually receive any
kind of subsidy at all from the
state. So we, I think, not only
dramatically underfund small
business and
p re ne ur ship
But we also have some mismatches
in supporting it and giving
people access. So even, you
know, community college
programs, for example, in the
trades, uh, where you might
become an electrician or often
not paired with programs and
entrepreneurship.
Where you might want to have
your own business as an
electrician, but you weren't.
taught how to be a small
business, which means it's on
you. You go find that program at
your local library sometimes or
you figure it out on the
internet. And so I think we've
done um
I think a disservice to a lot of
communities by not supporting
our small businesses and our
entrepreneurs. We find a lot,
especially in small towns, I
think of small towns where you
don't have an expert to do
everything. You have to be an
expert in multiple.
Things, which means I think
you're a little bit of natural
problem solvers of natural
problem solvers. I can fix this.
I'm gonna do this. That's also
what entrepreneurship is, is we
don't have this thing. How do I
solve it? We don't want to have
this. I want to do another
thing. And so I think a lot of
it is entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurship also gives
residents ownership in the
business they have.
So when we find, especially with
more geographically isolated
rural areas and rural areas in
general. A large plant and
because they're geographically
isolated.
Um
And kind of take advantage of
that imbalance in market power
to lower wages lower than they
should be and um try to take
advantage of that, where when
you are the owner of that
business, and you're locally
owned, right? You don't have
that same effect on your
You know, your neighbor, you
just don't.
And so I think entrepreneurship
is, uh, is one thing that we are
big, you know, proponents of
it's really creating programs
and services, uh,
to support entrepreneurship, to
support, support small
businesses, to support their
ideas, um, and that includes not
only programs, but also includes
things like we talk about, um,
either small business lending or
venture capital, right? Making
sure that they have the money to
start up that program, um, and
so I think small and small
businesses are also and new
businesses are going to pivot
into new industries as well,
right? So how do you pivot into
an industry, right? What do you
create a new business that is,
you know, leading into this,
whether it's tech or whatever
this new industry is. And so I
think small
businesses one, but I also think
thinking about non-traditional
um education. So we will do a
lot of, for example, 10 week
boot camps that it used to be
for a lot of tech jobs, you
would get a traditional
four-year degree. It's
increasingly not so. You can go
to um boot camps and to do
cybersecurity or IT to get
access to higher paying jobs.
Most of them remote. So even our
IT specialists who I talked to,
um,
Uh, almost 2 years ago, uh,
which we did everything she said
on my computer at home and
everything we did it virtually.
I said, wow, have you always
done it like this? And she said,
no, only since the pandemic. I
said, oh, were you in an office?
And she said, oh, yeah, but
doing the exact same thing with
my door closed in an office, and
she said the pandemic just made
them realize they didn't have
to. So she now, uh, was an IT
specialist. Didn't have to be
anywhere near an office, could
do it from home.
Um, and so I think there's a lot
of kind of non-traditional
pathways that we um can support
to expand economic opportunity,
um, to build on the quality of
life a lot of places already
have on top of that
entrepreneurship.
So another question uh related
to that. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair, as we move forward,
talking about fires and floods
that have affected New Mexico,
particularly in northeastern New
Mexico and uh close to the
central southern part of New
Mexico. So, as we talk about
more of Las Vegas and Riodoso, 3
of the areas where quality of
life, definitely, um.
was on track, if you will, but
for people.
love to visit and and enjoy, if
you will, the great outdoors,
uh, along with, you will, a lot
of the culture that was was
available.
But now as we rebuild.
things that
All of us are trying to struggle
with.
is, is how do we help these
people revitalize their
communities and possibly take a
new focus in terms of what
that's gonna be. Uh, how do you
handle, if you will,
catastrophes that occur within
states in some of the studies
that you've conducted.
So a lot of the research on
catastrophe finds that
Eventually they tend to be on
the same growth path.
Um, so it's not all, but that's
kind of typically what the
average impact is, is that
there's some impact you see it
go down and then eventually they
kind of build back and are on
the same path, which for some
communities might not be a great
thing to be on the same path.
They might want to be on a
better path. But I think what
we're increasingly seeing the
data is that more of these um
catastrophism big events are
starting to change where people
are thinking about living and
moving and visiting. Um, but I
think we're just now starting to
see a lot of that in it.
and I think that also is gonna
require, you know, thinking
about
How do we, how do we handle
that, right? How do we make sure
that we're responding
appropriately. I think it's
Um, different, but even similar
to, you know, crime rates that
shows up in our data, uh,
something that's kind of
negative thing, can we do what
we can to mitigate the impacts
to bounce back quickly, get
people the resources that they
need, um, to kind of minimize
it, understanding that right now
we're probably not gonna get to
zero just so.
rates typically are probably not
gonna go to zero. But how do we
make sure that we're responding
appropriately and making sure
that we can minimize those
negative impacts, and then boost
the positive impacts, right?
What positive can come from it.
Can we rebuild a new or better
community center, for example,
can we rebuild and newer better
park.
Is there, is there some way that
we can leverage it to minimize
the negative, increase the
positive.
So I am quite a few other
questions, but I know just
because of time, I'm gonna just
ask for another one and this is
related directly, Mr. Chairman,
to the quality of life that uh
we continue to hear about this
morning. So,
Hes back, it used to be.
You were
Long days, weekends if possible,
you provided for your family.
Today what I'm hearing is that
that quality of life.
It's going to be a combination
of work, and if you will, the
aesthetics, the other things
that are around on the outside.
So I think went directly with it
for an ideal, young family that
is
wanting to preserve a few of
their health.
What percentage of their day or
week.
should be devoted directly to
work and then the rest of the
time the family and the quality
of life within their community.
I mean, I think in terms of, I
think it varies for everyone. I
think it varies with your stage
of life, whether you have kids,
what you're doing, how much you
enjoy one or the other, um, and
I, so I think it just, it just
really varies. I do know that
recent grads, um, I've talked to
them in the positions that they
take and many of them are
accepting lower paid positions
that offer better, for example,
pay time off, and they offer
them the kind of balance that
they want to see. So we've seen
kind of a trend with some of the
newer grads.
Really focusing more.
On the balance between, you
know, that work-life balance
than previous generations did.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much,
doctor, for your.
responses.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you again, doctor, for being
here. Uh, I have one comment and
one question, uh, you mentioned
that you do work uh for Tels.
The town of houses in New
Mexico. And and I think about
when you talk about rural uh
innovation, I think a lot about
um the tribes and Pueblos of New
Mexico and specifically the
house close to.
town of Taos.
And I think about, you talked
about having communities play on
their strengths and how they've
done that, uh, successfully and
how they've tried to uh bring to
amenities casino, for instance,
and I think it's going to be a
hotel to attract that tourists
and capture that tourist money
that that's coming into the town
of houses, and I think about
those types of economic
development islands that are in
this state.
of New Mexico that are directly
related to Native American
communities that belong in for
for the long part have been um
Just living in poverty for for
for for century, right? And so
when I think of, of the way
things have worked out for them
in terms of economic
development, uh, engines, I, I
see a lot of that working in
Native American, New Mexico. Uh,
I do have one specific question
related to the work that you've
done, but do you know of any
specific quality of life.
programs, uh, that other states
or places are doing that work
well from your, from your
research or from your
experiences.
A lot of the quiet life programs
I know of are really local. Uh,
they're very local, and I tend
to think that's kind of
A great
Way to think about these
programs because quality of life
is, is, is a very local issue.
So in one part, it might be
really focusing on their local
parks and another part, they're
focusing on their K-12 programs.
So a lot of it is kind of either
realizing where their strengths
are and building on it that's
unique to that community, or it
can also be realizing where
their weaknesses are and knowing
that they have to build it up.
And it just kind of varies from
com community to community. So I
think in one community, it's
heavy focus on just K-12, right?
And that's where they're putting
their focus. And
community, it's trails. They're
really trying to get trails out.
I know in another community,
it's, um, so even nearby where I
am, we have um
A tow path which used to be used
to tow boats, uh, along the
canals, and now they've worked
really hard to um turn those
into trails, but then also
there's a history of um industry
along the rivers, um, and
they've done a lot of work to
just clean the rivers to where,
when actually when I moved
there, I never saw anybody kayak
on that river or fish or nobody,
nobody touched it. Um, and they
were actually when I moved
there, they were not river
otters cause they were, it
wasn't, it couldn't exist there.
And
Now we see um river, we have
river otters now. We have uh
bald eagles, actually there's a
bald bald eagle pair that lives.
2 minutes from my house, and we,
I know some people get kayaking
on that river, which I did not
see when I first moved in. So
it, I think kind of varies and
for us just because of the
history of industry we have,
that it's really seeing that
these things that we've
neglected or
On caught on fire for a river
that
We've, you know, cleaned it up
so that now people are using
this and starting to use it
more, um, and so it just really
varies from area to area, kind
of what they need and what
pieces that they're working on,
but a lot of it working on um
kind of finding ways to work
with the community, so we even
have a, a national park nearby
where the park rangers are
constantly like interacting with
people. Uh, so I know I've even
been running on a trail where
they surveyed me real quick and
asked, you know, what do you
like to do? How do you go on the
trail? What would you like to
see? Um, just to, to build on
that.
Got it.
Doctor, again, thank you for
your presentation this morning.
We all appreciate it,
safe travels.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK, we have a next on our
agenda, tax expenditure reports,
we have the secretary said if
you start Clark here.
Uh, as well as the sin chief
Congress from uh her department
as well.
Secretary, uh, whenever you're
ready, the floor is yours.
chairman and members of the
committee.
All right. Thank you so much for
having us for another year's
presentation of the tax
expenditure report, um, with me
here this morning is familiar
face, I think, our chief
economist Lucinda Sito, also
sitting just behind her. We have
our two senior economists that
um help not just with the tax
expenditure report, but every
fiscal impact report that we
write, consensus revenue
estimates and all kinds of
analytical questions that come
up throughout the year. We've
got Sarah Grubs and Pedro
Clavijo. So thank you to the
team.
All right, so I'm gonna kick us
off. I'll take us through about
the first half of the report.
Turn it over to Lucinda, and I
apologize, uh, to, you know,
some of the members if you've
heard this presentation before
the format is similar, but no
reason to reinvent the wheel if,
if it works. So I'll probably
take us pretty quickly through
the beginning, which is a
framework of just what the tax
expenditure report is some
consideration and then listen to
will provide you more
information on this year's
report and some of the
measurements that are in it.
All right. So starting on um
slide number 2, just to kind of
a reminder of what is a tax
expenditure report, also known
as a tax expenditure budget.
Um, you know, it's a, a funny
Uh, it's just, it's funny
terminology, a tax expenditure
because, you know, we're, we're
not taking in the revenue, so
therefore, we're not making an
expenditure with that revenue,
but really it's, it's kind of
the framework is to think that
when you choose as a
policymaking body to forego
revenue that would otherwise be
in the tax base, and you're sort
of making an expenditure
decision. You're expanding
through the tax code to
incentivize certain behavior.
And so tax expenditure report
will basically provide the
committee and, and the public
and the governor with uh
detailed list of how much
revenue we estimate is for on in
hundreds of different areas of
the tax code. Every tax credit,
tax deduction, exemption, and
preferential tax rate, so that
year by year, you can try to
assess whether those parts of
the tax code are meeting their
intended purpose. If, if it's
clear what that intended purpose
even is. Usually we have a
pretty
idea.
Um, so, basically, the, the idea
too is to provide something like
the same rigor of review in the
tax code as we do in the
budgeting process, so that
every, um, every tax expenditure
gets reviewed every year, and
there's sort of an active
thought about whether it should
be continued or changed or not.
So it's a great transparency
tool.
So, um, just to kind of recap on
slide 3, our tax expenditure
report has been published by the
department since 2012. It
started under an executive order
at that time, but as of now, we
are required in statute to
create this, um, and publish it
each year by November 15th, and
we publish it every fall to your
committee.
Um, Senator Tollman was a
proponent of this legislation
before we got it done and then
we included it in the tax code
cleanup legislation in 2023.
Um, every year we add a little
bit to the format. We're always
adding new things, deepening our
analysis, looking for better
data sources and then also
taking out some things that are
no longer active.
And we've got a list here at the
bottom of page 3 of where this
can be found on tax and rev's
website.
And so now I'll go into some of
the detail on the different
types of tax expenditures and
why some things aren't
considered tax expenditures. Not
every paragraph in the tax code
that creates, for example, an
exemption is one, it might be um
defining the tax base or staying
in line with federal law.
So an exclusion for on page 4 is
basically removing something
from the taxable base just to
define the tax base. And so this
might not be considered a tax
expenditure. We'll still listed
in the in the report towards the
end, we have a section of
non-tax expenditures and then
arguable tax expenditures. So
this could include um exclusions
from base income or business's
gross receipts, exclusions for
personal property, for example,
is not included in the property
tax base.
It's not a tax expenditure,
that's just defining the base.
So, um, we're not gonna focus
today on exclusions, but that's
what they are.
And the next two slides, 5 and
6, I'll talk about exemptions
and deductions. And again, they
are similar exemptions and
deductions are similar in the
way that they affect the tax
base, they narrow the tax base
by either removing income or
removing a business's receipts
from the base. Um, they have the
same the same impact on revenue
collected and on a taxpayer's
tax liability, the main
difference between an exemption
and a deduction is reporting
requirements from the taxpayer.
So if you have exempt income,
like, for example, nonprofits
are exempt from paying the GRT.
They don't have to file, they
don't have to tell us what
they're exempting. They just do
that without any contact with
the department.
versus a deduction, you have to
generally report that deduction,
you report your total gross
receipts that you claim your
deductions to get down to your
taxable gross receipts. So
there's more visibility for you
as policy makers on deductions
and exemptions. But again, they
have the same impact on tax
liability and revenue
collection.
I won't go through all the
details on those.
Um, so that was slides 5 and 6.
I guess on slide 6, I'll give a
couple of examples of um
deductions that we're very
familiar with, um, the back to
school tax-free weekend is one
that we hear about every year.
It's relatively small but very
popular. Um, there's the capital
gains deduction from Pit, which
you've narrowed in the last
couple, um, legislative
sessions, Food for home
consumption, and charity, one of
our largest tax expenditures,
that's a deduction, so we have a
lot of visibility into what's
deducted, um, and
And some more are listed there
too.
All right, so deductions and
exemptions narrow the tax base.
That's very different than on
slide 7, we start talking about
credits, so in a credit
situation, you have the taxpayer
tell you what their income or
gross receipts is, that's your
tax base. They take that by the
tax rate to get whatever their
liability is, and then if
there's a credit, they subtract
dollar for dollar, that credit
against their tax liability. So
it's kind of a below the line
reduction in tax due and credits
um
can be designed in a lot of
different ways. They can be
refundable, meaning they can
take your tax liability
negative. Um, they can be
transferable if you don't have a
tax liability, you can sell it
to someone else who does.
or not. So there's, there's, and
there's many other
considerations and credit design
too, but some of the most um
Uh, probably preeminent credits
that you hear about in the state
tax code would be the working
families tax credit. It's simple
because it's just a percentage
of the federal EITC, uh, the
angel Investment Pit credit.
It's relatively small but very
important to some.
Uh, we've, of course, got our
new child tax credit that is
just being claimed for the first
time this year, uh, film tax
credit against mostly sit and
partly pit, and wage jobs, tax
credit comes across several
different tax programs, GRT
Pitsit.
Um, there's an investment tax
credit, rural health
practitioner credit. There's
about say 35 to 40 tax credits
in the New Mexico code.
Onto um slide 8. We just talked
about basically designing the
baseline system of taxation. So,
um, you know, we talked about
whether something is or isn't a
tax expenditure and that it can
be arguable sometimes reasonable
people could argue about whether
something is or isn't, but we
are looking for any, anything in
the tax code that basically
deviates from the baseline
system of taxation, so a couple
common examples like the
baseline would be gross receipts
and the grocery receipts tax is
something that excludes.
or remove something from grocery
receipts or from net income in
pit or sit um from taxable value
in the severance tax. So each
tax program might have a
different
basis for taxation, but we're
looking for things that remove
something from the baseline.
And to be considered a tax
expenditure now on slide 9,
something has to just basically
be a deviation from the
baseline. So we first look at
what is the baseline for this
tax program. And then is this
thing a deviation from it.
Sometimes things are not
considered deviation, for
example, if we're preventing
preemption of federal law.
That's not a tax expenditure
that's just facing, making sure
that text code complies with
federal constitution, um,
sometimes something won't be
considered a tax expenditure,
like, for example, if you got
the grocery receipts tax that 5%
rate that the motor vehicle
excise taxes at 4%. It's not a
tax expenditure, but there is a
a preferential rate for.
excise taxes compared to GRT.
Um, and then pyramidding,
anti-pyramidding, uh, we
typically won't consider that a
tax expenditure because we're
just simply defining the base to
prevent double or triple
taxation on something.
OK, so uh again to further kind
of explain what something has to
do to be a tax expenditure on
slide 10. It really is about
conveying special treatment to a
certain activity or a certain
behavior. So special treatment
might be benefiting a certain
set of taxpayers or certain
decision that they might make.
Um
It might be to induce economic
development to make something
more attractive to do in New
Mexico versus elsewhere. Uh, it
could also be to induce economic
or environmental conservation or
to get a certain industry off
the ground. Those are all the
types of things we're looking
for in tax expenditures.
All right. Um, turning to slide
11, we'll start to talk about
what, how we categorize tax
expenditures for analysis and,
and summing them up. We've got 5
categories that we sort them
into Cit benefits is typically
the largest, um, that's
something that might be to
benefit a targeted population
such as low income, medically
vulnerable, um, things like
that, economic development, is
what it sounds like, trying to
induce a certain industry or a
certain economic growth in New
Mexico. And then there's a small
Area for environmental and
conservation and renewable
energy. Um, there's also a
healthcare related ones, um, tax
expenditures that are really
geared towards either drawing
practitioners to the state or
making it more possible for them
to succeed in the state or
increasing access to care,
things like that. And then
there's a few for very highly
specialized industries.
OK, so now we get into um the
results of this year's report on
slide 12. You can see, um, we've
charted the new data for FY 24
and you can see that the total
amount of
For on revenue that we estimate
from all tax expenditures grew
slightly from 23 to 24. And
that's actually pretty notable
because um if you see in 21, 22,
and 23, there's this kind of
blue and white uh shaded line.
Those are non-recurring, and
those are basically rebates. So
we had these large increases in
the amount of tax expenditures
and in the 22 and 23, but we
knew those would be
non-recurring and yet in 2024,
we slightly exceed even without
rebates and
talk a little bit more about the
data and what's going on there,
but part of that is um certainly
the child tax credit that came
in at about 131 million as
expected, and there's a few
other things driving that, but,
uh, tax expenditures are up in
2024, just slightly.
And then on slide 13, we break
the amount of the, the number of
tax expenditures, not the dollar
amount for gone but we break the
number of them into each of
their categories, those 5
categories I just mentioned. Um,
we have by far the most um
number of tax expenditures under
citizen benefits, and then a
fairly high number and both
highly specialized industries
and economic development.
We did add one new Citizen
benefit tax expenditure this
year, again, that was the child
tax credit.
And we were able to remove 15
that are now expired or obsolete
with your help.
To the next slide. We'll talk a
little bit about data
reliability, and there's always
a little hesitation, uh, for us
to present the aggregate numbers
like we did on a couple of
slides back because we know that
some of this is based on
estimates, you know, each tax
expenditure in the report will
either have a green, yellow, or
red, um, ranking as far as the
data reliability. Sometimes it's
very simple, a credit, we know
exactly how much was claimed in
a credit and a deduction that's
separately reported, we, we
might think.
We have all the data we need,
but we'll talk a little bit
about um taxpayers that may be
claiming the wrong deduction
code and, and kind of muddying
up the data and some of that is
definitely going on and um it
doesn't impact the amount of tax
they pay, so they're still
paying their a right amount of
tax, but it affects our data
reliability for reports like
this. And we'll talk about that
as we go on.
um,
in 2024 again, you can see that
the number of tax expenditures
came down in total, but also the
number that we have the most
reliable data for came down. The
number in green came down, and
that number in yellow and um so
we're having to do more
estimating and less reporting
actual data from GenTax to you.
Uh, slide 15, a bit more about
the data reliability issue and
we like this for the committee
the last couple of years, but,
um, basically the to, to take it
back a few years in July 2021,
tax and rev upgraded to a new
new genax version, which is a
good thing. We're doing it again
this year. Um, but when we
upgraded Gena, taxpayers for the
first time got a more
comprehensive drop-down menu of
deduction codes that they could
choose. Um, it used to be that
they just had the ones that are
statutorily.
required to be separately
reported, but now they had
additional deduction causes they
could also choose from, even if
not legally required to do so.
And we were thinking, well, this
is great. We'll get all this
good data and we'll be able to
improve the tax expenditure
report, but it turned out that a
lot of taxpayers don't know what
to choose, and so they just
maybe choose the one that starts
with the letter A and then
alphabetized list. And so again,
I wanna assure the committee
they're not paying the wrong
amount, but they're coding it
for these data purposes.
under sometimes the wrong one,
like, for example, you can see
aircraft sales or services GRT
deduction. We know that nothing
major has changed in our
aircraft sales industry in New
Mexico, and yes, we went from
having between 1 and 0 taxpayers
claiming that deduction to 50 or
70.
There aren't 50 or 70 new
taxpayers claiming that
deduction, but they're choosing
it from the drop-down menu.
So, you know, we are trying to
make that clearer and clearer
and improve the dropdown menu.
There's only so much we can do
to, to, and because taxpayers
are paying the right amount.
It's, it, it makes this data
worse, but it's, it's not
impacting revenue.
Another example under durable
medical equipment, but I wanna
assure you that the amount of
the aircraft sales guarantee
deduction hasn't risen in real
life to $4 million even though
that's what this says.
All right. And then we have a
few uh new additions to the 2024
tax expenditure report that we
want to highlight for you. I've
already mentioned the child
income tax credit that was
created in the 2022 regular
session and expanded in the 23
session, and the first year of
data shows that taxpayers claim
about 131 million for that new
credit.
And uh we also just added a
cigarette rate tax rate
reduction for modified risk
products that was put into law
in 2019, but we haven't seen any
claims for it.
Um, we also added a few items
from the tax code that are not
considered tax expenditures. Uh,
one is the medical cannabis
exemption from the cannabis
excise tax. Again, medical
prescription, if you will,
cannabis is not charged the GRT
or the cannabis tax. So we
listed in there because it's not
um
We we are foregoing that revenue
but we don't consider it a tax
expenditure.
We also added the net income
subject to entity level tax
credit against Pitt and sit and
a premium tax in lieu of all
other taxes. That's just a
different, it's a different
excise tax program rather than
the GRT so it's got its own page
in the report now.
All right. Um, slide 17 is, is a
really important one. Here we
list the 10 top tax expenditures
by their cost and for on
revenue. This includes both
state and local foregone
revenue, um, together. So you
can see on the uh right hand
side of this, you can see that
this year we have a new top uh
top number one slot is now the
prescription drug oxygen,
medical cannabis, GRT and GGRT
deduction.
It came up pretty significantly
from year to year to now an
estimated 506 million, but with
the caveat that we rate the data
um availability of that one is
red. It's, it's all estimation.
So we're using new national
data, uh, prorating it to New
Mexico to come up with that
estimate. So it does appear to
be higher, but also our data
reliability is, is not great.
Um, and then an update on the
sale of food deduction, which
is, uh, typically in the top 3
or, or so, um, that rose from
348 million in 23 up to 467
million in FY 24, and we do have
uh what we think is complete
data on that one. That's, and
that includes both the state and
local deduction, as well as the
whole harmless that the state
is, is, um, paying to partially
hold the local government's
harmless.
So, um, the Department of Health
licensed Hospital GRT deduction,
that's again where you, if you
recall several years ago, we
kind of leveled the playing
field between different types of
hospital structure. So now, um,
For profit, nonprofit and
government-owned hospitals all
pay the GRT or the GGRT but they
all can take a 60% GRT
deduction, and that rose pretty
significantly from 196 million
to 259 million.
And then down the list, um, one
that is, is interesting and
we're actually doing a review
internally on is the sale of
services to manufacturing, GRT
deduction. Um, that one rose
from 1.1 million to 141 million.
Some of that is the data issue,
but not all of it. Um, so we, we
have asked our audit and
compliance division to look into
the individual taxpayer returns
that are claiming that deduction
and try to make sure that they
seem appropriate. Um, do follow
up with taxpayers if necessary.
and we think that at least some
of the taxpayers claimed the
wrong deduction, but paid the
right amount. And so, um, it
could be that in the future
year, we will be able to see
that number come back down into
a more
Expected level, but I do think
it will still be higher than
next and then we'll go through
all the rest in detail, but you
can see child tax credit, uh.
That we've already talked about
working families is larger this
year, uh, the tax credit because
we've um continued to phase in
the expansion to it. It's now
worth 25% of the federal credit
whereas in years past it was a
little less.
Um, you can see how, uh, the,
also the apportionment election
in corporate income tax for
manufacturers has grown year
over year.
And film tax credits stayed
about the same at 102 million
capital gains deduction is
coming down somewhat. That can
be very volatile based not just
on legislative changes but on
stock market performance.
Uh, yeah, that's it for that
slide.
And then let's talk a little bit
next about um tax expenditures
that how much of the revenue is
being gone by state versus
local.
And there's a kind of
interesting trend here. Um, so
in years past, we, we saw a rule
of thumb that about 12% of all
foregone revenue is local, about
88% state, and the reason for
that was that basically all the
pit and sit for on revenue is
all 100% borne by the state, and
then some of the largest GRT
deductions, food and, and health
practitioners were partially
held harmless. So that was
reducing the local share. The
local share though in the, in
the most recent years data came
up from 12 to 19.
and there's a couple of reasons
for that, but probably the
single biggest one is that the
state reduced its GRT rate. So
when we cut the state GRT rate
by 0.25%, the amount that is
forgone in every state GRT
deduction is smaller because the
tax rate is lower. So all the
state GRT deductions came down a
little bit while the local rates
stayed the same and in some
cases rose a little bit. Um, and
then some of the growth that
we've just talked about in some
of the largest growing
deductions are um only
are, are impacting both state
and local because they're in the
team.
We can delve into that more if
you've got questions, but I
think that probably the most
important thing that's affecting
that is that the state ERT rate
went down.
And then, uh, my last slide
before turning it over to
Lucinda is, is really just to
cover that again, but in more
detail, reducing the GRT rate is
part of what increased local um
percentage.
And we've got a little detail
here on um the recurring GRT
only on the left. These are the
and and you can see basically
that, that the GRT which is
split between state and local
revenue forgo have really grown
a lot and every 24, uh, more so
than all expenditures, so that's
another way to look at that
increase in local incidence.
That alternate to Lucinda.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, thank
you again for having us this
morning.
take off for the secretary left
on, off on slide 20 dig a little
bit into um expenditures by
category.
As the secretary laid out, we
have 5 categories, and we're
gonna start with the largest one
as the secretary mentioned,
which is Citizen benefits.
And this year we're estimating
it was at 1.3 billion or 42% of
all expenditures. That is down a
little bit from last year, and
again, that's due to the, the
dissipation of all the
non-recurring rebates that the
secretary mentioned.
In the past, the, the largest
one, as you can see in the pie
chart is the sale of food at
retail deduction and the whole
harmless payments, um, close to
50% of, of this category.
But coming in at number 2 now is
the child income tax credit, um,
at 131 million, so that one, our
newest one has, has
come in the the the top 3 of of
Citizen benefits for this
category.
And once again, you'll see the
ones that the secretary
mentioned, ones we've seen
before, the working families,
the capital gain deduction, and
now the Social Security
exemption, which is now in its
2nd year.
Rounding out the top 5.
And if we turn to slide 21, I'm
gonna just give a little bit.
For um background information on
the child income tax credits.
The graph here is to highlight
the legislative changes that
occurred before this went into
law, when it was first
introduced in 2022, um, the
rebates, um,
Along the adjusted gross income
or a little lower and then in
2023, you raised the rebate
amounts for lower income.
Households. So now that the, the
credit ranges from $25 per child
up to $600 per child, depending
on the taxpayers' adjusted gross
income.
And in tax year 2023, we had
close to 239 tax returns that
claim the child income tax
credit, almost 25% of, of our
tax returns.
And as the secretary mentioned,
the aggregate amount was 131
million, and that averages about
5150 million per tax return.
slide 22.
Highlight, um, kind of a deep
dive that we did in the tax
expenditure report and, and
you've seen this in many
presentations that as a state,
we've seen
Um, very drastic difference
between two measures of poverty.
One is the official measure of
poverty, which only looks at
income, and then we have the
supplemental poverty measure,
which looks at all governmental
social programs, um, tax relief,
and adjustments for cost of
living.
And New Mexico in the graph
here, this is for, for
individuals under 18, so our
children population. New Mexico
is on the far left, and we saw
the biggest decrease from our
official poverty measure down to
the supplemental poverty
measure. And that's thanks again
to all the different tax relief
and governmental programs that
the state has put in place, and
still have a ways to go right
now it's measured at 8.9%. And
this measure was through 2023
before the new state income tax,
child income tax credit went
into effect. So we and other
researchers are looking forward
to seeing what that new tax
relief will do to lower this
even further, um.
Which is something that to
highlight what the state is
doing well, um, including what
you've done um with tax relief.
523, once again, just showing
the trend for your largest.
citizen benefit the food, um,
guarT deduction hold harmless, a
reminder there have been some
legislative changes that have
kept some municipalities at a
frozen face out.
And then
fiscal year 2024.
On the chart, you can see there
seems to be an uptick in the
overall cost of the deduction
amounts went up and the whole
harmless.
But in our research, we're not
seeing that this is necessarily
a consumption-driven increase
but rather taxpayer behavior,
the timing of when returns are
coming in and hitting a
particular fiscal year.
At 5:24.
Just demonstrating what the
secretary mentioned that this
year we've entered the last step
function of increasing the
working families tax credit,
we're now at 25% of the federal
earned Income Tax Credit and the
red line shows that expenditure
increase and that specifically
tied to the increase to 25%, as
the bars showed the claim, the
claimants is staying relatively
flat. So we're just seeing that
increase in the
rebate due to the statutory
change to 25%.
Is 25. We want
To point out an interesting
interaction that we found when
we were studying, um,
changed one of the expenditures,
and that's the exemption for um
taxpayers 6 to 5 and older and
blind. They can get a um
exemption of up to $8000. This
has been in statute since 1985.
And when we were looking at this
one, we saw a significant
decrease. Now, it's not a large
expenditure. It's been about 2
million.
turn on the left, the red line
you can see it, it drastically
went below 1 million, and we
were
Trying to dig into why that
happened.
is with the new social security
exemption, there's an overlap of
this population, obviously a lot
of 65 and older have Social
Security, and when we
So expenditures would keep
everything else the same. So if
someone with a 65 and plus blind
exemption.
If they have the Social
Security, we keep that stable
and we look at isolation in this
exemption, and what we found is
the Social Security is so
significantly larger exemption
that there wasn't much left for
many taxpayers to be exempt. So
hence, some taxpayers, the
Social Security totally absorbs
um
The taxable income and this this
other one is not impactful, but
as you can see, there's
certainly taxpayers that don't
have Social Security, who
We might not yet have social
security, so there's still
Taxpayers who are benefiting
from this, but um an interesting
interaction has occurred with
the new larger Social Security.
Outside 26, we turn to the 2nd
largest category.
Healthcare.
And in 2024, we estimated this
at 968 million or 32% of
expenditures. This is up, um.
About 250 million from last year
and a 25% and it's driven by 4
expenditures and as you can see
there's only 10 expenditures in
this category.
In this category is citizen
benefit, you could argue, you
know,
The healthcare could be a
citizen some benefit, um, but
these again as the secretary
mentioned, a lot of these aren't
incentivized, um, stable health
providers in the state and um
Ensuring
Um,
access to healthcare.
And the top 4 that
all seen um arise as we
mentioned earlier, the
prescription drugs, but then we
have some specific health
provider, um, incentives, the
hospital, 60% deduction, and
then 2.
Um, practitioner deductions,
including the one that has the
whole harmless payments.
And digging a little bit more
into those on site 27.
The medical GRT deduction and
hold harmless.
Again, there's
similar with the food deduction,
there are statutory changes to
hold some municipalities frozen.
In 2023, there was an amendment
to
Expand the deduction to include
copays and deductions.
that
Which one for the increase that
you're seeing, we in our
analysis can specifically tie
that to that expansion of this
deduction.
That slide 28.
seeing a similar trend with the
hospitals, um, back to after
2020 with the change in
legislation, we're also seeing
um an uptake in FY 2024. We're
still looking into this one.
This is a little different, um,
Maybe it's tied, um, to a
broader healthcare increase, but
we don't have a specific um
High for that increase, but we
are looking into that one.
And if we move to 29, we'll move
to um
The 3rd largest category
economic development.
That
seen it
He's in and of itself. It's now
16% of expenditures 485 million,
doubling in size, aggregate
wise, and also percentage wise,
and
It's specifically tied to two
manufacturing.
Expenditures, one is the
secretary mentioned, RGRT
deduction for sales of services
to manufacturing and also
theortionment election for um
corporate filers who are tied to
manufacturing. You can see from
the pie chart that those two
alone take up 50% of all the cat
um
Aggregate categories, and both
of those saw a significant
increase um from last year.
Mm
The 3rd 1, film and television
credit.
Along with that one, we're
talking about 75% of this
category are, are made up of
those three.
So turning to 3 side, 30.
Just a little deep dive, um.
Into the new sales services
manufacturing guarantee
deduction. This is new. This is
only its 2nd year, but as you
can see, um, this highlights the
dramatic increase that we saw,
um, and she, you know, to
reiterate with the secretary
said, some of this might be
taxpayers thinking they qualify
or just selecting a new one, but
They qualify for another
deduction, um, certainly
continuing to look at this one.
And the
also is keeping an eye on this
one. We expected it to be large,
um, this is, this is larger
than, you know, we originally
estimated.
But we're kind of, we're holding
it at this level, um, and
Obviously not expecting it to
grow as dramatically it as it
has, but um
And I have been out of it for a
revenue forecast.
A size 31.
Um, the film tax credit.
We've summarize again all the
legislative changes that have
occurred with this credit, and
you can see for 2024 just up
slightly from last year with 102
million, um, and it was 100
million.
In fiscal year 2023.
I
Quickly through the last two
categories.
Um, highly specialized industry.
Just up a little bit from last
year, we're at 2228 million
versus um 203 million, and
again, this is a category you
can argue this could be economic
moments, um.
We
categories is a highly
specialized because they're so
targeted to a specific industry,
and you can see it, um, the top
two are oil and natural gas
severance, and then you have the
locomotive engine fuel grocery
seats, tax deduction, um, as
the, the 3rd highest one in this
category.
5:33, our our last category
environment conservation and
renewable energy. This is
staying relatively stable.
2% of expenditure is 69 million.
This year just sound a little
bit from last year at 71
million.
The largest one in this category
is the renewable energy
production Credit, um.
insect.
34 and 35.
We just like to
Um
il lu s t rate some um some
expense.
I illustrate, but ones that have
sunset dates that are expiring
in the next 5 years. Um, for
those are in 2025. They're
listed in order which ones are
expiring first.
Um, just highlighting those, um,
in the tax code and if we turned
aside 36.
This is some sense of something
we do encourage in the statute
so that we can evaluate
expenditures so that you can see
are they are performing to what
you intended, and we've also
listed some other legislative
thoughts, um.
As we, as we evaluate things
that help us to evaluate tax
expenditures, and we've listed
some other sources here if you
want to compare our state
expenditures to others, if you,
um, charitable trust has
reports.
The federal government also has
a tax expenditure report, um, if
you're interested in that. And
with that,
moves for questions.
very much for being here this
morning. Let's go to the
question
questions and comments.
That's rights.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your, uh, presentation
today.
In terms of some of the
healthcare, um,
credits.
And deductions.
I
don't know that you would be
tracking this, but it would be
my hope that it would be
increasing.
access to healthcare. Do you
have any way of knowing that?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Stefani, it's a great question.
Um,
not in this report, although
you're, you're absolutely right
that that's part of the purpose,
and I, I do think if we went
outside of tax and Rev and tax
and Revs data and mission, and I
think it's possible that some of
the other agencies that are
involved in these programs could
Provide that kind of color, you
know, for example, we have, uh,
the Healthcare Affordability
fund distribution and that whole
program and, you know, there's
other areas where we really
invested in healthcare and
affordability and access and,
and all of that. Um, but it's
not really our focus, and yet,
um, some of it is in the tax
code.
So, if it would be helpful to
the committee, I could follow up
with my colleagues at the
Department of Health and uh
Healthcare Authority to see.
You know, if they have color on
that.
So Mr. Carry, I bring up the
topic. It's the same thing as
the child care tax credit.
We're hoping that it improves
quality of life reduces poverty,
increases healthcare. So if we
can keep those things in mind, I
think they might be worthwhile.
So thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Representative.
chair.
And, and thank you secretary.
How
Any nonprofit hospitals do we
have in New Mexico?
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
I think we will need to get back
to you with an exact amount, but
for ballpark, it's just say less
than 10.
We can get back to the committee
with that.
Um, Mr. Chair, the ones I know
are Holy Cross and Taos and
Presbyterian is still a
nonprofit, right?
Pretty sure, Mr. Chairman, um,
representative, I believe you
are correct, yes, that there's
still nonprofits. I, I just, I
just want the committee to
understand that most of our
hospitals are now.
Privately owned and those are
all headquartered in out of
state corporations. That's all I
have to say. Thank you.
One representative. Let's go to
Representative Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary on your
Top 10 list here.
77, how many of those are
refundable?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Scott, let's go down the list
and see if I can answer that
question. So GRT deductions, uh,
refundability wouldn't apply, so
not 1234. The child income tax
credit and the working families
tax credit are refundable.
And that wouldn't apply to the
sit manufacturing
apportionments.
For the film tax credits.
Or the capital gains deduction,
so it's really a refundable
credits listed here, child tax
credit and working families.
And
The film
is not refundable.
Mr. Chairman, yes, that, that
one is a refundable credit.
OK, so the 3 on this top 10 list
would be
come and come working families.
In the film and television
credit is that.
Accurate.
Madam Secretary.
And
I think that's correct, yes.
Thank you.
And do we have any projections
as to the trajectory of the film
tax credit in coming years.
Chairman and Representative
Scott, um, yes, the economic
development department does, um,
you know, assist the Craig with
those estimates and the amount
that is expected to be uh
reduced from corporate income
tax for that credit is included
in detail in the revenue
estimate that we'll be giving
this afternoon.
So Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary, another way to look
at these expenditure.
is not foregoing tax revenue.
But rather
Subsidizing in particular
activity in big working families
or families with children.
Or
Film
I
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Scott, yes, I think I said at
the beginning, incentivizing
behavior is same idea.
The second question.
The transportation and
processing of natural gas, leaf
was represented as untaxed.
With respect to
The emergency school tax.
Is that gas leave the state
without paying any.
Mr. Chairman Representative.
It does pay taxes. It's just
that that.
particular deductions reduces as
the secretary said, some of
their taxable, um,
Ba income but
There's still a remainder that's
that's taxable under that tax.
Madam.
Would it be accurate to say.
That gas is taxed.
At the emergency school tax
rate.
Someplace else.
And the taxing again at the
emergency school tax rate.
would be
Hidden twice.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
If I'm understanding the correct
correctly, but there's some
attacks of the emerg school test
when it's first severed and then
another tax or
I guess my question, Mr.
Chairman.
I
What is that gas, every gas,
every cubic foot of natural gas
is produced in this state is
taxed at the wellhead.
At the emergency school tax
rate.
It's definitely accurate.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, yes, OK. So taxing again
as we transport it.
it
would be in effect double.
Taxation on that same cubic foot
is not accuracy,
Mr. Chairman representative, I,
I think now I, I, are you
speaking to the natural gas
processors tax.
Which
would only be taxed on that if
it was processed to another
product, which raises its tax,
um, it's economic value, so
Yes, there would be a sever tax
if that natural gas was
processed in New Mexico to break
it up into products that
Have increased their value.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman, ladies, I, I wanted
To clarify.
That those products are
Very heavily taxed.
And New Mexico.
Currently
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
anyone else?
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. Thank you.
A couple of quick questions.
The, uh, on page 29.
This one.
Uh, road
Rose in the rankings relatively
quickly and it's the um
Sale of services to
manufacturing.
Could you, could you refresh our
memory? What, what did we do
there? So in other words, if I'm
a manufacturer, I don't pay GRT
on
On
Accountants, lawyers, things of
that nature.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes, that
there are 5 specific services
and um I'm
Blinking on all of them, but
Eagle was one of them, so
Under that, those categories of
statute, if you are supplying a
manufacturer with those specific
services, those can be deducted
from your, from the grocery
seats. OK, thank you. And then
on page 31, um,
102 million uh film tax credit.
the cap is this chairman,
secretary of the cap is 110
million, it's gonna, it's gonna
rise, um.
Over the next couple, 3 years.
Does that 102 million include
the film partners.
Or or excludes the film
partners.
Senator, that includes the film
partners, so this, this includes
the, the older credits that is
expiring and then the new one
that's under the cap and also
partners. So all, all portions
of the credit are included.
Thank you, Mr. So even with the
film partners.
It has not reached above 110
million.
Mr. Chairman said, that is
correct. OK.
I know offhand how much of
of that.
tax credit is film partners and
how much is non-film partner,
Mr. Chairman, Senator.
This is reported on our, our um
website by statute, and this one
Um, I will, we will confirm with
the committee, but it was in the
neighborhood of 10 to 20
million, um, and, and
In fiscal year 2024, but I will
get an exact figure for that.
Thank you, Mr. 10 or 20 million
for film partners or non-film
partners. Excuse me, Mr.
Chairman for Senator to be
clarified for the film partner's
portion.
Now, and there's a way to figure
out, Mr. Chairman, how much of
that tax credit goes for.
Employees for
For
For uh for building stuff for
For for movie stars, for
Or a catering, things of that
nature.
the economic department have
that information.
What does your department have
that information?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator EDD
would have a specific um
breakdown for each particular
taxpayer.
thick. Thank you. I appreciate
it.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Senator Worth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to flag that.
Chart on page 22 on childhood
poverty.
Because I think that's a pretty
extraordinary.
statistic.
It's something that
We often focus just on the OPM
official poverty measure in New
Mexico.
Number one, the highest child
poverty.
Before you do the adjustment.
We have, do we know what the
percentage?
is using SPM for New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Wirth,
yes, um, thank you for calling
attention to that. It's it's
exciting new data that came out
from the census this year. So on
the, in the bullets on the left
and under the most recent data.
The US official poverty rate was
15.1% in the New Mexico rate was
27.4%. That's that very high
blue bar that we are on the far
left of the chart, but then the
supplemental measure, that's the
orange bar, uh, the US comes
down from 15.1 to 10.4, but New
Mexico comes all the way down
from 27.4% official to 8.9%.
Supplemental, and if you, you
can kind of eyeball like the,
the
The improvement between the blue
line and the orange line.
New Mexico makes by far the most
improvement amongst all the
states, and that's not just the
tax code, it's a lot to do with
the tax code, but it also has to
do with things like preschool
lunch and opportunity
scholarship and universal pre-K
and
Things outside the tax code.
And Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary and again, I'm trying
to draw my little line going
across here, clearly we're
You know, now we've moved into
the bottom, I guess we, we, we
don't want to be on the top. We
want to be low here. We've moved
onto the bottom half. Do we know
specifically in terms of
percentages where we rank.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Wirth,
I, I heard 17%, but I think
that's 17th, right? But it's,
it's some somewhere right in the
middle. I did the same as you. I
drew a straight line across and
you can see we're right in the
middle of the pack, and of
course we'd like to do even
better, and if we've got 8.9% of
children in poverty, there's
obviously still more work to do,
but, um, to be fair, the
supplemental poverty measure is
a much more accurate measure and
it's wonderful to be in the
middle of the states instead of
The worst in the nation and that
and I certainly would agree. I'd
be curious as well.
If we could do, is there a
similar chart that just deals
with poverty, not just focused
on under 18 cause I'd be curious
what those is, is it a similar
analysis. Yes, Mr. Chair and
Senator Worth, we can provide
that to the committee just
official of all ages and versus
supplemental of all ages, and in
that one, we, we still do make
quite a large improvement, but I
think our improvement is most
pronounced uh for child poverty,
but we'll provide that to the
committee.
Mr. Chair, I just again wanted
to flag it because again, this
is something that uh
We take all the pieces by
themselves, but when you
actually look at what's what the
impact is, this is pretty
extraordinary and
Really does seem like a message
that needs to get out there, and
I want folks to understand.
The other side of all the work
that we've done. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, anyone,
anyone else questions or
comments?
Appreciate the presentation this
morning. Thank you for your
time. Thank you. We'll see you
this afternoon. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you again. Uh, we are a
little bit ahead of schedule,
uh, Senator Hickey will be the
one presenting for consideration
on his uh legislation, proposed
legislation at 11:45, but in the
meantime, Senator Stefaniks, you
had made mention if there was
time could squeeze you in.
Resent here.
Whatever you feel like.
All right,
yeah. That way I won't fall
again.
The floor is yours. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. A few months ago, I
presented to this committee.
The uh possibility of a tax
credit for volunteer
firefighters as a recruitment
tool.
And it would provide both for
volunteer EMTs and volunteer
firefighters $1000 a year tax
credit for those who uh provide
so much service,
uh, this real quick, the, the
piece of legislation is in your
packet so you can refer to your
packet for that legislation.
That's fine. It's 0.228617.5.
And I'd like to thank uh Martin
for working with me through 5
different iterations. This bill
was endorsed by economic and
rural development, but since
then it's been changed even
more. The tax um department uh
worked with the Department of
Health and has a few
recommendations for the bill,
and so we did incorporate the
ones that Martin felt were
necessary for uh credit for
credentialing the individuals
who have
provided enough service. Um, I
see this is a bipartisan bill.
We have limited it for 10 years
to $4 million for each category,
we don't think we would use 4
million for each category
because there's 4000 people
total and the volunteer
firefighters and EMTs together.
So I would stand for questions
and ask for your endorsement.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any questions or comments for
the senator on the proposed uh
requests for endorsement?
Senator or soon to be Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
you're.
Um
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, is
this credit refundable or
transferable or just strictly a
deduction from taxes.
Thank you, um.
Mr. Chair and and Representative
Scott, soon to be senator, um,
this is not refundable. It is a
tax credit. Oh, it is
refundable, sorry, Martin. It is
refundable, but it's can only be
used once during that year. It
can't be used if you're both an
EMT and a volunteer firefighter.
So if you meet both categories,
you can't get 2000, you can
still only get the one.
And I might need some help if
you have further question about
that refundable.
I guess the basic question, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, is if the tax
liability of that volunteer is.
Insufficient to develop the
credit, the state will write a
check.
Back to the taxpayer.
Is that accurate?
Um
Thank you, um.
Center to be, uh, on page 6,
Section F, that portion of the
tax credit that exceeds its
taxpayers' tax liability and the
taxable year in which the tax
credit is claimed shall be
refunded.
OK
Thank you.
Scott, anyone else questions or
comments?
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I move that we, uh,
adopt, if you will, uh, this
particular piece of legislation,
uh, as a recommendation on
behalf of this committee to uh
present this uh before the uh
full legislature in the
upcoming.
2025 legislative session. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Very good motion
made by Senator Campos, seconded
by Representative Herrera.
Anyone in opposition of that
motion, Mr. Chair, can we make
it specific that we got the 202
number just because I know these
things have a way of evolving
sometimes.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair, and so as part of the
addendum to the motion, uh, I
indicate that, uh, uh, tool
number 0.228617.5, uh, be the
adopted piece of legislation by
this committee. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you for the
clarification. Uh, again.
Uh, motion made by Senator
Campos, seconded by
Representative Vera on the
information in 202 number.
They were in opposition.
See no, uh, you haven't endorsed
piece of legislation. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you. Um, I don't see
Senator Hickey here yet. And so
I don't want us to wait around
for him, so I think at this
point in time, uh we can break
for lunch.
And uh we will come back.
At uh
At 12:15, let's just come back.
Well, no, no, no.
Um
Let's come back.
At 12:30.
And if we can get out of here
early, then then we will, but
12:30, we'll come back for
lunch. Thank you.
