All right good morning everybody
well okay I thought I have like
a echo you do and I did I really
do
alright sorry with me sorry what
do you guys
do in the sound I guess we turn
the effect down on the
on the channel.
Okay better better yeah
all right good morning everybody
i'm see senator jeff someone
welcome to the radioactive
hazardous materials interim
committee the legislature
appreciate you all being here we
will call this meeting to order
and I will still have some
committee members come in but
why don't we start off with a
round of introductions starting
with the committee and then
we'll go to the audience love to
hear who you all are sell
sufficient representative lord
sort of stuff.
Okay
is this what I would there were
going sorry
to speak on high representatives
stephanie lord i'm used to my
voice being louder sorry
came in from
sending a mountains this morning
beautiful morning on a ghost
other moon this morning was
absolutely fantastic look I was
so close was unbelievable
I really love this committee one
of my favorites happened to be
her love the drive out here and
represent block here to step out
he'll be right back.
Thank you mister chair see
senator help of junior district
twenty three northwest of a
kirky burner leo county
actually close to my district I
go all the way out to the real
pork or actually have that
leguna burger and gas station I
go that far thank you.
Thank you good morning committee
good morning everyone i'm angel
charlie state senator for
district thirty which is just
right outside of where we are.
My name is de chairman and I am
debbie sonya and I represent
house district twenty one and
bringing the okay near man's own
high school it's northeast
southeast corner of apple cookie
thank you
good morning i'm a
representative of joan ferrari
and i'm from last crucial
district thirty seven which is
kind of the northeast part of
last cruises thank you.
Good morning everyone I am
representative patty lumstra a
represent house district nine
house district nine is gallop
and nine naval chapters I have
been serving since two thousand
one and I need to say that I
started my college career in
this in this facility for those
of you don't know me I grew up
in this community grounds milan
community and then moved to
gallup in the late eighties
after getting out of graduate
school so i'm very very familiar
with this community and I saw
that media was being held here
wanted to join you know
appreciate it thank you.
When we have our committee staff
introduced themselves to.
I'm paul espace
attorney with a legislative
council service.
All right thanks and the staff
for the ones who really do a lot
of the amazing work behind the
scene supporting these agendas
together and they do and
incredible jobs so we think you
are
always a really honored to work
with you so I don't and
gentlemen whose mix in our audio
visual interest yourself because
we'll be working closely
david so why don't we turn to
the audience of you are
comfortable introducing yourself
you don't have to if you don't
want but we'll start with you
down on the front room.
Now I know are you recommended
we need here
you had a home cooked me of
this.
Present.
Thank you.
Perfect perfect
lucky.
Okay.
Sorry say again
could you say a little could you
say a little latter.
Okay.
Welcome
okay so
the service doing a.
Good morning committee chairman
members of the committee welcome
to new mexico state university
grants community college very
delighted that you have decided
to hold this committee hearing
here on on on animals you
grounds and on behalf of the
system president president
fed me community college
chancellor monica thought is and
myself as the ceo of grants
welcome to an assume I like to
take a little bit of time to
share a little bit about animals
you grants as you know we are
one of the branch campuses of
new mexico see university we are
the smallest campus our head
count is running about eight
hundred students which in
comparison to the size of our
county is where we're doing
pretty well almost gordo's
running about eleven hundred and
they are their counties about
sixty thousand or counties about
twenty six thousand and running
about eight hundred students
head account very pleased with
that
our academic programming
includes a nine associate
degrees in transfer programs
that transfer to new mexico
university as well as you are
six applied associate degrees
with our premier cte program in
both welding and automotive and
electrical systems as well as
some allied health programs in
plabotted me in certified
nursing assistance eighteen
certificates that will get
students into
careers within one year which
has shifted in the last five
years at what we're seen as
people are warning
industry recognize credentials
that will get them a job quicker
and and in the in the work force
faster and so to meet that need
we've been working on when yours
or less certificates we also
host two premier bachelor of
science degrees in better of
science of nursing.
And education as a part of a
partnership with our last
cruises campus and so we produce
eight nurses every year that
that are then
placed in our local community at
the siebel accounti hospital and
that's been a really good
partnership and a good feeder
program to keep nurses and
health care the health care to
meet the needs of the healthcare
industry here in grants
or campus also we have seventeen
full time faculty thirty five I
junked and twenty staff so we're
a small staff yet we are able to
meet the needs of of our
community and in a variety of
ways
we have an adult education
program which I am pleased to
announce that we have moved
from.
Ranking second to last two
second to first in one year and
so they have been recognized as
a as a
model program within the adult
education program and so they
are now sharing what they've
done state why to be able to
move that worker and we've taken
practices from what they're
doing to expand to the college
came very proud of our adult
educational program we graduated
thirty forty students this year
we also host a small business
development center on campus
that meets the needs of a small
businesses every community
college in new mexico has one
we're looking for fortunate that
grants has been able to keep
hours it's located on campus and
as of yesterday most recently
for new businesses and grants in
and twenty five jobs retained
it's very important to us that
we retain jobs and see where
county and continue to support
new businesses and existing
businesses and this is all done
with one employee at the center
we also have a child development
center daycare center that works
in tandem with our early
childhood program and so we meet
there's there's only two
daycares two large daycares in
grounds one is on our campus and
we hold that that center
provides the practice
for our early childhood
development program
right now in a month you grounds
is part of complete college
america funded by the bill and
melinda dates foundation
which provides us resources to
focus on degree completion i'm
very proud to say that this last
year we awarded over a hundred
certificate degrees and we are
in the it's been upward every
year so
could goes to my team because
without my team we couldn't do
what we're what we're doing.
For for the citizens of grants
in your packet at your table you
have some enrollment figures
we are we saw really large
increase last year in in head
county year before what i'm most
pleased about and I don't focus
necessarily on hit count by look
at student credit hours right
now we have a very large
population of students who take
part time courses and so when
that translate into into student
credit hours we're seeing our
student credit hours increase
annually every year which is
really positive for our campus
and as I said or degree
completions have been growing
exponentially and as well as
enrollment in general i'd like
to think you first of all for
supporting our capital projects
we have just finished the
complete roof and exterior of
martinez hall which is right
outdoor over five million
dollars
i'd like to personally think
each and every one of you to
continue to support the capital
projects for our buildings it
means a lot to our students who
come to school here that in a
rural college that they can go
and participate in higher
education in the same kind of
facilities as cnm unm and the on
the last cruise's campus so
thank you so much in addition I
like to think your support for
your your continued
efforts in work force
development with the grow money
where we're using that too to
help siebel accounty and the
programming we do at the college
to two months per and support
economic development here with
that if you have any questions I
welcome any questions and again
welcome to mexico state
university grants community
college.
Okay thank you very much for the
presentation and thank you for
hosting us here so really
beautiful building and and it's
great to hear about all the
colleagues here who have history
here in john and you know this
historic armed town so much
great history and thank you
probably the good work and
thanks as well and mse for
supporting the sponsoring or
lunch today and everybody is
here as long as it was food
working
enjoy and them representative
question
yes thank you too for you know a
hosting and taking such good
care of us while we're here and
I was wondering do you have a
dual credit program and do the
high school or middle school
kids students get to
participate.
Chersteinborn a representative
of friday yes we do have a door
credit program and we work
really closely with both of our
two local high schools grants
high school which is right
across the street as well as the
gunit account my high school we
also have dual credit
programming as far as zoomie and
pine hill and as well as the roo
i'm in addition or early college
high school located in
the mechaning is also considered
door credit we are last or
spring numbers for credit
students where a hundred and
sixty three students we have
been trying to streamline this
so that students who participate
in your credit are earning
college credits that will
transfer to a degree once they
get out of high school to really
important that they're on a
pathway and so while our numbers
aren't large like the other
campuses we are intentional on
the course on on the courses
they take so that when they do
go to the university or they
come back to us they already
count towards their degree
think you do happen to know what
some of the popular
credit credits are classes or
charge down born representative
yes the most popular programs
right now or cte programs
welding and itemotive as door
credit those are done in person
as well as our transfer programs
so we get a lot of students who
want to participate in I get
their english and math i'm
taking care of before they go to
the university another
popular program as our certified
nursing assistant and floor
bottom in program so those are a
primary classes that they tick
terrific thank you very much
you're welcome.
Okay thank you again
thank you welcome we have a
couple senators who arrived who
if you'd like to introduce
yourself chairman
good morning excuse me goodbye
mister chairman coaches at
lender lopez state senator
district eleven southwest
watching to burning your county
and I am attending your
committee as a guest today thank
you
thank you mr chair of my name is
internet to do a locus from
district sixteen and albuquerque
excited to be here beautiful
drive this morning
and very fashionable I might
have oh yeah we're thank you
so we will move on to.
A wood will hang on.
Alright well wait yasser moving
on to the next time in the
agenda the sand on mine
investigation project act
ericman rosa when you're ready
the floor is yours.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee.
Was just wait a moment for the
presentation to come out
okay okay
i'll go ahead and begin then
this presentation was created by
then you'll be stevens and
associates and I will present
and their behalf
the same one mine remediation in
restrictions study.
Presenting results to you today
on
environmental study performed
over about the last year and a
half and the study is documented
in an investigation report
the presentation is a summary of
that report.
The study was conducted to
satisfy conditions of the sand
line generating station facility
and my remediation and
restoration study act.
As your hear from later medias
was responsible for the study of
the generating facility and m d
was responsible for the study of
the mind.
Mmd contracted can you be
stevenson associate to conduct
the main study and that the
purpose of the study was the
guide.
Future mmd actions and
strategies regarding permitting.
Yes
yes certainly
okay.
Thank you mister chair
i'm on the
third slide now
the mine is located in the four
corners region western
farmington.
And it is near several important
surface water courses south of
the mind the sand one river
flows to the west
it is fed by the enemies and the
plotter rivers upstream of the
mine as well as the chuck river
downstream.
And the boundary you see there
on your slide is that of them
the mine and it's recent permit
boundary
a little bit of history on them
do you send one mine.
Surface trip mining began in the
early nineteen seventies
and mining operations switched
to underground mining in two
thousand two
and underground fire halted
mining in twenty eleven but that
was only temporary and otherwise
the the operations have remained
continuous and the nineteen
seven years
mainly resumed in june twenty
twelve and continued until the
end of twenty twenty two.
And the
the call was supplied to the
same one generating station.
Existing features at the same
one in mind the primary main
features include existing and
former pits and an underground
mine area the underground mine
area you can see is located and
the middle eastern side of the
site represented by the black
horizontal and vertical lines.
Call combustion by products from
the generating station also
called ccbs
are shown in yellow there and
were pleased in back fill in the
pits that were mine for call
they consist of ash and flu
gasties authorization material.
Ccb's have been topic of concern
and investigation at the mine
with previous studies more
information regarding ccb's is
provided in the report and later
in the presentation.
For a femeral training is exist
on the main and that's the hutch
canyon
the shamway stephens and
westwater arrives
which you can see on this slowed
hutch canyon and some way and
westwater royals were diverted
from their natural drainages to
accommodate the mining and it's
planned that the diversions are
to remain through closure.
On site royals flow during storm
events and dream toward the sand
one river.
A current mind status
here pictured is the junior
perpet.
Westmoreland is the current
owner operator of the mind they
have an active permit nineteen
oh one
and september twenty ninth
twenty twenty two was the last
operating day of that mind
currently
the
the mine is back showing the
junior pit
md conducts monthly minor
inspections as required by our
regulations
and the mine conducts quarterly
sampling events
quarter water sampling events
excuse me
the anticipate completion date
of of total backfill of the june
perpet is somewhere around
summer of twenty twenty six so
next summer sometime
data from the minds quarterly
sampling is used for the study
and made up of the bulk of the
data that dbs and a analyst.
Onto the next slide with the pre
investigation tasks totaled
since I know we we don't see our
size upon the screen
site recondistance.
Ups and any conducted decided
connisons to get familiar with
ditches and operations at the
mine.
They also conducted a public
outreach and received comments
through web based portal
somewhere email to mmd
public comments are also
included in that report
public notice
included in the information on
the public meeting which was
held that the sandwich college
campus on september twenty sixth
twenty twenty four
existing monitoring data
compiled largely consists of the
ground water and surface water
data collected as the mine.
Data have been collected like we
said earlier
since the nineteen seventies
providing a long monitoring
history to characterize
environmental conditions
where you can go to the next
slide existing groundwater
monitoring locations.
Numerous existing groundwater
monitoring wills are present at
both the generating station in
the mind.
Generating station monitoring
wells are shown in green
thanks to
our med colleagues for sharing
that information
and mine wells are shown in
blue.
Compiled
dvs in their compiled only
available historical data for
the mine from the seventies on
to the present.
And that
one extra point here was the dvs
added twenty twenty four
sandwich generating station data
to various maps in their report
to help with data
interpretation.
The next slide existing surface
water monitoring locations
existing surface water
monitoring locations here are
shown at the mine
there's two types there's the
water set surface water samplers
seen as
swm
and they're placed within the
euros to collect storm water
samples
second type of sample there is
the npds out for that are
monitored as part of the storm
water pollution prevention plan.
Like the wells historical
surface water data was compiled
for all available locations on
the main side.
Moving to the next slide study
desktop investigation.
A dbs and a reviewed the
existing documents and reports
but this information can
consisted of publications
monitoring reports and
permitting documents.
The evaluated existing
monitoring data
and these data consistent of
those collected primarily by the
mine
data were used to identify the
different water bearing rock
units and groundwater flow
directions within these units.
They were used to map the
distribution of chemical
constituents in surface water
and groundwater
they created time series plots
to show temporal trends performs
statistical analysis and
ultimately characterized surface
water and groundwater conditions
gbsna also identified potential
nearby receptors and assessed
the threadsight conditions
possessed it is receptors
this was documented in their
investigation for
study findings
to the next slide
we have three water bearing rock
units
at the top
deluvium
the fruit information below that
which is the shall bearing
excuse me the coal bearing and
shall bearing units
below the luvium
and then the picture cliff
sandstone beneath beneath that
the study found their
groundwater quality is poor
meanings considering
concentrations are higher than
water quality standards
this is jim generally speaking
some concentrations appear to be
naturally elevated as well.
Concentrations were greatest in
a luvial ground water
upgrading groundwaters also of
poor water quality but needs to
be better to find
and that historical discharges
from the generating station to
the westwater royal were also
noted.
As potential issues from with
the groundwater quality.
We also have a
while we do have a ground water
excuse me we do have a
background will.
That we views
for background monitoring are
getting background values and
that we're working toward
improving and getting in a
another background well used to
to measure background
information
with partnering with enemy d
as we go forward
the next slide is the overview
potential metric surface
from second quarter of twenty
twenty four.
Oh sha ok.
Hoops i'm going back sorry about
that.
Okay now we're now we're up and
running.
Thank you sir
so on this slide
so dbs and they put together
potential mattric surface maps
for all of the three water
bearing units the lubian as we
said earlier the fruit one
formation and the picture cliff
sandstone
and that was done to determine
the groundwater flow direction
i'm showing you only the olyvial
potential metric surface for
this presentation but there are
you can see the other two
surfaces in the report
generally speaking here the
luvian or the olivial
groundwater generally flows from
north the south toward the same
one
and see if I can won't show up
on the screen but you can see
that it moves in that direction
on the map
generating station
operates to
existing recovery trenches
the memorial trench recovery
system and the show way recovery
trench.
These trenches intercept poor
quality aluvial groundwater in
an effort to protect downgrading
over water quality.
This next light is the
box and whisker plots devorming
of the box and whisker parts was
one of everyone else is dbs and
a performed to evaluate
chemistry data
other analysis included chemical
constituent distribution maps
time serious parts and tabulated
comparisons to water quality
standards these analysis were
presented in the investigation
report
barkspots as you see on this
slide our graphical means for
summarizing and presenting data
shown here are the place of
tedies
does the upper left
graph soul feed is the upper
right and boron is the lower
left ph is the lower rate.
Greatest considering
concentrations for tedious and
sophie
were observed in the lubia
alluvial wells.
As can be seen on the right side
of the upper plots
that's the olympian second from
the right in each of those upper
plots.
However for boron boring was the
highest in the fill wells so the
mine material that was bacteled
into the pits
and that can be seen the lower
left
box plot
surface water quality as we
mentioned earlier is slightly
better than that of groundwater
with lower considering
concentrations ph values are
near natural too slightly
alcohol.
Study findings the water bearing
fruit information and the
picture cliff sandstone
their low premiability rocks
with low well yields whatever
levels are expected to recover
due to the association of mine
do watering
and that the breed ccb's present
or present a low risk to
groundwater quality
these were
a topic of the unm studies from
circa twenty twelve twenty
thirteen and the US g s that is
from twenty seventeen twenty
eighteen
most considering concentrations
in ccarible to those of native
ground water
also noted
long travel times in the
thousands of years to the sand
one river through these two
for true information and the
picture clear sandstone
onto the next
slide
will continue the study findings
service water quality is better
than groundwater quality
although the the poorest quality
among along the westwater and
lower somewhere royalist was
found storm water impoundence at
the mine
effective are effective at
preventing discharges to the
arroyance
curious of primary concern that
were noted
luvium alluvial ground water
beneath the westwater royal
and the shonware royal backwater
reach
and the settlement of westwater
royal appears to be impacting
surface water quality.
Uh investigation report did
identify a few day to gaps one
of which being additional
monitoring roles was was
warranted.
Storm water palments just to add
here are
designed to contain up to a one
hundred year storm and very few
discharges if any reached the
npds outfalls.
Potential hydrologic receptors.
The study valuated the potential
threats of poorer quality
groundwater to offsite receptors
like we mentioned earlier the
has can you can see here.
On the map
all the
different locations where there
are wells along the sandwater
sim one river.
Use their potential offsite
receptors included in the and
river basin and water supply
wills along the river
groundwater can potentially
reach these receptors by two
roots the shamway a royal luvial
groundwater system so perched or
ashes a shallow ground water
and
potentially traveling through
water bearing bedrock so the
fruit information or the picture
of sandstone
both of these potential cbs
pathways present minimal risk to
receptors due to the presence of
existing overview ground water
recovery systems of the memorial
trench in the some way recovery
trench and the fact that we have
low permiability water bearing
bedrock.
So wreck for the recommendation
and restoration slide
january seems an associates
recommended that the existing
my enclosure plan is adequate
with the current plan as
approved by nandy the primary
recommendation method is to back
full regret cover and
revegetate the expected we do
expect
to limit information with this
recommendation plan but
groundwater levels are expected
to recover due to the fact that
the minus dewater has stopped
you watering.
The continued operation of the
shamway a royal recovery trench
will be important for
containment of the shallow
luvial potential issues that may
arise there otherwise long
travel times on the thousands of
years are expected to the
sandwich river
and clean cover should remove
the need for a storm water
impayments
we
one last piece for this lied was
that
migration of poor water quality
through the fruit and formation
and picture cliff sandstone
presents little risk to
downgrade in water users because
of that very low premiability
and then consequently those
travel times are long and the
flux is small.
Continued operation of that
somewhere real recovery change
may be of importance to the
minor closure if alluvial
groundwater beneath the show
royal backwater reach changes to
the worst so if there is a
backflow toward the west that
recovery trench will prove
valuable.
Thank you that is I have time
for questions in anything you
like to come on thank you mister
chair members of the community
thank you for the really
thorough presentation and the
looks like a perot study that
was done here so committee
questions
can I have a few questions how
long the restoration plan and
the reclamation plan how long is
that going to take to be
implemented at these sites for
claiming to restore.
It really depends upon the
how long it takes for the money
to reclaim their
their pits and then get it to
get their
post mining chipography to the
appropriate to park fee
elevation enry vegetation so the
vegetation takes a minimum of
ten years so
on the order of I estimate
between ten and fifteen years
would be
time that the the
nd would potentially be ready to
uh sign our phone jurisdictional
release of of the site but my
uh
I understand that it all is
fixed the time of out of the
operator to get the
recommendation done then we
assess
thank you and then said a
curiosity you said the
jurisdictional lease so who owns
the land itself
thank you mister chair members
of the committee the land is
owned by a number of different
private entities.
A majority of it is federal land
as well so the blm has a large
stick in the surface and mineral
rates
and
west moral and does own some of
the surface rates as well so
it's a smattering of water
excuse me of surface rates there
with a situation like this what
purpose is is the land suitable
for after reclaimation or is it
not suitable for.
Thank you for the question is
your chair and members of the
committee the
the current postmaning menus is
designated gracing while life
raising and and habitat
there have been many
well they're already already
several
so our companies that have
been using the lands for
for accessing it in and
constructing sore panels and
generating power that way.
It it really and it could be
potentially used for the
intended post minimum use of
greasing because there have been
catalog in the area as well
then a final question for me and
then we have other committee
members so when you do a study
like this this was I guess
contracted out probably like a
lot of this stuff
do you
how do you oversee that work I
mean knowing that the company
who does that also does work
with industry
here just making sure that
you're looking at good grigorous
data
it's all accurate that we can
base
protective action on how do you
ground truth and i'll receive
this kind of research.
So thank you for the question
mister chair and and members of
the committee
though the ground you think here
is really that we
we perform we've been taking her
own water quality sampling as
well from the besides who were
always checking on the operator
that way.
The
data that we've shared with them
with gps and a
it is everything that we have
available and
asked if they look at it for me
third party
objective
standpoint and determine what
the best course of action is
without any
coloring I should say to their
opinion of professional opinion.
Uh so
looking at it with a critical
eye is something that we've
we've also gone all always
looked at third party reports in
that way
I would also mention that the
the act as as as written
from the house bill one forty
two was asking primarily for a
third party contractor to do the
work and not
an in house type of operation so
but to your
your question is to chair we we
take the notion of.
Taking our data and the mine
stated a very seriously and
looked to
go through the report with a
fine toothcome and ensure that
we are indeed protecting
groundwater and surface water
quality thank you yeah and i'm
not questioning it I just you
know it's publicly funded I
realize we we do a lot of
contract thing we have to but
definitely look to our
regulatory agencies too at the
end of the day be the experts
look out for the public interest
in make sure that we're getting
good work and we we can rely on
the answer see them so thank you
very much okay
thank you very much for this
thorough report i'm just gonna
have some questions to better
understand the report because
there are
just a few you know I have all
over these a little questions
and in first can you remind me
what ccb is
yes thank you mister chair
members of the committee
uh
the ccb is the cold combustion
by product
and it's essentially a material
that comes from the burning of
the describing if you will of
the
towers from the generating
station that's pulled out as a
ways product during the burning
process and in stockpiled and
then removed from the general
station and put into the mine as
back fill so it so what is it is
ash what what what's considered
ashia ash and then sold cause
the thing is is about well okay
so then you have been this
illuvious this is why I need
clification alluvial potential
metrics surfaced second quarter
twenty twenty four yes so as I
understood what you said is the
occupier is shell and so there
is a risk.
From the ccb's but then used it
then indian and i'm just trying
to understand the report but
then not too much of a concern
because too dewattering will
occur
and so that kind of emiliary is
the risk of well note d watering
will start occurring and that
alleviates the risk and i'd like
to understand given that there's
a shellow eco for and there's so
much of this ccb how is the risk
alleviated by the dewarden is
isn't the dewatering in this
forgive me cause i'm thinking
about the
stopping the dewatering isn't
that also an issue for the state
engineer like who owns those
water rights what happens to
those water rights and if the
dewatering stops
what does that mean and how does
it relate to avoiding the
potential impact of this ash on
the water did that make sense I
remember i'm just trying to
understand it yes that thank you
mister
senator lopez thank you for the
question
could be better up as my
apologies
my apologies
so
just to persist with the.
Understanding here that
with the finishing of.
Of the
dewardering so they've ceased
dewatering there's the
anticipation that the
groundwater levels will rise
slowly with term.
The usual studies indicated
would take three to five hundred
year or something like that to
rise
at three to five hundred years
years
okay in that area specifically
in the purpose hundred to five
hundred or three years to fight
three hundred to five hundred
years yeah sorry
so
there is the potential into the
future that water from
there would see if interview
luvium from the ground water
could potentially flow back into
the
call conversion by product into
the core combustion bribe by
product and
and then contemporary
contaminate the agree for that
way the idea is that there's two
trenches mainly the shone way
uh trench that has been put in
place about twelve fifteen years
ago or something like that to
travel potential contaminated
ground water from moving
downstream into the sand on
river that is in a pump back
system so should water
continuing water get to that
somewhere recovery trench in the
illuviour ground water it will
be humped back to a pound hire
up in the on the generating
station side now any water that
did make it into the the hard
rock to bedrock would take a
very long time on the order of
thousands of years to perk late
down into the hard rock and then
make it to the same one river
thank you I appreciate that that
helps me understand the
recommendation restoration point
that says continued operation of
the summary a royal recovery
trench important to containment
cause that was my question and
then you talked about them
unless there's back flow to the
west and I just didn't
understand.
Understand that I know I didn't
want to just accept it without
understanding it
no that that's that's perfectly
fine mr and
sender city locus that the the
current understanding of the
groundwater flow direction is
roughly to the southeast in that
view
however like we said earlier it
should the
ground water
fill up over the next hundred
years and then go into deliver
system it may reverse flow
and go into the show way
a royal area in your lubian
know I appreciate that that
that explanation and then
when we actually
talked about the revegitation
taking ten to fifteen years and
that's pretty important also to
the reclamation and recovery
what is the risk of
during these ten to fifteen
years what is the wrist of the
of not having the the the
vegetation in place for those
years.
Thank you for the question
mister chair and senators to
deal up as I
I think the the risk is very low
to the ground water
if if you if that's where you're
asking about only because
the cover that we require is on
the order of ten to twenty five
feet of cover that's required
above any ccbs.
So
there's storm water containments
that are in place and various
best management practices that
the mine uses during the
recommendation process to ensure
that.
Should there be storm water
runoff it is captured locally
and then allowed to evaporate uh
according to their their plan.
And the vegetation actually has
a very starting quick starting
quality there at the same one
mine because they are required
under their permit to.
Irrigate their vegetation for
the first year first two years
of of their proceeding so that
they have a quick growth rate
and then
then
whatever falls out of skies
what's left to help with the
vegetation but we've noted that
large amounts of vegetation has
have taken hold there and that
really helps with the that
evaporative
that were transparation as well
to keep water from percolating
into the ground and just working
to
assist the vegetation and so
that relates to the other
question I have about the the
use of the of the water rates if
they're not dewatering them they
are going to be using it for
irrigation for their
recommendation those rights or
maybe that's a state engineer
well thank you for the question
mister chair and and center city
look as that is
it's more of an it would be more
of an office of the stage and
engineers question but the water
that they are using currently
for the gregation is is trapped
storm water
from
their various locations around
the side so and then they also
have some pumped water that they
bring from
from wherever they believe it's
the same one send one river
water but it i'd have to check
on that i'm not exactly sure but
the with water that they do uses
is is a
intended use for watering the
vegetation so
of course the reason I ask is
because not only do we have
issues of great of water quality
we also are going to have issues
of water quantity so that that
and I know they're regulated in
two completely different ways
but that that's what I weigh ask
and then.
You'd send it solar companies
are currently using using this
land how many how much it could
help how is that work is that
over the reclaimed land which
how does it is that what I was
seen it I I we were we've
visited there but it at that
time there were no solar panels
thank you for the question
mister chair and and sender said
europe as
I I have
i'm with the understanding that
the
I miss spoke earlier is there
are there's a solar company that
has already put sore panels up
between kind of in the far east
side of of the same mind on the
old plot of mine whole road that
goes north from there.
Uh so that that's really the the
one I was focusing on
there are potentials that other
companies could come in and
utilize that area that's what I
wanted to mention as for sole
companies and potentials are
potential okay all right I I
appreciate that because I was
like yeah there's nothing on the
site currently
oh mr think you want thank you
for the reminder and mister
chair finally
is the epay involved in any way
with this or the billing
thank you for the question
mister chairman and senators to
deal with as the blame is only
in this process no they are not
involved in this study at all
they're involved in other
aspects of the closure process
because of their land being
involved the blm specifically
the epa is only involved in
this.
Again not in the study it is
only as holders of the and the p
d e s permits that the mine has
to carry.
Npd s n p d e stats national
pollution
discharge them in system thank
you
the reason I ask is because i'm
concerned about the federal
governments
massive deregulation of of
environmental concerns and of
course our state can have
stronger regulations and I think
it's really important to note
that the state regulations are
still in place and they're not
going to be affected by whatever
the epa or the blm does with
deregulating because they still
have to comply with the state
regulations and I think that's
really important to note and
really important to understand
because it's frightening to a
lot of people when i've received
a lot of calls about the
concerns about what's happening
at the mobile m so thank you
mister chairman I apologize for
not always going to check
our
all right thank you moving on to
represent
mr chairman thank you for your
presentation just some quick
questions in senator might have
asked i'm not quite sure
as far as potential groundwater
contamination is there are we
talking anything coming from the
call mines due to are you
somehow testing to make sure
nothing is coming from the
commons or if it is well how are
you testing it where is the
testing being done
thank you for the question
mister chairman members of the
committee though
the testing is coming from
various locations around the
main site.
And uh
they're
completed in in various
locations you can see
the blue
the blue here
well anyway
the blue you can see them and
various pastor at the mainside
they're completely very steps
and
looking for not only
background information but also
current
uh potential
impacted areas by mining
activities
so.
What you see there is a grouping
around all pits and
update and below end down
drainage from any surface to
services
so mister chairman so is any of
it
directly tied mines mines and if
it is r u either my new
companies from mediating the the
ground water contamination.
So
thank you for the question is
she members of the community
though
if if there is indeed a a
groundwater contamination
determined then we would
certainly ask for uh some sort
of remediation to you to
occur
based on the findings of the
study.
We currently
are moving forward with the
recommendation plan as is with
the understanding that we do
need to improve the background
understanding because this is a
naturally elevated
one of the constituents that we
looked at our nationally
elevated based on our current
information
so it's different more difficult
to discern.
What happened naturally or what
occurred as a result of mying
activity.
In this one of the question
mister terman you kept you said
that a lot of the royals and
some of the water reason i'll go
to the sand one river is there a
potential for contamination
there or do you monitor that I
would I wouldn't wondering what
if if I didn't know it was a if
it was being contaminated or
well thank you for the question
mr chairman and members of the
committee is
this is something that the
january receivings and
associates found the.
The
the well there were the uh
constituents that would be
elevated in ground water they
would be moving at a very very
slow rate toward the river in
the bedrock.
On the order of thousands of
years so and it's the the
slowness but also the flex
meaning that dose of whatever
would be coming out would be so
small because of the slow
permitability that's the with
the study findings were showing
thank you
senator
thank you mr chair thank you for
your presentation
I understand this to be a steady
but what is enforcement look
like.
Thank you for the question
mister chair and members of the
committee the.
Enforcement at the moment
appears to be
improving well
I should say staying with the
current recommendation plan as
is.
And insurer that cover material
is qaquon on cover material is
is a
measured which the minders do
you actively as they place taps
oil or top dressing material
on top of the back fill
material.
And then
ensuring that we've can
move forward with partnering
with any media and
getting background background
will information so
sharpening up with the
background elevation or excuse
me the background constituent
levels are relative to what we
see in our data at the mindset.
That would be the primary
items at this point
thank you mister chair i'm how
are we insuring long term
accountability or liability of
these companies over time thank
you for the question mister
chairman members of the
committee the long term
liability we hold a ninety five
million dollars bond with west
morrow and.
That surely band so that's not a
self band and
we
the only time we can uh take
away or or reduce the bond is
during a
phase three release which is the
reaching of a certain
standard of vegetation success.
And at that point they can
ask us for
a reduction in their band we
have to determine if that is a
valid request.
Based on the data that we know
if we have any surface water
ground water dude that is
elevated and doesn't meet
the requirements for the end use
which is the grazing and
wildlife and use.
Then we will have further
discussion with the operator on
how that can be mitigated thank
you mr chair.
For the reduction of find who is
does that come back to the
legislature
who were covered for the
reduction of fine and then
follow up to that how are tribal
nations over governments
included in the negotiations of
any decisions being
thank you for the question
mister chairman members of the
committee
d
reduction embarrassed occurs
between well it's only with mmd
and.
The
valet if it's the land owner if
it's a federal land owner
we deal with osmre the office of
surface mining recommendation in
forcement there are federal
oversight group.
And so they have to concur with
our approval or denial
and other other bad release so
only after the concurrence from
the federal oversight if it is
unfelt are we allowed to release
said money is that they
requested in the application
there is a week we do not have
any tribal
jurisdiction so
yeah
yeah
that's not to see that the
communities are not impacted
mr chair is there currently any
grazing happening in this area
region
mister chairman members of the
community I believe there's a
little bit of gracing in the
south end but i'm and there's
there's some toward the uh
I believe it's the stephens of
royo in that area
thank you mister and then
looking at the box and whisker
plots page that you have do any
of the levels exceeds a federal.
So they're they're elevated but
excuse me mister chair and
members of the community their
elevated many places but some of
these are above ten thousand tds
so as heard of the wc standards
and we
we don't regulate.
Wells that are above ten
thousand tedious so ten thousand
milligrams per lady yes so.
That's probably a better
question asked of of those who
have better understanding of the
waterdashquality regulations but
yes that some of these are
elevated.
And then I just a click thirty
online mister was able to find
that we have some permits that
are still under investigation
regarding the survey
particularly around water d p
thirteen twenty seven d p three
o six and dp eighteen forty
three why are those still under
review mr chairman members of
the commediate I would
graciously ask that you might
ask their question of to
presenters from now who have a
better understanding of the dp
process
just one more question mister
chair it reads that we have we
lock the data for a baseline
and that we started this in the
mid two thousand so we don't
have an accurate picture of
where we started from what is
the risk and how does that how
is that playing out of being
taken into consideration mister
chair members of the committee
thank you that is something that
was at the top of the
recommendation list of the
report in that we recognize that
that is
that based on information
perhaps from will that we can
drill further feel from uh any
sort of information that may
have come from the generating
station or from the mindside.
Uh needs to be still be drilled
and then we can generate or
receive data from that to then
take a fresh work at the
comparing that too the actual
measurements that we have taken
at the main side so
definitely partly
recommendations.
Okay got
thank you mister chair and thank
you
I appreciate all the questions
that help
for better understanding
but one thing that just was
mentioned about the grazing in
this other part do they test any
of the cattle or what i'll life
better are in that area.
Thank you for the questioning mr
chairman
made by a
I do not know if the test the
cattle in that area.
My
the degrees in that is done
there is actually on online
property I said within the
permanent area but it's online
from call mining so it's not on
active
recommendation that we
still have signed offer and if
you will
sell.
Insured answers no I don't know
if I don't know if any of the
catalysts tested
mr chair and thank you it
so it's not in an area where
they would have had any
you know run off.
Mister chairman madam chair III
mean I share I uh I don't know
uh where the cattle actually
goes uh
in I have an area in mind but I
don't have any idea if they're
right by in a royal there the
stephens are right
that would be a potential but
the the notion that
keep in mind that there are
no surface impacts from on that
east side and uh.
It's it's all underground money
that was standing in that area
so there's no
recommendation that was done by
the mind from surface mining
impacts it's all understood at
the surface in that area so
water coming down the stephens
are over example is fairly
unimpacted by any of the main
activity.
Thank you thank you mister.
I think mister
so san fran minded as the wind
right by currently
yes
so in that area northwest of
there because it sounds like
maybe you have it really been up
there either I have been excuse
me mister chairman the members
of the committee I have been up
there
and so that solar rate
yes I I know so that used to be
range
then I understand there may be
far there and then there is a
washed I think runs on the west
side of it along the mind area
that will area cause the mind
where it's located as the lowest
language in most of it I mean
it's not where it's getting
flooded but it also has a
holding point
of chair members of the
committee I don't know exactly
where you're speaking but if
it's in their far northwest area
where the panels have been put
in for that when company this up
there.
That's all offered the same one
mind permit it's not within the
same one mind permanent area
it's it's on mix of
I want to say
believe land and I think it
might be
you'd southern ute land up there
yeah yeah it is because I they
won't give they wouldn't put the
mind in my district okay
mandarin that goes right out
into my district because I have
rape along that highway up less
all the way to the state line to
forecorners then we have a car
about running from farming ten
around the morning along the
high back to the money and then
on back I am back on the other
side of the road rate where the
fire station is just outside of
the casino and then running down
back back down the south
so
you know we don't think that the
line adjacent to it is relevant
but nappy was right along there
up
and that's why there was much
concern about the emissions from
that mind into the area and the
community of curtain which is
just outside the park and
because there's not I mean we we
like to think that the stacks
were hiner we like to think that
but we're still fighting with
desert rough time in that sense
because of the missions that
come out of those stacks and i'm
worried and make it start their
sufficient there they allow
people to fish there and
straight by the area to you so
it then we had another
I think a mind breach up river
again during a discussed year
so
there are concerns about the
land
it water flows down here so yes
I would appreciate that
you just express our concerns to
everything work with you about
that
but thank you.
Thank you mister chair
thank you and I just have two
little quick follow up questions
to make my colleague senator
limited interesting point about
this point testing when you
issue a permit for a new money
activity is a common if you
baseline testing so that you
have that the store data for
reclamation.
Thank you for the question
mister chairman members of the
committee if we
started a new mind tomorrow yes
we would ask for basic
information
these minds have been running
for very long time so the
baseline information we do have.
Is
as is reported shown
maybe can be refined
to hear yeah I mean we've
learned a lot through doing
things the wrong way we have a
history legacy at contamination
because of that where we end up
holding the back in.
The fact that community so could
hear that funny question is when
a bond is issued and
let's say it's not enough down
the road what legal mechanism do
you have to be able to try to
get after more money is there
any of that company is no longer
around.
Thank you for the question
mister chair the.
We have several clauses in our
regulations that mirror the
smacker regulations
the cfrs I should say and.
We have a couple locations where
the director at his or her whim
uh and requirement can ask the
company to increase the band
amount
should there be an issue
unintended or otherwise
that we need to cover the
liability with more money.
That said
all the operators we have are we
have good relationships with
their willing to go the issue to
specifically speaking about
westmoro and they've got the
extra mile to ensure that
items are covered they're in for
the long haul
they're and that's why they have
the shirty bone with us that um
by practice we can't
plan for them to be around
forever so that's why we had the
responding please so we are on a
constant annual to semi every
mid permit period server two and
a half years we're looking at
updating the bond to ensure that
it covers liabilities on the
ground.
Thank you mister chair chair the
question by standard or pincho
beat me think about not only the
water contamination but also the
air contamination from the from
the smoked smokes checks do we
have data
has you know there were black
loan there's a whole federal
statute dealing with black long
for the workers in the minds
do we know if the surrounding
population which is primarily
curtain
every experienced health
outcomes
at a higher rate in that area
than others or are you wear
better has that been studied at
all
thank you for the question
mister chairman and said that
could europe as.
At you'd have to ask the uh new
media folks about the thing
coming from the stacks that's on
the other side of the
jurisdictional boundary from us
so I can't speak very well to
the item and I don't know
anything about the any study son
about loan health I apologize
but I don't have anything for me
on that
set of consider we're gonna hear
from enter he's going to touch
on this thank you very much I
fish their opportunity
all right thank you very much
good job today thank you very
much mister chair members of the
community thank you
moving on the next item on the
agenda the status of proposed
new uranium mining in new
mexico.
The.
Okay dj the floor is yours
thank you
chairman stoneborn members of
the committee please to present
you today a status of proposed
new uranium minds in new mexico
my name is david dennis and also
known as dj and I am the program
manager for the mining act
recommendation program for the
state and new mexico
just a little bit of background
about the mining act
recommendation program we are
regulatory program house within
the energy mineral's natural
resources department.
We regulate hard rock mining and
exploration in the state this
includes commodities such as
copper gold silver uranium in a
few other commodities such as
pearl like you made pummers are
focus is on a postdashmining
land use after mining and the
goals to of the program is to
have a return of a land status
to something that is productive
such as grazing or wildlife
habitat in most cases
the new mexico mining act
applies to all land statuses
within the stated mexico with
the exception of tribal lands
where a small program were nine
people in total to regulate all
hard rock mining in the state
and we have backgrounds in
geology soil science and
recommendation biology chemistry
and while life science.
The new mexico mining act
recommendation program stems
from passage of the new mexico
mining act of nineteen ninety
three and out of that act were
the new mexico mining rules
promulgated in nineteen ninety
four which is title nineteen
chapter ten of the new mexico
administrative code
I just want to point out a a
brief definition here it becomes
important later in my my talk
here that under the mining act
rules in the definition of
mineral there are certain
commodities that we do not
regulate in the state and that
includes sand and gravel
padashcoechi borrowed
we do not regularly call under
the mining act recommendation
program nor do we do a thermal
resources oil and natural gas.
But pertinent to this talk is an
exception in here which I have
underlined in your materials is
that we also do not regulate
commodities by product materials
and wastes that are regulated by
the nuclear regulatory
commission i'll elaborate on
that a little bit later in the
talk.
Just a little bit about state
permitting and of new minds in
new mexico i've listed here a
few predominant state laws this
is not an exhaustive list of
state laws that would apply
these are just in my mind the
predominant state laws required
one of which is the program that
I work for the new mexico mining
act and recommendation program
we focus on recommendation and a
corner stone of our permitting
processes financial assurance.
The new mexico water quality act
is another predominant state law
and that law focuses on surface
and groundwater quality.
And then the third predominant
law is the water law code
administered by the office of
the state engineer which focuses
on surface and groundwater
quantity.
Mining and minerals division
works with numerous state and
federal agencies as partners in
mind permitting we regularly
work with the bureau of land
management for a service state
land office environment
department game and fish
historic preservation division
and a new mexico state forestry
for threatening endangered uh
species.
On the federal side for of the
fence for new mind permitting
there's a a similar structure
there are some predominant
federal laws for new mind
permitting a few of which i've
pointed out here but again not
an exhaustive list of the
federal laws that may or may not
apply but the predominant laws
include the general mining law
of eighteen seventy two the bom
administers uh forty three cfr
thirty eight o nine surface
management regulations the
forest service implements thirty
six cfr two to eight surface
resources.
And federal agencies such as b l
m and four service are required
to also perform a valuation of
environmental impacts under the
national environmental policy
act or neeper of nineteen sixty
nine
the federal process I would say
is similar to a state permitting
process they have an application
similar to ours there's this
called a notice of intent for
small projects or plan of
operations for a larger scale
projects.
There is jurisdictional overall
app between the state of new
mexico and lands that are
regulated by the federal
agencies such as bill on a
forest service and we often
coordinate with those federal
agencies and some of that is
laid out ian memoranda of
understanding that we work out
with the federal agencies to
provide those guidelines
as I said the federal agencies
perform environmental analysis
under the neeper which there's
three sub categories of the
neighbor which is categorical
exclusion in environmental
assessment or for most large
scale new minds and certainly
the mines were talking about
here today our environmental
impact statements.
With that there are five new
uranium projects in the state of
new mexico ongoing at this time
at two i've listed them here and
i've also listed the websites of
the proponents they have
additional information on their
websites which is quite good so
they're their websites relisted
here for
in your spare time and further
information two uranium mind
projects that are currently in
progress by the mining and
minerals division include the
horror masomine and the roca
honda
there is one uranium exploration
project in process from mining
in minerals division and that is
the cbatter exploration.
And then there are two projects
that are exempt from the new
mexico mining act because they
are regulated by the nuclear
regulatory commission but i've
listed them here in an in an
effort to inform as I was asked
to do and that is the grant's
precision institute recovery
project in the church rock crown
point institute recovery
project.
I would like to just give go
through one slide at a time of
each of these minds to provide a
bit of a thumbnail of the
permitting status and the
location and all the first
mind up is the the horror mason
it's located to the northeast of
malan the proponent is there
might resources it's in siebel
accounting
the permit area as a mixture of
private and land managed by the
us for a service it's proposed
to be a conventional underground
mine with two lateral entrances
or inclines that would start at
the base of the may certain go
into and below the mesa.
The uranium or body for the
horror mastermind is above the
water table as such the mine is
anticipated to be a dry mine
which means that there would be
no dewatering four mining
operations that doesn't mean
that there wouldn't be water use
at the mine there would be water
uses on a commercial sort of
scale and that but that would be
for
september facilities showers
just control things like that
but the mine itself the workings
there are anticipated to be dry
am in no dewatering of the mine
is anticipated to be necessary
importantly the laharmase mine
is located within the mountain
or traditional cultural
property.
A little bit of permitting
history on the state side the
proponent began permitting opera
the permanent process in two
thousand nine and continued
through about two thousand and
twelve.
At which time there was a a long
pause by the operator in
pursuing this permit for about
twelve years there was little to
no activity between twenty
twelve and twenty twenty four
and then a resumption of
permitting activities by the
operator in late twenty four and
into current current day some
milestones that are under the
new mexico mining act for
permitting our listed here the
sampling and analysis plan is
currently in progress by the
operator.
Here again
the baseline data report is also
in progress by the operator the
mining operation and
recommendation plan is a task
that has not been submitted to
the mining and minerals division
yet but it's understanding that
the operator is
drafting that mine operation
recommendation plan.
In environmental evaluation will
eventually be done by the
minimum mineral's division
toward the end of the permanent
and process similarly we would
require financial assurance for
the mind plan and it's
reclamation toward the end of
the permitting process.
We began tribal consultation and
collaboration consultation
during the original phase of
permitting and then it went on
the long pause and we are
restarting tribal
consultation in partnership with
the US for a service through
their section one of six
consultation process.
And then eventually toward the
end of the permitting process we
would also issue public notices
in the opportunity for public
hearing on
the horror mace of mine on the
federal side it has a similar
permitting history began in two
thousand nine resulted in the
issue and of a draft
environmental impact statement
in twenty twelve and then there
was an operator pause again from
twenty twelve to twenty twenty
four in a resumption of
permitting activities on the
federal side late twenty four
into twenty five.
Current activities on the
federal tide include section one
of six tribal consultation some
memorandum of understanding
discussions with state agencies
such as the mining act
recommendation program and a
resumption of need uh
evaluation.
Next up is the rocar honda mine
the rocker hand of mine
is a proposed location to the
northwest of mount taylor
northwest of the village of san
mateo the proponent is energy
fuels located in mckinley county
the permit area are is
approximately four square miles
with a mixture of private for a
service and state office managed
land.
The rocar honda mine is proposed
to be a deep conventional mind
with
a shaft of approximately two
thousand fifty
the uranium or body at the
rocahonda mine is below the
water table and there would be
therefore considered a wet mine
and dewatering of that mine
would be necessary in order for
underground operations to
comments.
It's projected at this time to
need to pump about two thousand
to forty five hundred gallons
per minutes in order to dewater
the mine that water would be
treated at the sight through a
water treatment plant to
drinking water standards and
then discharged via a pipeline
bad a ten mile pipeline
to the real setting jose and
there would be a
necessity for a federal permit
that n p d e s which my
colleague already too earlier is
a federal permit for the
national discharge national
pollution discharge elimination
system for discharge of that
water to the rio san jose
again importantly the rock
behind the mine is located
within the amount taylor
traditional cultural property.
The permitting
history for the rokar hand mine
is similar to horror may so
although a little more
complicated
the app operators started
permitting in two thousand nine
and largely continued through
twenty fifteen with us a slowing
I would say from twenty fourteen
into twenty fifteen with
no
no permitting activity between
twenty fifteen and twenty
eighteen the resumption of
activities from the operator
from twenty eighteen to twenty
twenty and again inactive pause
on the operator side from twenty
twenty to twenty twenty four and
resumption of that engagement
with the state late twenty four
into today twenty five
there's as I said some
preliminary reengagement with
the state which involves
actively readressing the
memorandum of understanding
they have achieved some similar
milestones in their permitting
the sampling and analysis plan
is technically complete.
The baseline data report is also
technically complete
the mining operation and record
reclamation plan
is changing as we understand it
on the operator side and we are
anticipating a revision to that
mine mining operation in
reclamation plan
as I said before their couple
steps toward the end of the
permitting process that mining
and minerals division would
conduct that's the environmental
evaluation we would require
financial assurance once the
recommendation plan is
able to be approved or is
technically approvable.
Similar to la horror may so you
have engaged i'm at the outset
of this project
tribal communication
collaboration it's been on again
off again due to the pausing and
restarting and positing and
restarting but we are working in
partnership with the us forest
service again through their
section one or six consultation
process.
And again at the end of the
permitting process we would have
um the state would issue public
notices an opportunity for
public hearings on that permit
the federal side permitting
history is similar started in
two thousand nine a draft
environmental impact statement
was issued in twenty twelve.
There were some discussion in
twenty fifteen about doing a
supplemental environmental
impact
statement due to
a new alternative in the mind
plan which is a a discharge
pipeline then there is an
operator pars from twenty
fifteen to twenty twenty four
resumption of activities on the
federal side late twenty four to
twenty five resulting in new
memorandum of understanding uh
discussions.
On slide eleven
the cbedit exploration project.
Is located north of luguna
the proponent is premier
american uranium it's an siebel
account it's located on the cb
at a landgrant north of the end
of point
this project is exploration
there's been multiple drawing
phases completed and additional
drawing phases proposed.
The exploration permit was
initially issued by mining a
mineral's division in twenty
twenty three and the proponent
has renewed the permit in twenty
twenty four and again in twenty
twenty five as I said some
exploration has been conducted
and the proponent is proposing
some additional exploration
for this particular mind since
it is located on private land
there is no federal permitting
anticipated at this time.
The fourth project here on slide
twelve is the grant's precision
in situation recovery project.
This project is located between
the undermine the proposed
broker honda mine
and mount taylor in san mateo
the proponent is grants energy
it is split between mckinley and
people are counting this is an
institute recovery
project which is essentially a
well field and the uranium is
recovered through the injection
of by carbonate and the
extraction of that uranium rich
water
for state permitting
there would be governed are
jured the jurisdiction of the
new mexico environment
department but importantly
institute uranium recovery is
exampled under the program that
i'm representing here today the
mining act recommendation
program due to this project
being regulated by the nuclear
regulatory commission.
The fifth and last project
downside thirteen is that your
truck crown point in situation
recovery the proponent is there
might resources located in
mckinley county it's actually
two slightly separate areas
being permitted it's under its
in the church rock and the crown
point areas as I said it's an
inside you recovery via a well
field in injection of by
carbonate again state permitting
would be the jurisdiction of the
new mexico environment
department and is exempt under
the new mexico mining act due to
its
jurisdiction from the federal
nuclear regulatory commission.
That's the conclusion of my
presentation I think you for
your time and would be happy to
answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you
for the presentation will go to
the
committee and representative
londstrom
thank you madame chairman thank
you very much for the
presentation today
just had a couple of questions
you happened to know
what country is the predominant
uranium producing country do you
have a sense of italian.
Mr chairman members of the
committee dominant uranium
I I don't I am not sure to be
honest
I would ask maybe to defer I
believe there are some
representatives in the audience
today representing some of these
companies that may be able to
answer that question more
thoroughly my question matter
tears because i'd like to know
if they happened to also be
countries that we have now
increased tariffs
and how that is going to affect
what we do with that without
particular
mineral
you know it's my understanding
that ranium now
is being used in these modular
units specifically for
production of electricity are
you familiar with that
mister chairman members of the
committee I would say as a
general maladis
and primarily because the demand
for electricity in the country
has has escalated lots of
reasons and
the demand for electricity
particularly and i'll speak for
economic development is
incredibly important
whether it's for data centers or
it is for alternative fuels for
cars and things like that it has
it is really multiplied in our
country so I would just curious
just wanted to know where we
think we're going to be able to
produce electricity if you're
not looking at some of these
are like home a package plant as
i'm familiar madame chair with
package plans for solid waste
and things like that and for
wastewater treatment i'd be
super interested to know that.
And if these are countries now
that will be no re evaluating if
they trade with the united
states I mean I have I have no
idea how that's going to i'll
play out but I think it will
have some impact on this country
again and in what happens but I
appreciate having the chance to
ask a question thank you
thank you representative
thank you matter chairman I met
the clear presentation well on
page eight one of the first
things it says why are we
allowing.
And these are bridge to resume
without a mining operation and
reclaimation plan and without
financial assurance where are we
why do we do that is that coming
practice or.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
the deed these mines are not
currently operating these are
proposed mines.
And these are steps in the
approval process that we have we
that the mining companies have
to meet regulatory standards
before a permanent would be
issued.
So they have to meet him before
anything is issue alright yes
that's correct and the other
homework question.
Umm when we talk about gas and
will we have the reminiscent
produced oil you have that
when you were talking about um.
The grants precision and the
injection of my carbon it's make
a stretch of iranian right water
do we have any kind of
issue like we have with produced
water for more not guess do we
have any kind of water that
toxic that um we need to waste
part of it we need to remediate
or maybe like that from your.
Chairman standboard
representative thank you.
I will confess i'm not
institute recovery expert since
this is under the new to a
regulatory commission and is
outside of the jurisdiction of
the mining act itself however
just as general knowledge I
believe that the.
The injection
is right somewhat of a closed
route it's that you inject and
that injection creates.
In enrichment of those uranium
in the ground water that's the
extracted and then the uranium
is.
Umm precipitated out through a
plant and then that water goes
back into the injection cycle
and is recirpulated in that way
unlike oil and gas where the
target is not the produced water
it's the oil and gas and the
produced water is a
co product and in that way they
are different
if the question is about waste
I will be in unable to answer
that as I would say that that is
a
just my being unfamiliar with
their actual logistics of how
institute recovery is done not
the plant.
Thank you
senator city a lot.
Thank you mr chair
when when you're talking about
these the these minutes like
lacada sim with the
local and the is the operator
the same has the owner
mister chairman
senators deal opens thank you
for the question
under
under the eighteen seventy two
mining la
companies steak claims to the
mineral right
however the surface
estate is
variable
for the case of laharmaser
it is a mixture of forest
service
am some private land due to
access to the mine mostly roads
on private land the footprint
itself of the mine is on us for
a service so to answer your
question is the operator the
same as the owner
the operator has to own the
mineral claim or claims
but the surface estate his
regulated by either four service
blame or the state in myself if
it's on private then it is also
regulated by the finding act
recommission program thank you
that's true for my card is that
true for the other
for the other mindset see where
the
phone will go chairman steinborn
members of the committee
I would see so the mesa
if I may refer back with your
permission I
have to refresh my own memory
here the horror may sir is a
combination of.
Private and forest service land
rocar hander
it's the quad factor I guess we
try factor of.
Status is there's two sections
of four service land one section
of state land office managed
land and one section of private
my end
and super letters entirely on
private land being the c b at a
land of
see where the language
said members of the commission
is ma'am
there's no tribal land mister
mister chair in that area
mister members of the community
not to my knowledge.
Thank you mister chair and when
you talked about the new
pipeline.
Which of the minds
there's
the federal permitting process
I guess in two thousand and
fifteen there is a new or they
started a supplemental ease
because of a new pipeline
alternative and you you call it
a discharge pipeline
mister chair what is it that
they're just charging
mr chairman senator sadielopez
members of the committee they
are discharging the pumped water
from the underground mine
operations
that water goes to a water
treatment plant and would be
treated to drinking water
standards
prior to discharge down that
pipeline.
Mister chair so they're doing
that so that they can probably
get a permit from the state
engineers office by putting it
back
mr chairman members of the
committee
my understanding is the water is
pumped under the
mine dewatering act from the
office of the state engineer
and that is a subset of office
of the station years rules that
you can pump water from a mine
without a water right and it
doesn't grant a water rate.
The discharge down the pipeline
I I don't believe it's offer to
the state engineer but the
outfall of that pipeline is
regulated by
the federal agency the epa under
the national pollution discharge
elimination system
thank you is there collaboration
between the epa in the state
engineers office because as you
know there's a new you pointed
out there well the separation
between water quality and water
quantity regulation is there
adequate collaboration to make
sure cause both both the
problems we face in the future
mister chairman senator said
europe has.
Um.
The coordination air I believe
is really incumbent on the
proponent of the mind to
achieve the permit the npds
permit
this committee is also probably
aware that there's an effort
to get a state program for
surface water discharges but
currently it's at the federal
level but the proponent of this
discharge would need to
satisfy the regulatory
requirements of that discharge
whether that requires
coordination with the office of
the state engineer or not i'm
not aware.
And and it's really important
that we passed that wall to take
over regulation of the surface
water and in in this context
though I think that that's that
important to note and understand
uh with both of future water
quality and water quantity
of surface water in our state
then.
Pretty asked as question
so the federal permitting under
the nuclear regulatory agency
that accept exempts these
insight of recovery
do we know is is it being
changed under the new regulatory
the deregulatory environment
do you know with that if
anything has changed with regard
to standards or man power person
power or whatever chairman's
time born senator said yellow
pes members of the committee
and
i'm not aware that that's the
case
do you know who would be weird
as they would be aware but
anybody in the state would be
would they be aware of what's
going on with that agency
mister chairman members of the
committee
because it's a federal agency
we're talking about the nuclear
regulatory commission.
I bogive as state personnel we
would be only sort of ancelaria
you know a jay sense awareness
thank you I appreciate that
response and what
see if I had any more
questions.
And i'm just i'm making this
assumption but I want to come
from it so the laharon best of
mine using the water for
commercial use for septic
showers does control
you just said that under the
mining of
exemption or whatever they
didn't have to get a permit from
waiting but are these activities
commercial wire use different
children from it I mean they
would need
be subject to that regulation
thank you for the question
mister chairman members of the
committee
water
can sumptive water used through
showers dust control commercial
activities like that would be
regulated by the office of the
state engineer there would be a
water right associated with that
and beneficial use in that
consumption of that water the
the difference here if I may
explain a little bit why the
nuclear regulatory commission
regulates institute recovery
it is because the
the nuclear regulatory
commission regulates in richmond
not
conventional mining so in in
conventional mining
you are removing or or body
clearly
uranium rich rock but the
companies that are doing this
conventional mining are not
enriching that uranium it's
removal of that rock from the or
body whereas in institute
recovery there isn't enrichment
process in the subservice and
it's that in richmond that
triggers the nuclear regulatory
commission they are focused on
enrichment normally in richmond
is performed at a conventional
milling facility.
For conventional rock it gets
crushed and concentrated and the
nuclear regulatory commission
overseas those conventional
mills in the mining act does not
for that reason enrichment is
the sort of key element as to
windy and rc regulations are
triggered I don't know if that
answers your question about
water use the if the question is
about water you send institute
recovery and what the office of
the state engineer will require
as water rights for that
I am
unable to answer the question as
i'm adjacent to the process
thank you I appreciate that
because that you know that it's
a complex web of of regulations
and it's important to make sure
that the web includes everything
that could affect residents and
so that that's why as these
questions and then this may be
outside the scope of of what you
do but what is the agency
regulating employee or workers
safety in these
german standborn members of the
committee in conventional mining
that would fall to the m share
the mining safety and health
administration there's also a
statementing inspector located
in sakoro as a uh junk door
adjacent to new mexico tech in
the bureau of geology there is a
statement inspector office there
before conventional mining in
and that same is true for this
mister chair
to perfect mister chair members
of the committee.
I'm not entirely sure if m share
regulates a institute
recovery project and under the
nuclear regulatory
commission i.
I'm i'm not a hundred percent
sure mr chair is it possible for
you to figure out whether there
is a gap there whether it's
something we may might need to
fill
because as you know the history
of uranium waiting in this state
is not very pretty with regard
to worker
health and workers safety and so
if if there is a gap we should
be aware of it and certainly
fill it to make sure that our
residence are workers are
you know that we have good
safety for for those individuals
thank you mister check
mr german and the members of the
company if I understand your
question correctly i'm happy to
follow up is the question that I
understand it please correct me
if i'm wrong is you would like
to know whether
making a note cared to follow
for myself here thank you and if
you would like to know if the
mining and health administration
mining safety and health
administration m shar
protects workers under in if
that uh
matter no is an nrc facility
like institute recovery
in a yes if if if they are and
if not who is is there a gap.
Thank you thank you thank you
very much I appreciate that
message senator in in beach
maybe I can add to that I think
the senator brought up a really
interesting point with is the
nrc proposing any rule of
modifications that might impact
us here in the state in mexico
chairman members of the
committee not that i'm aware of
that maybe you would mind taking
a look at that just on behalf of
the committee because it's one
thing we're monitoring is what
chapping at federal level
respect a lot of things and this
could be an area where
regulations change we certainly
need to know maybe you could
bring it to the committee and
just share with call and some
we'd probably update the
committee on since we are the
oversight any for those types of
issues I appreciate it i've sort
of thank you
thanks for looking out on that.
Thank you missus
thank you mister chair and thank
you mr
i'm h eight two several others
the state permitting process
includes
baseline and sampling by the
operator and I was wondering how
reliable is sad information do
you double check it
you know how
how does that go yes german
are chermontstone members of the
committee
the sampling and analysis plan
is the first step in this
process it is essentially a work
plan that the
company provides to my division
the mining and minerals division
we review that work planned for
their owners and compliance with
the regulations revolving that
in that in the sampling and
analysis plan is the operators
plan to conduct wildlife surveys
soil surveys are and what a
quality resource surveys
threaten endangered species
historic preservation those
sorts of activities
once we acknowledge and have had
our comment period on the plan
it's the state government
experts such as my group that
review those and make
recommendations that maybe we
think they missed something and
should include some other
paspective study and then the
proponent
typically hires expert
consultants third party
consultants to conduct those
surveys in that information as
compiled into the baseline data
report which is then submitted
to mining and minerals division
for
scrutiny by our experts in house
and or our consultants that we
could hire if we lacked a
certain ex.
Which we don't at the moment but
there is a option for us to have
a third party review to the
third parties work should we
see that is necessary and in the
baseline data report
is reviewed by our agency and
are in house
scientists and we typically
there's a back and forth between
the operator and their
consultants to fill in data gaps
that we believe would be
necessary in order to achieve
technical completeness
okay and thank you and mr chair
and mister
when your experts are looking at
all of the permitting
information if they go through
the process in all this looks
fine but do you in the end look
at
how this will impact the
communities and.
Now and in the future you know
what are those impacts going to
be and decide whether or not you
really can permit you know this
mining activity
chairman signed born and
representative from thank you
for the question
it is a complicated question the
we look at had aspects of all
environmental impacts to soils
and threatening dangerous b c's
and like for instance one of the
components of the baseline data
report is a probable hydrologic
consequences of a new say
pumping water pumping
and what the impact to
surrounding wells would be that
does start to veer into you
office of the state engineer
jurisdiction of which they are a
consulting agency for us under
our umbrella sort of process
the initial stages here though
the are the simpling in our plan
and based on data report and
only after those are complete
could we really do the one step
in here which is the
environmental evaluation that is
essentially the mining act
recommendation program
equivalent of a neiper document
which evaluates the some total
of all the studies that have
been done and the effects in and
potential mitigation of those
effects.
As far as the community impacts
go that would be a portion of
the environmental evaluation
it's also a portion of the
federal partners through the
neighbor evaluation and we also
as here these concerns through
our tribal collaboration and
coordination
okay thank you mr chair thank
you
thank you mr chair I think
mister for being here
are the companies who are
seeking the permitting based in
new mexico
mr chairman members of the
committee.
I would base didn't you make sky
believe they have some officers
in new mexico I don't recall if
they're
new mexico
none home office I suppose in
your experience
could be a question for some of
the representatives in the
audience I believe that you're
here today
thank you mister chair and if
they're not based in a mexico I
think it's the first time in the
both profits to will leave the
state and not be have reinvested
mr chair can you provide data on
current ground water
contamination levels your former
your radio might
during those sites at my concern
is establishing a baseline here
are we starting from a point of.
Mister german members of the
committee
the
larmest min the rocker hand of
mine
are a new minds with
no significant uranium
mining previously performed the
broke i'm sorry my apart is the
lahora masonine
there are some legacy minds in
the vicinity of any immediate
vicinity of the horror masonic
believe the taffy mine comes to
mind and the old horror mine
they are partially reclaimed by
the forest service.
But the footprint itself about a
horror mace of mine is not
starting from a point of
contamination it's
unaffected I would say so the
baseline data should be good
baseline data rocar hander is
the the same I don't believe
there has been any surface
mining or subsurface mining in
the immediate vicinity of
rocanda and therefore the
baseline data for that should be
good
d
sybida exploration site there
has been uranium mining nearby
through uhm
the same anthony mine the jj
mine and
the jackpile on leguno nation
excuse me will be an applied
world and
but however the work that's been
conducted in the area where
sebators doing exploration has
been exploration
so I would expect any baseline
data should they pursue a permit
in the future would be also a
good baseline data the other two
minds the institute recovery
minds i'm unable to comment on
i'm not aware of the status and
based on data collection of
those particular facilities
thank you
and what constitutes immediate
area
thank you for the question as
chairman members of the
committee
close neighbor
right off the permanent area I
would say that the footprint is
of the horror mason miners
within a few hundred feet would
say
and of those legacy minds mister
terr what medical support if any
have we meaning the state
been able to offer people
suffering from kidney disease
respiratory illness or ca.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Uhm i'm an unable to answer the
question outside of my area of
expertise
mister how residents in this
area rely but still rely on
these water sources.
Are they at risk if they're down
if there if they rely on that
water I represent
I district that real wise
heavily on the awkward first and
down stream for
every day you says
what is the risk there
mister chairman center charlie
thank you for the question
there clearly is
a I think in just general
knowledge impacts
you human health and the
environment from legacy mining
activities the goal of
the new mexico mining act is
I think to prevent those sorts
of things from happening in the
future
so there are.
At I think is the reason for
these baseline studies and a
detailed mining operation and
recommendation plan and I
in cooperation with other state
agencies in their areas of
expertise such as water rights
and water quality
surface water quality from the
environment department I think
all these things in
collaboration have the same goal
under the mining act and that is
to
prevent
contamination of the that we've
seen in the past
I guess to answer the question I
would say that we are
extensively studying and
extensive we looking at the
companies proposed mitigation
plans to meet state r before a
permit could be issued for them
to operate
thank you mister thank you
mister
is it
is it safe to assume that the
state will allow mining activity
to proceed even if there is
unresolved to contamination in
the region.
Mister german senator charlie
in my estimation t
regulations are what they are
and if you meet the regulations
there is
a permit would be issued there
are extensive regulations that
uh companies have to meet.
But if those requirements are
satisfied permit would be
issued.
Can you speak to the communities
can you name the communities
that have been
disproportionately affected by
like a the mining and the
practice of uranium extraction.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
I think as general knowledge yes
it's not my area of expertise
umm I would say it certainly say
indigenous populations to new
mexico ligona akama
now the nation
as well as residents of grants
in the lawn just downstream
down windows from till sir I
think these are all general
knowledge about impacts to from
uranium minding in the state
thank you care thank you mister
all the communities that I
happen to represent are you
familiar mr mister senate
memorial fourteen
of the path legislative session
miss chairman center charlie I
as general knowledge I believe I
maybe not i.
Happy to have you elaborate
mister and mister
briefly or
sent memorial fourteen with the
memorial that opposes new
uranium permitting and the t c p
areas of mount tailor and
because of its cultural
significance to the indigenous
stripes and so the senate
supports that there's also a
mirrored memorial in the house
the house supports this in
addition the old public council
of governors passed to
resolution and december a posing
new uranium mining permitting in
the tcp and addition to multiple
agencies
and we've also called on a
federal delegation to oppose a
new uranium a permitting in the
tcp so mr chair and mister.
We going to do what is the state
going to do when and if the
tribes uphol.
Mr chairman senator charlie
thank you for the question
I think my estimation this
remains to be seen were pretty
early in these permitting
processes and ongoing tribal
collaboration under section one
or six and we rely on the state
historic preservation division
and they're input and expertise
the state shipo advises us as
part of our umbrella program
under the mining act and we
would rely largely on on those
experts to advise.
Journalists thank you mister
chairman I mean it is abundantly
clear that the tribes have come
forward and.
We are suffering from a legacy
and it is by a miracle that we
have reco.
That we are listening to our
tribal partners and putting the
needs of their citizens
ahead of the the needs of um.
Mr chairman I will ask this one
l.
Single community that is
experienced long term economic
benefit from uranium mining
without the without although in
during the environmental and
health.
Mister chairman singer charlie.
I personally am not in the
uranium business I am a state
government agency and permitting
so i'm unable to answer just to
do that outside my area of
expertise
and thank you
mr
I cannot and graph system an
example of that we all drove.
Can drive through main street
and see the enormous amount of
businesses that are bored it up
there closed the math exodus
that has happened from this town
because of a bust and a boom and
a bust that is what we are
experiencing right.
The.
Thank you mister
and I appreciate the
presentation which too
to always learn
I have a question and it's just
some of the information that has
been presented to us so you've
listed under the lahada mesa
mine under tribal communication
and consultation it says it's in
progress
under the roka honda mine
it's also tribal communication a
collaboration it says to be
resumed
and then under the civil yet
that uranium exploration there's
nothing listed
about any type of collaboration
or information and I assist
mister chair because although
I know there's the landground in
desk another question to ask
about the language and there's a
language meeting on monday so
i'm going to be asking some
questions at that meeting on
monday
um but lego no is close by so is
there any outrageous
communication with laguna point
well with regards to this
exploration
it's ongoing outreach has been
done or whatever mister chair
chairman sound more incentive
lopez thank you for the question
my apologies yes I should have
included a bullet on the cba
expiration
that discussed tribal
consultation we have engaged in
travel consultation and
I don't believe that we have
received any responses from the
tribes my guess is probably
because it is exploration and
not a mind permit yet or in the
future they might have some
additional comments or have some
additional concerns.
It's been my experience at the
exploration stage there's alas
less interest from tribes at the
exploration stage that's not
always the case but in the case
of cba
um we did reach out to the
tribes and we did not receive
any responses back
and mister chair thank you and
mister chiero's curious because
we can always send a letter and
i'm not just unless they knew
but sometimes you can do an out
region send a letter and say yes
we've made contact or whatever
type of outreach as it's
designated but is there really
beneficial effort for conference
your consultation where there's
a real dialog between the
leadership and the department or
whomever may be
that the company and whomever
else is part of this.
How should I say process at this
point
name as I mentioned I will be
asking i'm several yet they may
not be at the landground meeting
on monday but I will be going
through
the chairs co terrorists and
search just to see if we can get
some information from the
landground itself as to what i'm
going and what their engagement
is within this year exploration
if it says is the landgrand of
course private land which is
north of looking at public but
again just some questions from
the language perspective to as
to what's going on I think it's
fair to ask them questions to
and then just a comment mr chair
as we're talking about you
open
my name the lease or whatever
ill
legal means that there are the
permits and such
is there
when the permit is given is it
and opened in other words
there's that
an end date for the permit so
once the permit is given is just
open for however many years
until the company decides to
close i'm just asking a question
mr chair as we look at the date
you know the timeline
mister chairman senator lopez
thank you
under the new mexico mining
actor for new mind permits there
is a permit term
it is
I believe it says up to a twenty
year term but the mining act
recommendation program also
requires a regular
reviews of the permit and we
could
be very early again in the
permitting process and the
permit term
has not yet been thought about
however permit new new mind
permits are able to be renewed
on a ten year up to ten year
basis.
And until the end of the mind l.
Okay mister chair in the recent
way I ask so there's a
differentiation between existing
permits for existing minds as
compared to a new mind
application are there different
time lines with regards to that
mister chair mrperiod chair
members of the committee yes
there are differences in those
timelines between existing minds
and new minds existing minds our
minds that were were operating
in the nineties when the new
mexico mining act was passed and
they were swept swept in to the
act and
their permit terms are
undefined really so they can
continue to operate
under the existing mind permit
whereas new mind permits to have
a permit term and a renewal
process
thank you mr chair and I guess
the reason why I ask that that
is what is it for the state to
go back and review
what is the legitimacy if if
they have this term it's open
for twenty years old or whatever
it may be then what does the
state have
in the authority to go back and
review just to make sure that
everything was been followed for
updates to or do we wait for
her another emergency that comes
up in order for the state to
have proview
mr chairman senator lopez any
any new minds and any existing
minds in any exploration
projects large to small are
inspected by our staff at the
moment in minerals division on a
regular basis it's one of our
performance measures to inspect
all permits that we have issued
under the new mexico mining act
it's also a requirement under
the new mexico mining active
regularly review the financial
assurance bond associated with
those permits.
And there it's incumbent upon us
and the mining companies that
any changes to their mind plan
that create a change in either
financial assurance or
environmental standards goes
back to a review to either a
revision process or modification
process.
There are I would say regular
checks and balances on
permit term for example in that
we are inspecting them regularly
during their permit term and
checking their compliance with
their permit requirements.
If the mine if you're asking
about the legitimacy of the mine
and whether they're truly
operating or not
or if there's a pause in minding
there is a section of their
mexico mining act forced up
pying stand by status which
would allow a mining company to
have a pause in their
reclamation it's really a
deferral of recommendation to
concert the focus of our program
is on the recommendation of the
mind post mining but it would be
a deferment of recommendation
requirements with the pause of
up to if the mining company
paused for a hundred and eighty
days over longer they would be
required to go on stand by
that's a revision to the permit
under our rules which would
require public notice public
hearing
and then to resume to active
mining status
in this hypothetical scenario
with say the mining company
paused operations for a year and
they're on stand by status for a
year wanted to come off of
standby resume to operating
standard status there would be
another revision process to
resume binding operations and
other opportunity under that
revision for public notice and
public hearing
thank you mr chair because that
was one of their questions you
actually I think how to read my
mind as to where I was going in
this process just to have a more
clear
ill vision ideas to what a
company would have to go through
if they have paused and then
they're still an opportunity for
the public to engage so I
appreciate mr chair thank you
okay representative li.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
so much mister good presentation
a lot of information just a few
technical questions to start out
with can you tell me just on
average I don't know if you have
a statistic i'm not trying to
put you on the spark how long
does it take to permit a mind
such as the iranian mind in the
state if it's going through
state channels so not including
the
nrc so I don't know if you have
that in a general sense mister
chairman
chairman steinborn
representative block thank you
for the question
it's a difficult question to a
to answer it is a common
question
if I may point two some of the
history that we've seen to date
for instance for the horror
mason mine there was an
approximate twelve year pause
from the operator side in
pursuing that permit in
my mind
pursuing the permit is incumbent
on the proponent of the permit
they are applying for a permit
because they want the permit and
if the there are numerous
reasons as to why a company
would pause permitting.
For and where i'm going here
essentially it I would not have
expected a twelve year pizz and
the end
if they received their permit
tomorrow
you could count that time and
say it took them fifteen years
to get a permit
which is true but the devil is
in the details there and
it's why I have a hard time
answering the question it really
depends on the proponents.
Dedication to pursuing the
permit which contributes greatly
to the timeline I can tell you
that as a regulatory agency we
do have some time lines in our
regulations that we are required
to meet.
And just as a general
a comment it's my goal to be
responsive as the program
manager it is my goal to be
responsive to permits permit
applications that are submitted
to us.
Thank you mr chair and I didn't
mean to put a million dollar
question in your laptop maybe a
billion dollar question
depending on how much you're any
and we have in this state so we
do have a lot of rich natural
resources so mister chairman and
mister i'm wondering when it
comes to the permitting so you
said previously I think I heard
it if all requirements are met
from the state and it's for a
state permit then it will be
issued despite any kind of.
Socioeconomic or external
factors such as a group of
people trying to stop it for
example cause that's during the
prices that you go into with
public input correct mr chairman
representative block
my view is that we are a
permitting agency
the permit requirements
as I read the new mexico mining
act in the new mexico mining act
rules that their is no such
judgment afforded to
regulators such as myself as to
whether a project should or
should not be approved I would
view that
that I may be so balders to say
that that is uhm a decision of
the film legislative body of the
state of new mexico to decide
those sorts of
those sorts of issues
thank you so much mister chair
thank you so much mister I I
agree i'm inclined to agree with
that I think it's definitely
something that the legislature
has powered to do and they can
they can do that or they want
but when it comes to regulations
from the legislation that we've
passed I know there are a lot of
gray areas so when we've put all
these different things in your
lap through the mining act etc
those of how to be interpreted
and so have there been any major
challenges to your
interpretations of those I guess
under your ten year I don't want
to put you on the spot again
mister chairman
mr chairman representative block
it's hard for me to see how a
permit would be denied other
than for a technical reason
which would
tell me that you could go the
company or proponent could go
back and address that technical
issue um
upon completion of that
technical issue I would say that
um if it's to the satisfaction
of the requirements.
Then a permit would be issued
alright thank you so much mr
chair thank you for that and I
think I heard a comment earlier
saying I I forget who said it or
what it was but it was in regard
to some kind of group of
governors of twa blows and them
opposing certain projects I
didn't know specifically what
they were referring to but I I
did want to understand a little
more when it comes to the tribal
input and I know we're doing a
lot of checks and balances with
the federal government as well
can you just tell me a little
bit more about that regarding
actually talking not just to the
administration but to every day
citizens who live there have are
we also going directly to the
people it's kind of my question
mr chairman representative block
so we are engaged through our
forest service partner and under
section one of
consultation process which is
basically a subset of the neaper
process.
We are doing collaborative
consultation with the tribes and
I can give you some some real
world examples I think which is
what you're asking for
we were asked we the state of
new mexico were asked
independent of the forest
service to present to the publo
of acama and we
have a
energy mineral's natural
resources department I almost
set her acronym eminer ended up
has a tribal liaison that we
brought to that meeting and we
presented to the council of the
puble of acamer as well as some
concerned citizens that were
present at that and that was a
recent engagement I would say in
the west.
I would have to see my calendar
say three months four months
we've also engaged with
other tribal communities and
members and governors and with
tenant governors
at the physical site of the
horror masos so that we can i'll
block the grounds and kick rocks
and talk about concerns.
We've done those site visits in
cooperation coordination with
the forest service but we has
the state would also be open to
any meetings and presentations
to other travel
communities during the
consultation process or during
the entirety of the permitting
process really we take public
comment on throughout the
process and would be willing to
engage with our travel weeks on
through throughout the
permitting process
okay thank you so much mr
chairman thank you so much mr
and I thought it sounds pretty
comprehensive from the way I
hear it sounds like when we have
a meeting we do try to get
people there so that they
understand it's happening so I
think that's good and I think
that's important and healthy for
lawmaking in general or rule
making or your administrative
role to allow these permits so I
think that's very good and so I
I just have another kind of
little technical question go
into the end of your
presentation I believe it's the
I don't want to see it wrong
be yet a sierra so it's on a
land grants see boyta
voyata okay am I going to say
i'm has spanic and I i'm bad at
rolling our as i'm sorry I
apologize
yet how about there so i'm just
wondering it's on a land grant I
see the little star so what is
the regulation on a land grant
vs
the state cause I know if it's a
if it's private it's overseen by
this state landgrands are a
little different regulation wise
and i'm just wondering what that
looks like from your department
thank you sender steinborn and
representative block.
In the permitting structure a
land grant is private my end
though we we've treated as
private land.
Okay thank you so much for that
all right well I think that kind
of answered most of my little
questions so I really appreciate
your thorough answers and uh
you mister chairman for
indulging me I would go even
longer but I ran it of questions
so thank you so much
all right repson lord
thank you
thank you mister chair thank you
expert I just have a few
questions and it will run in
late on time
gone directly back to the
landground so
do they have because it's
private looked at private do
they have a say so debate are
they brought to the table when
this happens can they say we
approve would disapprove how the
language plan to there yes
german stoneborn representative
lord thank you for the question
it's my
me I would phrase that under the
new mexico mining act
the company would have to
present to us a right to inter
that property and it's our
understanding that that is a
mining lease that's executed
between the mining company and
the landcraft
okay so mr share an expert
seller is so they would have the
right to enter citizen land they
say yes we we like this at these
so they like that then there
would be a lease does the
landground are they the ones who
are going to receive part of the
money for what is happening on
the language for the minimum
mr chairman representative lord
i'm not privy to that
level of
documentation that it's just for
us it is.
A right for the mining company
to enter that private land
because there is a mining lease
that allows them on to that land
but I am not aware of the
details of
I think you're asking about the
may be financial benefits or in
that leason I am afraid of
unable to answer the question
just say simply not aware
some issue and exert who can I
find out about that because I I
have lane granted also be there
next week as well and they have
some questions on this too so
i'm trying to find out when
there's a lease I would imagine
there's a contract and you're
saying we have the rate to enter
that there's got to be some sort
of financial transaction that
happens between those two
individuals or two at the
company and the people the
language
chairman stenborn and
representative for
because it's a private contract
I imagine that information is
hard to
find unless it was voluntarily
given
ok so
as chairman in an expert what
i'm understanding is that that
would be a private contract as
it's a private land it would be
between them and least we would
now okay that's what I was
trying to get it
also wondering too then if it
becomes the majority and who
gets the money in house at this
first but i'll ask those that
the language
mister chair so I was learning
about with this section one or
six travel consultation
so when we're going through like
another hota were going through
that and these are all the
things that they are doing in
the process right there they're
looking sampling now some
baseline
so it's not necessarily that
any of the charge can come for
and say we do or don't want this
because some might some won't
but if they don't it's not
really a mandate is just a
console is that when i'm
understanding like something to
be taken consideration
mister chairman members of the
committee.
In the permitting process we do
have trouble collaboration and
try to look at medications that
are required or requested by
other state agencies other
federal agencies tribes any
concerns we try to have
mitigative measures that we
would implement through our
permitting process
sent mr chair and expert so if
i'm understanding can you
explain the best on page eight
when we talk about resumed
activities and twenty twenty
four and it's a section one of
six travel consultation does
that mean that they approved or
what is that mean that means
they were consulted it was
approved I am trying to get a
definition what what why that's
under that header
missed chairman members of the
committee section one of six is
a requirement under federal law
and
it is tribal engagement and in
this case the same for all the
horror that there are
a
tribal
turkeyologist at the forest
service that is speaker heading
the section one of six process.
It will also go through
the state shipo of any adverse
effects or
and that's currently aware
the process is at its still in
an investigative stage as far as
potential adverse facts to
archaeological or tribal
concerns and the tcp
and in the end my understanding
is there is a
mitigation process that the
forest service will undertake
and that the state will
undertake and I would just say
were too early in the permitting
process to
understand what those potential
mitigations may look like at
this time.
Thank you mister chairman extra
and i'm just trying to make sure
that I understand this process
that goes long as it looks like
there's quite a bit before you
even get to where you want to go
there still a lot of things that
taken and consideration.
I did have another question of
second way that okay so
misreturned experts are is it
right now in grants are they
using this institute where
they're putting the water in
mining the uranium mountain and
putting the water back and is
that happening right now mr
chairman representative of our
no okay so mr chairman expert
that's something they want to do
in the future is there any place
in the mexico where it's
happening right now this is
something new to me so I was
looking up a lot of the stuff
about how it works versus
regular mining going in their
mining so is there any place in
the mexico that that has
happening right now mister
chairman representatives of lord
no there are areas of the united
states in general awareness kind
of information here is that
there are some institute and
recovery operations in the us I
believe wyoming and my belief
texas mischarged it and expert
yes I was actually looking and
there
are right now to see what other
states are using that
I think that's all the questions
are here now thank you
got it I have a just a couple
quick questions dj
cell is a party review process
do you do archaeological
archaeological surveys from what
night
sender
steinborn members of the
commission yes under the new
mexico mining act and for new
permits new mining permits
archaeological surveys are
required under the sampling
analysis plan they give us the
plan to do those archaeological
surveys and under the baseline
data report those and findings
are our documented there they
remain confidential and they are
submitted to the
state historic preservation
office and we request their
comment and consultation under
them I might be act for their
recommend recommendations for
either avoidance as a mitigation
is.
The typical way to mitigate his
avoidance.
You know this question has been
asked if you already been on and
ask it as well
differently
are there any grounds under
which many getting factors we
call cultural impacts to
cultural issues
could be threats to
environmental issues are there
any kind of mitigating
circumstances where you guys
have a little bit of latter two
to say this isn't a good idea in
this location we're going to
reject this permit because it's
just the impacts are too high or
they could be too high
or is it very black and white
when someone requests a permit
they get to mitigate according
to whatever standard and the
automatically beginning
apartment or is there a middle
ground where you.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
I the
mining act and mining act rules
afford us the ability to
change mining plans upon
evaluation of those particular
impacts and mitigations.
And we can have the mining
company through our permitting
process do exy to medicate those
potential impacts and.
But there is nothing in the
mining act that would
prevent us from issuing a
permanent if they were to
satisfy the regulatory
requirements
thank you yeah and I
you know I think there is
definitely a policy issue here
over under what circumstances
certain extractive activities
are not compatible with other
considerations you know like
what we see
perhaps a mouth tailor area
perhaps when you look at me like
the pictures river and the
charer of mine and you know
where
history
other economies are threatened
that you know our thing is that
legislature probably should look
at four for potential reform but
final question are for you kind
of going thirty thousand feet
are there any
mining reform I think a question
we always have it says they're
mining reform coming down the
past are there any big picture
issues that you think we need to
kind of be thinking about in
terms of workers safety whatever
it may be I mean I just want to
one policy issue that maybe
something we want to look at but
other other big issues that you
think we should be looking at as
a legislature
thank you for the question
senators time or members of the
committee
at this time I I don't believe
so I I think
it's it is
difficult for me to
evaluate on the federal level if
that's what you're asking
I would not be able to comment
on that however at the state
level which is where i'm
currently um functioning
I think the mining act provides
a robust permitting process I
think it's good I think we have
the health and safety as far as
mine worker health and safety
i'm covered through.
The federal and our state safety
program in saquora real quick
just i'll ask just a quick quick
house or here of the mining
activity that you are
contemplating or that's being
requested of us that you said is
not happening now they activity
is not happening but then
process when we do anticipate at
the early as those permits could
be granted and mining could
resume.
Sender and members of the
committee it's a difficult
question for me to ask it is
highly dependent on the
proponents
how
how hard the proponent puts the
pedal to the metal to be honest
were we are responsive as a
regulatory agency and have
certain time ones that we would
need to respond when documents
and reviews are submitted to us
but once it goes back to the
operator for technical comma
addressing technical comments
it's sort of off timeline and
flat reason it's difficult for
me to answer as I point to i'm
earlier you know on a horror
master there was a a twelve year
pause on the operator side I
would never have guessed that at
that moment
but there are reasons for that
pause that I understand but it's
pay mine is difficult for me to
answer sounds good thank you
okay representative abated
closer cell
think your senator and thank you
mister
my questions actually go back to
the mining act itself and I
realize that there was a section
in there that talked about
counties and their ordinances
and pre emption can you tell me
how your office works with
counties
for permanently for permitting
so this is a multi part question
how they work with counties if
they do have an ordinance in
place and do any of the counties
have an approval process in
place that would have some type
of bearing on the permitting
process with your office thank
you thank you mister chairman
representative of
some counties do have mining
ordinances I too come to mind
thumb when can county santa fe
county
that i'm aware of their might be
more but those are two that i'm
at least aware of
we would treat really do treat.
Those county ordinances as like
a cooperating agency similar to
how we would
appreciate in our consultant new
mexico environment department or
office of the state engineer
under our umbrella program we
would poll those county
people into cut the comment
period and then it would be
incumbent upon the proponent to
satisfy the requirements of that
organized
from review of that county
representative but we would
coordinate with the county
representative i'm sorry maybe
represent them
I don't mean legislative
representative just a person
that is doing the permitting I
suppose at the county level we
would coordinate with that
person and
in issuance of a permit
think your senator think you
mister inner so if there is not
a county body currently in place
to review any type of permitting
applications in that area or if
a permit has been approved and
they do have ordinances to
oversee that they're a company
is compliant
where is the representation of
having a hard time understanding
that connection between a county
and the state because we've
heard a lot of conversation
about traveling per tribal
consultation and the state in
your office we see those clear
jurisdictional boundaries but
i'm trying to also look at this
as a new mexico citizen
standpoint and how the county
looks out for them because a lot
of these minds are in multiple
jurisdictions where it's not
just one county and so how do
you have oversight of that and
how do you regulate that in that
olient with that thank you if
you could answer thank you yes
mister chairman members of the
committee
d
distinction I think that we're
talking about here is that there
would be two permitting
processes that would be the
permitting process under the new
mexican mining act which i'm.
Representing today and a
permanent process from the
county that passed the work the
mining ordinance would say in
this case lincoln county the
proponent would need to satisfy
both of those requirements
before a permit would be issued
by my group and presumably by
thought the county as well
I think maybe you're asking
about whether there is expertise
at the county level to determine
the
completeness of an application
under that ordinance to which I
can't speak just do the lack of
knowledge I would assume that if
the country passed an ordinance
that they are prepared to
trade sticking over that
ordinance
but we would coordinate just as
knowing that there is a second
permitting process out there
that we would i'm coordinated
with them just like we would
coordinate with the forest
service through their permitting
process where the blm through
their permitting process it
would it elevates that county in
a way in that we would be
engaging with those county
experts to arrive at permit
conditions that are
satisfactory.
Good questions really good
questions at races.
Okay good job today it did get
in and if there is anything that
comes up that we need to know
let us know we are the kind of
watch dog committee for these
types of issues so you know we
appreciate what you do for the
citizens of the state let us
know if there's anything we
needed else we can do a better
job thank you now will follow up
with the the questions that were
asked for me to follow up on
thank you there's anything funky
going on with the n r c let us
know that to now and in the
future
create a google
s all right have a great day
safe trip home okay committee we
are behind schedule
we're going to work through
lunch so what we're going to do
now is we're going to take
five minutes for you all to grab
a lunch and will probably have a
few extras for those in the
audience families that need to
grab some lunch or even just
hungry he don't have to be
familiar
they would just let the app
committee members in the staff
grab a lunch real quick first
and then why not we will
literally start again in five
minutes okay so will just take a
five minute pass if you will go
gravel on true i'll do the
second.
The.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
